1. Dr. Tongues Relation of the General Massacre, Intended and Plotted by the
Papists: 2. Brought into Parliament by his Direction and Assistance: 3. Near
the time of their Prorogation, about the 22th. of June, 1678. by Richard Green
of Dilwin, in the County of Hereford, who first informed the Doctor of it.
Greenes Relation, delivered to Dr. Tongue, about the 20th. of June, 1678. as he
had Written it long before with his own hand, for his own better remembrance:
the Original whereof, the Doctor keeps for his own Justification, and will
produce when he shall be required.
Sunday the 23. of January 1674/5.
I Green coming from Dilwins Church on the Lords Day, being the 23d. of Ian.
last, with Thomas Boyer, Servant (and Kinsman) to Mr. Thomas Boyer, of Luntlow,
in the Parish of Dilwin, had a Discourse as follows: said Thomas Boyer, Mr.
Johnson does take a great deal of pains to Preach against the Papists, but they
care little for it. Said Green, because they come not to hear him: and said
Boyer, No, nor never will come now; Green, I wish that the Lord would be
pleased to open their Ears and Hearts, to hear and know the truth. Boyer, I
could wish so too, (said he) but it is to no purpose now, for they be further
off now ^^an ever they were. Then Green said, you have been amongst them
lately, what did you hear from ^^em? Bowyer said they be Devilish high, higher
than ever they were, I pr^y God grant, they ^^y never have their Wills, they
make account it will All be their own.

Note, he was lately returned from Staffordshire, with his Master, Captain
Boyer.

Thomas Boyer of Luntlow, in the Parish of Dilwin, Gentleman, Papist Convict,
lately returned ^^om a Journey into Staffordshire, meeting him, the said
Richard Green accidentally in the Fields, ^ed him, What News? to which he
replied: that he had heard of an Earthquake,

^te, It appears though Green, has not named the particular day, wherein he
had his ^onference with this Boyer, that it was betwixt Sunday, the 23d. and
Saturday, the 29th. of January, 1674/5. and that Captain Boyer; made the like
Discourse (whereof his mind was very full) the very same day to Mr. Robert
Woodhouse, another of the Witnesses, mentioned in the following Relation; as
they rode together to Mr. Woodhouses House: vide infra.

^d that at London, the Foundations of several Houses were sunk by it, and
worse news then all that, that the King was dead, and that it was a Week before
the News of the King was contradicted: to which the said Boyer replied, That
the said Earthquake was generally all over England, but no ^ouses sunk at
London, and that the News was there where he Traveled, That the King was dead,
but (...) continued not above 24 hours, that if it had continued 48
uncontradicted, the News of his recovery ^d come too late, for had it (the News
of his Death) continued, it would have been an Earthquake

Note, That Mr. Dugdale, in the Trial of Whitebread, Harcourt, Gavan and the
rest, says, that if the Kings Death should happen, they should have been ready
to give the first allarm in the Country: and that a Letter was sent into the
Country to show it was the Opinion of them at Paris and St. Omers, to give out
that it was (in Case the King had been killed) still those King killing
Presbyterians that had done the Fact, thereby to bring the Protestants over to
their side, to revenge themselves of the Presbyterians, and cut them off; that
they might more easily deal with the Protestants themselves, and cut them off
likewise afterward: and this shows both what overturning Earthquake, Boyer
spoke of.

^ed, such an Earthquake as had not been in England this Hundred years, it had
not only shaken, (...) overturned the very Foundations.

Whereupon Green said, you have good Intelligence, to hear that News, and to
have it contradicte^ in 24 hours: Boyer answered, the best Intelligence in
England This agrees with Dugdales Deposition, that they had three times a Week
constantly, and sometimes by Expresses, Letters from London.
He the said Boyer also said, that this was the third Fit of an Apoplexy or
Trance, that the King had had. To which, when Gree^ replied, that God be
praised, the Proverb was not fulfilled on hi^ Majesty; which is, If a man have
two shrewd Turns, let him beware of the Third. Boyer said, its true, he has
escaped the third, but let England beware of the nex^ said Boyer. See some
particulars here omitted, below Numb. 5. and Marginal Notes there inserted of
their Design upon the Kings Death, set out by Dugdale.

Memorandum, This was the effect of Greens Depositions, put in with his
Petition into the gran^ Committee of the House of Commons, June 78. then
assembled for suppressing Popery.

3. Green says, In the latter end of the same Week, the said Thomas Bowyer
(Servant and Kinsman t^ Captain Boyer) comes into my Shop, it being after I
had discoursed with his Master, and then after some Friendly greeting had
passed between us; I the said Green, said, Cousin Thomas (for Green was his
Kinsman) what were the Papists (whilst you wen^ V^z. about the 29 of January
1674/5.
amongst them,) ready to get up on Horse back, to cut our Throats? sai^ Boyer,
I, sure enough; it seems so said Green, for had not their News been quickly
contradicted of his Majesty's being dead, they were ready to mount, said Boyer,
Who told you, said Green; you are very close, but I have had some Discourse
with your Master, since you came home; said Boyer, did he tell you so? I Will
tell you nothing, they be a Bloody sort of People, God bless us out of their
hands, and so Boyer, departed with that Prayer in his month.

Note, That by these Words compared with other passages in this Relation,
Richard Green wrote this Paper within a twelve month after his aforesaid talk
with Captain Boyer (viz.) before February 1675/6.

Upon chance within the space of one year since, I met with Mr. Boyer, walking
along his Grounds, and after we had greeted each other according to the time of
the Day, Boyer, asked me, What News? Green, told him, I heard not any, I pray,
what have you heard? Boyer answered, I have heard none, but that the Parliament
is adjourned: Green asked him, What they had done, Boyer told me nothing at
all; but they were about to make a most unreasonable Act: Green, asked him what
it was; Boyer told him, it was that which he had told me of, which was to
settle the Inheritanc^ of the Crown upon a Protestant Successor: Green asked
him, if the Parliament would have made such an Act, I pray you what did hinder
them, and Boyer told me, that all the Parliament were not so inclined, but only
a factious party of them, in hatred toward the Duke of York, because he is a
Papist; Green told him, that I wished the Succession of the Crown might be
settled whilst his Majesty does live, to prevent a Bloody Dispute, which is
very much feared by many will be, except the Succession of the Crown be
settled: after which Boyer told me, that the Crown after the Death of his
Majesty, does absolutely belong to the Duke of York. Green asked him, How could
that be, being that the King has a Son, which is the Duke of Monmouth, whom
all the Protestants which I have heard speak thereof, do declare to be his
Fathers lawful Heir. Boyer told me, that is not, nor cannot be: Green, wished
him to take heed what he said, for the Duke of Monmouth is Legitimate, for Mr.
Benge of Pembridge, told me, that a very honest Gentleman told him, that a
Bishop told him, he married his Majesty to the Duke of Monmouths Mother; Boyer
said, I do not say the Duke of Monmouth is a Bastard, but the Objection is,
that the King was not married to his Mother with the Consent of the Parliament;
Green told him, that their Objection I supposed, would signify little or
nothing: for if there be a difference between the Duke of York, and the Duke of
Monmouth, and the Parliament do not settle it, I believe that all the
Protestants in England will adventure their Blood, before the Duke of Monmouth
shall lose his Birthright, and we lose the liberty of our Religion too: and
Boyer answered, And we will adventure all our Lives and Fortunes in the behalf
of the Duke of York, and for the Interest of our Religion: Green asked him,
what can you do, for you be nothing to us, said Boyer, Do not you think so, for
although we be but thin here, yet there be many in other places, and powerful
persons too: I will raise a Company; said Green of what? Boyer said of Horse:
Green, asked him how many his Company should be? Boyer said, an Hundred: Green,
said unto him, by that time you have bought an Hundred Horses, and armed an
Hundred men, I suppose you will make a great breach in your Estate: then Boyer
turned himself to me, and said, I believe I can Raise and Arm Threescore well,
and do my self no harm, what thin^ you? but said Green, where is your
Commission: said Boyer, I am now gotten into the acquaintance of them, by whose
assistance I can obtain a Commission from the Duke of York, as soon as another
can: and this Discourse was ended in a Meadow, called the Mill Meadow, with his
Face toward a Style, between that and a piece of Ground, called the Low
Furlong, at the West end of Luntlow^ Mill Garden, presently after the long
Prorogation of Parliament for 15 months or more.

N. B. This agrees well with Mr. Ienisons Relation of a Commission promised
him. And shows by the Proportion, this Captain out of a small Estate, proposed
to raise what Numbers they would have had to Cut our Throats, had not God
prevented their Design of Assassinating his Majesty, the Signal of this
Massacre. And here it may be noted by what false, sly, and pernicious
Suggestions and Insinuations, the Jesuits sow the Seeds of Sedition and
Rebellion in the Minds of simple and well meaning Persons of all Degrees; as
here in the present Case, pretending and raising false Titles to the Crown, and
thereby dividing the Loyal Subjects thereof into bloody feuds and resolutions:
which practices are dangerous to the Kingdom of England above all others, whose
People, as may be seen in the Example of this Informant, a poor Weaver from the
Yeoman to the meanest Mechanic, are all sensible of, and concerned for the
public Affairs; and therefore are (as a Wise Gentleman long since observe) the
only Kingdom of Gentry in the World, without mixture of Slaves, all Intelligent
of, and touched as Gentlemen in other Countries with, and ready to assist with
their Persons and Estates in all public Extremities.

Sir Rowland Stanly about two years since about Lady day, 1677. held a like
Discourse, concerning the Duke of York and Monmouth, with Mr. Becket, by which
it appears, this pretense of their Massacre was universally laid, how little
soever it may be believed or considered by some concerned, to lull us asleep.

Some Particulars omitted in the foregoing Relation of Greens Discourse with
Boyer, Numb. II.
BOYER told Green, that it would be the latter end of next Summer, before they
should effect their Design. Then Green asked Boyer, why it should be delayed so
long, seeing you were ready to execute the same immediately upon the receipt of
your Intelligence? to which he answered, That if that Advantage or Opportunity
had fell or happened into our hands, we would have made the best Advantage we
could have done of the Kings Death, but by that time we shall be in a
sufficient Order to effect our Design; Which was the Kings being dispatched or
killed by the Papists; for Mr. Dugdale says, in the Trial of Whitebread,
Harcourt and the rest, that two years before the said Trial, which was about
the time of these Discourses of Green and Boyer) he heard it Discoursed for the
first time in the little Parlour at my Lord Astons House, and at Mr. Ewers
Chamber by Mr. Ewers and Mr. Gavan (who were the first that broke the matter to
him, that the King was to be killed: that he saw a Letter under Whitebreads own
Hand, enclosed in one from Groves to Mr. Ewers, wherein he gave Mr. Ewers a
Caution, to be sure to choose those who were Trusty, Hardy and Desperate, etc.
to kill the King. That there were several Consultations at Mr. Ewers Chamber at
Boscobell, and several other places, for Conspiring the Kings Death: That at
one of these Consultations held at Tixall, about the 21 of September 1678, were
present, Mr. Gavan, Mr. Ewers, Mr, Peter's, Mr. Lewson, my Lord Stafford and
others, That he was chosen as a fit Person to kill the King, entertained by my
Lord Stafford and Mr. Ewers for this purpose; and to be sent for this purpose
to London, to be under the tuition of Mr. Parsons: that he saw Mr. Turner, when
he was going to his Brother Turner in Nottinghamshire, with Mr. Ewers, Mr.
Lewson and others, and they did consult and agree there in his hearing, about
Conspiring the Death of the King, Introducing Popery, etc. That he saw and
received several Packets of Letters from several Persons beyond Seas, which
were by Mr. Harcourts Instruction, and communicated by Grove to Mr. Ewers,
which Letters did contain matters in them, for the Introducing of Popery, and
Killing and Destroying the King. He likewise intercepted and read a Hundred
Letters, given under Mr. Harcourts own Hand to the same purpose. That Mr. Gavan
used several Arguments to prove the Lawfulness of, and showed him several
Examples for King-killing. Nay, for the killing of any to Introduce their own
Religion: he endeavored to prove it by Scripture, the Text Mr. Dugdale could
not call to mind, but it was to show, how it was lawful and good to destroy
any, for the advantage of their Religion: showing the Example of Father Garnet,
how, by several of his Relics beyond Sea, great Miracles had been done. And in
the Trial of Langhorne, he says, he was in most of their Consultations for the
Murder of the King, that he heard the very words used, was hired to be an Actor
in it, was to have a sum of Money, and a place appointed him to do it: and
that the Persons who put him upon it, was Mr. Ewers, Gavan, Lewson, Vavasser;
who were all Jesuits. The Sum promised by Lord Stafford, and confessed by Lord
Aston, was 500 l. advance money, and farther Reward, Preferment, etc.
and told me also, that all the Papists Universally, were engaged in the
carrying on of their Design, and not only in England, but in all places, and
especially the French Papists. Boyer also affirmed that this Plotted Note, That
Mr. Dugdale says, in Whitebreads Trial, that at some Consultations he heard
speak of a Massacre, that there was a Massacre intended, and an Army to be
raised, that if any did escape the Massacre whom they could not be sure to be
Papists, they might be cut off by the said Army; and in Langhorns Trial, he
says, that Ewers, Gavan, Lewson and Vavasser, did always speak of an Army that
was to be raised, but not actually till the King was killed. That it was first
concluded to raise an Army, but the last resolutton was, that no Armies should
appear till the King was killed; upon whose Death was to be the Massacre, and
then a pretty considerable Army to be raised, which was to cut of those who
escaped the Massacre.
Massacre was to be truly Catholic, and to be executed not only in all parts
of the Kingdom, but against all Protestants of whatever Sect or Persuasion,
Presbyterians, Independents or others, Quakers themselves not wholly exempted,
though by him weakly pretended to be favored: and that in case they could not
execute this designed Massacre that Summer, yet before the next Session of
Parliament at farthest they would do it.

Note, That the Summer 1675. in which this Plot was designed to be executed,
and consequently, the King to be killed, was in the time of the 15 months
Prorogation of the Parliament, and Boyer said, that was to be begun so, that it
might be fully executed before the time that the Parliament was to meet again.

By which it appears, that if they did not procure that long illegal
Prorogation purposely, the more securely to execute their Plot against the
King, yet at least they feared to be discovered in Parliament, and thought
their recefs the securest season for them to carry on their bloody Design
against Him and His People.

Greenes Memorandum
OMitted in my first Discourse with Mr. Boyer, which was presently after the
Prorogation of the Parliament, in the latter end of the year 74/5. in which, as
in all the rest of his Discourse, the said Thomas Boyer said, What says Mr.
Rawnel (which was their Priest, as he himself declared him so to be) the King
did but jeer the Parliament, when at his Prorogation of them, He gave them
Thanks for their care of Him and of the Protestant Religion, and that that
Prorogation was in favor to the Papists, whom the King looked upon to be his
best Friends.

I omitted this on purpose, because I looked upon it to be one of their
Jesuitical Forgeries, whereby they thought to encourage Protestants that were
but weak Principled, to become their Proselytes, and also to animate and
provoke to Rebellion against the Kings Sacred Person, and Established
Government all these Phanatical parties, which they by their Busy, Subtle, and
Devilish Policies, have torn, rent and divided from our Communion. A very sad
effect thereof appears in Scotland, I pray God grant that it may not be as a
shower of Rain, to cause their Seeds of Rebellion to spring or grow up here in
England.

In my second Discourse, I left not out any thing material, but his boasting of
the power of their Wealth, which Boyer expressed in these Words. Money is the
Sinew and Strength of War, by that time we make our Attempt, we shall be well
Furnished with That; and having Money, we shall not want Men: for there be many
of the Common sort of People, that will Fight for him that will give them the
most Money, and besure we will not starve our Cause.

Also in the latter end of Ian. 74/5. Mary Boyer, Sister to the said Thomas
Boyer Papist, being at my House, with other Discourses told me, That the King
was very Sickly, and would not live long, and then the Duke of York will be
King, and will set up our Religion.

The said Mary Boyer had before that time Contracted her self with a Protestant
Gentleman, but after her Brothers coming out of Staffordshire, and when she did
understand the Protestants were all to be destroyed, she broke off with her
Protestant Lover, and gave him 15 l. and after she did Marry with a Papist,
whom before she did very much despise.

John Marshall, Captain Boyers Sunday Fiddler, for that service only, has Meat,
Drink, Washing and Lodging, and all his Week time to himself, to employ in
Playing, Fishing, Fowling, etc. all for his own advantage. This was the man who
disarmed his Master Boyer, he was Baily, and both Treated and Threatened Green,
as is elsewhere said, and would have forsworn the Fray between Mr. Robert
Woodhouse, and his Master, etc. Thus Green.

An Account or Narration of what Mr. Thomas Boyer Papist Convict, declared to
Mr. Robert Woodhouse, of the Parish of Stanton upon Arrow, in the County of
Hereford, in the Evening of that day, January 74/5. being Pot-valiant, on which
he had fresh and fasting, more at large declared himself in the morning to me
Richard Green, as the aforesaid Mr. Woodhouse declared with his own mouth unto
me.
MR. Boyer said Robin, I will tell thee some News: Woodhouse, what is that:
Boyer, there will be a great many Bloody Noses in England this Summer:
Woodhouse, what will become of mine then: Boyer, thou art an honest Fellow,
there shall not one Hair of thy Head perish, I will stand between thee and all
harm: Woodhouse, what must I be under thy Protection; art thou to be so much
concerned in it: Boyer, I will raise a Troop of Horse for the Duke of York: Mr.
Woodhouse not complying with him, nor yet giving him any Thanks for his
proffered Protecting of him, the said Boyer being riding along with, and being
something behind the said Woodhouse, Boyer said, God Damn me, Robin, look to
thy self, for I will run thee through the Back: the said Woodhouse although he
slighted his proffered Protection, yet took notice of his danger, and thereupon
spurred his Mare which he did ride upon, which received all the Wounds that was
given in the Combatt, upon the receipt of which, she started with her Master
out of danger, and being out of the same, he drew his Sword to defend himself,
and with as fair warning to his Old Friend and new Enemy, he said, Now Boyer
look to thy self, my Sword is drawn as well as thine: which Words sounded so
shrill in Mr. Boyers man's (John Marshal aforesaid) ears, that he did ride in
between them, to part the Fray, which he did by disarming his Master, and by
giving Mr. Woodhouse good Words, who Woodhouse did afterward entertain them
both at his House that Night; but all the Words that passed between them
before, Mr. Boyers man would not acknowledge upon his examination, that he
heard any of them, and would have denied that (the fray) too, but that his
Master let fall the Scabbard of his Sword in the place, and Mr. Woodhouse in
kindness did send one or more of his Servants with himself, with a Lanthorn and
Candle to find the same, for at the present the Barrel ended all the Quarrel,
they drunk the other bout, and the Drunken Fit being over, it was no more
thought upon for a while: but afterward the aforesaid Boyer did desire one
Edward Price a Saddler by Trade, to make for him some Holsters for Pistols, but
how many I know not: the said Edward Price, having near the same time more
Papist Customers for such tackle, was jealous of them; and thereupon he
informed a Justice of the Peace therewith: upon which information several
Justices met in order to examine the said Price. And it happened so, that the
said Woodhouse being in a Market Town called Presteyn, and at the House where
the Justices met upon the aforesaid business, and in the Company of John Adams
and Richard Hill of the same, he asked them what was the meaning of the
Justices meeting there (which was but lately before,) who told him that Price
the Saddler had informed that one Mr. Thomas Boyer, a Papist, had bespoke of
him ten pair of Holsters for Pistols, to which the said Woodhouse replied,
surely then he is going to raise the Troop of Horse for the Duke of York, which
he told me he would raise, and therewith declared the aforesaid Discourse
between Mr. Boyer and himself to them, who informed a Justice of the Peace, or
Lord Bishop of Hereford therewith, whereupon the said Woodhouse was forced to
Witness the same; and then afterward (as it is before declared) in the Whitsun
week, 1676. I went in with my Information, and then after that, the Justices
had many times met together upon the same Concern, the said Boyer was committed
to Prison, there to remain until the next great Assize: and We the Witnesses,
Edward Price, Robert Woodhouse, Gent. and Richard Green were bound over to the
same, to justify our Evidence in his Majesty's behalf against Mr. Boyer, before
the Judge of the Assize, to which accordingly we all very diligently gave our
Attendance. But Judge Wild who rode that Circuit, called the said Boyer, and
did not trouble himself (as was expected in a business of that weight) to
examine either the Prisoner or the Witnesses, but told him that he had read the
Depositions against him, and that therein he did find that he had spoke very
dangerous Words, and did very sharply chide him, and told him it did not become
such a one as him to talk of the overturning of Kingdoms, and of the carrying
on of the changing of Governments, etc. and that he might by the Law take a
severer Course with him; but because he was a young man, he would only bind him
to his good Behavior, and therefore bid him produce his surety quickly; and he
the said Boyer, as before knowing the issue thereof, produced two Papists for
his Suretyes standing by him ready for the same purpose. Which binding of him,
was but a letting of him loose, (as it did afterward appear) to spit his
Popish Venom at poor Richard Green, which he and his accomplices did to the
purpose; for they Prosecuted me with four malicious Law Suits, and Threatened me
with many more, and at last, wrongfully Imprisoned me: and both before I went
to Prison, and in the Prison, he demanded nothing of me, but Submission and
Recantation; and to declare those Truths which I before upon Oath had Witnessed
against him, were False, and to Acknowledge that I had done him Wrong thereby;
and that by doing so, I may expect his love and favor as formerly: and in not
doing so, I should never come out of Prison, which though I never did; yet I am
out of Prison, Thanks be to God; but when I came out I was so much
impoverished, so much Threatened, so much Slandered, and so much forsaken of
Friends (for many sought to merit the favor of my Adversaries by doing me
Injuries) by which I was forced to sell my Goods and Cattle; and, my Wife my
fellow Sufferer with me in all this, took our flight together from our Native
Country.

These are the poor man's own Words, Written down in his own hand, who in
another proceeds thus in his Relation.

Anno Domini 1676.
ABout Whitsuntide, one Thomas Woodhouse of Standbeach in Herefordshire,
Hatter, bringing Richard Green a Hat, said, My Brother Robort Woodhouse was in
a great deal of trouble about Mr. Boyer (aforesaid) and very sorry he had
occasioned him to be questioned for Words spoken to him. Green questioned
Thomas Woodhouse about what time the Words were spoken by Mr. Boyer to Mr.
Robert Woodhouse, the said Hatters Brother, and he found by him that it was the
same time that he the said Green had the same conference with Captain Thomas
Boyer, viz. January 75/6. which confirmed him more in his fear of a Massacre.
Thomas Woodhouse related this Discourse with Green to his Brother Robert, who
sent for him to speak with him, and R. W. related that Boyer had told him,
there would be many Bloody Noses that Summer, but a hair of his Head should not
be touched, and that the said Boyer would raise a Troop of Horse for the Duke
of York, and enquired what Boyer had spoken to him; Green replied, he would be
excused; Then Woodhouse said, he would have him Summoned to Hereford, where he
was himself to appear the next day; to this he replied, he scorned to be forced
to Witness for his King and Country, if he would lend him a Horse, he would go
with him, and accordingly he did, and testified his knowledge in the
Particulars aforesaid, before the Justices of the Peace, then and there
assembled as has been related above.

And then it was (viz. about Whitsuntide 1676.) that the said Robert Woodhouse,
Richard Green, and several others were examined before Sir James Bridges now
Lord Shandoes, and other Justices of the Peace of the County of Hereford, as
aforesaid; upon whose examinations the said Captain Tho. Boyer was committed to
Prison, etc.

It is to be observed, That against the said Assizes following when the said
Richard Green attended to give Evidence against Captain Thomas Boyer, he had
reserved many considerable particulars of his evidence against the time of the
Trial, to which he expected that Captain Boyer would have been the^ brought in
the face of the whole County. So that the Depositions taken before the said
Justices are not so full as these Informations in several particulars,

Judge Wild who went that Circuit at that Assizes, never suffered any
Witnesses to be produced or examined against Captain Boyer (as is said) but
only said he had read the Affidavits, and ordered him to be bound to his Good
Behavior. Let it be examined by whose Order or Advice he suppressed the
evidence of so horrid a Massacre, its probable some of them in question did
contrive thus to Suppress this Discovery, their Names also who bespoke the
other Cases of Holsters should be inquired, as probably Conscious and agents in
this Suppression.

That by this means Greenes Evidence being Suppressed, the Discovery which he
designed upon his Oath to make in the face of the County of a general Massacre
of all Protestants, of what Profession soever, and that universally over all
the Kingdom to be made by the Papists Armed and Conspired together in that
Plot, was Concealed in a great part, and the Papists thereby encouraged to go
on ever since more confidently and fiercely in their Plot both against the
Kings Life, whose Death was their Signal, and against all his Protestant
Subjects that were to be Massacred thereupon, as far as the Papists Swords
could reach, and those whom the Massacre reached not weakened thereby, were to
be pursued and cut off by War and Foreign Assistance, under the Duke of Yorks
Authority.

In June 1678. about the 20th. day, a little before the Parliament was
Prorogued Dr. Tongue attending on the Parliament with some Propositions for
suppressing of Popery, and relief of the Poor, happened accidentally into the
Company of Richard Green, with whom he entered some Discourse about promoting
the Linen Manufacture, and his, the Doctors employing so many poor Women to
Spin, as might find the said Green constant Work, but found he had sold his
Loomes, and fled his Country for fear of the Papists.

That upon this occasion Green related the whole Plot unto Dr. Tongue, and his
Sufferings occasioned by the discovery thereof, and the accidental manner of
his being brought for an Evidence against his kind Kinsman and Landlord, and
great confident by Mr. Woodhouse. Then out of Compassion to the said Green,
and for encouragement of the like Discoverers and Discoveries for the future,
Dr. Tongue advised the said Green to complain to the Parliament then sitting in
a grand Committee for suppressing of Popery, drew him a Petition and Articles
out of his, the said Greenes own information, and directed him how to deliver
it, and least by any accident he might miscarry, wrote a note for him to the
Door keeper, to call out some worthy member to receive his Petition, and
followed him himself to the House, and saw his Papers delivered into Sir Trevor
Williams hand, and heard they were read in the Grand Committee.

Richard Greenes Petition To the Honorable the Commit for suppressing of
POPERY.
The Humble Petition of Richard Green, late of Biton in the County of Hereford
his Native Country, and thence terrifyed and forced by Malicious Suits and
Terrors by Thomas Boyer Gent. Papist Convict, and his Accomplices.
Most Humbly Shows,
THAT your Petitioner being a poor Weaver, held a House and Land of Thomas
Boyer of Dilwins in the County aforesaid, Papist Convict, for several years
paid him his Rent constantly, had never any difference with him till about
Whitsuntide 1676. at which time your Petitioner with several others, was
examined upon Reports spread in those parts of Change of Government expected,
and Insurrections to be made thereupon by the Papists.

That after such time as your Petitioner had made Oath of the particulars upon
which he was examined for his Majesty, contained in a Paper hereunto annexed,
whereupon the said Boyer was committed to Prison, and was discharged; he the
said Boyer after caused your said Petitioner to be causelessly Arrested at the
Suit of him the said Boyer, demanding only by persons sent to him during his
Imprisonment, Submission and Acknowledgement that your Petitioner had done him
wrong in his said Deposition, without which he should be kept in Prison and
have no discharge, notwithstanding your Petitioner did tender common Bail,
which as your Petitioner was advised, was all the Law did require; and your
Petitioner was accordingly detained in Prison about a fortnight, till he could
procure a Supersedeas from the Sheriff, (who was then in London) to his great
expense and loss of his whole subsistence for himself and Family, depending on
his Labor and Trade.

That the said Boyer having given out that he would Arrest your Petitioner
again, as he was credibly informed, which would have been his utter Ruin, and
refused 16 shillings Rent, tendered as soon as Due, he was forced to sell off
the necessary Looms, and other Tools and Instruments of his Trade to discharge
his Debts, contracted by his Imprisonment, and to fly his Native Country, to
which he still is in fear to return, for Reasons hereunto annexed. Humply Prays

That your Honors would according to your Wisdom provide and apply such relief
for your oppressed Petitioner, and Satisfastion for his unjust Imprisonment and
Ruin of his Family, as may stand with Justice and Honor of Parliament; that
your Petitioner, and other his Majesty's faithful Subjects may not be deterred
from Testifying their Knowledge on behalf of his Majesty, when they are
thereunto required, nor to bayl, assist and relieve one another when
Maliciously prosecuted by Papists, as in your Petitoners Case.

And your Petitioner shall Pray, etc.
The effect of Richard Greenes Depositions against Thomas Boyer may be seen
above in the second Paragraph of this Relation, which he put into the Committee
with his Petition and these Articles.

The means by which Richard Green has been forced and terrifyed out of his
Country by Thomas Boyer, Papist Convict, and his accomplices, annexed to and
put into Parliament with his Petition.
1. HE arrested the said Green without Cause, and detained him in Prison,
(refusing Legal Bayl,) till he had got a Supersedeas.

2. He terrified the special Bayl he had procured, by his Agents, that he
shrunk from him, though he knew him Innocent.

3. He terrifyed all his Neighbors, so that when he was to pay 16 s. his last
Rent due to Boyer, for a Tenement and Land he held of him, none durst tender it
for him, nor Witness it, and Boyer himself refused to take it, when he tendered
it before Witness, that he might terrify him with pretense of a Suit.

4. He had so frighted the Neighbors that none would help him Reap his Crop of
Rye, nor carry it for him, and was forced to get Strangers to do it, that when
he had brought a Team to carry his Grain, a Threatening Message was sent to him
that carried it, that by those means being in a very destitute condition, and
in fear of his life, or some other mischief to befall him; he has been
compelled ever since to Wander from Place to Place like a Banished man, to seek
employment for Himself and Wife amongst Strangers.

The fear of this Massacre, and his hard usage by his Landlord Boyer terrifyed
Green so, that he advised with his Wife to go out of England to Virginy or
elsewhere, but his Wife not consenting, he removed himself (as soon as he could)
further from the said Boyer, as distrusting his pretended kindness For Green
was Boyers Kinsman and had been very intimate with him till called to Witness
against bim.
if any rising should be, and with an intent also to be more free and at
liberty to testify what he knew of this Plotted Massacre, when further off from
him.

This was in February and March. 1676.

Dr. Tongue having laid this Foundation of a Discovery of this Plot, and brought
it thus into Parliament with one Witness present to attest it; he hoped that by
the Wisdom, Industry and Intelligence of that Honorable House, upon examination
of Green and other two Witnesses formerly sworn, and of the two Thomas Boyers,
Master and Servant forementioned, some effectual course might have been taken
to prevent such Bloody Designs of the Papists, as were then on foot, and
suppress the growth of Popery for the future, and so thereby to avoid the
danger of such Plots, Tumults and Massacres for the Ages to come, from which
otherwise these Kingdoms can never be secured, as is now most manifest.

N. B. This Captain Thomas Boyer has since taken the Oath of Allegiance, etc.

Albeit the Prorogation of the Parliament, which followed shortly after, did
render this first Attempt of the Doctors producing this Plot into that High
Court, and Propositions for Suppressing Popery ineffectual at that time; yet it
much encouraged him in his Proceedings in the next Discovery, which he made
shortly after, in the latter end of July 1678. by Mr, Oats's Papers, and
relation of the same Universal Massacre, in that he had given some Light of it
to the House of Commons before, and had some Evidence of the general Design, by
the Testimony of Green and others, whom he hoped to produce in Parliament, if
he could by any means bring Mr. Oats's Papers into that High Court, and caused
his Oath to be taken by Sir Edmund bury Godfrey for that purpose, in three
several Depositions, one of 73 Articles, September 6th. and two of 81 Articles,
September 28. 1678. that in Case he had failed of Success in the Privy Council,
he might have one Copy at least, to produce in Parliament.

In the latter any of December 1678. Richard Green after he had been examined
before the Secret Committee of the House of Commons, was ordered to go before
Sir William Scroggs, the Lord Chief Justice and make Affidavit of the Truth of
his Information, the Tuesday following, that the Persons Concerned, and the
other Witnesses might be sent for, but the Parliament was Prorogued on the
Monday, the day before that Tuesday appointed for his appearing before the Lord
Chief Justice, so that this purpose was defeated, and he remains yet either not
fully examined, or not sworn to his information, and particularly not to the
point of the Universal Massacre intended by the Papists in the long recess of
Parliament in the Summer 1676.

That Dr. Tongue has not beenable as yet, to procure a Copy of the Affidavits
or Examinations of Richard Green, Robert Woodhouse, and the other Witnesses
taken in Herefordshire before the Lord Shandoes, nor the Transcript of them
sent up to the Privy Council as he desired, and entreated the assistance of the
Commit therein, for the greater certainty of his Narrative of this Discovery,
and the Confirmation of the Evidence, and the refutation of the Scandals raised
against both him and it. Against him as a Contriver or Inventer of this Plot
and its Discovery to King and Parliament, and the Plot as his Malicious
Invention.

Richard Greenes Depositions.
Put into the Secret Committee of the Honorable, the House of Commons, by Dr.
Tongue in May 1679.
RIchard Green, late of Dilwin in the County of Hereford, Weaver; makes Oath,
that he received the relation of the following Particulars of the several
Massacres designed by the Papists against his Majesty's Protestant Subjects,
from the mouth of Captain Thomas Boyer of Luntlow in the Parish aforesaid, and
he verily believes the said Relation to be True.

I. That in Case his Majesty had dyed of the Swooning Fit he had in the latter
end of the year 1675. the Papists had then risen in Arms, and overturned all
the Foundations of the Government with such an Earthquake as has not been in
England this Hundred Years.

II. That albeit the King recovered of that which was his Third Fit, contrary
to the Proverb, yet they hoped to be ready by the latter end of Summer 1676.
for their Design.

III. That if they could not then fully accomplish their Design, yet at
farthest before the next Session of Parliament, then Prorogued for 16 or 17
Months, they hoped to effect it.

IV. That in this Design all the Papists at Home and Abroad were engaged, and
especially the French, and expected no assistance from any other Separate Party.

V. That no Protestants, Presbyters, Independants, etc. were to be spared.

VI. That Thomas Boyer aforesaid, was to raise a Troop of Horse for this Design.

VII. That this Deponent was to be at first examined at Hereford Assizes with
other Witnesses, where Justice Wild put off the Trial; And only bound the
Person aforementioned, (viz. Boyer,) to his Good Behavior 1676. and secondly,
before the House of Commons in June 1678. who, shortly after his Petition
delivered into the Grand Committee of the House For Suppressing Popery, was
Prorogued: Thirdly, before the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, by Order of the
Secret Committee, the last Sessions of Parliament, who immediately thereupon,
was first Prorogued, and then Dissolved.

VIII. That he was never yet examined upon Oath since, though he attended the
Secret Committee several times.

Richard Green.
Juravit coram me, John Hoskyns, Master of Chancery.
May the 12th. 1679.
Advertisements
DOctor Tongue does hereby disown whatever Books or Papers have hitherto been
Printed or Published in his Name, as Composed by him; or seen and allowed by
him to be Printed or Published, or shall hereafter; unless attested under his
Hand; as revised by him from the Press, exept some Translations out of French.

Courteous Reader,
There are in the Press, and will shortly be published, An Abridgment of
Controversies, being a brief and solid Confutation of Popish Errors, by express
Texts out of the Bible of their own Translation.

Also, the History of the Turkish Affassins; and a Parallel of the them with
the Popish; and other Papers of that Subject, the former long since translated,
and both now published by Dr. Tongue.

Be pleased to take notice also of that excellent Treatise, entitled The
Hearts Sovereign, long since published at the Charge of the Author, Mr. Tho.
Jones, late Household Chaplain to his Highness the D. of York: in which Family
he so vigorously opposed the Favorers and Connivers at the Growth of POPERY: of
which he is able, if called, to give a good Account, That, for that cause he
was removed from that Place, to make way for them to pervert his Highness's
family: and since, has been by their Contrivance, ruined in his Estate and
Reputation, as he hopes to make appear if admitted to Audience.


Errata, For 1674/5 read 1675/6.

FINIS.

