AN ACCOUNT OF Monsieur de la SALLE's LAST Expedition and DISCOVERIES IN North
AMERICA.

Presented to the French King, And Published by the Chevalier Tonti, Governor
of Fort St. Louis, in the Province of the Islinois.

Made English from the Paris Original.

ALSO The ADVENTURES of the Sieur de MONTAVBAN, Captain of the French
Buccaneers on the Coast of Guinea, in the Year 1695.

LONDON, Printed for J. Tonson at the Judge's Head, and S. Buckly at the
Dolphin in Fleet Street, and R. Knaplock, at the Angel and Grown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. School.

A NEW ACCOUNT OF THE Northern-America.
TRVTH and Sincerity being the chief Qualities, which make a Book of this
nature Valuable, the Author of this promises himself upon that account a
favorable Reception from the Public: and therefore thinks it would be
superfluous to make a longer Preface.

Monsieur Cavelier de La Salle, a Native of Roan in Normandy, the chief
Undertaker of the Discoveries in the Northern America, which make the
Subject Matter of this Book, was a Man of extraordinary Parts, and undaunted
Courage. He was the first that formed the Design of Traveling from the Lake of
Frontenac in Canada, to the Gulf of Mexico, through a vast unknown Country, in
order to bring the Inhabitants to the Knowledge of the Christian Religion, and
Extend the Dominions of the King of France. This Gentleman having duly weighed
all the Difficulties that were like to cross so Noble a Design, came to Court
to acquaint his Majesty with it, who was pleased not only to approve his
Enterprise, but also to Encourage it, by the Liberal Assistance, and the Power
he gave to M. La Salle, to dispose of his New Discoveries as he should think
fit.

I was then at the Court of France to solicit some Employment, having served
his Majesty both by Sea and Land, and lost one Hand in Sicily by a Granado, and
as M. La Salle was upon his departure, the Prince of Conti was pleased to
recommend me to him, as fit to accompany him in his Undertaking, whereupon I
was easily admitted, the Patronage of His Highness having been very useful to
M. La Salle. Every thing being ready for our departure, we set sail from
Rochel, July 14. 1678. to the number of 30 Men, amongst whom were Pilots,
Carpenters, Smiths and other useful Artists, and arrived at Quebec upon the
15th of September following; we remained there some days, after which having
taken our Leave of Count Frontenac Governor-General of Canada, we sailed up the
River St. Laurence to Fort Frontenac, where we landed.

That Fort lies within 120 Leagues from Quebec, about the 44th Degree of
Latitude, on the Mouth of a Lake called likewise Frontenac or Ontario, which is
near 300 Leagues about, and has a communication with four other Lakes, much of
the same extent. All those Lakes are Navigable, and plentifully stored with
Fish; The Mouth, or entrance of this Lake is defended by a Fort with four large
Bastions, which might protect a great number of Vessels against the attempts of
any Enemy. As M. La Salle had Erected this Fort, the King had given him the
Propriety thereof, and of all the Lakes thereabouts with their dependencies.
The Country about it is so Charming, that it is impossible to describe its
Beauties: The vast Meadows are intermixed with Woods and Forests, full of all
sorts of Fruit Trees, and watered with fine Brooks and Rivers.

It was in this place that we prepared our selves for our great Voyage, and
Glorious Undertaking, of which no body, I am sure, can give a better account
than my self, not only because I accompanied the said M. La Salle, but also
because the chief Care and Burden of that Perilous, though Glorious Enterprise,
fell upon me by the untimely Death of that Gentleman. The Account which I offer
now to the Public, is extracted out of the Journal I kept, wherein I set down
things as they appeared to me: It Is true, I am sometimes obliged to take things
upon Trust, because I could not be always with M. La Salle, but I am so fully
convinced of the Probity and Honesty of those upon whose Evidence I have
advanced any thing, that I may answer as well for their Observations as for my
own. The Reader must not therefore expect here Noble and Pompous Descriptions,
such as Authors use to adorn their Works with, but a natural simplicity, and a
rigid fidelity. If my Style seems harsh and unpolite, I have no other Apology
for it, but that I may have contracted some thing from the Commerce of the
Savages of America, with whom I have so long conversed.

Whosoever considers this Enterprise in it self, the difficulties it was
attended with, and the advantages that Europe may reap from the discovery of
those vast Countries, which are above eighteen hundred Leagues North and South,
will I hope agree, that an exact account thereof is worthy of the Curiosity of
the Reader.

The Fertility of the Soil.
That large Country is now called by the name of Louisiana, since the French
took possession thereof in the Name of Lewis the Great. The Soil is, generally
speaking, so fertile, that it produces Naturally without any Culture, those
Fruits that Nature and Art together have much ado to bring forth in Europe:
They have two Crops every Year without any great fatigue; the Vines bring
extraordinary Grapes, without the Care of the Husbandmen; and the Fruit Trees
need no Gardiners to look after them; the Air is every where temperate; the
Country is watered with Navigable Rivers, and delicious Brooks and Rivulets,
and diversified with Forests and Meadows; it is stockt with all sorts of
Beasts, as Bulls, Orignac's, Wolves, Lines, Wild Asses, Stags, Goats, Sheep,
Foxes, Hares, Beavers, Otters, Dogs, and all sorts of Fowls, which afford a
plentiful Game for the Inhabitants. They have discovered Mines of Lead and
Iron, and it is not doubted but there are also Mines of Gold and Silver, if they
would give themselves the trouble to look for them, but the Inhabitants of
those Countries valuing things only as far as they are necessary for Life, are
yet unacquainted with the Fanciful Value we put upon those Metals, and have not
dig'd up the Earth to look for them.

The Manners of the Inhabitants,
Those Inhabitants have nothing of Man but the Shape and the Name; they live
without any Laws, Religion, Superiority, or Subordination, Independency and
Liberty being their Summum Bonum, or the ultimate end they propose to
themselves. Their Life is always wandering, having no settled Possessions; they
take several Wives, if they please, whom they quit when they will, and leave
them to others, just as they do their Habitations, for after having for some
time cultivated a piece of Ground, they quit it without any occasion to
Cultivate another, and the first comer takes possession thereof, so that they
are perpetually changing their Habitations, and by this continual motion, every
thing becomes in a manner common amongst them: they know no Superiority, and
think the World is made only for them.

Their Religion.
I said they have no Religion, though it seems they have an obscure Idea of God,
because they live as if they thought there was none. They believe in general
that there is a God, but who does not concern himself in what they do. Some
Worship the Sun, and others fancy that the World is full of certain Spirits,
who preside over their Actions, and they are so extravagant as to believe, that
every thing in the World has a Spirit, and that they are Good or Hurtful
according to the Caprice of that Spirit. It Is upon this Principle that are
grounded all the foolish Superstitions of their Jugglers or Monitous, who are
their Priests or Magicians.

I don't believe that they have carried their Reflections so far, as to think
on the Nature of their Souls; though it is true, they seem to believe their
Immortality, and a kind of Metempsychosis, or Transmigration of Souls; but they
have so many extravagant fancies upon this Subject, that it is in a manner
impossible to discover their true Opinion. I may say in general, that they are
so stupid in matters of Religion, that they are not convinced of their own
Belief, nor of what others believe, and therefore Laugh at the Instructions of
our Missionaries.

Their Good quali^ies.
However, notwithstanding that brutish temper, they have as good a Sense as the
rest of Mankind, to know their true Interests, and therefore are capable of
Negotiations, Commerce, and Counsel. They know how to weigh and consider the
Consequences of an Enterprise, and take Just Measures to compass it. When they
meet together to consult about some great Design, they sit in a private place,
in a profound Silence, smoking Tobacco, and every one speaks gravely in his
turn. It is to be observed by the by, that they never make any Treaty,
Convention or Agreement with any body, till they have first of all, mutually
exchanged Presents. They give commonly Collars as the Symbol of Union; they
have a particular Kettle for Peace, and another for War. They proclaim Peace
with the Calumet, and War by great Outcries, or rather dreadful Howlings.

Their Science in War.
They know likewise how to Incamp, and Fortify their Camps with Intrenchments
and Pallisadoes. They observe also some Order in their Attacks.

Their Tillage.
This Soil produces indifferently all sorts of Corn and Plants, but as they have
observed, that some among them are more proper for their Nourishment than
others, they take care to Sow and Cultivate them, and therefore they have great
Crops of Indian Corn, of which they make a sort of very delicious and
nourishing Pap. They Cultivate also what they call Touquo, of which they make
their Cassave, and Turnips, wherewith they make Cassamite. These are their own
terms, which are not to be translated. Their Physic.
There are in their Country several sorts of Trees, from which an excellent
Balsam drops, the use whereof the Savages know very well, as also of several
Plants against Wounds, and the venomous bitings or stinging of Serpents and
other Creatures.

Their Astronomy.
Their Knowledge is not circumscribed within those narrow bounds, they carry it
as far as Heaven, and have obtained a sufficient Knowledge of the Course of the
Sun, Moon and Planets, and pretend thereby to foretell the changes of the
Weather, Winds, Storms, and other things of this nature.

Their Dexterity.
Besides those qualities already mentioned, they have a wonderful dexterity at
several beautiful and useful Works: Some of them make extraordinary fine Mats
for their Coverings, and adorning their Cabins; others have found the way to
Dress Leather to make Wastecoats and Shoes; but their greatest dexterity
appears, in my opinion, in the structure of their Canoos which can never sink.
They make them with the Barks of Elm, Walnut-trees or Eldertrees, about 10 or
12 Foot long, the side being a little turned inward as Gondolas. Instead of
Oars they make use of two pieces of Wood, like two Bakers Peals, and term
Swimming what we call Rowing. As their Canoos draw very little Water, because
of their lightness, the Savages Swim with an extraordinary swiftness, even
against the stream of Rivers, and undertake very long Voyages without fearing
Rocks or Storms.

Their Travels by Land.
Though there are neither Road nor Path in that Country, they Travel through these
vast Forests and Wildernesses, with the help of certain Marks they make upon
the Rind of Trees from place to place; and by these means, the Women and
Children are able to find the Men when they go a Hunting, or upon any
Expedition. They very seldom bring home what they kill, and it is the Office
of their Wives to fetch it and dress it.

Their Cabins.
I think fit to add, in this Place, a short Account of their Cabins,
Houshold-Goods, and the like. Many of them are wandering in Woods, where they
lie upon the Ground as Beasts; but such who live together, make Cabins, or
Huts, with Branches of Trees driven into the ground, interlaced with others,
and joined at the top as close as possible, and covered with Reeds, or large
Leaves of Trees. The inside looks somewhat better, it is well-enough Matted,
and most of them have a sort of curious Floor.

Their Beds.
Their Bedsteads are made up with some pieces of wood, upon which they lay skins
full of Wool or Straw; but for their Covering, they use the finest sort of
Skins, or else Mats finely wrought.

Their Kitchen Vtensils.
They have Cellars, or rather Holes, to preserve their Corn, their Wood, and
other Provisions; but all their Kitchen Utensils consists in some few pieces of
Earthen-Ware, which they make with Clay, and harden it with the Dung of Bulls.
They have no sorts of Mills, but instead thereof, use to grind their Corn
between two Stones, with a great deal of trouble. They make use of a sort of
sharp Stones instead of Knives; but this must be understood of such Savages,
who never had any Commerce with Europeans.

Their Arms.
They use Bows and Arrows with great dexterity, and the extremity of their Arrow
is armed, instead of Iron, with a sharp Stone, or the Tooth of some Animal.
They have besides heavy Clubs, or sharp Sticks, instead of Swords or Halberds.
They use also wooden Corslets against Arrows, and make Bucklers with several
skins stitched together.

Their Apparel.
Most of them go stark Naked, and are so inured to Rain, and other Hardships,
that their bodies are almost insensible; and the soles of their Feet so hard,
as to resist the sharpness of Thorns and Stones. Their Women have still
preserved a shadow of Modesty, for they wear commonly about their waste a large
Girdle, from which hang two pieces of skin, which cover in some manner their
Nakedness. I speak of those Savages who Inhabit a Temperate Climate, for those
who live to the Northward of Quebec, and other cold Countries, cover themselves
with skins of Bears, Stags, Ellends, and the like. I must observe also, that
those who Inhabit toward Mexico, seem more civillized than others; for though
their Climate is pretty Hot, they cover themselves with Mats finely wrought.

The care of the Family divided between the Husband and the Wife.
The care of the Family lies equally upon the Husband and the Wife: The former
goes a Fishing or Hunting for the Family; and the Wife Tills the ground, and
gets in what she has sowed. It is likewise her Duty to fetch Fruit, Herbs, and
other things in the Woods. When the Savage is come back from Hunting, he takes
first of all his Pipe, and as he smoaks, tells his Wife what he has done, and
what he would have her to do, which she must obey without any reluctance.

Character of the Savages.
One may observe in Men a great Gravity and Authority, and in Women an
extraordinary Complaisance for their Husbands, and as they follow their Natural
Instinct in every thing they do, their Behavior is always sincere and without
any affectation; and one may truly say, That the conjugal Union between them,
is the effect of a Natural Inclination, which is common to Men and to Brutes,
and not founded upon a true Friendship.

Of Women in particular.
The Savages being perpetually in Action, they are free from several Diseases
that the Europeans are subject to, and it is observable, that these Women have
not that natural Incommodity that ours are liable unto, and that, which is
still more to be wondered at, they bring forth without any Pain, or at least
without any ceremony as they go along, making no other Provision for it, than
their own girdle, and some Skins to wrap up the Child into.

The Breeding of their Children.
They have a very extraordinary way to bring up their Children, for though they
have no Clouts or Swath-Bands, they have found a way to keep them very clean
without any great Trouble. They provide themselves with a good quantity of Dust
of rotten Wood, which is as soft as any Down whatsoever, and is very good to
preserve them against Humidity. They lay their Children upon that Dust, and
wrap them into some good Furs, and tie them pretty fast, and have nothing to do
for dressing them, but to change that Dust, by means whereof they keep them
always clean, till they are able to walk about.

How they feed them.
They Feed them with Pap, made with Indian Corn, and give them a Bow as soon as
they can walk; so that they use themselves to shoot, and follow their Parents
into the Woods, learning thereby betimes the usual Places for Hunting; and
having no manner of Education, they are only guided by their Natural
Inclination and Sensuality, as Beasts.

I should never make an End, should I undertake to give a particular Account of
all the Customs of the Savages; but I think that what I have said is sufficient
to convince the Reader, that their Intelligence extends only to what is
Necessary for supporting their Natural Life; and that if they have any Law
amongst them, it is to observe none at all. Born and bred up in Forests,
Hunting is their greatest Pastime, to which I may add War, Quarrels, and
Cruelty, which is such, that they must turn their Arms against harmless Beasts,
when they want Pretenses or Opportunities, to use them against Men.

Mr. La Salle undertakes with 30 Men to Travel through those Nations.
It was through those Wild Nations that Mr. La Salle undertook to Travel, and
discover a Way to the Gulf of Mexico; and whosoever will impartially consider
that Enterprise, must agree, that this courageous Design can hardly be
paralleled. But this will appear the better, if they consider what
Preparations he made for that great Journey. He had only Thirty Men, as I have
already said, without any other Provisions, but Powder and Shot, which were to
supply him during his Voyage. We had first of all a Bark, and some Canoos, but
we were soon deprived of that help, and forced to Travel by Land, and carry our
Equipage, crossing large Rivers upon Rafts, or Trees, having no other Guide
through those vast unknown Countries but a Compass, and the Genius of our
Commander, who (according to the variation of the Needle, and the Knowledge he
had in Astronomy) was able to guess at the Climate we were in, and what course
we were to follow.

These Difficulties, the Armies of Savages, which we were obliged to Fight to
force our way, Hunger, Thirst, and other Wants and Perils, were however
surmounted by our Courage and Constancy, so that we arrived at the Gulf of
Mexico, and after several Misfortunes returned Home. But before I proceed any
further, I think fit to give an Account of the Four Lakes I have already
mentioned.

The upper Lake, or superior Lake.
The First lies above the 47 Degree of Latitude, and is called Upper Lake, or of
Frontenac, and may be 80 Leagues broad, and 300 in circuit. It has
communication with the Lake Herie, or of Conti, by a Canal of above 20 Leagues
long, interrupted by a Fall of 600 Foot high, known under the Name of Fall of
Niagara. This Lake of Conti joins with another called The Lake of the Hurons,
or of Orleans, by a Canal or stream which is very Rapid, and this last Lake has
communication to the South with a Fourth, called, The Lake of the Islinois, or
of the Dauphin: It joins also by the North-side with another Lake, larger than
any of the rest, called, The Lake of Conde; but we did not see it.

We Sail from Fort Frontenac.
Having Refreshed our selves about a Fortnight at Fort Frontenac, we embarked
on the 18th. of November, 1678. on Board a Vessel of 40 Tunns, to cross the
first Lake I have mentioned, and this was the First Ship that ever Sailed upon
this Fresh Water Sea. The Wind being very contrary, we spent a whole Month
before we could arrive at a Village called St. Onnontouane, where Mr. La Salle
sent some Canoos to fetch Indian Corn for our subsistence; and from thence we
continued our Course toward Niagara, but the Stream being too rapid, and the
Wind contrary, we were obliged to cast an Anchor about 9 Leagues from that
Place, whither we went by Land. Niagara is a Village of the Iroquois, situated
upon the Lake of Conti, near the wonderful Fall I have taken Notice of.

An Account of the Iroquois.
This Nation, the most Warlike and Cruel of all the Americans, is possessed of a
Tract of Land from Montreal, or rather from the place where the Two Rivers,
which form that of St. Laurence, meet, to the further end of the Lake of Conti,
which is about Two Hundred Leagues to the South. This Nation is very Ambitious
to command their Neighbors; and when they hear of any other Nation which grows
powerful, either by the Number of their fighting Men, or by the extent of their
Possessions, they march to subdue them, and they make sometimes Excursions
three or four hundred Leagues. They are indefatigable, undaunted in the
greatest danger; and of such a fierce Courage and Constancy, as to be proof
against the most exquisite Torments, When taken by their Enemies, rather than
betray the Designs of their Countrymen: They never ask, and seldom give
Quarter. They drink the Blood of their Enemies, and add to their great Cruelty,
all the Stratagems, Subtilty and precaution, that one might expect from
Experienced Soldiers.

They receive kindly the French.
This Nation, though Fierce and Cruel, as I have represented them, received us
very kindly. We laid one Night in their Village, and went the next Day to view
a proper place, above. Three Leagues higher, to Build a Fort, and having found
an advantageous Situation, M. De la Salle laid the Foundation of it, and
ordered his Men to Work upon it with all imaginable Diligence; but the Jroquois
taking some Jealousy at it; it was thought fit to desist, to avoid giving
Offense to so dangerous an Enemy; and therefore we contented our selves to
fortify our Magazine with strong Palisadoes.

M. la Salle had given orders for Building a new Ship or great Bark, and our
Men workt about it with all the diligence that the Season of the Year could
permit; but the cold was so excessive, that not only Rivers, but even those
vast Lakes were frozen all over, insomuch that they looked like a Plain paved
with fine polished Marble. We traded in the mean time with the Natives, and got
a great number of Furrs; but several things being wanting to continue our
Voyage, this courageous Gentleman resolved to return by Land to Fort Frontenac,
and come back again in the Spring with a new supply of Ammunition and
Merchandise, to trade with the Nations he intended to visit. He sent likewise
fifteen Men further into the Country, with orders to endeavor to find out the
Illinois, and left his Fort of Niagara, and fifteen Men under my command. One
of the Recollects contineud with us.

The Winter being over, a Bark arrived from Fort Frontenac, with Ammunition and
Merchandises, but it was stav'd to pieces against the Coast, by the fault of
the Pilot, however most of the Effects were saved; and soon after, M. la Salle
arrived, who immediately renewed his Commerce with the Iroquois, and
endeavored to give them some Idea of the Power of the King, that they might
have some respect for his Subjects. This new Ship being near finished, he sent
me with five Men to view the Coast, and the Country to the North side of the
Lake, above 120 Leagues from Niagara. We Embarked in our Canoos, and having
rowed two days, or rather swom, to use the style of the Savages, arrived to the
straight of the Lake Herie.

Lake Herie.
This straight or Canal, by which the Lake Herie joins with that of the Hurons,
is about Thirty Leagues long. I landed to the North side, and enquired for the
Men M. la Salle had sent before; but hearing they were gone higher, I
advanced-into the Country in hopes to find them; and this gave me an
opportunity to take an exact survey of that delicious Peninsula, which has
almost the form of an Heart, by reason of the three Lakes already mentioned.

Having made all the Observations I thought necessary both as to the Canal
between the two Lakes, and the nature of the Soil, I returned to give an
account thereof to M. la Salle, who, before my arrival, was gone back to Fort
Frontenac with a considerable quantity of Furrs, from whence he returned to
Niagara, on the Seventh of August, 1679, with a fresh supply of Ammunition and
Provisions, and three Recollects. The Spring and most part of the Summer were
thus spent in frequent goings and comings, which however are absolutely
necessary in order to make a good and lasting Settlement.

Our Bark being finished, and every thing ready for our departure, we sailed
toward the middle of August, and having happily crossed the Lake Herie, got
into that of the Hurons, which, as it has been already said, is much larger
than the other two. We met there with a dreadful Storm, as great as any that I
ever heard of upon the Ocean, or any other Sea, but we had the good Fortune to
find a good Road called Missilimachinac. It is an Isthmus, or neck of Land
about Twenty Leagues broad, and 120 long, between the Lake of the Hurons and
that of the Illinois, which is one of the finest situations in the World; and
besides the prodigious fertility of the Soil, and all sorts of Game, the
Inhabitants have an extraordinary plenty of Fish.

Fall S. Mary.
M. la Salle took an exact survey of that fine Country, and having marked out a
Fort for our security, sent me, with some others, toward the North-East, to
observe the Fall St. Mary, and endeavor to discover some of our Deserters.
This Fall forms two Canals, and a pretty large Island, which being reunited,
make a very Rapid River, by which the Lake of the Hurons has communication with
another much larger than all the rest. I went ashore upon the Northern Coast
of the Lake Huron, and advanced through a most delicious Country, as fas as the
River Onta, which coming out of that great Lake, runs about a Hundred Leagues,
and falls into the River St. Laurence. The charming Prospect of the Banks of
that River, made the Fatigues I suffered very easy to me, tho I had no other
Provisions than what I could kill with my Gun. I spent Eight Days in my
Journey, and from thence went into to the Southern Canal I have spoken of where
I Landed. I discovered there a large Plain between the Lake of the Hurons and
that of the Illinois, and a fine Settlement belonging to the Jesuits. I found
there also our Deserters, who appeared, at first, very stubborn and
disaffected, but were at last persuaded to return with me to Missilimachinac,
where I understood that M. la Salle had Sailed from thence toward the end of
September, for the Bay of Puans, where he arrived the 8th of October, as I have
been informed since.

Bay of Puans.
This Bay of Puans is formed by an overflowing of the Lake of the Illinois,
occasioned by a great River, which falls into this Lake. This River called
Onisconcing comes from another Lake about 100 Leagues distant; from which comes
another River, which falls into the Mississipi; and therefore this Lake may be
looked upon as a Communication between Canada and the Gulf of Mexico, as one
may see by the Map.

M. la Salle being arrived in that Bay, took some new measures, and sent back
his Bark, laden with Furs, to Niagara, and embarked again in Canoos with
seventeen Men and a Recollect, to go to the further end of the Lake of the
Illinois, where he arrived the first of November, 1679, and landed at the Mouth
of the River of the Miamis.

The Country of the Miamis.
This Country lies between the 35 and 40 degrees of Latitude; is bounded to the
East by Virginia and Florida; and on the other side by the Iroquois and the
Illinois. The Soil is very fertile, and produces all sorts of Corn and Fruit;
it abounds also in Cattle and Fish. M. la Salle visited the Inhabitants, and
finding their Temper tractable, endeavored to gain their Friendship by
Presents. They exchanged some Merchandises, and M. la Salle managed this Trade
with so much prudence and dexterity, as to convince them, it would be a greater
advantage for them to Trade with the French than with the English or the
Iroquois.

However, as he observed that this Nation was inconstant, and easily imposed
upon, he thought fit to build a Fort for his Security, and to make there a kind
of Magazine for the execution of his further Designs, which was accordingly
done with all convenient speed, M. la Salle having chosen an advantageous
Situation at the Mouth of the River.

The impatience I had to re-join M. la Salle with the fifteen Men I had brought
back to their Duty, obliged me to make all the haste possible, but the want of
Provisions, and the contrary Winds obliged us to land within Thirty Leagues of
our Fort, where we found Acorns and some Staggs, wherewith we refreshed our
selves. My Men were so harassed, that I could never persuade them to imbark
again the same day, which obliged me to imbark alone with our Pilots, promising
them to return speedily. The Weather being very stormy, we spent six days
before we could reach the Fort Miamis, where I gave an Account to M. la Salle
of my Discoveries. He received me very kindly, but told me withal, that he had
been better pleased to see me arrived with all his Men.

These last words seemed to me a Command, and therefore after having refreshed
my self, I went again into my Canoo, but I was hardly Fifteen Leagues off, that
I was met by a violent Storm, in which our Canoo was overturned and then set to
rights again, and at last driven upon the shore, from whence we went over Land
to meet our Men at the place appointed. We arrived there the next Morning, and
having spent the rest of the Day to get them together, embarked again, and came
in less than one day to Fort Miamis.

M. la Salle was very glad to see his Men together, looking upon this Recruit
as a necessary Supply to carry on his Designs, and yet these very Men
disappointed them, and some time after put an end to his Discoveries, and to
his Life, so that the Men alone, upon whom he grounded his hopes, were the only
cause of all the Misfortunes that befell him, and of the Tragical end of his
Life.

M. la Salle having in less than two Months put his Fort in a good posture of
Defense, as well to protect his Barks, and Canoos, as to defend himself against
the Natives on the Land side, and engaged the chief of the Nation into his
Interests, resolved to advance as far as the Illinois, whose nearest Habitation
was above 100 Leagues from our Fort.

River of the Illinois.
The only way to go to them, was to Embark upon a River, which springing from a
Hill within six Leagues of the Lake of the Illinois, becomes Navigable above
Forty Leagues from our Fort, and falls into the Mississipi, after a course of
200 Leagues. We left our Fort and the Country of the Miamis in the beginning of
December, leaving only ten Men to secure our Magazines; and having carried our
Canoos and Equipage over Land, arrived four days after upon the River of the
Illinois, where we Embarked to the number of Forty four Persons, without
reckoning Three Recollects. We fell down the said River, by easy Journeys, the
better to observe that Country, and supply our selves with Provisions. The
Banks of that River are as charming to the Eye, as useful for Life. The
Meadows, Fruit Trees, and Forests, affording every thing that is necessary for
Men and Beasts, so that being amused by that agreeable variety, we spent six
days from the Portage (that is the place where we Embarked) to the first
Village of the Illinois, A Village of the Illinois
called Pontdalamia, consisting of above 500 Cabins, where we found no
Inhabitants. We went ashore, and viewed their Cabbins or Cottages, which are
made with great pieces of Timber, interlac'd with Branches, and covered with
Bark. The inside is more neat, the Walls or sides, as well as the Floor, being
finely matted. Every Cottage has two Appartments, wherein several Families
might lodge, and under every one of them there is a Cave or Vault, wherein they
preserve their Indian-Corn, of which we took a sufficient quantity, because we
wanted Provisions.

We continued our Voyage, and above Thirty Leagues lower fell into a Lake or
Pond above seven Leagues in Circuit, where we caught excellent Fish; and
following the stream, fell again into the Channel of the River, and found our
selves between two Bodies of Savages, who were Encamped on both sides the
River. They had no sooner discovered us, but they run to their Arms, The
Illinois put themselves in order of Battle.
and put themselves in order of Battle, after having sent their Wives and
Children into the Woods. We put our selves likewise in good posture, and
brought our Canoos upon a Line, and advanced toward the Shore in that order.
The Illinois observing our Countenance, and being naturally inclined to Peace,
contented themselves to ask us, who we were? We answered by our Interpreter,
that we were Subjects to the King of France, and come to make them know the
Master of Heaven and Earth, and offer them the Protection of our great Monarch;
adding, that if they would put themselves under his Protection, they should
live happily, and free from the Insults of their Enemies. We told them besides,
that though their Country was plentiful, they wanted Industry to enjoy the
Advantages of it, and therefore offered them our own, provided they would have
Commerce with us. The Illinois having heard our Answer and Proposals, received
us not as Savages use to do, They accept our Proposals.
but as Men wellbred and civilized. They expressed as much as they could, their
Veneration for our King; they presented us the Calumet, the Signal or Badge of
Peace among all those Nations, as it has been already observed. They use the
word of Singing or Dancing the Calumet. When they sing it, they drive a Pole
into the Ground, and every one brings in that place what he has taken from the
Enemy, of which they make a kind of Trophy, and sing about it their Warlike
Expeditions and glorious Feats. They call Dancing the Calumet, when they Dance
about that Trophey after the Singing is over.

We answered their Ceremonies and Complements by all the demonstrations of Joy
we could think on, and some Presents as tokens of our Friendship. We told them,
that Necessity had forced us to take some Indian Corn out of their Village,
They entertain us.
for which we gave them some Toys and Brandy. This Convinced them of our
Sincerity, and sending for their Wives and Children, made preparations to
entertain us with all the Solemnity and Magnificence they are capable of, with
Beef and Stag, and all sorts of Venison and Fowls. We were very liberal on our
side of our Brandy; so that the Feast lasted three whole days; during which, we
made several Discharges of our Arms, at which they were frighted, but our good
Words and kind Expressions confirmed them in the good Opinion they had of us.
The familiar Titles of Brothers, Friends, and Comrades were not forgotten; and
even some of us were Adopted into the chief Families amongst them; so that
through the natural Inconstancy of the Americans, we discovered in the
Illinois, a great Humanity, and a good disposition to Civil Society.

Character of the Illinois.
They are naturally Caressing, Flatterers, and Complaisant, but on the other
side Cunning, and dexterous at all Exercises. They are generally speaking well
shaped, strong, and of a brown or tawny Complexion. Hunting is their great
Delight, which makes them indocible. They love Women with excess, and Boys
above Women, so that they become by that horrid Vice, very effeminate. It Is
observable however, that notwithstanding that vicious Inclination, they have
several Laws to punish that infamous Vice. For as soon as a Boy has prostituted
himself, he is degraded in a manner of his Sex, being forbidden to wear the
Apparel or Name of Man, and to make any Office or Function fit for Men, even
nor so much as to be suffered to go a Hunting. They are therefore looked upon
as Women, and confined to their Employments, of whom they are even more
slighted and hated than by Men; insomuch that these Wretches become, by their
Crime, the scorn and contempt of both Sexes. Thus without any help but natural
Reason, they are sensible of their Crime, and have made these Laws as a Bridle
to master their brutish sensuality, though, as I have said before, they hate all
manner of restraint; they marry several Wives, and to preserve Peace and Union
in their Families, they marry commonly Sisters or near Relations. They are very
Jealous, and punish the Infidelity of their Wives with a great severity.
Hermaphrodite are very common amongst them, but whether it be an effect of the
Climate or no, I do not pretend to determine. Women, and the prostituted Boys I
have spoken of, work fine Mats for hanging their Cottages, while Men go a
Hunting or till the Ground for sowing of Indian Corn. Their Country is situated
along the River, which bears their Name, and are dispersed in several Villages.
This contains about 1500 Souls, amongst whom we computed 500 fighting Men.

M. La Salle being sensible of the strength of this Nation, thought that
nothing was to be neglected to keep them in amity with us; but at the same time
that it was necessary to provide our selves against their Inconstancy. A Fort
built.
Therefore he ordered a Fort to be built upon a rising ground near the River,
which was in a little time in a posture of defense. However he was in great
pain for his Bark which he had sent back from the Bay of Puans to Niagara, of
which he had no manner of News. This, together with the malice of some of our
Men, made him so melancholy, that the Paleness of his Face betrayed the grief
of his Heart; but as he was very Courageous, he concealed it as well as
possible, contenting himself to manifest it by the Name of Crevecoeur (breaking
Heart) which he gave to his Fort.

We had however hitherto no great cause of Complaint; we had happily carried on
our Discovery to 500 Leagues beyond Fort Frontenac, and made several Forts for
the Communication and Security of our Settlements. Most of the Savages were
entered into our Alliance, and the fiercest among them, had not so much as
offered to stop our Progress, so that we found no Enemies but our selves, and
our own Divisions, which proved at last a fatal source of great Misfortunes and
Miseries.

Murmurings of the French.
Most of our Men being discouraged by a long and tedious Voyage, the end whereof
they could not see, and weary of a wandering Life in Forests and Deserts, where
they had no other Company but Brutes, and Savages, without out any Guide,
Carriage, and Provisions could not forbear murmuring against the Author of so
tiresome and perilous an Enterprise. M. La Salle, whose penetration was
extraordinary, discovered immediately their dissatisfaction, and tried all
possible means to prevent the consequences thereof. The glory of the
Enterprise, the exemple of the Spaniards, the hopes of a great Booty, and every
thing else that may engage Men, we made use of to encourage them, and inspire
them with better Sentiments; but these Exhortations, like Oil poured upon Fire,
served only to increase their dissatisfaction. What said they? must we always
be Slaves to his Caprichio's, and be continually bubbl'd by his Visions, and
foolish Expectations? and must the Fatigues we have hitherto undergone be used
as an Argument to oblige us to go through more Perils, to gratify the Ambition
or Folly of a merciless Man, who upon fair pretenses has transplanted us into
this new World amongst Brutes. We are very far from our Country, without
Provisions or any other help; but our case shall be ten times worse, if we
follow the wandering Inclinations of a Man, who is resolved to go to the further
end of the World. He has made himself Rich by our Perils, and to our own loss;
what then have we to do, but to put a stop, by his Death, to our further
Miseries, and take possession of what he has gained by our Fatigues? These were
the Arguments these Villains used to encourage themselves to the horrid Crime
they had resolved upon; but having, upon second thoughts, considered the
consequences of their violent Designs, they thought it would be more safe to
incite the Illinois against him, that he might perish by their Hands.

The Artifices of the Malcontents.
To compass that villainous Design, they made a show of an extraordinary
Friendship to the Savages, and let them know, that by reason of the good
Entertainment they had received from them, they thought themselves obliged to
acquaint them with the dangers they were threatened with. They told them that M.
La Salle was in a strict Alliance with the Iroquois, their ancient and
implacable Enemies; that he was advanced into their Country to discover their
Situation and Strength; that the Fort he had built was to bridle them; and that
the Voyage he pretended to make to Fort Frontenac, was in order to acquaint the
Iroquois with their Condition, and conduct them into their Country, to destroy
altogether their Nation, having agreed together to share the Booty amongst
them; concluding, that having revealed to them the wicked Designs of their
Commander, they left it to their own prudence, to take what measures they
should think necessary for their Security.

It Is very easy to guess what impression such a Discovery wrought upon a Weak
and Credulous People, who believed without any further Inquiry, whatever our
Villains had told them. They broke off immediately their Society with us, and
looked upon us, but chiefly upon our Chief, as their greatest Enemies, and
resolved upon our Ruin. M. La Salle suspected the cause of their Mistrust, and
was sensible of the danger he was exposed to, but did not know from whence it
came. His great Courage was not however cast down, and trusting to his good
Conscience, went boldly to the Chief of the Savages, and told them, That he
observed such an alteration in their proceedings with him, that he could not
but be concerned at it; and therefore desired them to tell him the Motives of
their Mistrust, and to consider whether they were well grounded, or only an
Artifice of their common Enemies, who were jealous of the good Correspondence
that was between them.

The Illinois could not refuse that reasonable Demand, And how they were
discovered.
and therefore told him, that his own Men had discovered his Designs against
them, in conjunction with the Iroquois. M. La Salle, though surpised at the
Perfidiousness and Treachery of his Men, made use of such convincing Arguments,
to prove the Malice of his Accusers and his Innocence, together with the
impossibility of his League with a Cruel Nation, who is bound by no Law nor
Sense of Humanity; that the Illinois were persuaded of the sincerity of his
Intentions, and of the Motive of his Enemies, and therefore we became Friends
again.

The arrival of Mausolea.
The Calm was hardly settled, but that it was disturbed by a more dangerous storm
than the former, by the arrival of one Mausolea, a secret Emissary of the
Iroquois, of the neighboring Nation of the Mascontans, a Cunning Seditious and
Eloquent Man. This pretended Ambassador arrived in the Camp of the Illinois
during the Night, and having gained the chief of them, the Council was called,
where Mausolea having displayed his Presents, acquainted the Assembly with the
motives of his Embassy. He told them that it was not the Interest alone of his
Nation and theirs, but rather of all the Americans, His Discourse.
which had occasioned his Deputation, seeing that they were informed that the
French were come with a Design to subdue the whole Country of the Northern
America to the Gulf of Mexico; that to succeed therein, we pretended not only
to make use of our own Forces, but likewise of the Americans themselves; that
in order thereunto, we had contracted a strict Alliance with the Iroquois their
common Enemies: That the Fort we had erected on their River, was the beginning
of our Tyranny, and a place of Refuge 'till the arrival of our Confederates:
That if they expected any longer, and gave us time to join together, their
Miseries should be past remedy, and therefore advised them to prevent us, and
destroy us whilst it was in their power.

The crafty Contrivance of the Illinois.
These Calumnies of Mausolea made a great impression on the credulous Illinois,
and so much the more, because his Accusation agreed exactly with what our own
Men had told them. But doubtless the Reader expects an Account of the Reason
that put the Iroquois upon this Villainous trick; and if we remember what has
been already said of the Character of that barbarous Nation, it is easy to
discern, that they were afraid that the Illinois would grow too powerful by
their Commerce with us, and be enabled by the use of Firearms, to make head
against them, and therefore they made use of this Mausolea to Accuse us as he
did, in order to incense the Illinois against our Nation, and prevent thereby
our Settlement in the Country.

M. La Salle, who relied upon the Faith of the late Reconciliation, knew
nothing of this new Storm; and having no other Thoughts than to settle his
Union with the Illinois, rose very early, and went directly to the Camp of the
Illinois with his best Friend, where he was mightily surpised to see a general
Uproar, and that no body would speak with him. The Conjuncture was very nice,
and therefore M. la Salle was in a great perplexity, and did not know what to
do. Some were of Opinion to retire into the Fort 'till this new Treachery was
discovered, but he would not hearken to this Advice, lest his Retreat should
confirm the Accusation of his Enemies; and took a Resolution more worthy of
himself, though more dangerous. He went up boldly to the Assembly of the Chief of
the Nation, and expressed himself as well as he could in their own Language,
and much to this effect.

Friends,
Mr. la Salle's Speech to the Illinois.
I Cannot but wonder at your Inconstancy; we parted very good Friends last
Night, and this Morning I find you almost in Arms against me; no body speaks to
me, and every body threatens me: What new Crime have I committed? or rather by
what new Impostor have you been incensed against me? I surrender my self, and
therefore if ever I have acted against the Interest of your Nation, you may do
what you please, I am at your mercy. The Savages considering his Speech, and
his Countenance, were almost persuaded with his Innocence, and told him the
Subject of the Embassy of Mausolea, who was at that time present, whereupon M.
la Salle directed his Speech to him in this manner. You accuse me of an
Alliance with a Barbarous and Treacherous Nation, but where are your Proofs? If
you have any? speak out; but if you have none, do you think the Illinois will
believe your malicious Contrivances.


Mausolea had certainly no Proof, but endeavored to make out his Accusation by
some Circumstances; as his former Commerce with the Iroquois; the Fort he had
built upon the River of the Illinois; and his return to Fort Frontenac,
concluding that though these were no direct Proofs, yet they were substantial
Indications of his Design. It was very easy for M. la Salle to answer his
Arguments, and to show that the Iroquois, being jealous of their good
Correspondence, and sensible that their Union would enable them to make head
against them; had hired this Emissary to create these Divisions. He advised
them to consider every thing, and how the Iroquois had subdued, by their
Artifices, the Miamis, the Quiaquons, and the Mascoutans, who sent this
pretended Advice and therefore exhorted to weigh every thing, and enquire into
the Embassy, for he suspected Mausolea was sent by the Iroquois, and not by
his own Nation; assuring them, in the mean time, that he was come to protect
them against the Iroquois and their other Enemies.

The effect of his Discourse.
These Reasons being accompanied with the assuredness which a good Cause
inspires, had all the expected effect; insomuch that Mausolea himself; out of
Fear, or remorse of Conscience, confessed, that the Iroquois had spread those
Reports among the Mascontans, on purpose to excite a general Insurrection
against us, and owned that the safety of the Illinois, and of his own Nation,
depended on their Union with us; whereupon the Illinois made us all the
Protestations in the World, that they would never renounce our Alliance, nor
give ear any more to the Suggestions of our common Enemies.

M. la Salle divides his Men.
This Peace and good Correspondence being thus happily restored, M. la Salle
turned all his Thoughts toward his Enterprise, and finding himself near the
great River Mississipi, he resolved to divide his Men to carry on at once his
Discoveries to the North and to the South, by means of that River, reserving
for himself to fall down to the Sea, and to send some body else toward the
source of the River. But as he was thus preparing himself, his Treacherous Men
plotted to put a stop both to his Journey and to his Life, and to poison him
and his best Friends at once. They pitched upon Christmas Day for acting this
Villainy, and found means to put some Poison into the Pot, to cut off at one
blow, all such as might have avenged the Death of their Captain, and likewise
to remain the sole Masters of the Fort, and of all the Effects that were
therein.

M. la Salle Poisoned by his Men.
The Dinner was hardly over, that M. la Salle and his Friends found themselves
very ill. They fell into Convulsions and other Symptoms, which discovered the
true cause of them; whereupon they took a Dose of good Treacle, and by this
quick remedy, prevented the effect of the Poison, insomuch that all recovered.

They run away.
This was too plain to be denied, and too horrid to be forgiven, therefore the
Rogues ran away to avoid the just punishment they deserved; and though M. la
Salle sent after them, it was not possible to overtake them, the thick Forests
affording them a fair opportunity to make their escape. The desertion of these
Villains weakened our Band, but we were soon recruited by several young
Savages, who engaged themselves into our Service, and likewise by some French
Men who were dispersed and wandering in the Woods, so that our number was in a
little time considerably increased.

Things being thus settled, M. la Salle applied himself to the execution of his
Project, Mr. Dacan appointed for the discovery to the North.
and appointed Mr. Dacan for the Discovery of the Country along the Mississipi,
to the North-east, with four French Men, two Savages, and Father Louis a
Recollect, He gave 'em Arms, Ammunition, and some Merchandise to trade with the
Nations. They Embarked on the 28th of February 1680, and fell down the River of
the Illinois into the Mississipi, and from thence went up that great River for
450 Leagues together to the North, and came within seven Leagues of its Source,
landing now and then on both sides to view the Country, and by what Nation it
was Inhabited.

The source of the Mississipi.
The Mississipi. springs out of a Fountain on the top of a Hill in the Country
of the Issati, about the 50 degree of Latitude: It receives so many Rivolets,
that it becomes Navigable for Boats within six Leagues from its Source. The;
Country along its Banks is Inhabited by several Nations, as the Hanetons,
Issati's Oua, Tintonha, and Nadouestians, who received Mr. Dacan with all the
kindness imaginable. He traded with them, and increased his number with several
Savages, who offered to accompany him. He let up likewise the King's Arms about
two Leagues from the source of the River, upon a great Tree in sight of those
Nations, as a Mark that they became Subjects to his Master. He made also
several Settlements, and one, among the rest, among the Issati's where some
French Men desired to remain.

M. Dacan takes possession of that Country.
This Gentleman, charmed with the docility of these Nations, and engaged by the
advantageous Trade that he met with there, advanced to the Lake of the
Arsenipoits, which is about Thirty Leagues in Circuit. That Nation received our
Men kindly, notwithstanding their natural fierceness, and they founded there an
Habitation, and another among the Chongaskabees, or Nations of Strong Men, who
are Neighbors of the Arsenipoits.

M. la Salle takes leave of the Illinois.
While Mr. Dacan was carrying on his Discoveries, M. la Salle took his leave of
the Illinois, to return to Fort Frontenac, in order to get a new supply of Men
and Ammunition, and likewise to view in what condition were his Forts,
Magazines and Settlements, and hasten the building of a new Ship, which he had
ordered to be made. He set out the 8th of November, 1680, and Three days after
arrived to the Village of the Illinois, where he resolved to build another Fort
on a rising ground, in order to command the Miamis, Outagamis, Kikapous,
Aisnous, and Mascoutans; and to serve likewise for a Place of Refuge to the
French. This Design, though prudent and advantageous, was however attended with
some fatal Consequences, as we shall see hereafter.

Having taken all the observations that he thought necessary; A Treachery of
two of his Men.
he continued his Journey, and met, about two Leagues from the Village of the
Illinois, two of his Men, whom he had sent two Months before to
Missilimachinac, to endeavor to get Intelligence of his new Ship. These Rogues
pretended to have done their utmost, without having been able to Discover what
was become of her, though they had burnt it themselves, after having sold the
Effects that were on board to the Iroquois. M. la Salle suspected presently
that it was lost, but however, appeared as unconcerned as before, and sent me
in a Letter a Draught of the Fort he had marked out, ordering me to work
thereupon immediately.

These V^llains, who had already sold us to the Iroquois, made a great haste,
in order to improve the absence of our Commander to their advantage, and
delivered me the Letter of M. la Salle, which being very pressing, I went
immediately to the place I was commanded to, exhorting my Men to Peace and
Union; and leaving the Fort under the Command of the most Faithful. The place
M. la Salle had pitched upon, was a Rock very high, the top of which was even
and of a convenient space, so that it commanded the River, and the Country
round about. Our Fort Plundered.
I had already drawn some Lines, and made other preparations to build it, when
I heard that these Villains had seduced and perverted most of our men, insomuch
that they had plundered our Fort, and carried away what was most valuable in
it. I returned immediately, and found only seven or eight French Men in the
Fort, who had been so honest as to detest the Villainy of their Comrades, but
not able to prevent it. I confess my Heart was almost broke, when I considered
the Condition we were in, without any help amongst Savages; but having found a
good quantity of Ammunition, with Arms left in the Fort, I thought the Cause
was not altogether Desperate, and encouraged my Men, by the hopes of a quick
return of M. La Salle, and all other Arguments that I could think on, not
forgetting the glory they had gained by their Fidelity, and the Reward they
might expect, if they supported this Disgrace with Courage. I took an exact
Account of the Damage we had sustained, and sent it to M. La Salle. I
redoubled in the mean time my care and application to preserve our
Correspondence with the Illinois, and by these means we put our selves very
near in as good a posture as before, the number of Men excepted.

M. La Salle having received these dismal Tidings, made a great search after
those Rogues, and pursued them so closely, that part of them surrendered
themselves, and the rest were taken. He caused the most Seditious to be Hanged,
and pardoned the rest. He sent the Messenger back to me, with a promise of a
quick Supply, and Orders to tarry for him in the Fort. A whole Year however
elapsed in this expectation, but our number being increased, by the arrival of
some French Men, and the conjunction of some Savages, we would have wanted
nothing at all, had not a sad and unforeseen Accident disappointed our Measures.

Our loss was hardly repaired, when we fell into a greater danger; The Iroquois
come to attack the Illinois.
for in the Month of September 1687, we discovered within a quarter of a League
of the Camp of the Illinois, about 600 Iroquois armed with Bows, Swords,
Halberds, and a great many of them with Firearms. This unexpected Army
frighted the Illinois, and revived their suspicion of our Correspondence with
their Enemies; and I must confess, I was in a great perplexity, knowing not
what to do in so nice a juncture. However having determined my self, I did
whatever I could to encourage the Illinois, and told them that I would go to
the Camp of the Iroquois, and endeavor to bring them to Terms; assuring them,
that if I could not succeed, I would share the danger they were in; but that
they had no time to lose, and therefore advised them to send their Women and
Children away, and put themselves in good posture of defense. This Proposal
convinced them of the sincerity of our Intentions, and therefore they gave me
an Interpreter, and one of their chief Men to accompany me, and be Witness of
my Negotiation.

The Army of the Iroquois divided into two Bodies, and commanded by
Tagancourte, Chief of Tsonnontouans, and Agoustot Chief of the Desouatages, two
experienced Generals. That of the Illinois was not 500 strong, and we were not
upward of 25 French Men amongst them, divided in their Battalious, to encourage
them by our Example, and keep them in the best order we could, I parted from
our Army with my Interpreter, an Illinois, and two French Men, and advanced
toward the Iroquois, whose Left Wing moved, at the same time, toward our Right,
where our Men appeared very resolute, and prepared to make a vigorous Defense.

A custom observed amongst the Savages.
As soon as I came near them, they shot at us, but by chance none was wounded,
whereupon I sent back the Illinois, and the two Frenchmen, taking upon my self
all the peril attending such a Deputation. As soon as I came at a convenient
distance, I showed a Collar, it being the Custom amongst the Savages, to make
all their Proposals with Collars, the same being the Symbol of Peace, Union,
and Alliance. I advanced upon the public Faith of the Badge, but I was no
sooner in the Camp, but I was seized by those Villains, one of whom took my
Collar, whilst another designed to stab me with a Knife, but it pleased God,
that the Knife slided along one of my Ribs, which saved my Life. The most
Rational, or rather the least Brutish of? em, rescued me from their Hands, and
after having stopped the Blood with a kind of Balsom, conducted me to the middle
of their Camp, with my Interpreter; where they asked me the Subject of my
coming.

My Deputation to the Iroquois.
Though my strength was considerably abated by the loss of my Blood, my Courage
was not cast down, neither was I daunted by their Number and Threats. I
complained therefore, first. of their unjust Proceedings, and violation of
their Public Faith; and then of their coming, without any provocation, to
attack a Nation, which was in Confederacy, and under the Protection of the King
of France, my Master; therefore I entreated them to return home, if they had
any respect for that Prince; and that they would look upon the Illinois as
their Friends, since they were so united with us, that whatsoever conspired
their Destruction, conspired our own. I told them besides, that they ought to
consider the danger of their Enterprise; the Illinois being about six Hundred
men, and the French above 200; and that my Mediation and Exhortation to Peace,
were not the effects of any Fear we had for them; concluding, that I entreated
them to make Peace with the Illinois in the Name of our King, and of Count
Frontenack their Father; and that I should not complain of the loss of my
Blood, if t was so happy as to succeed in my Negotiation.

While I was thus arguing, the two Armies were skirmishing; The Success of it.
and some time after, an Iroquois came to give Advice to the General; that
their Right Wing began to give ground, and that they had observed some French
men among the Illinois, who had made a great fire upon them. This Advice came
very unluckily for me; for the Savages were so incensed against me, that they
presently talked of killing me. I was preparing my self to suffer every thing,
but observing a young rash Iroquois standing behind me with a Razor in his
Hand, and knowing the Custom of that Cruel Nation, which is to cut off their
Enemies Head, and then take off the Hair and Skin like a Cap, which is amongst
them the greatest Trophy, I did not doubt hue this young Warrior had a great
fancy to my Hair, which he touched now and then, and lest he should do it too
soon, I told him, that he ought, at least, to expect the Orders of his Masters.
Tagancourte would have me put to death, but Agoustot being a particular Friend
of M. La Salle, opposed the other General, and by a kind of Miracle, Mercy
perhaps, for the first time, prevailed with this Barbarous Nation; and it was
resolved to send me back to the Illinois, and tell them they were disposed to a
sincere Peace and Union, giving me a fine Collar of Porcelain, as a Token of
their sincerity. They protested that they would for the future, live in Peace
with the Illinois, and look upon them as Brethren, since they were Children of
the Governor of Canada, which they did not know before.

The consideration of the danger I had escaped, Cured me almost of my Wound,
and gave me sufficient strength to return to our Camp. I met about half the
Way, Father Gabriel de la Ribonde, and Father Zenoble Membre, who almost
dispaired of seeing me any more, and therefore could hardly express the joy
they had for my happy return. We went together to the Illinois, to whom I
delivered the Message of the Iroquois, but advised them withal not to trust too
much to their Words and Presents; for I could not persuade my self, that so
Cruel and Ambitious a Nation would return Home without any other Advantage, but
that of having made Peace with the Illinois, whom they pretended to subdue;
which was ra^^^^ a dishonor, and therefore I looked upon all their
Protestations as an Artifice to surprise their Enemies.

The Resolution of the Illinois, upon my return, and their Desertion.
The Illinois were fully persuaded with what I told them, of the Infidelity of
the Iroquois; and yet they resolved to return the Present by an Embassy. They
called, in the mean time, a Council, to take the necessary measures for their
Defense; but their young Warriors being satisfied with the Glory they had
gained in the first: Attack, wherein they repulsed their Enemies, would not
venture a second Fight, and most of them left their Camp. The others being thus
weakened by their Desertion, ran away upon the approach of the Iroquois, who
plundered their Camp.

Being thus forsaken by our new Confederates, we retired into our Fort, but the
Illinois being reinforced by fresh Men, appeared again two days after, upon a
rising ground in good Order, and resolved to fight; whereupon the Iroquois
thinking they were more numerous than at first, and having tried their Valor
in the former Attack, defir'd me to interpose my mediation for a Peace, which I
accepted; and they gave me one of their Chiefs as an Hostage. I went to the
Illinois with Father Zenoble, Both Parties accept my mediation.
and told them the Proposals of the Iroquois; and that I had brought one of
their Chiefs for Hostage. The Illinois were very well pleased with my Message,
and assured me that they were sincerely disposed to make Peace with the.
Iroquois; then they gave me a full Power to make it upon what Terms I should
please, and promised to send immediately an Hostage for confirming what I
should say. Both Parties being so well disposed, I took some refreshment, and
returned to the Iroquois, whom I told that I was empowered to treat with them,
and desired that we might immediately enter upon the Treaty.

Imprudence of an Illinois.
They were pleased with it, and the Hostage of the Illinois being arrived at the
same time, confirmed every thing that I had said, so that the Treaty would have
been concluded in few Hours, had not the Imprudence of this Illinois broken all
my measures. This inconsiderate Fellow began to praise the Valor of his own
Nation, and their Generals; but owned, that being hardly 400 Men, they looked
upon their Proposals of Peace as a favor, which they would acknowledge by some
Presents of Beavers and Slaves. This foolish Confession undeceived the
Iroquois, who having believed what I had told them of the number of the
Illinois, were glad to make Peace, and in some fear of their Enemies. They
began then to speak very big, and complained in very hard words, I had deluded
them, and done them a great injury, saying that they would have got a
considerable Booty, if they had not believed me.

I must confess I was put to a plunge, but having recovered my self, I
answered, That what I had said before, and what, the Illinois said then was
true, for the Illinois were above 600 Men upon their Arrival, and at the first
fight, but that a great number having deserted since that time, it may be that
their Number was reduced to 400. That I had no other intention but to bring
both Parties to a right understanding: That they were Masters of the Camp of
their Enemies, and might impose upon them what Conditions they pleased, since
they offered themselves to buy the Peace. They approved, or at least seemed to
approve my Reasons, and sent back the Illinois, to acquaint the Chiefs of his
Nation; that they desired to see them the next day in their Camp, to conclude
the Treaty.

The interest between the Iroroquois. and the Illinois.
They came accordingly the next Morning, with a great quantity of Beavers Skins,
and several Slaves, which they presented to the Iroquois, who received them
very kindly, and promised to restore them their Camp and Habitations, which
they confirmed by some Presents of three Collars of Porcelain and Furrs. The
first Collar signifying that they begged Pardon of the Governor of Canada, for
having attacked a Nation who was under his Protection; the second signifying
the same civility to M. La Salle; and by the Third, the Iroquois swore an
eternal Alliance with the Illinois. These Presents being mutually exchanged,
both Parties retired.

The Treachery of the Iroquois.
Whilst these two Nations were giving each other mutual Marks of a sincere
reconciliation, I discovered that the Iroquois were secretly making Canoos, to
follow the Illinois along the River, and exterminate them; and being asked by
one of the Chiefs of the Illinois, what I thought of their Reconciliation? I
told him very frankly, that the Promises and words of that treacherous Nation
were not to be relied upon; that I did not doubt but that the Canoos which they
were getting ready with so much secrecy, were designed against them; that
therefore I advised them to retire into another Country with their Families,
and fortify themselves in some advantageous Post, 'till the Iroquois were gone
away. The Illinois approved of my Advice, and went back to his Nation, and I
retired into our Fort.

The Iroquois make Presents to the French.
The Iroquois having considered how they had used me, thought fit to give us
some satisfaction, and therefore on the 10th of September, eight days after
their arrival, they desired me and Father Zenoble to come to their Council,
where being sat, they brought six Packs of Bever-skins, and told me, that their
Nation offered us those Presents, and desired us to give the two first Packs,
in their Name to Count Frontenac their Father, and assure him that they would
trouble no more the Illinois, knowing they were his Children; that they gave me
the third to serve me as a Plaster for my Wound; that the fourth was Oil to
rub our Legs during our Voyage: By the fifth, they exhorted us to Worship the
Sun; and by the last, they required us to march away the next day, and retire
to our French Habitations.

Their Answer.
I returned them our thanks, in the Name of our Nation, for the respects they
had expressed for the Count de Frontenac, and Mr. la Salle, and for their good
Entertainment, and likewise for their Oil and Plaster, but I thought fit to
ask them when they themselves designed to march away, and when they would
restore that Camp to the Illinois, according to their Promise. This Question
did not please them, and after a general grumbling, they told me, that since I
was so curious, they would satisfy me, and that they would depart, after
having devoured some of our Brethren, or else some of the Illinois. As soon as
I understood this Answer, I thrusted back their Present with my Foot, and told
them, that seeing they had such a Design, I would accept none, adding withal,
that I would march away without their. Order or Leave, when I should think fit.
The Chiefs of the Iroquois having heard my reply, stood up, and told us that we
might retire. There was amongst them one Abenaguis, with whom I had been
acquainted, who told me, that they were very much angry with me, and advised us
to retire with all the haste we could to our Fort; which we did accordingly,
and stood all the Night long upon our Guard, being resolved to defend our
selves to the utmost extremity.

When we saw our selves safe, Father Zenoble and I made several Reflections, on
the Dissimulation and Infidelity of that Nation, and likewise on the dangers we
had been exposed to in their Council; and I remember that that good Father
blamed my proceedings; and said, That in those nice occasions, we ought to be
more pliant, in hopes to find a more favorable opportunity. I agreed with him
in general, but insisted, that this Principle admitted of some exceptions, and
that assuredness and vigor were more prevailing upon barbarous men, than a
more prudent way. In the mean time we advised what was fit to be done in this
juncture; The French quit the Fort.
and being unable to defend us against so many Enemies, we resolved to quit the
Fort the next day. I Embarked the next Morning with two Recollects and five
French men; the others who were in the Fort, having chosen to go and live among
the Illinois rather than to return home.

Having equally divided our Arms, Ammunition, and Goods, we Embarked the
Eleventh of September 1687, very early, and about Five Leagues from the Fort,
we went ashore to repair our Canoo, and dry some Furs, which the Water would
have spoiled. As we were busy about it, Father Gabriel told me that he would
take a walk along the Shore; Father Gabriel murdered by the Savages.
and I advised him to keep in our sight, be cause we were surrounded with
Enemies; but the charming Prospect of that Country engaged him a little too
far, so that seeing he did not return, we began to mistrust that he was fallen
into the Hands of the Savages. Father Zenoble and I advanced into the Woods to
look for him, but could not discover what was become of him, notwithstanding we
fired our Arms, and made all the Night long a great Fire to give him notice of
the place where we expected him. We understood since, that he was met by a Band
of Savages called Quicapous, who murdered him, and sold, some time after, his
Breviary to a Jesuit, from whom we learned these particulars. Thus dyed this
Holy Man, in the seventieth Year of his Age, by the Hands of those very Men for
the sake of whom he had left his Native Country, and suffered so many Fatigues.

We waited for him 'till the next day about Noon, but having no hopes of his
Return, we Embarked again, and after one Months Navigation, landed within two
days Journey of the Lake of the Illinois, into which we carried over Land our
Equipage. We embarked again on the 20th of October, and ten days after, were
forced to land, by contrary Winds, within 20 Leagues of a great Village, called
Potavalamia, where we found no other Provisions but Acorns.

I was sick of an Ague, and my legs were so swollen, that we could not reach the
Village I have spoken of 'till the 10th of November. We found no body in it,
nor any Provisions, but having, by good chance, advanced into the Country, we
met with a good quantity of Indian Corn, which enabled us to Imbark again. The
Winds were so cross, that we were obliged to come a, Shore few days, after,
where having found some fresh footsteps, we, followed the Track, and came to
another Village of the Pontoualamis, which was likewise abandoned, but however
afforded us some Provisions, which were sufficient to maintain us 'till our
arrival at the Buy of Puans, which; was toward the latter end of November.

Having already described this Bay, I need not repeat it now, but I must add,
that there is a Creek in it called the Creek of the Sturgeons, because of the
prodigious quantity of that, sort of Fish that is caught in it. We refreshed
our selves in that place for several days with the Pontoualamis, who
entertained us with scorched Bees and Stagg. We diverted also our selves in
Hunting of Beavers, which afforded us a great satisfaction.

The Country about the Bay, being watered by an infinite number of Rivulets,
lined with great Trees, and the Woods being full of Aspen-trees, the Branches
and Leaves whereof are the dainty food of Beavers. Those Creatures are very
numerous in those Parts.

An Accouns of Beavers.
The Beavers are, as every body knows, Amphibious, Creatures, who cannot live
without Air, Water, and Land. They are near as big as Sheep, but not so tall,
their legs being very short, but so nimble, that they come nothing short of
Apes for dexterity. They have a Muzzle or Nose, and strong Teeth; their Body is
covered with thick Hair, and pretty fine, but their Tail is made up of a kind
of twisted Hair, Which forms a figure like that of a Triangle, and serves them
as a Trowel to beat the soft Earth they make use of to build their Habitations.

The Instinct or Industry of those Creatures is almost incredible, and
therefore I am sensible that many will question the Truth of what I have to say
about it, however, I may assure the Reader that I do not Romance in the least.
When they have a mind to make a new Settlement or Habitation, and have found a
proper place for it, which is commonly in the Channel of a: River, provided it
be not too deep, or too broad, they look for a Tree on the Bank of the said
River, leaning a little toward the Water. They meet together in a Circle, and
because their number is always odd, it seems that they hold a Council, to know
what is fit to be done. The first thing to be done, is to cut down the Tree
they have pitched upon, but not horizontaly, but in such a manner that it may
fall into the very place they have a mind to, that is cross the River, to stop,
or at lead to abate the Rapidity of the stream. If the Branches hinder the body
of the Tree to lie in die Water. they cut them likewise, and then make a
perfect Dike or Bank with Mud and Gravel together, leaving now and then some
places open for the Water, lest the River should overflow their Bank. If the
Tree cannot reach the other Shore, they fell another Tree over against it to
join that, and make a perfect Causey or Bridge. This Work being completed,
they build their Habitations or Caves near that place, and employ nothing but
mud in the following manner; they lay a Lay of it, and beat it very hard with
their Tails, and then another, and so on successively, 'till it is about three
Foot high; they Arch it and Polish it very handsomely, and divide it into three
several Apartments, which have communication one with the other; one of them is
to lie in, the second for their Provisions, and the third serves them for a
necessary House. They make a Canal or subterranean Aqueduct from the River to
one of their Apartments, in which they have a kind of Pond, wherein they hold
their Tail, for otherwise they could not live. This Canal serves also for
another use, for when they hear any noise, they make their escape through that
place into the River. Every one is obliged to work, but if any one has his Tail
excoriated or other wise hurt, he lays it flat upon his back, to show that he
is unable to work.

How they Hunt Beavers.
When the Savages go a Hunting, they follow the Rivers, and as soon as they
discover any Causey, Bridge or Bank, they may be sure that the Beavers are not
far off. They come as near as they can, but as soon as the Beavers see or hear
them, they run through their Canal into the River; but as they must breath from
time to time, the Savages soon shoot them, if it be in Summer time; for in
Winter they use another Art to catch them. They make holes in the Ice and
having beat out the Beavers from their Habitations into the River, they must
come to breath through those Holes, and then the Savages catch them alive by
the Tail.

Having refreshed our selves above Ten Days in this place, and taken in
Provisions, we Embarked again on the Seventeenth of December for
Missilimachinac, but eight days after were foreed back by a contrary Wind. The
Savages were gone away, but had left some Provisions, which we wanted very
much; for the Ice and the malady of our Men obliged us to continue in that
place, where we suffered very much. Finding our selves in that extremity, I
advanced into the Woods to endeavor to find some relief, and it pleased God
that I met with two Savages, of the Nation of the Outnovas, who conducted me to
a Village belonging to the Pontoualamis, where we met several Frenchmen settled
in that place, by whom we were kindly received, as also by the Savages. Father
Zenoble understanding that the Jesuits had a Settlement in the bottom of the
Bay, thought it was more becoming his Character, to pass the Winter amongst
them, than in company of the Savages, and went thither two days after our
arrival; but we continued 'till the next Spring in that place, and lived very
comfortably.

We diverted bur selves at Hunting wild Bulls in the beginning of March, How
they Hunt Bulls.
the Grass being already grown. Those Bulls are near twice as big as ours, the
Hair looks like a fine Fleece, and is very long; their Horns are bent
backwards, and extraordinary long; their Eyes are likewise larger and bigger
than those of our European Bulls, which make them look terrible. They go always
by Droves of three or four Hundred in each. When the Savages go a Hunting, they
encompass a Drove of these Bulls, and one of them comes creeping as near as he
can, and then stands up, making an Outcry, which frightens away the whole
Drove; the Savages being in a Circle, they cannot escape without being shot;
but as they become very fierce and dangerous when they are wounded, the Savages
shoot them in the Thigh or the Shoulder, to prevent their coming upon them, and
when they are down, they break their Heads with Clubs. As they are excellent
Marksmen, they never miss, and twenty Men will sometimes kill Forty and Fifty
Bulls.

That which is wonderful in this, is the havoc, which the Shot sent by the
Savages makes; for besides the exactness and swiftness of the Stroke, the force
of it is very surprising, and so much the rather, because it is nothing else
but a Stone, or a Bone, or sometimes a piece of very hard Wood, pointed and
fastened to the end of an Arrow with some Fishes-glue, that causes this terrible
effect. When the Savages go to War, they poison the Point, or extremity of
their Dart, so that if that remains in the Body, Death follows of necessity;
the only Remedy in this case, is to draw out the Arrow through the other side
of the Wound; if it goes quite thorough, or if not, to make an aperture on the
other side, and so to draw it through; after which they know by instinct,
certain Herbs, the application of which both draws out the Venom, and Cures 'em.

I stayed all the Month of March in this place: Father Zenoble came back to me
at Spring, and we re-embarking at the Creek we had left, came to Land at
Missilimachinac in the beginning of April, with a design to stay there for M. de
la Salle. From the 11th of September, 1681, when we took our leaves of the
Illinois, to the 1st of April, Seven Months were slipped away; during which time,
M. de la Salle, upon the Advice that I had given him by my Letter, was come
down to the Illinois with a good Recruit, with intention to help us. The
Iroquois having Advice of his Descent, and being afraid of being hemmed in
between two Armies, were retired, and, the Illinois were again entered into
their Possessions. However M. de la Salle found but some few, the rest being
gone to winter in the Woods; he exhorted those that remained, to call their
Countrymen, assuring them he would build a Fort that should shelter them from
the Invasion of their Enemies; The Fort of Crevecoeur
he visited the Fort of Crevecoeur, which was strill in the same condition, and
placed therein a small Garrison of Fifteen or Sixteen French, and a Commander,
with Ammunition and Arms. After this, he went again up the River to the great
Village, whither many Families of the Illinois were returned; he labored hard
upon the enclosure of his New Fort, and having understood by some Scouts, that
I had taken my way toward Missilimachinac, he set forward again to join me,
having left some Soldiers and Pioneers at the intended Fort, to continue his
Work and defend that Post.

He came not to Missilimachinac 'till about the Fifteenth of August, in the
Year 1682. There we took new measures to perfect the Discovery we had begun. We
must needs think forthwith of making some new Provision for so long a Voyage.
It was with this Design, that after Six Days rest, M. de la Salle set out in a
Canoo for Frontenac, Father Zenoble and I going along with him; haying sailed
happily the first day, we landed at a Village called Trejagou, belonging to the
Iroquois. M. de la Salle Traficked there with some Skins, and having ordered me
to stay for him there, with Father Zenoble, he went on board the Canoo
Frontenac. There he found his Bark ready, and stored her with abundance of
Ammunition and Provisions; he listed there some new Soldiers, and eight days
after, lent me his Bark laden with fresh Men, good Merchandise, and such things
as were most necessary. The Father and I went on board, and landed the first
Day at Niagara, below the Fall of the River: There we were forced to put our
Baggage and Merchandise upon Sledges, and so conduct them to the Lake Herie,
where we re-embark'd in a Canoo to the number of Twenty Persons, as well
Soldiers as Mariners, together with our best Merchandise. After Three days
Sail, we landed at the side of the River of the Miamis, where having lodged our
selves in Huts, I had time to reassemble there some French and some Savages,
Abenaguis, Loups, Quicapous, and others. There I augmented our Provisions by
Hunting, and I bartered some of our Commodities for Indian Corn.

There it was that M. de la Salle came to rejoin us toward the end of
November; the day of his Arrival we, fell down the River of the Miamis in a
Canoo, to the Mouth of another River named Chicacou; and we went up it again to
a small Harbor, which is but a League from the great River of the Illinois.
Having put on Shore in this place, we passed the Night with a very great Fire;
for the Cold was so sharp, that the next day the Rivers were froze and
unnavigable. We were obliged then to have recourse to the Sledge, to carry our
Baggage to the Village of the Illinois, where we found things in the same state
that M. de la Salle had left them; only the Village was better Peopled; which
gave us opportunity to defer our Intrigues a little, and to renew our
Provisions.

The Rivers being still blocked up with Ice, we found our selves obliged to
begin again our Journey by Land; the Third day of January, 1683. we had pusht
on our way to Thirty Leagues below. There the Weather grew mild, and the Ice
melted, so that Navigation appearing commodious, we went on Board a Canoo, the
Twenty Fourth of January, and fell down the River or the Illinois, to the River
Mississipi, where we arrived the second of February.

The River of the Illinois.
The River of the Illinois, reckoning from its first Carriage to its
disemboguing into the River, is at least 160 Leagues Navigable. The adjacent
parts are as pleasant as fruitful; one, sees there Animals of all sorts, Stags,
Hinds, Linces, Wild Bulls, Goats, Sheep, Hares, and infinite more, but few
Beavers. As to the Trees, they are nothing but Forests of High Trees, with
great Walks, which seem drawn by a Line; besides Elms, Beech, Plane-trees,
Cedars, Walnut and Chesnut-trees; one sees there whole Plains covered over with
Pomgranate-trees, Orange Trees, and Lemmon-trees; and in one word, with all
kind of Fruit Trees.

In many places there are to be seen large Vines, whole tendrels being twisted
about the Branches of huge Trees, bear Bunches of Grapes of an extraordinary
bigness.

Being Embarked upon the Mississipi, we followed the Course of this great
River; six Leagues from the Mouth of the River Illinois, we met with that of
the Ozages, Of the Ozages.
the Banks of which, and places thereabouts, are no less agreeable and Fertile;
it is true, its Water carries so great a quantity of Mud along with it, as to
change that of Mississipi, and make it all Muddy for more than Twenty Leagues.
Its Brinks are bordered with great Walnut-trees; one sees there an infinite
number of Footsteps made by the Beavers; and the Hunting for them there is
very great and common. Going up toward its Source, its Banks are inhabited by
Savages, who trade much in Skins; we passed one Night at the Mouth of this
River.

The next day, after we had sailed Ten Leagues, we came to the Village of the
Tamaoas, where we met with no body at all, the Savages being retired into the
Woods to Winter; we made there however some Marks to let 'em know that we had
passed by. After that, continuing our Voyage, we arrived, after a Course of 3
Days, at the Mouth of the River of the Ouabachi, that comes from the East, The
River of the Ouabachi.
and throws it self into the Mississipi, Eighty Leagues from that of the
Illinois: It is by this River that the Iroquois come to make War upon the
Nations of the South. In this place we lay in Huts one Night, and after a
Course of Sixty League, following still out great River, we came to land at a
Bank Inhabited by Savages, who are called Chicacha. Here it was that we lost a
Frenchman of our Company, named Preudhomme. The search we made for him during
Nine days, gave us an opportunity of discovering several Nations, and of
Building a Fort in this place, to serve as a Rest and Habitation for the French
in that fine Country.

Hunters well received of the Savages in Chicacha.
During this Interval, Two of our Hunters met with two of the Savages Chicacha,
who offered to conduct 'em into their Village. Our Men, led by a Spirit of
Curiosity, followed them; they were very well received, and after laden with
Presents, and were entreated by the Principal among them, to procure that our
Commander will honor them with a Visit. Our People being very well satisfied
with their reception, made their report of it to M. de la Salle, who the next
day went himself with Ten of his Company; he received there all the good
treatment that could be expected from People the most civilized; and had no
trouble to inspire 'em with Sentiments of submission and Obedience to the King.
These Ravages also contented freely to the finishing of our Fort.

This Nation is very numerous, and is able to furnish out Two Thousand Men; The
Nation of the Chicacha.
they have all Faces flat like Plates, which is reckoned among them for a
stroke of Beauty; it is for this Reason they take care to make the Visage of
their Children flat with tablets of, Wood, which they apply to their Foreheads,
and gird very, hard with Bands: All these Nations to the Sea Shore give
themselves this Figure. Every thing is very plentiful with them; Corn, Fruits,
Grapes, Olives, tame Hens, Indian Hens, Bustards, etc. M. de la Salle having
received such good Refreshment there, and having made 'em, by way of
acknowledgement, a Present of some Knives and Hatchets, he returned to his own
People. At last, after Nine days expectation, Preudhomme, who had lost himself
in the Woods, where he had lived upon nothing but Wild Fowl, found us again;
Preudhom me lest in the Woods, rej^in the French.
M. de la Salle entrusted him with the care of finishing the Fort, which he
called after his Name, and gave him the Command of it; after which he took his
Course upon the same River toward the end of the Month of February.

We were three Days without disembarking: An Alarm caused by a Drum.
The fourth after having made Fifty Leagues, we came to a Village of the Cappa:
We had scarce set foot on Land, but we heard a Drum beat; forthwith fancying we
saw the Enemy at our Heels, we threw our selves into our Canoos, and went over
to the other side; and so we immediately made a Redoubt to secure our selves
from any surprise.

The Savages came to view us in a Canoo; The good treatment which the Savages
Cappa gave the French.
we sent some of our Men to 'em, to present them with the Calumet; they
accepted it freely, and at the same time offered themselves to conduct us to
their Habitations, and promised us all manner of assistance. M. de la Salle was
very ready to go thither; in the mean time one of the two Savages went before,
to give notice of our arrival to those of his own Nation. Their Prince,
accompanied with some of the chief of 'em, came forward to receive us. As soon
as he saw M. de la Salle, he saluted him in a very grave and respectful manner;
offered him any thing that depended upon him or his Nation, and taking him by
the Hand, led him toward his Cottage. M. de la Salle walking along with him,
testified to him how sensible he was of his Civilities, and let him understand
his Design and Intentions, which tended to nothing else but the glory of the
true God, and to make known to him the Power of the French King. Being arrived
at the Village, we saw a very great multitude of People, in the midst of whom
were some Archers drawn up in a Line. The Prince making a little halt, declared
to all the Assembly, that we were sent by the King of France, to Discover North
America, and to receive its People under his Protection. Then there followed a
general Acclamation, by which the People seemed to testify their Joy: As soon
as the Prince had assured M. de la Salle, of the perfect submission of all his
People to the Orders of the King, he conducted him into his Cottage, and gave
him, and those of his Company, all the good treatment possible. Besides this,
he made him very considerable Presents, namely, abundance of Indian Corn, and
other necessary Provisions, with which M. de la Salle was very well satisfied,
as well as with all his other Civilities. This Nation was scarce any thing of
Savage; The Manners and Customs of the Cappa.
they give Judgment according to their Laws and Customs; every one there enjoys
his own Goods in particular.

The Nation of the Akanceas.
Eight Leagues from hence are the Akanceas, whose Land is above sixty Leagues
over: They are divided into several Villages, almost at equal distances. The
Cappa gave us two Guides to carry us to the First, which they call Togengan; it
stands upon the Bank of a River, and there we were very well received. Two
Leagues from this Town, we fell down in a Canoo to that of Torimant; and six
Leagues from this last, to another called Ozotoni. We were equally well
received in every place; and as our arrival had already made a noise in all the
Country, we found a very numerous Assembly of People in this place, which
caused M. de la Salle to set up the Arms of the King, with a Shot of our
Artillery. The Arms of the King set up at the noise of the Artillery.
The Noise and Fire of our Arms impressed such a respect upon all the
Multitude, and threw 'em into such a Consternation, that the Prince, on the
part of his Nation, The Climate of this Country.
swore to us an inviolable Alliance This Climate and that of the Cappa is the
same; it is about the 34th Degree of Latitude. The Country throughout does
generally abound in Grain, Fruits, and Wild Fowl of all sorts. The temperature
of the Air is wonderful, there is never any Snow to be seen, and but very
little Ice: Their Cottages are built of Cedar, The Religion of its Inhabitants
all matted within: They have no determined Worship; they Adore all sorts of
Animals, or rather they Worship but one Divinity, which discovers its self in a
certain Animal, such as it shall please their Jongleur, or Priest, to pitch
upon; so that it will be sometimes an Ox, sometimes a Dog, or some other. When
this visible God is dead, there is an universal Mourning; but which is
presently changed into a great Joy, by the choice they make of a new Mortal
Deity, which is always taken from amongst the Brutes.

About Sixty Leagues below this Nation, Taercas,
are the Taencas, a People that give place to none in America, either for Force
or Beauty of Climate. The Akanceas gave us Guides to conduct us thither, and
going on Board a Canoo, we still followed the Course of the great River.
Crocodiles in great numbers.
After our first days Voyage, we began to see some Crocodiles along the brink;
They are in a very great number upon these Banks, and of a prodigious bigness,
some being Twenty or Thirty Foot long. To see so monstrous an Animal, who would
believe that it comes into the World but like a Chicken, being hatched of an
Egg! only it is oserved, that it grows as long, as it lives. We took notice
that they fled when we pursued 'em, and that when we fled they, pursued us; we
dispersed them with our Fusees, and killed some of 'em. The day following being
arrived over against the first Village of the Taencas, M. de. la Salle sent me
to the Prince, to give him notice of his Arrival, and gave me two Guides of the
Akanceas, and two Abenaguis to be my Interpreters.

As this Village stands on the other side of a Lake, which is Eight Leagues in
Circumference, and half a League over, we were forced to take a Canoo to cross
it, which we performed in two Hours. As soon as we landed, I was surpised to
see the Grandeur of the Village, and the Order of the Cottages; they are placed
in diverse rows, and in a straight Line, round about a large space, being all
made of Earth, and coveted over with Mats of Cane: The Grandeur and Order of
the fine Village of the Savages.
We presently took notice of two fairer than the rest, one was the Princes
Palace, the other the Temple; each of them was about forty Foot square, the
Walls ten Foot high, and two Foot thick; the Roof, in the form of a Cupilo, was
covered with a Mat of diverse Colors: Before the Prince's Palace stood a Dozen
Men Armed with Half-pikes. As soon as we came up, an Old Man addressed himself
to me, and taking me by the Hand, led me into a great square Hall, the Floor
and sides of which were covered with a very fine Mat; at the further end of the
Hall, over against the Entrance, was a very handsome Bed, with Curtains of a
fine Stuff, made and woven of the Bark of Mulberry-trees. The Prince of the
Taencas.
We saw the Prince of this People upon this Bed, as upon his Throne, in the
middle of four handsome Women, and encompassed with above Sixty Old Men, Armed
with Bows and Arrows; they were all Clothed with very fine White Garments;
that of the Prince was adorned with certain Tufts of Wool of different Colors;
A Description of the Women of these Savages.
the rest were all plain. The Prince had upon his Head a Diadem of woven
Rushes, very curiously wrought, and enriched with large Pearls, and raised with
a Plume of various Feathers; all that were about him were bare-headed: The
Women were dressed in Clothes of the same Stuff; they had upon their Heads
little Rush Hats, adorned with several Feathers, and had all Necklaces of
Pearl, and fine Ear-Pendants of the same; they had Bracelets of woven Hair, and
several other Jewels which set off their Attire: They were not quite Black, but
Brown, their Visages something flat, their Eyes Black, sparkling, and pretty
large; their Shape line and free; and they all appeared to me of a smiling and
very pleasant Air.

Being surpised, or rather charmed, with the Beauties of this Savage Court, I
addressed my Speech to the venerable Prince, A Discourse addressed to the
Prince of these Savages.
and spoke to him in the Name of M. de la Salle. That having the Honor to be
sent by the King of France, the most potent of all the Kings upon Earth, to
make a Discovery of all the Nations of America, and to invite them to live
under the Government of so great a Prince; we came to offer them our Friendship
and Protection; to which the upper Countries had all freely submitted: That if
we did pretend to settle our selves in the Country, it was not so much to bring
them under a rigorous Yoke, as to maintain for them, by the power of our Arms,
what was already in their Possession; and to impart to them our rarest Arts and
our Wealth: Not so much to spoil them of their Treasures, as to teach them a
more advantageous way of using them. Not to Usurp their Territories, but put
them in a way to Cultivate and Improve them, and to instruct them in our
Commerce. In short, not to become their Lords and Matters, but to Establish a
Brotherly Friendship with them.

The Prince all this while hearkened with great Attention, (and one of our
Abenaguis having given him to understand what I said) embraced me, and with a
smiling Countenance, told me, That after the Account I had given him of our
great Monarch, he could not but conceive the greatest Respect and Veneration
for him; that he should the next day see M. de la Salle, and that he would give
him more particular assurances of it. Whereupon I presented him in M. de la
Salle's Name, with a Sword inlaid with Gold and Silver, some Cases of Razors,
Cizars, and Knives, and some Bottles of Aqua vitae. I cannot express the Joy
and satisfaction he received these small Presents with. But I took notice at
the same time, that one of his Wives, who had a pair of the Cizars in her Hand,
admired very much the neatness of the Work, and would now and then give me a
Smile, which I fancied might be a modest way of asking me for a pair too. I
took an opportunity to draw near to her, and pulling out of my Pocket a small
steel Case of Filligreen-work, wherein was a pair of Cizars, and a little
Tortoise-shell Knife, and pretending to admire the whiteness and fineness of
her Garment, I slipped the Case into her Hand, and she received it, squeezing my
Hand pretty hard. Which gave me reason to think, that these Women have not
Hearts altogether so Savage, but that they might easily be tamed by us, and
taught the Politer Arts of Conversation. Another of the Company, who was not
less pretty, and neatly accoutred, drawing nearer to us, gave me to understand
by the Thorns she showed me, which she made use of to fasten her Train, that
some Pins would be very acceptable to her. I gave her a paper of 'em, together
with a Case of Needles and a Silver Thimble. These little Trinkets she received
with a wonderful joy; and then I gave as much to the two others. She who was
the finest and the most agreeable of 'em, having taken notice that I admired a
Collar of large Pearl that she had about her Neck, took it off, and made an
Offer of it to me, with abundance of civility. I refused it a good while, but
reflecting upon the plenty of Pearls that is among them, and that the fishing
for 'em was in the Seas thereabouts, I made no further difficulty, and after a
few more offers, I accepted of it. But, in return, I gave her ten Yards of Blew
Ribbon, which she valued, at least, at as high a rate.

The Night now drawing on, I was going to take my leave of the Prince, but he
very earnestly desired me to stay 'till the next day, and gave the charge of me
to an Officer, to let me want for nothing. I did not want much Courtship, and
the desire I had to see a little of their Manners and Behavior, made me
readily enough accept of the kind offer. I was conducted into an Apartment
furnished much after the rate of that the Prince was in. There they brought me
a Collation of Wild-fowl, and Fruit, and some Liquors, of which I tasted. All
that while there was an Old Gentleman with me, who was very good Company, and
especially because he resolved me all the Questions I put to him. As for what
concerns their Politics, he informed me, that they were entirely governed by
their Prince's Absolute Will. That they obeyed him as their Sovereign; that
they owned his Children his lawful Successors; that when he died, they
sacrificed his first or Chief Wife, the first Steward and twenty Men of his
Nation, to be his Retinue and wait upon him in the other World. That during his
Life, no Man drunk in his Cup, nor eat out of his Dish, or walked as he was
passing by; that care was always taken, not only to clean the Way for him, but
also to strew it with sweet Herbs and Flowers. I observed in that little time I
was in his Presence, that when he spoke to any body, they made a loud kind of
humming before they answered him; and I'begg'd this Old Gentleman to tell me
the Reason of it: He told me that this was looked upon as a token of admiration
and respect. As to their Religion, he told me that they Worship the Sun; that
they had their Temples, their Altars, and their Priests. That in that Temple,
there was a Fire which burnt perpetually, as the proper Emblem of the Sun. That
at the Decrease of the Moon, they carried a great Dish of their greatest
Dainties to the Door of the Temple, as an Oblatory Sacrifice; which the Priests
offered to their God, and then they carried it home, and feasted themselves
with it.

As to their Customs, every Spring they go in a Body to some retired place, and
there turn up a large space of Land, which they do with the Drums beating all
the while. After this, they take care to call it the Desert, or the Field of
the Spirit. And thither they go in good earnest, when they are in their
Enthusiastic Fits, and there wait for Inspiration from their pretended Deity.
In the mean while, as they do this every Year, it proves of no small advantage
to them, for by this means they turn up all their Land insensibly, and it
becomes abundantly more fruitful. In Autumn they gather their Indian Corn, and
they keep it in great Baskets 'till the New Moon in the next Month of June:
Then the Families get together, and every one invites his Friends and
Neighbors, to come and eat Cakes, and some Meat they get likewise; and thus
they spend the Day in Feasting.

This is all I could learn that Day of their Religion, their Government and
Customs. The next Day I had the Curiosity of seeing their Temple, and the Old
Gentleman had me thither. The Structure of it was exactly the same with that of
the Prince's House. As to the outside, it is encompassed with a great high
Wall, the space betwixt that and the Temple forming a kind of Court, where
People may walk. On the top of the Wall are several Pikes to be seen, upon
which are stuck the Heads of their own most notorious Criminals, or of their
Enemies. On the top of the Frontispiece, there is a great Knob raised, all
covered round with Hair, and above that, an heap of Scalps in form of a Trophy.

The inside of the Temple is only a Nave, painted on all sides, at top with all
sorts of Figures; in the midst of it is an Hearth instead of an Altar, upon
which there is continually three great Billets burning, standing up on end; and
two Priests dressed in White Vestments, are ever looking after it, to make up the
Fire and supply it. It is round this that all the People come to say their
Prayers, with strange kind of Hummings. The Prayers are three times a Day; at
Sun rise, at Noon, and at Sun set. They made me take notice of a sort of Closet
cut out of the Wall, the inside of which was very fine: I could see only the
Roof of it, on the top of which there hung a couple of spread Eagles, which
looked toward the Sun. I wanted to go into it; but they told me that it was
the Tabernacle of their God, and that it was permitted to none but their High
Priest to go into it. And I was told that this was the Repository of their
Wealth and Treasures; as Pearls, Gold and Silver, precious Stones, and some
Goods that came out of Europe, which they had from their Neighbors.

After I had seen all these Curiosities, I took my leave of all those that were
with me, and went back with my two Interpreters, to M. de la Salle; to whom I
gave a faithful Account of the good Entertainment I had received from the
Prince of the Tacucas; of his Magnificence, and especially of his good
Inclinations to acknowledge the King's Authority. Some time after we saw him
coming toward us, in a very magnificent Barge, with Drums beating, and the
Women that attended him playing on several Instruments: Some of them were in
his own Barge, some in others that went along by the side of it. M. de la Salle
received him in a respectful manner, and yet with that gravity as best became
him, considering the Character he bore. He thanked him for the honor he did
him, and told him he did not receive it but in the Name of the Prince his
Master; and that as he did not doubt but he was willing to acknowledge his
Power, so he might safely assure him of his Royal Friendship and Protection.
The Prince of the Tacuca's made Answer, That what he had heard of the Grandeur
of the (...) King, and of the Valor of his Subjects, would not permit him to
hesitate, in paying him in Person the Hommage which he was persuaded was due to
him whom he represented; and that though he was a Sovereign, he cheerfully
submitted to our great King's Power; and that he should be glad to merit our
Alliance and Protection by his Services. After these mutual Protestations of
Friendship, they made each other their Presents. M. de la Salle presented him
with two pieces of Ribbon, and some Trinkets for his Wives. The Prince gave him
six of his richest Robes, a Collar of Pearl, a Piroque or Barge filled with
Ammunition and Provision; after which, there was brought a Dozen of Bottles of
Aqua vitae, prepared with Sugar and Almonds, and Apricock Kernels. Then the
King's Health was drunk, with a discharge of all our Guns, after that of the
Prince of the Tacuca's in like manner; after which he went again into his
Piroque, and went away very well satisfied.

We continued all that Day on that Shore, where we took the Altitude, and found
our selves at the 25th Degree of Latitude, the next day being the 22d of March
1693, we went and lay ten Leagues off

M. de la Salle perceiving a Piroque, that made up toward us, to see what we
were, gave me orders to chase it; which I did; but as I was just going to lay
hold of her, above a Hundred Men straight appeared on the Shore, with their
Bows ready to shoot us. M. de la Salle, with loud calling after me, made me
stop; and being come back to his Company again, we went all and stood over
against them with our Muskets ready presented. This posture of ours frighted
them, and made them lay down their Arms; and I was immediately ordered to go
and carry them the Calumet. Being come up to them, I offered them the Collar of
Peace; they accepted it very civilly; they embraced me, and gave me to
understand, that they would be Friends with us. M. de la Salle seeing in what
an obliging manner they had received me, came to join us on the same Shore; and
as soon as those Savages perceived him to be our Chief, they paid him all kind,
of Honors and Respect. He told them that he did not require any thing from
them, but a cheerful Acknowledgment and Submission to our great King's Orders;
to which he added, for their encouragement, the Example of the other greater
Nations, and made use of the Arguments he before used on like occasions. They
answered him, that they had their Prince, and that they could determine nothing
without his Orders, and offered either to bring him to us, or to conduct, us to
his Dwelling. M. de la Salle, who was always glad of an Opportunity of seeing
the Situation, Manners, and Faculty of those Nations, chose the latter. Their
Village was four great Leagues off from the Shore. We were no sooner come into
it, but the Prince came to receive us; he had us into his Cottage, where he
treated us very handsomely, it was the Prince of the Nation of the Naches. This
People is divided into two Provinces; this was the least of the two. Their
Territories are seldom above Twenty Leagues compass, and their greatest
Revenues is the Pearl Fishery which they have in the Sea about them.

There is a great many Diverse of that Nation, who dive to the bottom of the
Water, and fetch up these precious Shells from the lowermost part of the Rocks.
On a fair day you may see the Shells on the Rocks open themselves to receive
the Dew of Heaven. Which Dew breeds the first Seeds of the Pearl within the
Shells, which appear like little white Grain that sticks fast to the Shell.
These small soft Grains do in time become hard and white, as we see they are.
It is observed that the Pearls which are fetched from the bottom of the Sea,
are fairer than those which are found on the Rocks, because the Sun tarnishes
these, and the Thunder is destructive to their Seeds.

This little Prince presented M. de la Salle with some Dozens of 'em, of a
considerable bigness; and in return, we gave him a Hatchet, a Kettle, and some
Knives. They gave us besides these, some Provisions; and having staid there the
whole Day, we went away the next very well satisfied with each other. They gave
us a couple of Guides, to show us the way into the other Nation of the same
Name, which is Ten Leagues farther in the Country. In the mean time M. de la
Salle sent two of our Men to carry some fresh Provisions to those that waited
for us by the Water side, together with Orders to fall Ten Leagues lower down
the River, and to stay for him there.

Thus we went under the Conduct of our Guides, and came that Night to the great
Village of Naches. This Nation is able to set out Three Thousand Men in any
time of War. Their Land is very well Cultivated, and bears Indian Corn, all
sorts of Fruit Trees, Olive Trees, and Vines. There are vast Meadows to be seen
there; vast Forests and all sorts of Cattle; Fishing and Hunting being all
their Employment and their Wealth.

The Prince received us with a great deal of Joy; made us a great many Presents
both of Pearl and Provisions, and treated us very generously. The next day we
planted there the King's Arms, giving a Volley of Shot; after which we took our
leaves of the Prince, who assured us of his entire Submission; and we went to
meet our Men with new Provisions.

Being got aboard our Canoos, we went forward, and about Eight Leagues off, we
came to the Village Coroas, where the Prince received us as the rest had done,
and paid Homage.

The next day being the 27th of March, 1683. we planted our Huts at the Mouth
of a great River, which comes from the West, and is called La Sablonniere; Ten
Leagues from hence, as we continued our Course, we found the River divide it
self into three Channels; I took the Right-hand-stream, M. de la Forest took
the left, and M. de la Salle the middle way; we followed each our Course for
about Ten Leagues, and in a little time after, we sound our selves re-join'd by
the uniting of the Three Streams again into one. We were hardly got together
again, and gone forward Five or Six Leagues, but we espied some Fishermen by
the Waterside, who were Quinipissa's. As soon as they saw us come near, they
allarmed all the test of their Men, and straight the Drum fell a beating, and
the Shore was in an instant lined with Savages, all armed with Bows and Arrows;
we were willing to send Four French Men to treat with 'em, but they were
severely sent back by a shole of Arows; after which, four of our Savages
offered to go to see what they could do, but they were used in like manner; in
so much that M. de la Salle, not willing to run any further risque here, he bid
us leave them in quiet, and trouble our selves no further with them.

Twelve Leagues from the Quinipissa's, we fell to the Right, on the Village
called Tangibao; we found it pillaged, sacked, and a great Heap of dead Bodies
one upon another. This sight struck a mighty honor in us, and concluding that
it was not good staying there, we went on; and about Ten Leagues further, we
begun to find the Water brackish; the Shore seemed somewhat more extended, and
all strewed with Shells of different shape and figure, some like drinking Cups,
some like Snails ending in a spiral point, and all of a most agreeable variety
of Colors. We kept on still, and alter an Hours failing, we put our selves
into a Canoo, and kept along the Coast, the better to take our Observation of
the Shore, and so came back to land at the River's Mouth.

This was on the Seventh of April, 1683. The first thing we then took care to
do, was to return our humble thanks to Almighty God, for our good Success, and
for that he had carried us in safety to the end of our Voyage, after more than
Eight Hundred Leagues, sailing and rowing with so small a handful of Men, and
so little Ammunition; and that through so many barbarous Nations, which we had
not only discovered, but in some measure made subject to us. We Sung the Te
Deam; after which, taking our Canoos, and our Equipage upon Sledges, we went
and planted our Huts a little above the Shore, to be out of the reach of the
Sea, which wholly overflows it, after six Hours Ebb, during which it is left
quite dry.

Having pitched here our New Camp, we sastned a Cross to the top of a large
Tree, and set up the Arms of France: After which we raised three or four Huts
more, and Entrenched our selves there. Then M. de la Salle took the Altitude,
to know where the Mouth of the Mississipi was. The Spaniards, who had attempted
to find it out, though in vain, had already given it the Name of Del Rio
Ascondido. According to M. de la Salle's Calculation, it is between the Twenty
second and Twenty third Degree of Latitude; that it throws it self into the
Gulf of Mexico, with a large Channel which is Twenty Leagues wide, and very
deep and Navigable.

M. de la Salle would be a little acquainted with its Shores, before he would
leave them. It is certain that they are not fit to be inhabited, by reason of
the frequent Inundations by the Spring-Tides, and the Barrenness of the Shore;
there is nothing but Canes and Reeds, and Woods overthrown. But about a League
and a half within the Country, it is the most pleasant in the World, fine large
Meadows, fair Woods full of Mulberry-trees, Nut-trees, and Chesnut-trees. The
Fields are covered with all sorts of Fruit Trees, as Orange, Lemmon,
Pomegranate, and the sides of the Hills with Vines, and the Fields bear Indian
Corn twice a Year. We saw in all their ponds and Rivers vast quantities of
Waterfowl, Geese, Ducks, and Teal, Moor-hens, etc. and in the Woods and
Fields, Partridges, Pheasants, Quails, and other kind of Fowl; of four Footed
Creatures all sorts, especially one large sort of Oxen, which they call
Cibola's; these are much larger than any has been mentioned, and are raised
like a Cammel from the Chine to the middle of the Back; they feed among the
Canes, and go together sometimes no less in number than Fifteen Hundred. They
Hunt them them after a particular manner. When they are in the midst of these
Canes, where there is no coming at them, the Savages get round about them, and
set fire to 'em in several places, especially when the Wind is something high,
which makes at first a mighty smoke, which turns all of a sudden into a Flame,
and this strikes so great a terror into the Herd, that they all disperse
themselves, and the Savages, who lie in wait upon Trees, shoot some with
Arrows, some with Bullets, and make an incredible Slaughter among them. By good
Fortune, the Savages Tangibao, Quinipissas, and Naches, had been a Hunting when
we were there (for they always join when they Hunt them) and they left us three
fine large ones, which we seized, and having dressed them, they feasted us all
for three Days, and we had some left the day we went away from thence.

M. de la Salle, having a mind to go and give an Account of his Discoveries to
Count Frontenac, and to confirm the Nations he had gone through in the good
esteem of us, resolved to go up the same River back again to the IIlinois, and
thence for the Lakes, in order to get to Quebeck, and from thence set Sail for
France, and give the Court a true account of his Success.

The Eleventh of April of the same Year 1683, we got in a Canoo on the said
River; we were about Sixty of us. As this River divides it self into three
Channels, about Fifty Leagues from the Sea, we came the first day to the place
where they met together, and in Six days after that, to the Point where it
divides it self: There our Victuals failing, it was highly necessary to look
about us. The first Relief we met with, were some Crocodils; we killed two of
'em in a little while, that were pretty large: The flesh of them is good,
white, firm, and very well tasted. It is as firm as Tunny, and near in taste to
Salmon, and we feasted on it for some days. The Stream of our River began now
to grow stronger against us, so that we were forced to get on Shore, and use
our Sledges, as far as Quinipissa's. As this People had given us a scurvey
welcome as we came down, we were forced to consult how we should do to make
them a little more tractable, wherefore we sent two Abenaguis, and two Loups
toward them. They met with four Women only, which they brought to us that
Night. This Prize pleased us very well, hoping that by their means, we should
best compass our Designs. We used those Women with all the Civility and
Prudence imaginable; and being come near to their Village, the next morning we
sent one of them home with some small Presents, to show that we did not come in
an Hostile manner, only wanted their Friendship, and what was chiefly
necessary, some Recruits of our Provisions. She showed them all the little
Gewgaws we had given her, and related to them what good Entertainment she had
received from us, and what Designs we came upon. Immediately they sent four of
the Chief of their Nation to us, who brought along with them some Provisions,
and invited us to come and be merry with them. We then restored the Three Women
into their Hands, and we came nearer to them, but still standing upon our
Guard. When we were come into their Village, they presented us some of their
Fruits, and some Waterfowl pretty well dressed. After this Refreshment, we
retired about a Hundred Paces from them, and lodged in our Huts that Night,
between the Village and the River. By break of Day these treacherous Rogues
surrounded, and attacked us: But they mist of their aim; for we had set
Sentinels, all that Night, and with their first Approach, we were prepared to
receive them. We killed five or six the very first blow, upon which the rest
fled; and we pursued them a little way, and having killed three or four more,
we thought that was enough, and we took their Scalps with us to serve for a
Trophy.

From thence we went forward to the Naches; we had hid some Indian Corn there,
as we went down, and we found it again in very good condition. The Prince came
straightway to receive us; M. de la Salle, after the first Compliments passed,
presented him with the Scalps of the Quinipissa's we had brought with us, who
were his greatest Enemies. Which made it the more grateful, and served to show
him that we were not Men to be fooled with.

The first thing he did, was to give order for something to be fetched to
refresh us; which we freely accepted of. All this while we observed that we saw
no Women in the Village, which made us suspect some Roguery. Notwithstanding we
kept eating and drinking, and never seemed to take any notice of any thing, but
we kept our Arms all the while. A little while after we spied a great number of
Men in Arms drawing toward us, and we in an instant put our selves in a
posture of defense. But the Prince bid us fear nothing, and assured us that we
never needed to entertain any suspicion of them; he went up to 'em and
commanded them to halt. After which, he told us, that it was a Party of his Men
who had been against the Iroquois, but that they for their own part were
resolved ever to maintain a firm Friendship with us. His words he confirmed by
some Presents that followed, as also some Provisions, which we heartily and
thankfully received, leaving them, by way of return, some of our Canoos, which
indeed were but cumbersome to us; and that we came off safe and sound, but we
attributed our safety to our care and watchfulness.

After this, we continued our Course toward the Tacuca's, and the Akancea's,
who received us very handsomely at our Landing.

Thus, passing through so many different Nations, we made trial of the
faithfulness of some, and the treachery of others; and by a due mixture of
mildness and severity, and a constant care, we did not only frustrate their
Designs, and avoid their Ambush, but we brought them to Terms, and made them
submit to us.

On the Twelfth of May, 1683, we left the Akancea's, and pushed forward to the
Mouth of the River of the Illinois; after which we went on along the Shore,
quite up to the Fort Preudhomme, where M. de la Salle fell dangerously ill.
Father Gabriel staid with him, with a good many of his Men; and I was commanded
to go with Twenty of his Men to Missilamachinac, to look after his Affairs. I
left him there the Fifteenth of May.

I went the first Day to lie at Ouabaches; where I was made very welcome.

Twenty Leagues further, I met with some Iroquois. These Savages, who are the
most barbarous of all others, are sneakingly submissive when their Party is the
weakest, but most unmerciful when they have an advantage. There was but Five of
them that met us; and they told us we should not go far e're we should meet a
Company of above Four Hundred Men well Armed. This Advice made us take care to
stand upon our Guard, for truly it is not very safe to fall into the Hands of
these Barbarous People when they march in a Body. We had not gone a quarter of
a League, but we spied a little Army, which we took at first to be Iroquois,
but they were Tavaroa's who had joined themselves with some Illinois. They
seeing our Firearms, took us for Iroquois, and were going to surround us, with
a Design to burn us, for that is the usual way of dealing with those barbarous
Fellows, whensoeever they get any of them; so great is the abhorrence which all
Nations have against them. But the Illinois having discovered who we were, they
unbent their Bows, and gave us part of their Provisions. We pursued our Road to
the River Chicacou, and after Twenty Days Journey, we at length arrived at
Missilimachinac, in the beginning of July; where we staid for M. de la Salle,
who came and joined us in September the same Year. He stayed there but three
Days, to give some necessary Orders. He gave me the command of Fort St. Louis,
with orders to see it finished, and a full power to dispose of the Lands
adjacent, and left all his Men under me, except six French Men he took with him
to Quebeck. We went away the same Day, he for Canada, I for the Illinois.

I went directly to Miamis, at the head of Forty Men, French and Savages. I
came to it on the 6th of January, 1684, and visited the Fort, which was in a
very good condition. There I left Ten of my Men well Armed, and pursuing my
Journey, I got, by the end of the Month, to Fort St. Louis. I set Men at work
about it immediately, and in less than two Months time I completed it.
Presently after this, I invited all the Neighboring Nations to come to it.

There needed no great pains or Art to get them thither. The beauty of the
Country, the fruitfulness of the Land, the convenience of a fine Navigable
River; the nearness of about a Hundred different Nations, and of those little
Lakes, or rather little Seas, which make it a fit Seat of Commerce for all
North America; and reach from the River St. Laurent to the Gulf of Mexico. In
short, the advantageous Situation of this Fort, which was designed as a
Bulwark for all the Nations that should come to settle there, against Nations,
was a sufficient Invitation and Inducement to them to come and dwell there. So
that in a little time, there was above Five Hundred Huts made up, and in less
than two Months, there was a wonderful great concourse of People of all
Nations. By this it is easy to be seen, with how little difficulty the Savages
might be tamed, and polished, by planting here and there some Colonies of
Europeans. For how few soever they be, they are, as it were a oiment of Concord
and civil Society amongst the most barbarous Nations.

In the mean while M. de la Salle being arrived at Quebec, had the
dissatisfaction not to meet with M. la Comte de Frontenac; for he had been
re-manded to France by an Order from Court, and was gone thither. After his
Arrival, he did not fail to acquaint all the City with the Discoveries he had
made, and with the News of so many Nations yielding themselves subject to the
King's Power. The Te Deum was sung, as an acknowledgment of this happy Addition
of glory and Honor to the Crown. The earnest desire which M. de la Salle had,
to go to give the King and his Ministers an Account of the success of his
Travels, made him hasten his Departure. He went from Canada in the beginning of
October, 1684. But before he set Sail, he sent the Chevalier de Bogia to me, as
a Person that had been highly recommended to him. He came to me to St. Louis's
Fort. I received him as well as I could, and gave him the best Entertainment
that my Condition would permit me.

On the Twentieth of March, in the same Year; having received Advice, that the
Iroquois, being jealous of our new Establishment, were coming against us with
considerable Forces; I sent an Express to M. de la Durontai, Governor of the
Fort Missilimachinac, for some assistance. In the mean while I raised new
Fortifications, and by means of good Ditches, Rampires, and other Works, I put
the Village into a good posture of Defense. They came on the 28th of March, and
lay before us, to the number of Five Hundred; we beat them back bravely in
their very first Attacks; at last, after Six Weeks, we raised the Siege, and
forced them to retire with the loss of Fourscore of theirs, and not of one of
ours. They took a few Slaves in the Neighborhood, that they might have
something to Brag of, and might not be thought to come back empty; but as they
were just a going to flea their Scalps, the poor Wretches were happily so
cunning as to get away, and came to us in our Fort.

About the 15th of April, M. de la Durontai, and Father de Loy a Jesuit, with
Sixty French came to assist me, but it was needless then. In the mean, while M.
de la Bar was come to Quebeck, to succeed the Count de Frontenac. This Change
was a dreadful blow to New France in general, which looked upon Count de
Frontenac as their Patron. But it proved no less severe, in respect to my own
particular. For no sooner was this new Governor come over, who was a Friend
and Relation of the Chevalier de Bogia, but he gave him the command of St.
Louis's Fort; the rise and perfection of which were all owing to me. He
directed his Orders to M. de la Durontai, to deliver to me; who informed me
with the new Governor's Orders, to give up my Command of the place, and to
invest the Chevalier therewith. I could do no other but obey the Orders. I left
some considerable Effects in the Fort, whereof I made an Inventory, which the
Chevalier was so kind as to set his Hand to; and I left the place the same day,
taking with me what was of most moment and use. I first took the Road of
Montreal, and thence went to Quebeck, where I arrived in the beginning of July.
I could do no less than go and wait on the Governor, and give him a faithful
Account of the Condition and Importance of the place, which I had left by his
Order, and of the state of the Country in general. He he heard me very
courteously, and very civilly offered me any other Post I should desire in
America. I thanked him for his kind Offers, and told him, I was not willing to
take any Employment until M. de la Salle came back; and so we parted.

As soon as I arrived, I did not fail to write to M. de la Salle, and give him
an Account how I was served, and how I thought my self wronged, by being thus
put out of the Command he had given me. Adding, that I really thought there
might be some Danger of the Peoples sitting uneasy under a new Governor, and
forsaking their new Habitations, or committing some Disorder. I writ besides to
M. de la Forest, a Friend of mine, to support my Interests with our common
Protector. These Letters had all the good effect I could wish or hope for. I
received an Answer to my Business by M. de la Forest himself, who came back to
Quebeck in the latter end of July 1684. I had the satisfaction to learn from
him what a gracious reception M. de la Salle had met with at Court, and what
considerable Forces the King had granted him to settle the Colonies in the
New-found-lands; and withal that he was embarked for the Gulf of Mexico; but
what completed my joy was, that I triumphed over mine Enemies, by my
restitution to St. Louis's Fort, in the Quality of Governor, and Captain; for
which this Gentleman brought me the Letters which M. de la Salle had obtained
from the King in my favor.

I equipped my self straightway with Arms and all Materials necessary, as well
for the Fortification of the place, as for the raising of my Company. And after
we had spent some days together at Quebeck M. de la Forest and I, went away
together the First of Novebmer, he for Frontenac, of which place he was going
Governor, and I for the Illinois.

The Ice putting a stop to our Voyage on the River of St. Laurence, we were
forced to stay and Winter at Montreal, until the next Spring, in 1685.

In the beginning of April, we got up the River again as far as the Fort
Frontenac, where I took my leave of M. la Forest. I went in a Canoos on the
first Lake to Magara, where after I had shot the fall of the River, I got to
Missilimachinac, and then to Miamis, and being come to the Mouth of the River
of the Illinois, I went to Fort St. Louis, about June 15 in the same Year.

The Chevalier de Bogia, immediately entertained me with all possible marks of
Joy, Friendship, and Respect; and I endeavored to make a suitable return to
his Kindness; but at last, after having informed him of M. de la Salle's
Embarking, and of all other News then stirring; I found my self obliged to show
him the Letters Patents, to be Commander in Chief, and Governor of Fort St.
Louis, with which the King thought sit to honor me. He received this Order
with a great deal of submission, and put me again in possession of the place,
with all the Effects with which I had entrusted him, assuring me, at the same
time, that nevertheless he should still be ready to do me service upon all
occasions, and always to perform the Office of a faithful Friend. We spent the
rest of the day together in amicable Conversation, and the next Morning he
departed a third time for the Town of Quebeck.

In the mean while the Miamis and the Illinois, neighboring Nations and our
Allies, being at variance about, certain trivial pretensions; I endeavored to
reconcile them; having, received from both Parties Hostages and Pledges of
their Fidelity. In the beginning of August, being much disturbed that I had
heard no News of M. de la Salle, I passed over to Missilimachinac, to make some
Enquiry after him. There I was informed that the Marquess d'Enonville succeeded
M. de la Bar, M. D' Enonville nominated in the place of M. de la Bar.
in quality of Governor of New France; and I had also the Honor to receive a
Letter from him; in which he was pleased to express his desire of entering into
a Conference with me, about the Design he had to make War with the Iroquois; at
the same time he gave me to understand, that M. de la Salle, having been for a
long time at Sea, had, without doubt, already entered the Gulf with four tight
Ships, given him by the King, and that apparently he must needs have arrived at
the Mouth of the River Mississipi, or in some other Port.

This Letter served only to increase the Earnest desire I had to meet him,
insomuch that I immediately took care to provide what Supplies I could for him;
fitted out Twenty Canadians, and returning to the Illinois, with my new
Recruits; I arrived within a Month, at St. Louis's Fort: Where, after having
given necessary Orders, I left the Command of the Place to the Sieur de
Bellefontaine; and set forward with Forty Men for the Gulf of Mexico. Thus we
passed down our River into the great one of Mississipi, followed its Course to
the Sea, and spent about two Months in performing this Voyage.

Upon our Arrival on the Sea shore, not meeting with what I sought for, nor any
Person who could give me any Information about the matter, I sent out two
Boats, viz. one to the Easty and the other to the South-west, to endeavor to
make some Discovery: They rowed up and down about Twenty Leagues from one side
to another, along the Coast, and having descried nothing, were obliged to stand
in for some Port for want of Fresh Water, and returned to join our Fleet, after
a Course of two days; without being able to get any notice of what I expected.
All that I received from them by way of Consolation, was only a Porpoise, and
some very sine Shells of Mother of Pearl, which they took on a Rock.

Therefore perceiving that it would be to no purpose to wait there any longer,
I advised with the most prudent Men of our Company, about the Course we ought
to steer at our return. I was inclined to follow the Coast as far as Menada,
hoping by that means, continually to discover some new Country, or to take some
good Prize: But the most part were of the contrary Opinion; affirming it was
safer to keep a known Road, rather than to take one that was not so, and which
otherwise could not but be of very difficult passage; as well by reason of the
High Lands along the Coasts, as for the great number of Rivers that unload
themselves into the Sea; so that we were obliged to take a Resolution to return
the same way that we came.

Before our Departure, having observed, that the Tree on which M. de la Salle
had caused a Cross, with the Kings Arms to be set up, was ready to be thrown
down by the boistrousness of the Winds and Waves, we got up a little higher,
where having Erected a large Pillar, we fixed a Cross upon it, and underneath
the Arms of France. We lodged that Night in the same place, but the next
Morning being Easter Monday, A. D. 1685. we set forward on our Journey,
traveling by Land along the Banks of the River Mississipi.

On the Sixth day, being arrived in the Country of the Qinipissa's; The
Quinipissa 's reconciled with the French.
their Commander in Chief came to meet us, and having offered us the Calumet,
begged pardon for their ill usage of us, during our last Voyage; entreating us
that we would vouchsafe to admit 'em into the number of our Allies. However we
answered their submissive Addresses very magisterially, and having refreshed
our selves a little among 'em, we pursued our Journey. Four Leagues above, we
discovered in the Country a certain Nation, Ouma's a Savage People.
that had escaped from us at our first Descent, I mean that of the Ouma's, who
are the most valiant of all the Savages; although it be true indeed, that as soon
as they saw us and our Arms, they were struck with a kind of Astonishment,
accompanied with a panick Fear, that quite curbed their fierceness, and obliged
them to promise an entire Obedience to our Injunctions: They offered us some
new Refreshments, and to serve us to the utmost of their power. A strange Beast.
In those Territories we observed an extraordinary rare Animal, that partakes
of the nature of a Wolf and a Lion; as having the Head and size of a large
Wolf, but the Tail and Claws of a Lion: He devours all sorts of Beasts, yet
never sets upon Men: He sometimes carries his Prey on his Back, eats part of
it, and hides the rest under the Leaves of Trees; but the other Animals have so
great an Antipathy against this Beast, which is called Michibichi, that they
never touch what he leaves.

Akanceas a Nation.
After the Oumas we met with the Akanceas. Indeed all these Countries are so
pleasant, and so extremely enriched with the Productions of Nature, that we
could not sufficiently admire 'em: The Trees in the Woods, which are of an
extraordinary height, seemed to be artificially planted in Rows: The Soil
brings forth good Grain, with great variety of Fruit Trees, and the Fields are
every where stored with all sorts of Game, both for Hawk and Hound; but there
is also abundance of huge wild Cats, which devour every thing that they can
find. Our French Men charmed with the Beauty of this Climate, desired leave of
me to settle there; and forasmuch as our Intention was to civilize the Savages,
and to render 'em sociable by our Conversation, I readily consented to their
Request. Whereupon I made the Draught of a House for my self among the
Akanceas, and left Ten French Men of my Retinue with Four Savages, to carry on
the Building of it; granting 'em a License to lodge there themselves, and to
cultivate as much Land as they could grub up, and clear of Trees: Insomuch,
that this small Colony was in Process of Time so extremely increased and
improved, that it serves as a Place of Rendez-vous to the French, who travel
into these Parts.

From thence I continued my Course along the River of the Islinois, and after
Three Days Journey arrived at St. Lewis's Fort, on the Festival of St. John,
being less tired with the Fatigues of my Travels, than perplexed about the
Uncertainty of M. De La Salle's Destiny. Forasmuch as I had not as yet paid my
Respects to our new Governor; after having passed some Days in refreshing my
self, I left the Islinois in the end of the Month of June, and arrived at
Montreal, July 15. Then I went forthwith to salute the Gevernour, War declared
against the Iroquois.
and received Orders from him to cause the War against the Iroquois to be
declared amongst our Allies, and to summon 'em to appear at St. Lewis's Fort,
to carry on such an Expedition.

Having received this Commission, I soon took leave of Monsieur D' Enonville,
and arrived in the Country of the Islinois, September. 4. from whence I speedily
dispatched diverse Couriers from all Parts, to give notice to the Neighboring
Nations of our Design, and to exhort 'em to appear betimes at the place of
Rendez-vous. Whereupon all the People met together in the end of the Month of
March, A. D. 1686. as well Islinois, as Chianous and Niamis. The whole
Multitude consisted of about 400 Men; to whom I joined 60 French Men of my
Company, leaving 40 in the Fort under the Command of M. De Bellefontaine. This
small Army encamped within a quarter of a League of the Village; where having
caused the whole Body to stand to their Arms, I declared to 'em the King's
Pleasure, and the Governor's Orders; exhorting 'em to signalize their Valor,
and to exert their utmost Force, to repress the Insolence of the Iroquois, our
common Enemies.

This Speech was followed with the general Acclamations of all the People;
whereupon I immediately put my self at the Head of 'em, and began to march to
the Canal that joins the two Lakes of the Suvrons and the Islinois. In that
Place stands a Fort that bears the Name of St. Joseph, St. Joseph's Fort.
and which serves to defend those small Seas. Monsieur De la Durontay was the
Commander of it, to whom I sent one of our Frenchmen to give him notice of our
Arrival. Upon which Information he immediately commanded his Lieutenant to meet
me with 30 Men, and the next day he himself led up the like number. Then we
encamped on the Banks of that Straight, and Provisions were brought to us
thither from all Parts. Two Days after M. de la Foret, Governor of the Fort of
Frontenac, and M. de Lude, Commander of that of the Miamis, each at the Head of
his Company marched to join our Army. All the Forces being thus assembled, we
held a Council of War, to consult what Measures ought to be taken, and it was
determined, to divide the Army into two Bodies, one of which should be
commanded by the Sieurs de la Durontay, and de Lude, to secure the Avenues of
Missilimachinac, and to defend the Coasts of the Lake Herie, as far as Niagara;
where we designed to erect a Fort, which was already begun to be built, to curb
the Iroquois, who always made some Opposition on that side: And that M. de la
Foret and my self should be Commanders of the other Body, to invade the Enemies
Country.

The management of Affairs being thus disposed of, M. de la Durontay marched
along the Coasts of Missilimachinac, and met with a considerable Party of the
Enemies, composed of above 500 Men, as well English as Iroquois, (here it may
be observed by the way, that those two Nations maintain a strict mutual Amity,
The English and Iroquois are united to make War with the French.
when engaged together against the French) and attacked 'em so vigorously, that
above half of 'em were killed on the spot; some Prisoners were taken; and the
rest were put to flight.

On our side, at the distance of 20 Leagues from Niagara, we found Means to
meet with a numerous Party of English, Iroquois, and Ouabaches, who under the
Conduct of Major Gregory, were conveying a great quantity of Brandy,
Provisions, Ammunition, and Merchandises, to the Inhabitants of the Iroquois.
We fell upon 'em; and after having killed the greatest part of the Iroquois,
and of the other Savages, we seized on their Baggages and Merchandises, took a
great number of Slaves, and carried away above 25 English Men Prisoners. After
this small Victory we continued our March to Niagara, where we completed the
Building of the Fort in sight of the Iroquois, and even at the very Foot of
their Habitations.

The prosperous Success of our Arms in the beginning obliged us to send a
Messenger to the Governor, to give him an Account of every thing that had
passed, and M. de la Foret, who was very desirous to accept of this Commission,
set forward with all possible speed. M. D'Enonville received the Information
with a great deal of Satisfaction; caused it to be communicated to the whole
Continent of Canada; and sent us fresh Supplies of Hurons, Plononteaus and
Ouatoua's; who came to meet us at the Rise of the Cataract, with a Bark very
well manned.

Thus being re-enforc'd with these new Recruits, I marched further into the
Territories of the Enemies; but we entertained in our Camp a certain Iroquois,
who feigning to be disgusted at the Proceedings of his own Nation, seemed to be
extremely well affected to ours; nevertheless this treacherous Renegado took an
Opportunity to abandon us to return w the Enemies Army, and gave 'em notice of
our March, as also of the Marks of bur Savages, so as they might be certainly
discovered. Thus as we were continually advancing forward, we arrived on the
other side of a Morass, at the distance of Three Leagues from the Camp of the
Iroquois; where some of 'em lay in Ambush, expecting our Approach, and killed
Seven of our Men, among whom was my Sub-Lieutenant: However we soon rallied,
repulsed 'em vigorously, and after having cut off above Thirty of their Party,
pursued 'em to the Woods; but not being able to come up with 'em, and not
judging it safe to advance any further, lest we should fall into another
Ambuscade, we contented our selves to plunder their Villages, where we put to
the Edge of the Sword every one whom we met in our way.

We encamped for some Days in that Place, and the Army under the Command of M.
de Lude and M. de la Durontay came to join ours. The next day after their
Arrival we did not stay a moment, e're we took a Resolution to force the
Enemies Camp; who being informed of bur Design, by their Spies, did not think
fit to wait for our Approach, but decamped with great Precipitation. We found
in their Camp some Remainders of Indian Corn, and other Provisions, which we
made use of to our Advantage, and we spent the Night in their Tents, or rather
Huts; the Season being already very far advanced. The next Morning we sent back
all our Allies to their several Territories, with Orders to meet together again
upon the first Summons; while the Sieurs de la Lude and de la Durontay repaired
to their Respective Stations.

As I was marching to mine, I met with certain Hurons, who gave me to
understand, that I was ready to be surrounded with the whole Army of the
Iroquois. There was no longer any Means to have recourse to M. de Lude, and de
la Durontay, who were already embarked in Canoos on the Lakes; insomuch, that I
was obliged to cause my small Band of Men to halt, and instantly to dispatch a
Courier to Niagara to demand speedy Succors of the Commander of the new Fort.
It happened accidentally, that M. de la Valrome, the Governor of it, supposing
us to be engaged with the Iroquois, was leading up Fifty Fusileers to our
Relief, and in the mean while the Messenger whom I sent, having met with him,
informed him of our present Distress, which caused him to hasten his March: His
Arrival inspired us with new Courage, so that the Enemies appearing, we set our
small Army in Battel-array; yet when we had advanced toward 'em within
Musket Shot, they had not the Courage to stay for our coming up, but suddenly
turned their Backs upon us: Whereupon we pursued 'em for some time, till about
100 of them perished on the spot, and the rest found Means to escape into the
Woods. Then I immediately caused a Retreat to be founded; and having convoyed
M. de Valrome on part of his way, I judged it expedient to take up our
Winter Quarters at Missilimachinac, and to reside there till the next Campaign,
in case the War should continue.

The Iroquois forced to submit.
The Scene of Affairs began now to be changed; for the Iroquois resigned to us
their Habitations that were near Niagara; made a Present of their best Skins to
the Governor; and engaged that for the future they should not disturb the
Tranquillity of the Nations that were under our Protection, and who were our
Allies. A Treaty of Peace being thus concluded, I set forward in my Journey to
the Country of the Islinois in the Month of April, 1687. and should have been
very well satisfied with the Success of the Campaign, if I had not been
continually troubled, by reason of M. De la Salle's long Absence, not knowing
what might have befallen him: For he for out from America, A. D. 1683. and we
did so in 1687. so that Four Years were almost past, without having any other
News of him, than that of his re-embarking or his Departure from Rochel for the
Gulf of Mexico, but without getting the least Information concerning his
Return Indeed I knew not what to think. Did he not perish (said I to my self)
by Shipwreck, or rather did he not land on some Coast, inhabited by Barbarians,
who perhaps might have dispatched him out of the way? Thus being perplexed with
such distracting Thoughts, I could take no Rest, nerther could I Steer any
certain Course, but suffering my self to be conducted by my Attendants, rather
than leading 'em my self, I arrived as St. Lemis's Fort in the end of the Month
of May.

As soon as I entered my House, I was extremely surpised, there to meet with
M. Cavelier, M. De La Sall's sown Brother, and indeed, I did not discern in his
Countenance that free and sprightly Air, which usually appears at the first
Meeting of two Friends, after a long Interval of Separation: However, the first
Transports of my Joy, not permitting me to make long Reflections, I
incontinently embraced him, and at the same time inquired of him about his
Brother's Welfare. Upon this Address, he appeared to be altogether put to a
stand; so that a sad Look up to Heaven, a deep Sigh, and a certain Effort,
which he seemed to make within himself, were taken by me as so many ill Omens;
I earnestly entreated him to conceal nothing from me, and after he had
recovered himself a little, he told me very positively, That M. de la Salle his
Brother was in perfect Health; but that the ill Success of his Navigation had
so far pulled down his Spirits, that he had scarce Courage to continue his
Course; that in returning by small Voyages, he took delight in trading with the
different Nations, whom he met with; and that having charged him to go before,
to give me notice of his Arrival, he determined still to reside among the
Naches and Akanceas for some time, to purchase certain Merchandises of both
those Nations.

The Assurance, with which he spoke to me, joined with a Show of downright
Integrity, which was natural to him, besides the Deference due to a Person of
his Character; for he was a Priest, would not suffer me in the least to call in
Question the veracity of his Relation, and served a little to encourage me
against my sad Presages. Therefore I entreated him to give me an Account of his
Voyage, and to let me know when they re-embark'd, and at what time they landed.
Since then I gave him a great deal of Scope, to deliver his Mind ingenuously,
and without Constraint, he began to relate the particular Circumstances with so
much the more Freedom.

He told me at first, That the whole Court of France, being charmed with the
great Discoveries made by M. de la Salle, the King made no scruple at all to
grant him the Supplies he desired; not to mention the Titles of Honor, that
procured him greater Authority in his new Plantations: That they set out from
France, July 24. A. D. 1684. with four Vessels, very well provided of all
things necessary, and above 200 Men, as well Soldiers as Artificers of all
sorts of Trades, and that nevertheless by a Complication of Misfortunes, their
whole Fleet was reduced to a few Boats, and that great number of Persons, to
Seven or Eight French Men, who served as a Convoy to his Brother during his
Return.

Forasmuch as these Remarkable Crosses afforded Matter of Wonder, I could not
choose but be very desirous to be informed of all the Particulars of their
Adventures: Whereupon M. Cavelier resuming his former Narrative from the
beginning of their Navigation, told me, That after a Calm which continued for
some Days, in the Latitude of St. Domingo, they were suddenly surpised with a
violent Storm; insomuch, that one of their Ships, laden with Merchandises, to
the value of above Thirty Thousand Livres, was hurried away with a furious
Blast of Wind, and afterward taken by certain Spanish Piroques.
Rovers: That the rest of the Fleet cast Anchor before the same Island, where
they were soon refitted, and supplied with fresh Provisions, which with the
Merchandises there bought, served for the Cargo of these Vessels, but that the
greatest part of the Mariners, by living somewhat too licentiously, contracted
very dangerous Diseases.

That they cruis'd about from thence toward the Islands of Caimant, and took
in fresh Water on that of Cuba; where, having found many Tuns of Canary, good
Brandy, Sugar, and Indian Corn left unguarded, they seized on the whole Cargo,
and got such Reprisals as were sufficient to make 'em amends for the loss of
every thing that the Spaniards had taken from them before: That afterward
being supplied with all manner of Provisions, they set Sail again; and that
having always had a favorable Gale of Wind, they would have entered the Gulf
of Mexico; but that perceiving the Currents to be very rapid, and the Shelves
to be numerous, they were obliged to stand off from the Shore, which hindered
M. de la Salle from lighting on the exact degree of Latitude, for the Mouth of
the River Mississipi; insomuch, that to avoid the exposing of the Men to
greater Dangers, he ordered 'em to land at the Bay of Spiritu Santo, 50 Leagues
below the River they sought for: But two Days after, hoping to discover it,
they got on Board their Ships again, and always taking care to steer into the
Main, to shun the Rocks and Shelves, they at last arrived a great deal higher
in a Bay, afterward known by the name of St. Lewis. This Bay is of a very
convenient Depth for a Harbor; but it is dangerous landing there, as well by
reason of the Shelves of Sand that encompass it; as for the Rocks with which
it is beset on all sides.

Indeed the missing of the Entrance of the River (continued he) would have been
no great Detriment to us; for after having once arrived so near its Mouth, it
would have been difficult to descry it, at least by Land; afterward to convey
our Ships thither; to form a kind of Harbor, to prevent Mistakes for the
future; and even to build a regular Port; but ill Luck would have it, that
after M. de Beaujeu, who commanded one of the three Vessels, was come on Board
our Ship; the two others were lost, as well by the ill Management of the Pilot,
as by the Carelessness of the Mariners; for the first ran upon a shelf of Sand
in the Mouth of the Bay, from whence it was impossible to get her off,
notwithstanding our utmost Endeavors; although indeed we were so fortunate as to
save the Men, and the best of our Effects. The other Ship was dashed in pieces
against a Rock, even in the very Harbor, with the loss of the most part of the
Mariners; but we had luckily unloaded it of all our Provisions and
Merchandises: Besides, that the greatest part of our Company and Goods were set
ashore by M. de Beaujeu, who after having been a Witness of our Misfortunes,
set Sail to return for France.

M. Cavelier having thus related the Disasters that befell their Fleet,
proceeded to give the following Narration of the other Adventures and
Occurrences that happened during their Voyage. To reckon (said he) from July
24. A. D. 1684. the Day of our Departure from Rochel, to Feb. 18. in the next
Year 1685. when we disimbark'd at St. Lewis's Bay, about Seven Months were
passed; at what time my Brother having gathered together the Fragments of our
Vessels, and after having discovered the advantageous Situation of the Country
at the Mouth of a very fine River, The River of Cows.
called the River of Cows, in the midst of many others that fall into the same
Bay, with a great number of populous Nations, and the delightful Prospects
caused by the enameled Verdure of the Lands, the Abundance of Fruit, and the
numerous Herds of Cattle, was soon induced to cause a fine Seat to be built for
himself in those Parts; having at first made the Draught of a Fort, and
delineated the Compass of it; giving Orders at the same time for putting his
Design in Execution: And indeed, the necessity of building some Apartments for
Lodging, and the convenience of procuring Timber and Mortar contributed so far
to the carrying on of the Work, that it was entirely completed within the
space of Two Months.

In the mean while, M. de la Salle growing more impatient than ever to recover
the River of Mississipi, made Incursions on all sides to descry it. Forasmuch
as that whole. Country is divided by a great number of Rivers that empty
themselves at diverse Intervals into the Bay; he sometimes traveled by Land,
and sometimes in a Canoo, accompanied with Ten or Twelve French Men, armed with
good Fusees: At every one of those Distances he met with several Habitations of
the Savages, and every where abundance of all sorts of necessary Provisions,
even so much as tame Fowl.

At last after Fifteen Days search he met with a spacious River, and followed
the Course of it for Seven or Eight Leagues to the Place, where it rolls into
the Sea, and perceived it to be really that which he had so long sought for,
and the Mouth of which he was not able to discover: Therefore he took an
Observation of its Latitude again, that he might not miss it, in case he should
have occasion to pass through the Gulf at any other time. Thus being well
satisfied with this Discovery, and yet more delighted with the Fruitfulness of
the adjacent Territories, he returned to his new Colony, but as an addition to
his former Misfortunes, he soon found that some of his Men died, quite worn our
with those lingering Diseases, which they had contracted at St. Domingo, and
that above Forty of them were assassinated by the Savages. He was extremely
afflicted at so great a los^; but having fortified himself against immoderate
Grief, he summoned those that were left (the number of whom did not amount to
100) encouraged 'em, and exhorted 'em to take care that by the Means of their
Labor, mutual Concord, Industry and good Correspondence with the Barbarians,
they might make Advantage of the Riches that Nature afforded 'em, in great
Abundance.

Since the newly discovered Countries appeared to M. de la Salle, to be so many
conquered Provinces; and in regard that all the Losses he might sustain seemed
to him to be of no account, in comparison of one Nation, that was voluntarily
subdued; he endeavored to comfort himself with the Hopes of better Success in
the Undertaking of some other Voyages, and thus having taken a new Resolution,
he determined to discover those vast Territories which are situated between the
River Mississipi, and the Gulf of Mexico, to the South-east. On the 22d. Day
of April, 1685. he set out from St. Lewis's Bay for this new Voyage, taking
along with him only Twenty Persons, among whom were our two Nephews, Cavelier
and De Moranget, a Father of the Order of Recolet and my self. Our whole
Equipage consisted only in two Canoos, and as many Sledges to carry our
Provisions and Merchandises.

On the first Day we passed above 20 Rivers, the Territories lying round about
which, appeared to us to be as it were an enchanted Country, and conversed with
a very obliging sort of People, who denied us nothing. It Is also remarkable
that in those Parts among the horned Beasts, in the Meadows we saw a great
number of Horses: but so wild, that one cannot come near 'em.

On the second Day, we began to get our living by hunting; we killed a
Roe-Buck, and lay that Night, in the open Fields, in the middle of a small
Retrenchment: Ever since that time we made an Agreement to use the like
Precaution in every Place, where we should have occasion to take up our
Lodging.

The Meeting of four Booted Horsemen.
On the third Day, about Noon, we met with Four Booted Horsemen, who accosted
us in a very respectful manner, asking us who we were, and where we were going?
We declared to 'em, that we were French Men, and we were only Traveling
through those Countries, with a Design to discover the several Nations of
America, and to offer 'em the Protection of the King of the French, one of the
greatest Monarchs in the Universe: And that if they were willing to submit to
his Power, they should soon be sensible of the Effects of his Favor, by the
means of his numerous Fleet: They on the other side immediately entreated us to
accept of a Lodging in their Cottages, and to accompany 'em to their Village:
We readily consented to their Request, and were very kindly entertained by
them.

Quoaquis a Nation of the Savages.
This was the Nation of the Quoaquisor Mahis: The Men are of a very swarthy
Complexion, neither are the Women more fair; they have very fine black Hair;
their Eyes being also black, their Face and Nose flat, and their Teeth very
white: Otherwise, their Carriage is free and unaffected. The Men in those Parts
are clothed with Corslets of double Leather, which are Arrow-proof; wearing
from the Waste to the Knees a kind of Pantaloon Breeches, made of the Skin of a
Bear, Stag, or Wolf, and their Head is covered with a sort of Turban of the
same Skins: They have also Boots or Buskins of the Skins of an Ox, Elk or
Horse, very artificially dressed. For the Horse-Furniture, besides their
Corslets, Buskins and Bucklers, covered with the hardest Skins; they have
Saddles made of many pieces of Leather, fitted and glu'd one upon another; as
also Wooden Stirrups; Bridles like ours, and Bits made of the Teeth of a Bear
or Wolf. Their Women.
As for their Women, they wear instead of a Bonnet a Contexture of Rushes or
Reeds, of diverse Colors; their Hair being sometimes braided, and sometimes
tied in Knots: Their Body is covered with a Vest of very fine Wool, reaching
half way down their Thighs: They are shod almost after the same manner as the
Men, and wear Buskins on their Legs.

We only lodged with 'em one Night, but always stood upon our Guard, watching
by Turns from time to time. The next day, the chief Commander came to meet us
with certain Presents, as Indian Corn, and to assure us, etc. That they should
be always very willing to keep an amicable Correspondence with us, and to live
under the Laws of that Prince, whom we acknowledged: On the other side we made
'em a Present of some Knives, with Glasses, and other Toys, for their Wives;
after which we took Leave of 'em, and continued our Journey.

About Two Leagues from thence we found our selves on the Banks of a very fine
River, which we called Riber from one of our Retinue, Riber River, why so
called.
so named, who was drowned therein. There were numerous Herds of Cibolas,
feeding along the sides of this River, of which we instantly killed three, and
caused 'em to be Boucanez.
salted, to serve for our Provision. At the distance of a League from the same
River we got up another, that is more rapid, and on which we imposed the name
of Hieus, The River Hieus.
that of a certain German of our Company, who continued Three Days lost
thereabouts, having ventured to go too far into the Woods, by reason of the
great Delight he took in hunting.

Biscatonges, a Nation of the Savages, surnamed Weepers.
Thus in pursuing our Journey, sometimes in the Plains, and sometimes across
the Torrents and Rivers which we passed in our Canoos, we arrived in the midst
of a very extraordinary Nation, called the Biscatonges, to whom we gave the
Name of Weepers, in regard that upon the first Approach of Strangers, all these
People, as well Men as Women, usually fall a weeping bitterly: The reason of
their Practice is very particular; for these poor People imagining that their
Relations or Friends deceased are gone a Journey, and continually expecting
their return; the remembrance of 'em is revived upon the Arrival of new
Passengers; but forasmuch as they do not find in their Persons those whose Loss
they lament, it serves only to increase their Grief. That which is yet more
remarkable, and perhaps even very reasonable in that Custom, is, that they weep
much more at the Birth of their Children, than at their Death; because the
latter is esteemed only by 'em as it were a Journey or Voyage, from whence they
may return after the Expiration of a certain time; but they look upon their
Nativity, as an Inlet into an Ocean of Dangers and Misfortunes. Let the case be
how it will, this first Torrent of Tears being once over, nothing was to be
seen among the whole Multitude of these People, but a serene Aspect, and an
engaging Air, full of Kindness and Respect: They conducted us into their Huts
that were neatly matted, where they offered us some powdered Beef and Venison,
with some Sagavite, Sagavite, a sort of Bread.
their ordinary Bread; which they make with a certain Root, called Toquo, being
a kind of Bramble. After having washed, dried, and beaten it to Powder, they
make it up into a Paste; which being baked, is of a very good taste, but of an
Astringent Quality. We added to their Treat a little of our Brandy, and gave
'em a Couple of Bottles full of that Liquor: Whereupon they made us a Present
of diverse Skins, well dressed, which served to make us good Shoes. These People
worship no other Deity but the Sun, and that is the peculiar God of almost all
those Nations: Upon which occasion we told 'em, That our Prince was the Sun of
other Kings; that his Luster was spread abroad throughout the whole Continent
of Europe, and even in diverse Parts of America: That if they would submit to
his Authority, they should ere long be sensible of some of the Effects of his
Grandeur and Generosity. Whereupon they readily submitted, and took an Oath to
maintain a mutual Friendship with us for ever.

Having spent two Days among that weeping Nation, we set forward again in our
Journey. On the first Day we traveled Ten large Leagues, almost continually in
the Woods, and afterward we arrived within sight of a great Village, in the
entrance of which we espy a huge Roe-Buck, which a Chaouanous of our Retinue,
aimed at, and killed with one Fusee-shot. The Report of the Gun, A Fusee let
off, strikes a Terror into the Minds of the Savages.
and the Flame that accompanied it appeared so dreadful to those Inhabitants,
that at the very sight of our Company and Arms, they were all extremely
terrified, and betook themselves to flight. The chief Commander, and three of
his Sons, having showed more Resolution, brought 'em out of their Panick Fear;
so that they advanced toward us, to offer us some Refreshment; and the use of
some of their Huts for our Lodging, during the Night. But my Brother not
judging it convenient to trust 'em, we took up our Quarters a little further
off, according to our usual Custom. It was well for us that we were so
cautious; for the next Morning, at break of day, we discerned a great number of
that Rabble, lying in Ambush among the Reeds, and armed with Bows and Arrows.
M. De la Salle immediately caused 'em to be rudely attacked, and obliged 'em to
call for Quarter. But they were released for a certain quantity of Indian Corn,
which the Son of their Commander brought to us, and we immediately took a
resolution to decamp.

At the distance of six Leagues from thence we came to another Village,
consisting of above 300 Huts, inhabited by the Chinonoas, The Chinonoas know
how to distinguish the French from the Spaniards.
who received us very favorably. All these Countries are situated almost on
the Eastern Coast of the Sea of Mexico; so that the Spainards frequently make
Inrodes into them, and abuse the Natives after a most outrageous manner:
Insomuch that these Savages knew how to distinguish us from them, by the Air of
our Countenance, our Language and Deportment; and the Antipathy they had
against all those of that Nation, served only to increase their Friendship and
Kindness toward us.

We soon gave 'em to understand, that there was no manner of Correspondence
between the Spaniards and us, and that they were our declared Enemies:
Whereupon having offered us every thing that was in their Possession, they
entreated us to unite with them, in order to maintain a vigorous War against
the Spanish Nation: We replied, That we were not at present in a condition to
do it, but that we would speedily return, with greater numbers to assist 'em,
insomuch, that having spent the Night very peaceably among those People, we
departed the next day, laden with a great deal of Indian Corn, and very fine
Skins.

We had scarce marched League on the Road, when a certain Person of our Company
found himself stung by a Viper, A Man stung by a Viper.
and suddenly made a hideous Outcry: Within less space than half a quarter of
an Hour, his Body swelled prodigiously, and became all over livid. We
immediately made large Incisions on the part affected, bathing it with Brandy
and Salt of Vipers, and gave him some Orvietan; so that after Two Days he was
perfectly cured.

The Passage over a rapid River.
Then we continued our Journey, and after Two Days march we arrived on the
Banks of a very rapid River: It was requisite to pass it, and we were then
destitute of Canoos; for those we made use of before were so leaky, that they
took in Water on all sides, and we were forced to leave 'em, as being no longer
serviceable to us. Therefore we could find no other Expedient, but to make a
Caie^
little Boat of Canes, and many Twigs of Trees, twisted one within another, and
covered with our best Skins. My Brother and our two Nephews first went on board
with two Savages to steer it, whilst I stayed with the rest of our Company on
the side of the River. They were scarce got into the middle of the Current,
when the Swiftness of the Stream hurried 'em away in a moment, and took 'em out
of our sight: But by singular good Luck the Boat was stopped about half a large
League from thence, by a great Tree that floated on the Water, being half
plucked up by the Roots; so that grappling the Branches, by the means of
certain Poles, they at last made a shift to get over to the other side,
otherwise the extreme Swiftness of the River would undoubtedly have carried 'em
into the Sea.

In the mean while, we were very sollicitous to know what was become of 'em; we
incessantly followed the Course of our Bank, looking forward as far as possibly
we could, and crying out with all our force to endeavor to recall, or to
discover 'em. We spent a whole Day and a Night in this Anxiety, and the next
Day we began the same Toil again, till at last they answered us, and we
descried 'em on the other side. 'Twas absolutely necessary to join 'em, and to
that end we were forced to expose our selves to the same Danger. Therefore we
set about the making of a new Boat, (for the first was unjoynted, and no longer
capable of holding any thing) and having provided strong Poles, we all passed
over at several times, with as much safety as could be wished for. Our whole
Company being thus re*united, we pursued our Course under the Conduct of my
Brother, who had no other Compass to steer by than his Genius. In the mean
while one of our Hunters straggling to follow the Game, we lost him a whole Day.
But the next Morning, we saw him again laden with two Roe-Bucks: He had also
killed another at the same time, and left it at the Distance of half a quarter
of a League: Therefore, after having given us the two, he went back, attended
with an Abenaguis, to fetch the other, and having brought it, we feasted our
selves with part of his Venison, and kept the rest for our Provision.

A Savage on Horseback demands who we are.
Having passed from thence into the most delightful and most populous Countries
of all the others, after a March of Six of Seven Leagues, we saw making up
toward us a certain Savage on Horseback, with his Wife behind him, attended
with four Slaves, who were well mounted. This Man accosting us, inquired who we
were, and what we sought for in that Country? My Brother gave him to
understand, as well by his own Mouth, as by that of the Savages of his Retinue,
that we were French Men, and that our Design was only to offer to all the
People of their Continent, as far as the Gulf of Mexico our Alliance, and the
Protection of the King of France. Whereupon the same Savage immediately
alighted, presented his Horse to my Brother, and even constrained him by his
earnest Entreaties to accept of it, and to go to the Place of their Habitation;
assuring him, that he should be very welcome, and that his Proposals should be
favorably heard. My Brother, after having returned him many Thanks for his
Kindness, told him, that before he proceeded so far, he would very willingly be
informed of the Opinion of his whole Nation, by an Envoy, sent to them to that
purpose. The Savage received this Answer very favorably, and by a Surplusage
of Civility left his Wife and one of his Slaves for Hostages: My Brother on the
other side gave him his Nephew Cavelier and two Chaouanous. The Savage mounted
on a Horse that belonged to one of his Slaves, and my Nephew Cavelier on that
which was given my Brother. The next Day our Envoy returned with our two
Chaouanous, both mounted on fine Horses, laden with all sorts of Provisions,
and made a Report no less agreeable than surprising, of the kind Entertainment
he had received from those People, who are called Cenis. Cenis, a Nation of the
Savages.
The place of their Habitation is extended 20 Leagues in compass, and divided
into many Hamlets, situated near one another. Their Cottages are 40 or 50 Foot
high, being made of thick Branches of Trees, which meeting together in a point
at the top, form a kind of arched Roof; the inside of 'em is well matted, and
always kept very neat, even to Admiration.

M. de La Salle being informed of their good Intentions, did not fail to convey
himself thither the next Day, and saw the principal Elders of the Nation, who
were all adorned with Plumes of Feathers, and clothed with their richest
Skins, coming to meet him, and the distance of 200 Paces from the Village. My
Brother received 'em at the Head of his Company, and the first Salute being
given with Reciprocal Compliments, he was conducted to the Village by the
Commander in chief across a very fine Body of young Men, drawn up in Arms, and
through a very great concourse of People: Afterward he and his Company were led
into a Quarter, which seemed to constitute a separated Hamlet, and were there
nobly entertained. The Commander was convinced of the Magnificence of our
Prince, by the Character he received of him from M. de la Salle, acknowledged
him as his Sovereign, and made my Brother a Present of six good Horses, and of
his finest Skins; who on the other side presented the said Commander with
diverse Hatchets, Sizers, Knives, and Razors, which he accepted with a great
deal of Complacency and Satisfaction. At that time the Ambassadors of a certain
Nation called the Choumans, resided there, Ambassadors of the Choumans.
and the occasion of their Embassy was to propose the making of a League with
'em, to carry on a War against the Spaniards, their Enemies, and Tyrannical
Persecutors: They gave us a Visit, and solicited us to enter into the same
League; insomuch, that we promised to assist 'em, after we had made an end of
our Voyage; and they took an Oath, as the others had done, to maintain an
inviolable Friendship with our Nation.

The Nassonis have their Habitations at the distance of a Days Journey from the
Cenis, Nassonis, a Nation of the Savages.
and we thought fit also to pass into their Territories, were we received the
like Entertainment, meeting with the same Acknowledgments, and the same
Protestations of Amity. And indeed, all these Nations have an equal Antipathy
against the Spaniards. The Pastures in those Parts afford Fodder to numerous
Herds of Oxen and Horses, and in all the Enclosures belonging to their private
Families are to be seen many fat Capons, Hens, Pullets, and large Indian
Pigeons. We could discern among them, as well as among the Cenis, some Tincture
of the Christian Religion. For some of 'em made the Sign of the Cross, and
others expressed to us by certain Marks the manner of celebrating the Mass;
insomuch, that we clearly perceived it to be the Effect of some Spanish
Missions: But it is not to be doubted, the Increase would be much greater; if
these first Seeds of Religion were sowed among 'em by Persons, to whom they
have less Aversion. And indeed our Father Recolet, by the means of some Images,
Crosses and Agnus Dei's, which he distributed up and down, easily made 'em
comprehend and believe every thing that he taught 'em; so great is the Docility
of the People of that Country.

Notwithstanding the great satisfaction we had among those Savages, Sad
Disasters.
yet we met with two sad Disasters; one of which was the Desertion of Four of
our French Men, and the other was my Brother's Sickness. As for the four
Deserters, it is not known whether they were excited by the Pleasantness of
those Countries, to endeavor to settle themselves among some of the
Neighboring Nations; or whether being enticed by the alluring Baits of the
Savagesses, they returned to the Cenis; or whether they retired to the
Nassonis. However, it is certain, that as soon as they had Horses in their
Possession, they did not any longer imagine themselves to be among the Savages;
so that we were not able to retain 'em, neither could we have any Tidings of
'em ever since that end.

As for my Brother's Indisposition, it was undoubtedly the Effect of Grief
occasioned by the Desertion of some of his Attendants. He fell sick, August 24.
in the same Year 1685. After three Months traveling, and within 200 Leagues of
St. Lewis's Bay. His Sickness was followed almost at the same time with that of
De Moranget, our Nephew. However, during that Affliction, we had the good Luck
to find among the Savages all the Help that could have been procured in Europe,
except Physicians: For we had every thing that we could wish for, particularly
Veal, Mutton, Pullets, Pigeons and Ring-doves; besides, all sorts of wholesome
Herbs, as well for Pottage, as for Ptisans, Decoctions, and other Remedies
necessary for sick Persons. Our two Surgeons were also present, and were very
serviceable to us upon this occasion; nay, the very Savages themselves, as well
Men as Women, gave us Meat, Fowl, and other sorts of Venison; insomuch, that at
last (thanks be to the Divine Providence) by the Means of our diligent Care,
both our Patients recovered their Health, after a Months Indisposition.

As soon they had regained their Strength, my Brother being of Opinion that he
ought to improve his last Discoveries; and not being able to go any farther,
without entering the Territories of the Spaniards, from whence according to all
probability, we should never have come back; took a Resolution to return to his
new Colony. Therefore we set forward again in our Journey in the end of the
Month of September, 1685. But we had this Advantage, that we were now in a
capacity to return on Horseback, whereas we came on Foot; That which was most
surprising in our new Furniture is that our Horses without being shod, had so
hard a Hoof, that they could go any where; and had so tender a Mouth, that they
gave way to the Curb, as if they had been trained up to it: Every one of our
Company was reasonably well mounted, and our supernumerary Horses served either
for Change, or instead of Pack-Horses, to carry our Provision, Canoos, and
other Equipage; which was no small Consolation to us.

However, since the most useful things sometimes prove the most fatal, it
happened either accidentally, or for want of Skill, that one of our Horses
occasioned the Loss of a Savage belonging to our Retinue. For on the Banks of
the River La Malign, A Crocodile drags a Man into the Water, and devours him.
on which my Brother run the hazard of being lost, a Horse prancing at the
sight of a huge Crocodile, threw his Rider into the Water. He had scarce
fallen, when that ravenous Beast dragged him away, and devoured him in our
sight. We were extremely troubled at this sad Spectacle; but in such Voyages
it is difficult to avoid the sad Accidents, to which those who undertake 'em are
sometimes liable. Therefore the safest way for a Traveller is to prepare for
such Disasters, by quieting his Conscience, and by putting himself under the
Protection of Almighty God, who is our Guide, and constant Preserve.

Forasmuch as no Remedy could be found for this Misfortune, we continued our
Journey; and after Three Months march, we arrived at St. Lewis's Bay in the
beginning of the Month of January, 1686. As soon as we came near our Colony, we
perceived that all the Fields thereabouts were cleared of Trees, and well
cultivated. We there met with a great number of Women, and Cottages, filled
with new Families, each Family having its peculiar Store of Provisions, with a
Garden, and other Apartments. In a word, every thing seemed to promise a happy
Improvement, and a numerous Increase. My Brother was received there as the
Father of this little Commonwealth, and we took great Delight in observing
these beginnings of the Incorporation of our French Men with the Savages, and
the good Use that every one made of the Advantages of this new Plantation.

In regard that my Brother's Presence in that Country, was necessary, as well
for the completing of the Fort, as for the modelling of this new State, we
sojourned there about Three Months longer; after the expiration of which time,
he determined to return to France to get new Supplies at that Court, and to
procure some Recruits of Tradesmen, Artificers and Laborers, as well in favor
of this last Colony, as for all the others that are planted in diverse parts of
Northern America. After having taken leave of every one, he set out,
accompanied with 20 French Men for Canada, and traveled by Land to the Country
of the Islinois, in the end of the Month of March, A. D. 1686.

Although this Road was the most troublesome, yet it served not only to discover
the Course of the Rivers, Many Rivers.
of which we only saw the Mouths, in passing down the Mississipi; but also to
give us a nearer View of all the People, who inhabit along the Banks; so that
we might take frequent Opportunities to contract new Alliances with 'em. At
first we crossed the River of Ducks, so called, by reason of the numerous
Flocks of wild Ducks, with which it is covered. Afterward we passed La
Sablonniere, or the River of Sand, with only has for its Bed a vast Sandy
Country; then the Robec, the Banks of which are inhabited by certain People,
who all speak in the Throat, Quanoatinos; a Nation of the Savages.
and at last the Malignant River, in the Territories lying about with are the
Quanoatinos, a People as formidable to the Iroquois, upon account of their
Valor, as for their Cruelty. For besides that they fight furiously, without
giving Quarter, they made a Law among themselves to cause as many to be burnt
as they can take Prisoners. As we continually went forward, we met with the
Tarahas the Cappas, and the Palaquessons all declared Enemies of the Spaniards.

The Fruitfulness of overy Country.
I shall not here give a large Description of the particular Rarities of all
those Countries and Nations; but I shall content my self only to declare, that
although the said Countries are very fine, generally speaking; yet in every one
of 'em, its peculiar Nature and Beauty may be more especially observed. For
some abound in Indian Corn, of which Frumenty is made; others in Tonquo, and
others in Cassave, of which the Natives make a kind of Bread.

An innumerable Multitude of Cibola's is to be seen amongst those People who
live nearest to the Seacoast. There are also vast numbers of Beavers amongst
the Ouadiches, the Akanceas, the Iroquois, and in many other Quarters of
America: And Bears are very frequent in the Northern Parts. As for Horses, they
are only found among the Nations who are Neighbors to the Spaniards, but one
may almost every where see Orignas; Staggs, Elks, Wolves, Ounces, large Rams,
Weathers, and Sheep, that have a much finer Wool than ours.

In traversing all these Plains we discovered a prodigious Number of Savages,
who all entertained us with a great deal of Courtesy, and with an entire
Submission to the Laws of our Monarch. Whilst we were traveling between the
Palaquessons, and the Nouadiches, our Provisions failed, and we were obliged to
have recourse to hunting; so that three or four of our Men, most expert in that
Exercise, usually lest their Companions to repair to the Woods, where they did
not continue long, without bringing us good store of Venison. The advantageous
and most delightful Situation of the Territories that lie between two Nations,
A pleasant Country situated between two Nations.
who are well affected to ours, is much to be admired, the whole Country being
extremely fertile in Indian Corn, and all kinds of Fruits, affording also great
variety of Game, and the Pastures abounding in Cattle of all sorts, but more
especially in Horses. All these great Advantages induced my Brother to
endeavor to plant a Colony in those Parts. In order to carry on this Design,
he judged it expedient that I should be sent before to the Islinois, as well to
inform you of his Arrival, as for some other Reasons, of which I shall
hereafter give you an Account. He gave me for my Retinue Father Anastasius,
Cavelier, my Nephew, M. de la Marne, four other French Men, and two Slaves to
serve me as Interpreters, with two Canoos, two Pack-Horses, and necessary
Provisions. We parted May 15. A. D. 1686. and traveled by Land, as well for
the Convenience of our Horses, as for the frequent Supplies we might get from
the Savages, who show as much zeal for the promoting of our Interest, as they
are the professed Enemies of the Iroquois and Spaniards.

Nouadiches, a Nation of the Savages.
On the first Day we took up our Quarters among the Nouadiches, who received us
with extended Arms, and invited us to join with 'em, in maintaining a War
against the Spaniards: They assured us, That there was a great deal of Gold and
Silver amongst 'em; that they would willingly leave us all their Wealth, and
that they would only reserve to themselves the Women and Children, to make
Slaves of 'em: However, notwithstanding the little Respect we had for the
Spaniards, we must needs have an Aversion to that Proposal; for we could not
give our Consent, that the Christians should become Slaves to the Savages.
Therefore to color our Denial, we replied, That our number was not sufficient
to be capable of assisting 'em in that War, but that we would go in quest of
Captain Tonti, to whom we would not fail to represent the same Conditions they
offered us, and that without doubt he would accept of 'em. This Answer gave
Satisfaction to the Savages, who supplied us with abundance of Provisions, and
caused us to lodge in their best Cottages.

Diverse other People.
The next day, we pursued our Journey to the Cenis and Nassonis. The latter gave
us Guides to conduct us to the Country of Nabari, and these last in like manner
took care to provide other Guides to convey us to the Naausi. We were equally
well received by all those People, and we every where found the same
Dispositions to make an Alliance with us, and to live under the Protection of
our Prince. The Lands thereabouts are fruitful, and the Climate very proper for
the planting of Vineyards; The fruitfulness of those Countries.
for Vines often spring up there spontaneously; so that one may see clusters of
Grapes growing amongst the Elms, and flourishing under the shadow of their
Leaves. One cannot travel three Leagues without meeting with some River or
Brook. There are also Herds of Beavers: All the People are generally addicted
to the Adoration of the Sun, and have no other Clothes than a certain
Contexture of Rushes, or of very sine Mats, which are set out with Paintings of
several Colors, representing the Sun, Birds, Flowers, etc. For matter of Arms,
they are altogether unknown to 'em, except the Bow and Arrow; insomuch, that
the discharge of a Fusee or Pistol would appear to them, as it were a Clap of
Thunder, preceeded by its Lightning.

Cadodaches, their Reception of the French.
Afterward we passed from the Territories of the Naausi to those of the
Cadodaches, where we were entertained after a very generous manner, so that our
Reception might well he styled a splendid Triumph. For the principal Elders of
the Nation came forth to meet us, and conducted us through two Ranks of their
armed Youth into very neat Cottages. The rest of our Entertainment was as
pleasant and diverting, as the manner of managing it was Savage and
Fantastical; at first, certain tawny Women, but well shaped, and half naked,
were very officious in washing our Feet in Wooden Troughs, and then we were
served with different Messes, very well dressed: For besides boiled Meat, Broth
and Venison, the ordinary Mess among those People; they presented us with a
large Dish of Roasted Turkeys, Geese, Ducks, and Ring-doves, not to forget
another Dish of broiled Pigeons. But we were disturbed in the midst of our
Jollity, by a very sad Accident, which happened to M. de la Marne, one of our
Company: Forasmuch as the Heat of the Weather was excessive, occasioned as well
by the Climate, M. de la Marne washing himself in a River it drowned.
as the Season of the Year; that unfortunate Gentleman had a mind to wash
himself in a River that runs through the Village. To which purpose, having chosen
a shady place for greater Convenience, he threw himself into the Water, and
unhappily fell into an Abyss, where he was swallowed up in a Trice; some time
after, perceiving that he did not return, we were desirous to go to the Place,
where he retired; but he was not to be found, and we began to suspect that
perhaps he might be devoured by some Crocodile: However, the Inhabitants having
seen the Place, where he threw himself in, no longer doubted that he was lost
in that Gulf. And indeed, after having made a search at the very instant, he
was taken up dead, and quite disfigured.

I cannot sufficiently express how much we were transported with Grief at the
sight of so sad a Spectacle. The Wife of the chief Governor came her self to
bury him; and after having performed the Funeral Obsequies, decently Interring
his Body, we set up a Cross over his Tomb: In the mean while, the Savages, who
were Witnesses of our Ceremonies, joined their Tears with ours, and endeavored
to comfort us, by doing us all the good Offices that lay in their Power.

Other Savage People.
The next day we met with the Narchoas and the Ouadiches on the Banks of the
same River, and about five Leagues lower we had a sight of the Cabinvio's and
Mentons. These People not knowing what our Arms were, took us for the Masters
of Thunder, and were much afraid of us at the same time. The Beavers are very
numerous in their Country, and more especially in the Territory of the
Ozotheon's, where they are so common, that the Inhabitants are obliged to burn
their Skins. These People provided Guides to conduct us to the Akanceas,
Akanceas.
on whose Jurisdiction they depend. There we began to know our selves; for we
saw a Cross erected, on the middle of which the King's Arms were fixed, and some
few Paces farther we met with a fine House, built after the French Fashion, and
inhibited by a certain Person, named Coustute, who received us very kindly, and
gave us to understand, that that Seat, with all its Dependencies, was under
your Jurisdiction. After having rested there two Days, we went to the Villages
of the Torimans, Doginga's and Cappu's, to get up to the River Mississipi.
These last People accommodated us with a A sort of Boat.
Piroque for two Horses that we gave 'em in Exchange.

Thus being wearied with out Travels by Land, I determined to passon the
Mississipi again, to the River of the Islinois, and Father Anastusius was very
glad that he had an Opportunity to go on board the same Canoo with me. M.
Cavelier, my Nephew, took five other French Men to accompany him, and
contenting himself with one Savage, left me another, to serve for an
Interpreter and Rower. Having met at our Place of Rendez vous, in the Country
of the Miamis, we parted; so that he traveled lover the Plains, and I embarked
on the River Mississipi, August 15. A. D. 1686.

It were needless to give a particular Account of all the Nations that we met,
and therefore I shall only make mention of those whom we did not discover in
our Descent. Chicacha's.
The Chicachas were the first that we found at the Distance of 30 Leagues from
the Akanceas: They are a very docil, industrious, valiant and warlike People,
and sufficiently numerous to raise an Army of 2000 Men upon all occasions. We
continued our Course from thence to the Ouabaches, within ten Leagues of their
River, and saw that of the Massourites and Ozages, which is no less rapid and
deep than the Mississipi. We passed on it during two Days, as well with a
Design to discover the Nations inhabiting on its Banks, as to get some fresh
Provisions, and in our Passage we descried the Villages of the Panivacha's,
Pera's, Panaloga's, Matotantes, and Ozages, all gallant, numerous, and
good-natured People, who among the several Messes and varieties of Fruits, with
which they treated us, caused us to eat some Grapes of an admirable taste.

On the third Day, after having rowed on that River, we endeavored to recover
the Mississipi; on which, being embarked in a Canoo, we steered our Course on
it for some Days, even as far as the River of the Islinois; and after Thirty
Days Navigation we arrived at the Foot of Crevecoeur Fort, from whence we
returned to that of St. Lewis. Indeed we were then so unfortunate, as nto to
meet with you there, (which was no small trouble to us); but at present we have
the Consolation to see you in good Health.

M. Cavelier having thus concluded his Relation, we renewed our Embraces, but I
continued for some time speechless, without being able to make any Application
to him; for, to say the Truth, I did not well know my self, nor in what
condition I was at that time. On the one side, the loss of our Fleet, and of
the greatest part of the French Mariners, was a very great Mortification to me;
and on the other side, the Assurance that was given me of M. de la Salle's
Welfare, and of the Success of so many sine Discoveries, obliged me to turn my
Sorrow into Joy. I was also extremely furpriz'd at the strangeness of his
Adventures; but at the same time, the Absence of a Person, for whom I had so
particular a Respect, and whose Return I had so long expected with the utmost
Impatience; besides, the Regret upon reflecting, that I was not an Eye witness,
and a Companion of his Travels, pierced my Heart with so sensible a Grief, that
I was not by any means able to surmount it. Neither could I any longer contain
my self, or forbear easing my Mind a little, by uttering these mournful
Expostulations. Alas! (said I to M. Cavelier) how could it so fall out, that
M. de la Salle, my Patron, and my only Support, should spend Two Years in
returning to America, and that during that whole Term, I should not be only
deprived of the Pleasure of seeing him, but also should not find Means to hear
any* Tidings of him? Or how is it possible that I should not be permitted to
embrace him? I must freely declare to you, that notwithstanding the Joy which
your Presence affords me, I find my self seized in beholding you, with a more
Intense Grief, since the more I look upon you, I am so much the more troubled
that I have not a sight of him. Heavens! (continued I) has M. de la Salle
resided in America Two Years, and cannot I as yet lay hold of some Opportunity
to meet him, or to speak with him? Alas! it is not my Fault; for as soon as I
could judge, that he had touched at any of the Coast of the Gulf of Mexico, I
made a descent on those Countries; I searched about all the Capes and Shoars of
that Sea, as well on the side of Malcolina, as on that of Mexico; I visited all
the People, who inhabit those Coasts, viz. The ^ichenos, Ozembogus, Tangibaos,
Ostonoos, Mansoleas, and Mousa's, and inquired of them after M. de la Salle,
but none could give me any manner of Account concerning him* Hence then you may
take some estimate of my excessive Trouble and Sorrow.

How was it possible (replied M. Cavelier for you to meet us? You went to seek
for us at the Mouth of the River Mississipi, and or the adjacent Coasts;
whereas we only landed 25 Leagues above it: You followed the Course of that
River, both in your Descent, and at your Return; but we always kept at a
distance from thence, steering to the South-east, and along the Gulf of
Mexico. By what means could you expect to meet with us, in following so
contrary Courses? At least (said I to him) he ought to have sent some
Messenger, to give me notice of his Return. It Is true indeed, (said he) and he
would certainly have done it, if it had lain in his Power: But who of those new
Comers could find out the Roads that lay cross the Territories of so many
Barbarians or would be willing to make such an Attempt at so great a distance?
Or could he spare me, or either of his two Nephews for that purpose? Besides,
the Hopes he had of seeing you ere long in Person, made him continually defer
to inform you of his Arrival. It must be confessed (said I then) there is no
Remedy for what is past* that which revives my Spirits is, to hear that he is
in good Health, and whereabouts he is: It will not be long (by the help of God)
are we shall go again to find him out. In the mean while (continued I) I call
to mind, that you have somewhat else more particular to communicate to me from
him, and therefore I would entreat you to declare it to me, that I may make due
Preparation, even as soon as it is possible for my intended Voyage.

Take it thus (replied M. Cavelier my Brother being impatient to procure the
necessary Supplies, for the Establishment and Maintenance of his new Colony,
and to cause two Ports and two Havens to be built, viz. One on St. Lewis's Bay,
and the other at the Mouth of the River Mississipi, the bottom and sides of
which he has very accurately observed, deputed me for this Employment, only
with a Design that I should incontinently return to France, as well to inform
the Court of his last Settlement, and of his great Discoveries, as to prepare
their Minds, and to induce 'em to grant what is requisite upon so emergent an
occasion. For that very Reason he also sent me to Quebec, and gave me a
particular Charge to wait upon you, in order to borrow some Money, upon the
Receipt of which I will give you an Acquittance, and my Brother will place it
to Account.

After this Discourse he presented me with a Letter, which was well sealed with
M. de la Salle's Seal. As for the Writing, I did not examine it; and besides,
the Characters used by those two Gentlemen, who wrote almost the same Hand, are
so like, that 'twould be difficult to find out the difference. However, I read
that Letter with extreme Delight; in which, the same Request was contained,
with Protestations of an entire Trust, and of a most sincere Friendship. The
Joy with which I was transported, to hear Tidings of so intimate a Friend; the
Candor of the Person who delivered the Letter to me; and the Devotion I had
made of every thing that I possessed, to the disposal of a Person, to whom I
thought my self infinitely indebted; did not suffer me to take the matter into
Consideration. I immediately asked M. Cavelier how much Money he desired?
Whereupon he told me, that he believed his Brother had mentioned the Sum of
7000 Livers. It Is true indeed (said I) but if you have occasion for more, you
need only demand it of me, since all that I have is at your Service. He thanked
me heartily, and told me, that in case he should stand in need of somewhat
more, he might procure it in France. Therefore I paid him the Sum of Money
agreed upon, at that very Instant, and he insisted to give me his Receipt,
according to the Order, which (as he said) he had from his Brother. I readily
consented, and forasmuch as he protested to me, that he determined to set out
on his Journey the next day, I gave some Refreshment to his Attendants, and
recruited his Provisions. We spent the Remainder of the Day as pleasantly as we
could, and very early the next Morning he took leave of me, departing with a
Franciscan Recolet, and a Slave, with a design to pass into the Country of the
Miamis.

I was also preparing to pass on the River the next day, and every thing was
disposed for my Departure. Having spent the rest of the Day, with much
uneasiness, the next Morning I was potting my small Cargo on board, when about
Nine a Clock I espied coming toward me the Sieur Constur^, my Lieutenant, in
the Country of the Akanceas, where both the Caveliers, viz. the Uncle and the
Nephew refreshed themselves for some time: Indeed at first I was very glad to
see him, but in a moment after he threw me into a terrible Consternation: I
immediately erquir'd of him, where he left M. de La Salle? M. de La Salle,
(said he) do not you know that he is dead? The Death of M. de La Salle.
How! (cried I) is M. de La Salle dead? It Is too true (replied he) he is
certainly dead; for he was assassinated by his own Party, in the Territories
situated between the Palaquessons and the Nouadiches. Hey! what do you say? (said
I) is it possible? Why! M. Cavelier his own Brother but now took Leave of me,
and was so far from telling me any thing of this matter, that he gave me a
Letter under his Hand, and did not seem to show the least mark of Grief or
Concern. Sir (said he) I had the Information from his own Mouth; his Tears, and
those of his Nephew were too evident a proof of the Truth of what they
asserted; and I an very sorry that I should be the first that (...) to bring
you so bad News. I was extremely surpised at this Answer, and quite over
whelmed with Grief, insomuch, that for a while I was not able to speak nor
weep; neither did I know how to dispose of my self: However, some Moments after
I rose up, and spoke to this Effect; M. de La Salle my only Protector, is dead
(as you say) and murdered too by his Attendants! O Heavens! can this be? But
may I know who are those Miscreants that durst imbrue their Hands in the Blood
of so excellent a Patron? They are two Ruffians (replied M. Cousture) named Dan
and Lancelot. The Authors of his Death.
Ah! wicked Wretches (said I) by what Motive, or rather, by what Demon were
they excited to commit so execrable a Fact? Then I entreated him to tell me all
that he knew concerning that Matter. Alas! Sir, (said he) not to trespass too
long on your Patience, I shall proceed to give you an Account of every
particular Circumstance of his Death, as it was related to me.

M. de La Salle being recovered of a very dangerous Disease, repaired to his
last Colony at Fort St. Lewis, and departed from thence, March 26. A. D. 1686.
with a Design to visit his old Plantations, accompanied with about 30 Persons;
among whom were his Brother, his two Nephews, the two Lantelots Brothers, Dan,
a Savage, named Choonanou; two English Free-Booters; and one Hieus, a German by
Nation.

On the first Day of their March, M. de La Salle perceiving that the younger
Lancelot, being still weak after his Recovery from a violent Fit of Sickness,
was not able to follow the rest of the Company, determined to send him back to
the Bay; neither could he be prevailed upon by any means to alter his Mind,
notwithstanding the earnest Entreaties made by his Brother, that they might not
be parted; insomuch, that young Lancelot was at last obliged to return to the
place appointed. These Proceedings which appeared to be Arbitrary, and
Imperious, were hard to be digested by a Man of Courage. In the mean while it
unfortunately happened, that this young Man was met on the Road by certain
Savages, who cut his Throat, The younger Lancelot killed by the Savages.
and the News was brought the same Day to his elder Brother, who could not
restrain the Excess of his Grief. He immediately laid the Blame on M. de La
Salle, and from that very moment, being transported with Rage and Passion, he
swore his Destruction. After having given himself up for some time to
Complaints and Lamentations, he suddenly stifled his Indignation, designing to
^et it break forth again with greater Vehemence upon some favorable
Opportunity. Therefore he followed the rest of he Company; but after Two Months
march, their Provisions failing, between the Territories of the Palaquessons
and the Noadiches; Dan and Lantelot made an Agreement to go a hunting in the
Woods, and solicited the Sieur de Moranget, to accompany 'em. The unfortunate
Gentleman, without mistrusting any thing, condescended by way of Complaisance,
to grant their Request. But the two Ruffians, who being excited as well by
Envy, upon Account of his singular Merits, as by the implacable Hatred that
they bore his Uncle, had long ago formed a Design upon his Life; having now
insensibly drawn him aside, reek'd their Malice upon him, to which purpose they
gave him a blow on the Head with a Hatchet, of which he died two Hours after,
De Moranget knocked on the Head with a Hatchet.
like a good Christian, heartily forgiving his Enemies; of whose Revenge this
was the first Effort.

The Day being ended, and M. de La Salle not seeing his Nephew return, nor his
Companions, spent the Night in a strange Perplexity: The next day he went
himself to the Place, where he judged that they might have been, and was soon
follw'd by Father Anastasius, his Brother and his Lacquey, neither was much
time spent, ere he sound the Person whom he sought for. For being arrived in a
Meadow, situated on the side of the River Mississipi, he espied Lantelot's
Footman through the Grass, which was very high, and instantly asked him what was
become of De Moranget his Nephew? The Villain impudently answered that he might
go look him on the Bank; and indeed the Body of that unfortunate young
Gentleman lay extended there, and two Vulturs were fluttering over it, to get
their Prey. In the mean while those two perfidious Wretches lay hid in the
Grass, with their Fusees ready cockt; and as M. de la Salle was drawing near
the Footman, to chastise him, he was shot in the Head with three Balls, which
Lantelot had discharged against him; whereupon he fell to the Ground with his
Face all over bloody. Father Anastusius and his Brother having heard the Report
of the Gun, immediately ran to him, and found him dying, but not as yet
altogether destitute of Sense and Knowledge. Neither did their Grief hinder 'em
from assisting him at his last Gasp, at least with respect to the Salvation of
his Soul: For he had Time and Strength sufficient to make his Confession, and
to offer up himself to God, as it were a solemn Sacrifice. This was the last
Effect of their Rage, and the Tragical end of our Illustrious Hero, and of your
good Friend.

These last Words struck me to the very Heart, M. de la Salle 's Death much
lamented
insomuch, that I had no Strength left to complain: I continued dumb and
unmovable for some time; but at last the violence of my Grief, causing me to
come out of my Consternation by the means of a sudden Flood of Tears: 'O
Heavens! (said I) shall I never see M. de la Salle again? Alas! what Hope,
what Help is there now left me? What will become of all those blooming
Families, of which he was the common Father, the main Support, and the only
Consolation? What a desperate Condition are they in? How many brave
Undertakings are now spoiled, and how many Persons are ruined by the Loss of
one single Man? Alas! is it possible that a Person so venerable for his
Virtue; and so useful to France, upon Account of his great Discoveries; or that
a Man so universally respected, and beloved even by the most barbarous People,
should be massacred by his own Followers? Is there any Punishment severe enough
for these Murderers; I say, for those wretched C^^itifs? But where shall we
find 'em? Oh! that I could discover 'em, and bring 'em to condign Punishment.
Their Business is already done (then said Conture) those Villains are already
punished, if their Death may be thought sufficient to expiate their Guilt.
After what manner (said I) did the Earth open to swallow 'em up; or did Heaven
strike 'em dead with Thunder? No, Sir, (replied he) their Comerades did 'em
Justice. These profligate Wretches, after they had perpetrated that horrid
Fact, determined in like manner to destroy all the rest, that they might not
leave any Witnesses of their Crime; but the two English Men seigning to espouse
their Interest, and to justify their wicked Action, obtained a Pardon for the
Brother, and the Nephew that survived their Kinsman, with Leave to bury the two
dead Bodies.

Whilst these two afflicted Relations, and the good Monk were employed in
performing their last Devoirs to the Deceased, those perfidious Villains ran to
seize on the rest of M. de La Salle's Effects; the whole Cargo consisting in
Ten Horses, some pieces of Linen Cloth and Merchandises, to the value of about
2000 Crowns. As soon as they had taken Possession of all the Goods, the rest of
the Company was obliged to make a Virtue of Necessity, and to join with 'em.
The Brother and the Nephew, who had redeemed their Life by silence, and by a
voluntary Resignation of every thing, were likewise forced to follow the
Torrent. Afterward they arrived at the Village of the Nouadiches, among whom
dwelt certain French Men, who had deserted M. de La Salle in his Lifetime.
These People perceiving the Arrival of this new Company, very well armed, and
moderately accoutred, were no less overjoyed to see 'em, than the French were,
entertained 'em very honorably; and at the first Salute invited 'em to be
their Companions in their Expedition against the Quoanantino's. It being
requisite to suit themselves to the Time; and to comply with the present
Exigency of Affairs, they all entered into that Association, except the two
Caveliers, and the Father Recolet.

In the mean while Lantelot and Dan, who set up for Commanders in chief of the
Company, took up their Lodging apart; absolutely disposed of all the Effects of
M. de La Salle, at their Pleasure; diverted themselves at his Cost; and made
good Cheer. But the departure of the Savages was daily expected. The English
Man and the German, that had no share in the Spoils of the Deceased, and who
nevertheless stood in great need of necessary Accoutrements, went well armed to
meet their pretended commanders in their Tent, and entreated 'em to take Care
that they might be supplied with some Linen for their new Expedition. Lantelot
treated 'em rudely; the English Man re-iterated his Demands; and the former
made him a second Denial, with much more Refractoriness than before. Lantelot
and Dan assassinated by an English Man and a German
Whereupon the English Man upbraiding him, said, Thou art a vile Traitor; thou
have killed thy Master and mine; and at that very Instant, drawing a Pistol
from his Girdle, he shot three Balls into his Reins, and laid him sprawling on
the Ground. Dan immediately ran to his Fusee, but the German soon stopped his
Career, broke his Head, and killed him outright. Some of the Company hearing
the Noise, ran toward 'em forthwith, and Father Anastasius found one
stone-dead, and the other dying: He confessed Lantelot, who was M. de La
Salle's Murderer, and had scarce given him Absolution, when a certain French
Man burnt his Hair with a Pistol-Shot, without Ball; insomuch, that the Fire
instantly taking hold of his Shirt, which was very greasy, the miserable
Wretch expired amidst the Elames. Thus thove wicked Murderers perished
according to their Deserts, whose Crime was of too deep a Dye, to remain long
unpunished, and it is not to be doubted that those who shall read this
Narrative, will conceive a just Indignation against the like bloody Assassins.

Afterward the English Man and the German made themselves Masters of their
Spoils, and offered 'em all to the discretion of the two M. Caveliers, who only
took as much as was necessary for their Journey; and having left 'em the rest,
came to me in the Country of the Akanceas. They were the Uncle and the Nephew,
accompanied with M. de la Marne, and M. Joustel, and a Chaouanou savage, and I
had all that I have related from their own Mouth: I was also an Eye witness of
their Lamentations and Tears; they rested Two Days in your House, and on the
third following they set out for the Islinois. Thus, Sir, I have given you a
particular Account of what you desired, according to the best of my Knowledge.

I only conversed (said I then) with the Uncle and the Father Recolet, but as
for the Nephew, M. Joustel and the Chaouanou, I had no sight of 'em. As for M.
de la Marne, I remember that M. Cavelier told me, that he was drowned;
nevertheless, I cannot recover my self from my Surprise, when I reflect on the
Constancy and Tranquillity of Mind, with which he related to me the particular
Circumstances of his whole Voyage, and all his Adventures. It Is a common
Saying, that deep Sorrow is dumb, and I dare not call in question the Sincerity
of his; but I am certain, that he has made no Scruple to cross the Proverb. He
had some occasion to use Dissimulation (replied Cousture) He was willing
somewhat to allay his Grief, by the telling of long Stories; and besides, he
had some By-ends, and some particular Reasons for such a Deportment at that
time.

I very well comprehend your meaning (said I) he was desirous to borrow Money
of me, and he was afraid, lest I should refuse to lend him any, if he informed
me of his Brother's Death. But alas! I was too much indebted to his Name and
Family, to deny him any thing. Would to God I had nothing left in the World,
and had not lost my honored Protector, my dear Patron, and my most faithful
Friend! But alas! all our Lamentations are to no purpose; and since we cannot
repair so great a Loss, let us at least arm our selves with Patience; let us
also endeavor to bring to Perfection what he has so happily begun.

At that very instant I encouraged my self in my Resolution to make another
Voyage, with a Design not only to carry Relief to those poor French Men, who
were abandoned on the Sea-shoar, but also to undertake some new Enterprise,
that might afford me some Consolation for the Loss I had sustained. To that
purpose I made Preparations for a new Descent to the Seas, and to visit all
those Nations that were lately discovered by M. de La Salle, and mentioned to
me by his Brother.

In the mean while I received a Letter from the Marquis D'Enonville, our
Governor; the Purport of which was to inform me, That we were engaged in a War
against the Spaniards, War with the Spaniards.
and by which he gave me free Liberty to make what Attempts I could upon 'em.
This Letter, in Conjunction with what M. Cavelier had told me concerning those
Nations, who were ready to make War with 'em, animated me so much the more to
hasten my Journey. Therefore I set out December. 3. A. D. 1687. accompanied with
five French Men, four Chaouanous, and some other Savages, and left my Cousin De
Liette, Commander of Fort St. Lewis. My first Journey ended in the Village of
the Islinois, and I found 'em lately come back from an Expedition against
diverse Neighboring People, from whom they carried away 130 Prisoners.

From thence I passed to the Cappa's, who gave me very good Entertainment, and
some time after the Toginga's and Torimans received me with the like
Demonstration of Friendship and Respect. Then the Course of my Journey brought
me to the Ossotoues, where I built an House for the Convenience of Traffic.
There I spent five or six Days, during which, I made new Purchaces, and
increased my Store of Provisions. I departed from my House in the Month of
February, 1688. and after some Days traveling I got up again to the great
Village of Taensas. As we were pursuing that Journey, one of my Chaouanous
being attacked by three Chachouma's, killed one of them, and himself received a
slight Wound on the Pap, with the glancing of an Arrow. But a far greater
Disaster befell us during that Journey. For two French Men of my Company
straggling in the Woods to hunt, were assaulted by a Party of Naches, and
unfortunately killed. We were so much the more sensible of this Indignity, in
regard that 'twas impossible for us to revenge it, not being able to come up
with those Savages.

A quarrel between the Taensa's and the Nachitoches about Salt.
Upon our Arrival among the Taensas, the principal Elders of that Nation
informed me of the Contest they had with the Nachitoches, about Salt, of which,
the latter would not suffer 'em to have any share, and entreated me to be
Mediator for the making up of their Differences. I readily accepted of the
Office; so that Thirty Taensas having joined our Company, we arrived after
Eight Days march, at the Village of the Nachitoches. This Nation constitutes
only one State with two others, viz. the Ouasita's and the Capichis. The chief
Commanders of these three sorts of People being met together, they caused me to
sit down in the middle of 'em; but the Thirty Taensa's, before they took their
place, desired Leave to go to the Temple, to implore the Assistance of their
God, for the obtaining a firm Peace. (Here it is observable by the way, that the
Sun is the Deity which is most commonly adored among all those People.)
Therefore these Taensa's were actually conducted to the Temple; and after
having said their Prayers, were brought back to the Assembly, where they called
their God to witness the Sincerity of their Intentions, as to the matter of
Peace; made their Presents to the three several Nations; and nominated me for
Guarantee of their Treaty. Whereupon I promoted their Interest as far as it lay
in my Power, making the best of their Claim, and at last brought Matters to a
good Accommodation; insomuch, that the Nachitoches promised to supply 'em with
Salt, in exchange for their Skins and Grains. Upon the breaking up of the
Convention, they took a reciprocal Oath to maintain Peace and an Amicable
Correspondence one with another, and danced the Calumet, according to the usual
Custom of the Americans. Afterward I took my leave of both those Nations.

The Nachitoches provided Five Guides to conduct me to the Village of the
Yataches, and to go thither; I was obliged to pass on the River Onoroyste,
about 30 Leagues. During our Course we found fifteen Cottages of the Naches,
and took up our Lodging amongst 'em that Night, continually standing upon our
Guard. The next day, having met with Twelve of 'em apart, we did not spare 'em,
but revenged the Death of our French Men, whom they had barbarously
assassinated. After having traveled for some Days, we arrived in the
Territories of the Yataches, who are united to two other Nations, that make
three Villages together, viz. the Yataches, the Onodo's, and the Choyo's. As
soon as they had notice of our Arrival, they came three Leagues to meet us, and
brought us good Provisions for our Refreshment. Afterward we went out of the
Champion Country to their Village, and the chief Elders entertained us at
several Feasts. Then I made 'em some Presents, and desired that I might have
Guides to conduct me to the Quodadiquio's. They made a great deal of difficulty
to grant me any, by reason that three Days ago they massacred three of their
Ambassadors; nevertheless, by the means of Entreaties and Protestations to
defend 'em, they were at last prevailed upon to furnish us with five.

When we drew near the three Villages, we discerned the Tracts of Horses and
Men on the Road, and indeed in the Morning diverse Horsemen appeared, and
offered to convey us thither. I was attended with 20 Fusileers, well armed, and
so in a Condition to keep those Savages in awe. I had no sooner entered the
Village, but a certain Woman, who held the first Rank in that Country, A
remarkable Adventure.
made an Address to me, and importuned me to revenge her Husband's Death, who
was killed by the Yataches. A little while after another Woman came to me, to
make the same Complaint, and they apparently were the Wives of those
Ambassadors, whom the Yataches had assassinated not long before. All the People
seemed to be concerned at their Death; and forasmuch as they were very
sollicitous about that Affair, I made a Promise both to the Widows, and to the
People, to take Vengeance for the Murder of their Husbands and Ambassadors.
Then they conducted me to their Temple, washed my Face with Water, before they
permitted me to enter; and after having prayed to God for the space of one
quarter of an Hour, they led me back into the Cottage of one of those Women,
where I was magnificently entertained. There I was informed, that the Seven
French Men, who were separated from Cavelier, after the Death of M. de la
Salle, were still living among the Nouadiches. I was extremely delighted with
this piece of News, and hoped to put an end to my Evils, if I could once find
means to meet 'em again. Therefore having passed the rest of the Day among the
Quadodiqui's, I entreated 'em to furnish me with Guides, and assured 'em, That
at my Return I would either oblige the Yataches to give 'em Satisfaction, or I
would require Blood for Blood at their Hands.

People united together.
The Quodadiquio's are united to two other Nations, viz. the Napgitoche's and
the Nassonis, whose Territories are situated on the red River. These three
Nations speak the same Language, yet their Assemblies are not convened by
Villages, but by Habitations, very remote one from another. Their Countries are
very fine, affording abundance of Game, and variety of Fish; but there are very
few Oxen. These People maintain cruel Wars against their Neighbors; insomuch,
that their Villages are not very populous. They all have very sine Horses,
which they call Cavallio's. The Men and Women have their Faces pricked, and
even all the other Parts of their Bodies: And indeed the Fantastical Humors of
Men is altogether unaccountable, since that which in looked upon as Deformity
in one Country, passes for Beauty in another. Their River is called the Red,
because it actually throws up abundance of Sand, The Red River.
which renders it as red as Blood.

I set out from thence April 6. A. D. 1690. with two Slaves, who were my
Guides, for the Country of the Nouadiches. As we were traveling on the Road,
we met with certain Savages of that Nation a hunting, who assured us, that they
had left our French Men at home, which was very joyful News to me, but at the
same time I had the Misfortune to lose a young French Man of my Retinue: He
found means to return three Days after, but without his Snap-sack, where I had
put the best part of my Provisions, which created me a great deal of trouble.
However, not thinking fit to take any notice of his Neglect, we took up our
Quarters that Night within half a League of the Village of the Nouadiches,
where the principal Elders came forth to meet us. I instantly inquired of 'em
after our French Men, and they answered, that they were in good Health; but
forasmuch as they were not to be seen, I could promise my self no Good by it.
The next day, being arrived at their Village, and none of 'em appearing, my
Suspicion was still increased. The chief Governors of the Nation did not fail
to offer me the Calumet; but I refused to accept of any thing at their Hands,
till they had produced the French Men. When they perceived that I persisted in
my Resolution, they confessed that our French Men having accompanied 'em in the
War against the Spaniards, were surrounded by the Horse; that three of 'em were
killed; and that the other four retiring to the Quoanantino's, they never heard
any Tidings of 'em since that time. I replied, That certainly they themselves
had murdered 'em; they denied it stiffly, and forasmuch as I incessantly
accused 'em, their Wives fell a weeping, and made me understand by their Tears,
that the Information concerning their Death was too true.

The Nouadiches used their utmost Efforts to clear themselves, and offered me
the Calumet a second time; I told 'em that I would not accept of it, till I
were thoroughly convinced of their Innocence as to that Point, and that
nevertheless if I could be serviceable to 'em in any thing, they should find my
Fidelity inviolable. The chief Commander answered my kind Expressions, with a
Present of Ten sine Horses, well harnessed, and I gave him seven Hatchets, with
a Set of Glasses.

We left their Country May 29. and advanced within a Days Journey of the
Palaquessons, where we were informed that the last Colony established by M. de
la Salle, on the Coast of the Gulf of Mexico, not having been able to maintain
it self in a perfect Union, was quite dispersed; that some were intermixed with
the Savages, and that others found Means to get to the French Plantations in
other Places. Therefore not judging it expedient to seek for 'em where they
were no longer to be found, I took a Resolution to return the same way I came.
In the mean while I endeavored to pass to the Village of Coroas, but a
prodigious Inundation happening, by reason of the extraordinary Rains, which
continued for Three Days successively, we were involved in the greatest
Straight imaginable: For the Water every where rose up to the middle Leg at
least; insomuch, that we were forced to sleep, and to make Fires on thick
Trees, and we thought our selves happy, in being then provided with Cassave,
Beef and Venison: We continued three or four Days in this forlorn Condition,
but as good Luck would have it, we discovered a small Island, which the Waters
had not as yet overflowed, and we retired thither for a Day and a Night: Our
Horses were somewhat recruited there, and the Ground being suddenly dried by
the excessive Heat of the Season, and of the Climate, we got up in a Days
Journey to the Village of Coroas. Coroas, a Savage People.
I cannot sufficiently express the noble Entertainment we met with among those
People, who employed several Persons every day in fishing and hunting, on
purpose to treat us, and supplied us with abundance of Pullets, Geese, Pigeons
and Turkeys. But that which redoubled my Joy is, that two of those French Men,
whom I sought for among the Nouadiches, were luckily found here; and that I had
so favorable an Opportunity to reunite 'em to my Company.

I took my leave of the Coroas, July 20th. and arrived on the 31th. in the
Territories of the Akancea's, where I was seized with a Fever, which obliged me
to stay there till August 15. After I had a little recovered my Strength, I set
forward again in my Journey to the Country of the Islinois, and arrived there
in the Month of September. Thus the Treaty of Peace concluded between the
Taensa's and the Nachitoches; the pleasure of being most kindly entertained by
all the Savage People; and the Satisfaction of bringing back two French Men,
whom I had given over for lost; were the Fruits of my last Voyage.

By this Relation one may take an estimate of the Riches and Beauty of all
those Countries, inhabited by so many People, that are all in a manner already
brought under Subjection, and who have a perfect Idea of the Grandeur of our
Monarch. It cannot be conceived how much that Continent abounds, as well in all
sorts of Grain and Fruit, as in variety of Cattle. It Is surrounded on all sides
with great Seas, the Shoars of which are very deep, and seem to present us with
natural Ports; insomuch, that three or four Havens on the Gulf of Mexico would
undoubtedly secure for us the Possession of those Territories. The French are
generally so well beloved, that to make themselves Masters of 'em, they have
nothing to do but to settle there incontinently, and to plant their Colonies.
What is wanting, may be transported thither by our Vessels; as in like manner,
what is wanting in our Country, may be brought us from thence. For from those
Parts we have our principal Stores of Skins; we might also get Silks, Timber
for Ships, and diverse other Commodities. If there be a scarcity of Corn and
Wine, it is less occasioned by the defect of the Soil, than for want of the
Improvement of Husbandry. Lastly, to procure all the Treasures of Nature, it is
only requisite to bestow some Pains in seeking for 'em, and to improve 'em when
found. Such is the State of Affairs in that Country: God grant that a happy and
lasting Peace may soon put us in Possession, and secure us in the Enjoyment of
these Advantages.

FINIS.
A RELATION OF A VOYAGE Made by the Sieur de Montauban, Captain of the French
Privateers, ON THE Coasts of Guinea, In the Year 1695.

WITH A Description of the Kingdom of Cape de Lopez; and an Account of the
Manners, Customs and Religion of the Natives of that Country.

London: Printed in the Year School.

A LETTER to Monsieur
SIR,
I Have at last received the Relation of the Voyage, made by Capt. Montauband,
commonly called Montauban, and I have sent it you printed. You will admire
without all Doubt, as well as I, how by the means of his singular Prudence and
Courage, he extricated himself from those weighty Pressures, under which any
other Person in his Circumstances, would have unavoidably perished: You may
also call to Mind in reading the beginning of this Narrative, that you had a
sight of some of his Seamen at Bordeaux, A. D. 1694. from whence he set out the
next Year to undertake the Voyage, of which he here gives us a particular
Account.

He gave chase to diverse Ships that he met during his Course, and engaged at
Cape Verd, with a Frigate of 34 Pieces of Ordnance. At St. John's Cape he came
up with an English Vessel of 20 Guns, and took her after a small Engagement.
Afterward he took a Caper of Brandenburg, and steered his Course to Angola. At
last he discovered the English Guard-Ship, armed with 54 Pieces of Cannon near
the Coast, and fought her during five or six Hours, till they both came to
boarding with great Fury. But when he was just ready to master her, the English
Captain set fire to his whole store of Powder, and both the Ships were blown up
into the Air, with a most dreadful Noise and Havoc.

You may have the satisfaction to take a view of so terrible a Shipwreck in
this Narrative, as it were on the Sea shore, and to observe how Capt. Montauban
makes his Escape with Fifteen or Sixteen of his Men. He suffered Hunger above
Three Days, and at last arrived at Cape de Lopez, where he went to visit the
King of the Country: He has given us a Description of the Court and Kingdom of
that Prince; treating at the same time of his Religion, and forming a Project
for the establishing of the Roman Catholic in those Parts. He stood Godfather
to the King's Grandson, by his Son Prince Thomas, and embarked in a Portuguese
Vessel, to return to Europe. An English Man of his Acquaintance took him on
board his Ship, and conveyed him to Barbados, where he was confined in a
Chamber by the Order of M. Russel, Governor of the English Island. Afterward
he was set at Liberty, and transported to Martinica, where he was present at
the Death of M. de Blenac, General of the French Islands. From thence he passed
over into France, and continued very doubtful thither he should try his Fortune
again by Sea or not.

All these Particulars (Sir) are related in so plain and natural a Style, that
you may clearly discern the Integrity and Generosity of the Author. Indeed it
must be acknowledged that Sailers and other Persons, taken up with the
Management of Maritime Affairs, ate nothing near so polite, as those that have
Employments on the Land, by reason that they do not keep so much Company, and
have not an opportunity of conversing so frequently with the more refined Wits
of the Age; but to make amends for this Defect, they are generally a great deal
more sincere. Therefore you need not fear, lest a Sea-Captain should impose on
your Credulity: Besides, I have often heard him making a Narration of the same
Voyage, yet never could perceive him to vary in the least Circumstance;
insomuch, that the Candor and free Air, with which he was wont to relate the
bravest Actions that were performed in the Engagements, would soon persuade his
Hearers to believe, that what he said was certainly true. Neither did he write
this Narrative through Ostentation, since he himself sufficiently declares in the
beginning of it, that he did it only to give an Account of his Expeditions to a
Minister of State. Lastly, if you still doubt of the Fight, in which the Sieur
de Montauban suffered Shipwreck, you cannot but remember that you have read it
in the Gazettes of the Month of September or October, of the present Year.

I am, SIR, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, B***

A RELATION OF THE VOYAGE OF THE Sieur de Montauban, Captain of the French
Privateers, on the Coasts of Guinea, A. D. 1695.
AFTER having been so often made sensible of the Malignant Influences of the
Planet that governs at Sea; and having, by the means of a cross Fortune, lost
all the Goods which I had gathered together, with so great Care and Pains, I
should take no Delight in calling to Mind the Misfortunes that put an end to my
last Expedition; were it not that the Desire of being still more serviceable to
the Public, and to Private Persons, as also to testify to his Majesty the
fervent Zeal I had for his Service, did not oblige me to set Pen to Paper, to
give some Account of my Observations to M. Phelipeaux, in which he may discern
with what Earnestness I penetrated into the most remote Colonies of the
Enemies, to destroy 'em, and to ruin their Commerce.

I was not willing to enlarge this Relation with an Account of all the Voyages
I made, and of all the particular Adventures that befell me on the Coasts of
the New Spain, Carthagena, Mexico, Florida, New York, New England,
Newfoundland, the Canary Islands, and Cape Verd, where I cruis'd up and down
above Twenty Years, having begun to follow the practice of Navigation at the
Age of Sixteen. I might also add the Expedition of the Year 1691. in which,
being Commander of the Ship, called The Machine, I ravaged the Coasts of
Guinea, entered the great River of Serrelion, seized on the Fort of the
English, in which there were 80 pieces of Cannon, and caused 'em to be blown
up, that they might not be refitted: But I will confine my self to the
Narrative of my last Voyage, because it is the latest, and that which is still
fresh in Memory, as having been made known buplickly by the Report that was
spread abroad in France and elsewhere, about the firing of my Ship, and the
blowing me up into the Air, after so prodigious a manner.

In the Year 1684. after having ravaged the Coast of Carrack I got the Wind to
Santa Cruz, and was informed there, that a Convoy of Ships was to set out from
the Islands of Barbados and Nevi^ for England. Whereupon I was obliged to go
to the Latitude of Bermudas, with a Design to seize on that small Fleet, and in
hopes of getting a good Prize. I was no sooner arrived, but they appeared
steering directly toward me, without any manner of Fear; but I attacked the
Convoy, called the Wolf, with two other Merchant-Ships, laden with Sugar; the
rest having found means to escape, during the Fight. As I was carrying off this
Prize, I met with another English Vessel of Sixteen Guns, that came from Spain,
and was likewise sailing for England: She surrendered after a slight
Engagement, and I conveyed her to Rachel, where the Court of Admiralty adjudg'd
her to me as lawful Prize. After having sold her, I brought my three other
Ships to Bordeaux, where I arrived in the Month of September, A. D. 1694. These
were in like manner allowed to be good Prize, and I immediately sought for
Merchants to dispose of 'em.

In the mean while my Free-Booters, who had not seen France for a long time,
being now arrived in a great City, in which Voluptuousness and Luxury are
predominant, were desirous to make themselves some amends for the Fatigues they
had endured, during so long an Absence from their Native Country: Insomuch,
that they riotously wasted vast Sums of Money, and gave way to all Actions of
Extravagance. The Merchants and Victuallers made no scruple to trust 'em, or to
supply 'em with whatever they desired, upon the Reputation of their Wealth, and
the Report that was given out in the City, with reference to the great Prizes
in which they had a Share. Thus they passed all the Nights in variety of
Divertisements, and the Days in running about the Streets in Masquerade,
causing themselves to be carried in Chairs, with lighted Torches at Noonday:
This Excess of Debauchery destroyed some of 'em, and four others deserted me;
so that perceiving that I lost my Men, notwithstanding all my Precaution, and
all the Prohibitions that I could make, I determined to retire from the City as
soon as 'twas possible, to preserve the rest of my Company.

At first I filled up again the Vacancy of those that were lost, by an equal
number of young Men of Bordeaux, who in a short time were as capable of playing
their Parts as the oldest. And indeed, I always take a particular Care to
instruct my Men in the best manner of firing a Piece, and the frequent
Exercise, with which I usually train 'em up, within a little while, renders 'em
as expert in shooting right at a Mark, and in handling their Arms, as the most
ancient Free-booters of the Sea, and the most skilful Hunters on Land.

After having victuall'd my Ship, which carried about 34 Pieces of Ordnance, I
set out from Bordeaux in the Month of February, A. D. 1695. with a Design to
cruise on the Coasts of Guinea, in Africa. To that purpose I passed to the
Islands Azores, which lie in the 37th. Degree of Latitude, and roved up and
down during Eight Days, without discovering any thing. From thence I steered to
the Canary Islands, situated in the 25th. Degree, and descried the Pike of
Teneriff at a very great distance, which is reputed to be the highest Mountain
in the World. It Is reported that those Islands took their Name from Dogs,
called Canes in Latin, great Numbers of which were found there by the
Portugueses. I sailed round about 'em for Fourteen Days, to wait for certain
Dutch Vessels, which (as I was informed) were to come that way; and indeed,
they actually appeared, but entered the Port before I could come up with 'em;
which Disappointment obliged me to steer my Course for Cape Blanc, and the
Islands of Cape Verd, which lie between the 14. and the 18. Degree of Southern
Latitude. Upon my Arrival, I met with two English Ships riding at Anchor in the
Road of the Island of May. I sent out my Shallop to discover 'em; and forasmuch
as she brought me word, that they were Privateers or Interlopers, of 30 Guns
apiece, I took a Resolution to take 'em by boarding; and therefore tacked
about, to make up to 'em: But whilst I was running a Course on one of the
Points of the Island, those Vessels did not stay till I had tacked about again;
but suspecting my Design, they speedily set sail, leaving their Cables, Anchors
and Shallops on the Road.

I pursued 'em all that day; but the Night approaching, I lost the sight of
'em, and returned to the Road, from whence they set out, to hoist up the Cables
and Anchors, and to sink the Shallops, to which they were fastened. Afterward
I steered my Course to the Island of St. Vincent, to pay my Ship, and to take
in fresh Water and Wood. This Island is one of those of Cape Verd, or
Green-Head, where I stayed Eight Days, and at the end of that Term, having
received Information from a Portuguese Bark, that there were two English
Privateers of 20 or 30 Guns at the Island of Fuogo, one of which was refitting,
by reason of an Engagement she had with another Privateer, I immediately
weighed Anchor, and made that Island, which is not very far distant from those
of St. Vincent, hoping to meet with the Enemies there; but upon my Arrival I
was informed by the Portugueses, that they had left the said Island de Fuogo,
five Days before, in the Night, without giving any notice of their Course.
Whereupon I steered mine to the Coasts of Guinea, and touched first at the Cape
of three Points, where I met with the Guard-Ship which was a Dutch Frigate of 34
Pieces of Ordnance, and was cruising on the Main. She did not fail to descry
me, and forthwith sailed directly toward me, to make a Discovery: Forasmuch as
I also had a sight of her, and wished for an Opportunity to fight her, I caused
a Dutch Flag to be set up, to avoid disheartning her, and to give her Liberty
to draw near within my Cannon-Shot. When I perceived her to be near enough, I
put out the French Colors, and made a Signal co her to strike Sail^ but she
incontinently let fly a Broadside at me with a great deal of Courage and
received mine in like manner. Thus we continued battering one another, from
Morning, till Four a Clock in the Afternoon:Neither was I able to get the
Weather gage, nor to come to a close Engagement, to make use of my B^^anier
Fusees to good purpose, in which consists the principal Force of our
Privateers, nor to hinder her, by the means of the Advantage of the Wind, which
she still kept over me, from casting Anchor under the Fort of the Cape of the
three Points; where there were also two there Dutch Men of War, one of which
carried 14 Guns, and the other 18.

I was apt to believe at first, that those three Ships would join together in
quest of me; so that I tacked round about during a whole Day, to wait for 'em,
and cast Anchor within a League of the Road, hoping that at last the Shame of
seeing themselves insulted over, after such a manner, would excite 'em to
endeavor to revenge the Affront. But all these Efforts were in vain, and
apparently the Guard-Ship was too much disabled to stand in need of a second
Engagement. A small Portuguese Vessel that passed by soon after, gave me to
understand, that those Ships were the same, that had obliged the Sieur^ Roy,
Commander of the King's Pink, called the Deep, to abandon the Coast, which was
afterward confirmed by the Sieur Roy himself, at the Prince's Island, where we
happened to meet.

Thus having perceived, that the Enemies refused to sight, and judging that in
would be disadvantageous to me to attack 'em under the Cannon of the Fort; I
took a Resolution to go to Cape de Lopez, and to the Islands of the Prince, and
of St. Thomas. By the way, I went to discover St. John's Cape, which is on the
Continent of Guinee, as well as that of this three Points, and I luckily met
with an English Ship of 20 Guns, laden with 350 Negro's, Elephants Teeth, and
Wax. It cost me no great trouble to take her, and the Captain told me that he
came from Ardra, where he took on board 550 Negro's, some of whom he caused to
be put to Death, for revolting against the Ship's Crew, and others made their
Escape to Land in his Shallop, which they had taken away. Ardra is one of the
principal Towns of Guinee, situated on the Sea-shoar, being the usual Place of
Residence of a Prince, who governs a large Tract of Land in that Country.

From thence I passed to the Prince's Island, in the sight of which I took a
small Caper of Brandenburg, armed with Eight Pieces of Cannon, and 70 Men: She
was wont to cruise in that Latitude, and to seize on small Barks that passed by
that way, without any Distinction of Nation or Colors. Afterward I entered
the Harbor, to cause my Ship, which was very soul, to be cleans'd, and to
dispatch the English Prize, I had taken just before: I sent her to St. Domingo,
in America, to be condemned there, under the Command of the Sieur de Nave, with
a sufficient number of Men, whom I took out of my own Ship. But I was informed
some time after, that she was retaken by certain English Men of War, who were
before the lesser Goeree.

In the mean while, not to suffer my Mariners to lead an idle kind of Life, I
gave Orders to the Officers to cause my Ship to be careen'd, and with the
Brandenburg Caper I had taken, and 90 Men, whom I put on boards her, we steered
our Course, during a Month and half, cruising up and down the Coasts of Guinee,
or round about the Islands of the Prince, and of St. Omer, without meeting any
Enemy. Afterward I returned to the Road of the former of those Islands, where
I caused my Ship to be victuall'd with all possible speed; and having made
every thing ready, I weighed Anchor, and stood in directly for St. Thomas's
Island, with a Design to sell or to truck away the Caper I had taken. And
indeed, I bartered her for Provisions, not having a sufficient Store to serve
us whilst we cruis'd along the Coasts of Angola, where I determined to pass
five or six Months, to avoid a Privateer which the English were building in
those Parts of Guinee: They actually fitted out three Men of War and a
Fire-Ship, to seek for me in the Road of St. Thomas, where they judged that I
was to continue for some time. At my departure from that Island I descried a
Ship riding at Anchor, and making toward her, I gave her Chafe for a long
time, but I could not by any means hinder her from getting a-shoar, and falling
in with the Island of St. Omer. I mifs'd in not taking her 150 Pounds of Gold
Dust, which that Dutch Interloper had traded for on the Coast.

Afterward I steered to the Coasts of Angola, which are situated above 250
Leagues beyond the Equinoctial Line. I arrived there September 22. and got
Information at the distance of three Leagues from the Port of Gabin^la, that
there were two English Vessels, laden with Negro's. Forasmuch as I lay under
the Wind of that Port, I kept off from the Shore, hoping that the next day the
South-west Wind, that usually blows from the Main, would convey me directly
into the Port. That Morning, very early, I descried a Ship with English Colors
making up toward me, yet I did not at first take her to be a Man of War, but
discovered some time after, that she carried 54 Pieces of Ordnance. I used all
the Precaution imaginable not to fright her away, and set up Dutch Colors to
make up to her with greater Facility: The English Ship on the other side did
almost the same thing, and by the Cannon-Shot, which she boldly discharged from
time to time, endeavored to draw near us. Having perceived her Design, I
feigned to wait for her coming up steering very slowly, to induce her to
believe that my Ship was over loaded, or that our Course was hindered for want
of Sails, or a sufficient Complement of Men. We passed after this manner from
Break of Day, till Ten a Clock in the Morning: She incessantly maintained her
Flag with Cannon-shot without Balls; but perceiving at last that I did not do
the like to make good mine, and that we were already come within Gunshot one
of another, she let off a Cannon load with Ball, which obliged me to put out
French Colors, and to answer her Salute. At the sight of that Flag, the
English Man of War, without endeavoring to get the Wind of us, let fly two
Broadside, which I received without so Men killed: I stopped that being come a
little nearer, I might render her incapable of making an Escape; using my
utmost Efforts to get close within Fusee-shot, determining to embolden her to
come on Board, since I was not in a condition to board her, because we were to
the Leeward. At last, having approached by little and little, and seeing her
within the reach of my Fusileers, who lay hid under Deck, I caused 'em to get
up, and they made so continual a Fire, that they soon abated that of the
Enemies.

In the mean while, forasmuch as their Company consisted of above Three Hundred
Men, and they were also sensible that their Design could not be accomplished by
the discharging of their Cannon, a Resolution was taken to board us, which they
did with hideous Outcrys, and Threats, to give us no Quarter, unless we
surrendered: But their Grappling-Irons not being able to lay hold on the Stern
of my Ship, theirs ran in such a manner, that she dashed her Poop against my
Boltsprit, and broke it in pieces.

Than my Men taking the Advantage of the Hurry and Disorder, lost none of their
aim, and fired so furiously for an Hour and half, that the Enemy being no
longer able to resist; and having lost many of their Mariners, began to
despond, and retired underneath the Decks. I also perceived almost at that very
instant that they made me a sign with their Hats to give 'em Quarter. Whereupon
I caused my Men to desist from firing, and commanded the English to embark in
their Shallops, in order to surrender themselves on board my Ship. At the same
time I appointed some of my Attendants to leap into that of the Enemies, to
seize on it, and to prevent all manner of Surprise. I was already overjoyed at
the taking of so considerable a Prize; and so much the rather, in regard that
after having mastered that Vessel, which was the Guard-Ship of Angola, and the
largest that the English had in those Seas; I should be in a condition to ge^
better Prizes, and to attack any Man of War whatever: My Men were no less
joyful than my self; some of whom were going from on Board, and others were
employed in veering the Cable, with a great deal of satisfaction, when on a
sudden Fire, having taken the Powder in the Gun-room, by the means of a Match,
which the Captain had left there, hoping to escape with his two Shallops; the
Ships being grappl'd together, were both blown up into the Air, and made the
most dreadful Noise that ever was heard. It Is impossible to make a lively
Representation of that sad Spectacle; for since the Spectators were themselves
the Actors in so bloody a Tragedy, they knew not whether they saw it or not,
and were not able to judge, but of what they themselves had felt: Therefore
leaving it to the Reader to imagine the Horror that might arise from the sight
of two Ships that are blown up into the Air with Gunpowder, above the height of
200 Toises.
Fathoms, forming as it were an huge Mountain of Fire, Water, Fragments of the
Ships, Cords, pieces of Ordnance and Men, with a deadly Havoc; during which,
amidst the noise of the Guns that were let off in the Air, and of the roaring
Waves that swelled upon all sides; one might also hear the horrible crashing of
the shattered Masts and Tables, of the torn Sails and Cords; of the Men crying
out, and of the broken Bones, leaving all that I say to the Imagination of the
Reader, I shall only declare here what befell my self, and by what good Fortune
I escaped.

When the Fire took, I stood on the Deck of my Ship in the Fore-Castle, where I
was giving Orders, and was blown up with some part of the Deck so violently,
that (as I take it) the extreme Height, to which I was hurried, hindered me
from being involved among the Fragments of the Ships, where I must inevitably
have been crushed in a thousand pieces: I fell back into the Sea, quite
stunned, and continued for a long while under Water without being able to
recover my self; till at last struggling in the Water, as a Man, who is afraid
of being drowned, I got above it, and caught hold of a piece of Mast that say
near me. Then I cried out to some of my Men whom I saw swimming round about me,
and exhorted 'em to be of good Courage, hoping that we might save our selves if
we could find some of our Shallops. But that which troubled me more than my own
Misfortune, was the sight of two half Bodies, in which there was still some
Remainder of Life, floating on the Water, and leaving the Place where they sunk
stained with their Blood; as also to see round about me an infinite number of
Limbs and Members torn from Bodies, and the greatest part of 'em spitted on the
Sprinters of Wood. In the mean while, one of my Men having espied an entire
Shallop amidst the Wreck, that swam on the Water, told me that 'twas requisite
to endeavor to stop a Hole therein, and to take out a small Boat, which was
enclosed within it. Whereupon about Fifteen or Sixteen of us, who had escaped,
made up to the Shallop, every one on his piece of Wood, and took so great Care
to clear our Boat, that at last our Attempt proved successful. Thus we all got
into it, and not long after saved our Master-Gunner, who had one of his Legs
shot off in the Fight. We took up three or four Ours, or pieces of Planks, that
served us for the same use. Then we sought for somewhat to make a Sail, and a
small Mast; and after having furnished our selves in the best manner we
possibly could, we entirely relied upon the Divine Providence, which alone was
able to secure our Life and Safety.

As soon us I had ceased from Work, I found my self all over besmeared with
Blood that run our of a Wound I received in my Head, and which was apparently
occasioned by my being blown up. There fore Lint was made for me with my
Handkerchief, and a Band with a piece of my Shirt, having first washed the
Wound with Urine. The same thing was done for others of our Company, who were
wounded, whilst our Shallop sailed without any sight of Land, neither did we
know whither we were steering; but that which added to our Affliction was, that
we had no Provisions, and had already passed three Days without either eating
or drinking; insomuch, that one of our Men, quite worn out with Hunger and
Thirst, drank so great a quantity of salt Water, that he burst. The greatest
part of our Company vomited continually, whether they received any Injury from
the Water they swallowed upon their falling into the Sea, as if befell me, or
from that which they were nocessitated to drink. As for my self, I was a long
time indisposed, so that my Body swelled extremely, and a great number of small
Pimples broke forth throughout my Body: But I am apt to believe, the cure of my
Dropsy, and the Health that I have in some measure recovered, and which is by
degrees more and more restored, to be chiefly owing to a Quartan-Ague, that
seized on me a little while after that Misfortune. I do not reckon up the other
Inconveniences that were occasioned by so desperate a Blow, it being impossible
that they should not befall any Person under my Circumstances. The Fire of the
Powder burnt all my Hair, my whole Face, and all over one side of my Body, and
I became sensible of that Accident, which commonly happens among the
Cannoniers, who serve at Sea; that is to say, I voided Blood through the Nose,
Ears and Mouth. I know not whether the Blast of the Gunpowder produces that
Effect, by excessively dilating the Vessels that contain the Blood in our Body,
so that the ends of the Branches let it out, or whether the great Noise and
Commotion that it causes in those Organs, opliges the Veins to open: But let
the case be how it will, it is of no great moment, since this is not a proper
Place to hold a Consultation of Physicians, as long as we are ready to be
starved with Hunger; nor to enquire what became of all the English Men, when we
had much ado to save our selves.

We continued our Course by rowing up the Current, because we knew it came from
the Port of Cabinda; but forasmuch as the Wind was contrary, we could never
reach it; and we were forced to content our selves only to make Cape Corsa if
it were possible, which is distan. Twelve Leagues from that of Cathersna, where
we were not able to land, by reason of a Bar, which renders the Coast
inaccessible. That was our Design, but Hunger hindered us from putting it in
Execution, and 'twas requisite to overcome the Obstacles that Nature laid in
our way, by getting a-shoar notwithstanding the Ba^ which we did at last, with
a great deal of Difficulty, hoping to meet with some Negro, who might supply us
with Victuals. Therefore one of our Company being detach' to seek for somewhat
to appease our Hunger, had the good Luck to find in a Pond that the Sea had
formed hard by, good store of Oysters sticking to certain Branches, and
immediately ran to give us notice of this Discovery. Whereupon we all got up
the Channel, to that Pond; and being arrived there, eat Oysters with a very
good Appetite; opening 'em with Knives we had in our Pockets, which we lent one
to another very charitably. After having spent two Day there, I divided my Men
into three small Bands, and sent 'em to seek for Provisions and Habitations
farther up the Land, with Orders to return to the Shallop in the Evening. I
also went forth with the rest, but we did not meet with an Habitation, nor any
Footsteps of Men. We only saw many Herds of Buffies, of the bigness of an Ox,
which fled from us as we drew near 'em. Thus the whole Day being spent, without
finding any thing, we all came back to the Shallop to feed upon Oysters, and
took a Resolution to depart from that Place the next day, to go to Cape Corsa,
to the Leeward of which is situated a large Port, where the Vessels that come
from Cruising, take in fresh Water and Wood. The Negro's who inhabit the
Country as soon as they are informed of the Arrival of any Vessels, by the
discharging of their Cannon, instantly repair to the Shore, bringing Provisions
to be exchanged for Brandy, Knives, Hatchets, and other Toys. They are obliged
to take up their Habitation far from the Sea, by reason that all those Coasts
are surrounded with Marshy Grounds. We were no sooner arrived at that Cape, but
we heard a great noise made by the Negro's, who came to self Wood to the Ships
that lay at Anchor in the Port, and I made enquiry among 'em, endeavoring to
find out some of my Acquaintance: For since they had very frequently supplied
me with necessary Refreshments, Wood and other Commodities in my other Voyages;
I hoped to meet with some Persons that had Knowledge of me; but although I knew
many of 'em, nevertheless 'twas almost impossible to persuade 'em, that I was
Captain Montauban, in regard that I was so much disfigured; and they all took
me for an Impostor that designed to impose on their Credulity. However, I took
the Liberty to tell 'em in their Language, which I understood a little, that I
was ready to starve with Hunger, and that I entreated 'em to give me somewhat
to eat: But I could not prevail by any means whatever, and 'twas absolutely
requisite for me to beg the favor of 'em to conduct me to Prince Thomas, who
is the Son of the King of that Country, hoping that he would call to mind the
good Offices I had formerly done him.

At last I found means to introduce my whole Company into the Presence of that
Prince. We passed at first through the Habitations of those Negro's, and began by
little and little, to make some Impressions on their Mind; insomuch, that they
gave us some Banna's, which are a kind of Figs, longer than ones Hand. The next
day we arrived at Prince Thomas's Seat, but I was in so sorry an Equipage, that
I could not make him take any Cognizance of me, by all the signs I gave him,
either in the Moorish Language, or in that of the Portugueses, which he speaks
very fluently. Forasmuch as in bathing with him one day, he had seen a Scar
occasioned by a Musket Shot I had received in my Thigh; he told me that 'twas
requisite at that very Instant to know whether I really were Capt. Montauban;
and if I were not the Person, he would take Care that I should lose my Head.
Whereupon he asked me whether I had not such a Scar; so that after having
showed it to him, he immediately embraced me, and told me that he was very much
concerned to see me in so deplorable a Condition. At first he caused wholesome
Victuals to be distributed to all my Retinue, and caused 'em to be lodged in
separate Apartments, giving particular Orders to the Negro's, with whom they
were quartered, to take all possible Care of 'em. As for my self, he retained
me in his Court, and caused me continually to eat at his own Table. When I was
a little refreshed, he acquainted me with his Intention to conduct me to his
Father, whose usual Place of Residence was five or six Leagues distant from
thence; that is to say, ten or twelve from the Seashoar. Whereupon I gave him
to understand, that I was very sensible of the Honor he did me, with extreme
Satisfaction, and humbly entreated him at the same time to give me leave to
take my Free-Booters along with me, and to bestow on us some Pieces of Stuff to
put us in an Equipage fit to appear before so great a Monarch: He condescended
to grant every thing that I desired, so that three Days after, we set out
altogether in a large Canoo, and passed up the River of Cape de Lopez, by
reason that the Country is so full of Fenns and Marshes, that one cannot travel
through it by Land.

Upon our Arrival at the King's Court, in a Village, consisting of three
Hundred Cottages, covered with Palm-Tree-Leaves, where the King keeps his Wives
and Relations, with some other Negro Families, that have obtained the greatest
Share of his Favor; a Lodging was provided for me in Prince Thomas's
Apartments, and all my Attendants were disposed of in others. We found the
Inhabitants making great Lamentation and Mourning, because the chief Priest of
their Religion, whom they called Papa, died that very Day; and in regard that
the Funeral Pomp was to commence, which is usually continued for Seven Days,
for Priests of his Quality. Indeed he was in great Veneration and Esteem among
those People, who looked upon him as a Holy Man. Forasmuch as during the whole
time of that doleful Solemnity, the King was in Mourning, and admitted none to
public Audience, Prince Thomas advised me to wait patiently, and not to stir
out of my Lodging, unless it were to visit his Majesty, because it was the
Custom of his Nation.

However, I could not forbear going to take a view of the Funeral Procession,
yet could discern nothing but a great Concourse of People round about the Corpse
of the Deceased Person. In the mean while, I was well entertained by the Order
of Prince Thomas, who was gone to see his Father. Indeed there was no want of
Banana's, Elephants Flesh, and River-Fish; but we had neither Bread nor Wine,
nor any kind of Sauce, as it may be easily imagined. My Men were treated in
like manner in their Apartments, during the whole time of our Abode in that
Place.

At the end of Eight Days Prince Thomas came to us, and introduced as into the
Presence of the King his Father; he is a portly Negro, of a tall Stature, well
shaped, and aged about Fifty Years; who, to do me greater Honor, upon his
Son's Recommendation, went out of his House, on purpose to receive me, and
advanced some Paces forward to meet me. He leant on four or five Women, who
supported him on all sides, showing a certain Grandeur, after a very confused
and odd manner. He was surrounded with a great number of Negroes, armed with
Lances and Fusees, which they discharged from time to time with very little
Order: Many Trumpeters and Drummers marched before him, and at the Head of that
Company were carried diverse Standards, of the Color of those of Holland. He
had no other Clothes than a piece of Cotton-Cloth, with white and blue Stripes,
with which some Parts were only covered by several Folds made round about his
Body.

He was pleased to make me sensible of his Amity and Respect for me, by many
Demonstrations; and having stretched out his Hand, told me, that 'twas the
first time he gave it to any Man. When we were arrived at his House, he sat
down at the Door, and caused me to be placed on one side, and his Son on the
other. Then he asked me several Questions about the Grandeur and Power of the
King my Master; and after I had acquainted him, that he alone at present
carried on a War against the English and Hollanders, (of whom his Majesty had
some knowledge, as having often seen 'em at Cape de Lopez) and that he likewise
maintained it against the Germans and Spaniards, more potent Nations than the
former, he told me that he was well satisfied with my Narrative, and that he
had a mind to drink a Health to the King of France. Whereupon some Palm-Wine
was immediately brought to him, which was not very disagreeable to the Palate,
and his Female Attendants ferv'd him with it in a large Crystal-Glass. As soon
as he began to take the Glass, the Negroes and Negresses, who attended in great
numbers, held up his right Arm, and continually kept it steady in the same
posture, till he had made an end of drinking. Afterward a great noise was made
with the Trumpets and Drums, and a Volley of Musket, or rather Fusee-shot.

Then Prince Thomas asked me what was the Name of the King of Frande; and after
I had made Answer that he was called Lewis the Great, he told me he was
desirous that I should stand Godfather to a Child he had, aged only seven or
eight Months, and that I should name him Lewis the Great; whereupon I could not
forbear smiling a little. He promised me likewise that at the first Voyage I
should make to his Country he would deliver him into my Hands, to be conveyed
to France, and presented to the King, for whose Service he designed him; being
well pleased that his Son should be educated after the manner of that Nation,
and in the Court of so great a Monarch. I also engaged on the other side, that
the very first time I should come back to Guinee, I would not fail to put him
in mind of his Promise, to the end that at my Return to France I might set
before the King the greatest Present that could possibly be made; namely, the
Son of Prince Thomas. Pray assure him (said that Prince) that I am one of his
particular Frineds, and that if he stand in need, of my Service I will pass
over into France, with all the Lances and Fusees belonging to the King my
Father; that is to say, with all the Forces of the Kingdom. Then the King
resuming his Discourse gave me to understand, that he also would take a
Progress thither in Person, if it were requisite, and immediately all the
Negroes and Negresses made so hideous an Outcry, that I was extremely
surpised: That Cry no sooner ceased, but the Fusileers discharged a Volley of
all their Firearms, the Trumpets sounding, and Drums beating; and the
Lance-men fell a running from one side to another backward and forward, with
great Shouts; so that I could not choose but be somewhat frighted: And indeed,
I did not know the meaning of that Uproar, neither was I able to recover my
self, till I perceived that the King drank a Health to the King of France a
second time, with the some Ceremonies as before; that; Prince Thomas pledged
his Father, and that 'twas ordered that we should all drink at the same time.
Which being done accordingly, the King caused two Loaves of Wax to be brought
to him, made me a Present of 'em, desiring me to accept of 'em as a Mark of his
Friendship, and afterward entered his House.

This Audience being thus concluded, Prince Thomas conducted me through all the
Quarters of the Village, where he went to visit his Friends, and on the
following Days we passed to diverse other Villages, situated farther up the
Country at the distance of five or six Leagues one from another. These People,
the greatest part of whom never traveled to the Sea-shoar, and consequently
never had a sight of white Men, ran from all parts to see us, and brought us
greater quantities of Fruit, and of Flesh, of Buffles and Elephants, than we
could eat. The Elephants of that Country are not altogether like those of the
East Indies; being but of one kind, as also are those of Cofala, near
Zanguebar, on the Eastern Coasts of Ethiopia. The Negroes eat 'em with a great
deal of Delight, and esteem their Flesh beyond any other: They make their most
sumptuous Feasts with 'em, and those who were desirous to do us most Honor,
presented 'em to us instead of Buffles; on which, nevertheless I set a greater
Value.

Forasmuch as they were not able to comprehend the difference of Color between
our Complexion and theirs, they stroak'd our Faces with their Hands, to see
whether the white Color would pass away; nay, diverse of our Company had their
Hands scraped with Knives, sometimes even till they were hurt, yet we durst not
complain of that rough usage: However, Prince Thomas perceiving it, commanded
his Attendants not to suffer 'em thus to rub and scratch our Fingers, and spoke
aloud to the People that ran after us, telling 'em that all Foreigners were
white, and that if the Negroes traveled into other Countries, they would
appear as strange to those Natives, as we did among them in Guinee. Nay, he
often smiled to see the Multitude continually running after us, as if we had
been some unknown Animals; and I know not whether he were displea'd to see us
thus pestered by the Importunity of the Negroes, or whether he might not take
some Delight in observing the Sottishness of those People: And indeed, I had
sometimes an opportunity to take notice of all their extravagant Fopperies.

At last, after three Days Journey, accompanied with variety of Divertisements,
the Prince conveyed me through another Road to take leave of his Father. The King
caressed me in a most obliging manner, according to the Custom of his Nation,
and made me promise to visit him the first time I returned to Guinee.
Afterward we embarked in his Canoo, and arrived the next day at Prince
Thomas's Village, where he continued the noble Entertainments, with which he
was wont to treat us. Then he told me that he was desirous that I should
perform the Office of a Godfather to his Son, and I complied so much the more
willingly, in regard that I had an Opportunity of contributing somewhat to the
making of a Christian, and the sanctifying of a Soul.

But forasmuch as I doubted whether the Priest of the Village knew how to
baptize, or remembered the Words that ought to be pronounced in the
Administration of that Sacrament, I entreated the Prince to provide some of
those Priests who were in the Portuguese Vessels, and he accordingly sent for
one to Cape de Lopez, who arrived two Days after. The Christian Religion was
first introduced into that Country by the Portugueses, although it be true
indeed, that they do not maintain it therein as much as it is requisite: But
the Obstacles that hinder the Propagation of it, proceed without doubt from the
difficulty of inhabiting an almost wild and barren Country, where the Air and
Provisions are not natural to Foreigners: Therefore in order to its firm
Establishment in those Parts, 'twould be expedient for the Europeans to have
settled Habitations, or to build Towns there, to instruct the Negroes in the
Articles of Faith, and Mysteries of the Gospel, and to send Missions thither
from time to time; which might be done with great Facility, by reason that
those People are extremely docil, and very capable of imbibing good Principles,
and of embracing any Doctrine that one would go about to teach 'em, since they
have lived for a long time without any manner of Belief, or any Idea of another
Religion. These Negroes being thus converted to Christianity, some of 'em might
be ordained Priests, who might be furnished with Rituals, and other Books
relating to the Ceremonies of the Church, and a Catechism for the regulating of
their Faith, till they were capable of reading the New Testament. It would also
be requisite to establish a Bishop in that Town, who should take care to send
Priests into the several Habitations of the Negroes throughout the Country, and
to cause Oratories to be built in the most populous Places.

Thus the Christian Religion might be propagated in Guinee, and would be less
liable to be extirpated by the Wars that the Natives make with foreign People.
A Reformation might also be effectually carried on among the Christians, who
reside in the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco, and a mutual Correspondence might be
maintained between the Priests of that Nation, and those of Guinee, to the end
that they might assist one another in the Preservation of Religion throughout
all the Coasts of Africa. Indeed Christianity was planted almost after the same
manner among the Gentiles, who had a much greater Aversion to our Faith, than
the Negroes of Guinee have at present. The Priests, who are to be found
thereabouts, are not for the most part real Priests; not having been ordained
by any Bishop, and having only substituted themselves in the room of those who
died in their Country: Neither have they retained any thing that savours never
so little of Christianity, although they perform may Ceremonies, and have some
Appearance of the Administration of the Sacraments.

But to return to our private Christening; upon the Arrival of the Portuguese
Priest, Prince Thomas's Son was actually Baptized, and named Lewis the Great,
according to his Father's Intention: A certain Negress of his Relations stood
Godmother, and I my self was Godfather. I was told that that Lady bore the name
of Antonia, which she received from the Wife of a Portuguese Captain, who held
her at the Baptismal Font. Two or three Days after the Celebration of this
Solemnity, which was performed with all the Magnificence that could be expected
among the Negroes; some of prince Thomas's Guards, who were posted, at Cape de
Lopez, to give notice of the Arrival of the Ships, came to acquaint him with
that of an English Vessel. Whereupon I entreated him to give me leave to embark
therein, to return to my native Country, in order to my perfect Recovery from
that illness, under which I still labored. But he was not willing that I
should put my self into the Hands of my Enemies; and desired me to have a
little Patience, till the Arrival of some Portuguese, with whom he would
readily permit me to go. However, he went to Cape de Lopez, to truck away
Elephants Teeth, Wax, and Negroes, for Iron, Arms and Brandy, and returned
after ten or twelve Days, when he told me, that a Portuguese Vessel lay at
Anchor at Cape de Lopez; that 'twas requisite to cause my self to be conveyed
in Canoos, to embark there; that he had recommended me to the Captain; and that
I should want nothing that was necessary for me during my Voyage to Europe.

Then I took care to get all my Men together, except two, whom I did not think
fit to wait for, because they had taken a Progress into the Country for five or
six Days, and I knew not where to find 'em. Therefore we embarked in the Canoos
of that Prince, after having solemnly taken my leave of him; and being arrived
at Cape de Lopez; I perceived that the Portuguese Commander was an old
Acquaintance of mine, with whom I had contracted Friendship at the Island of
St. Thomas. Whereupon I took Ship with him, and three Days after, we cast
Anchor before the same Island; the Governor of which showed me a world of
kindness, and did the like to all my Men, during a whole Month that we were
obliged to stay in that Port. At the expiration of that time, an English Ship
arrived, which had been steering her Course on the Golden Coasts. I soon got
into the Acquaintance of the Captain, and at last we became so intimate
Friends, that I thought my self bound in Honor to accept of the kind Offers he
made me, He entreated me to embark with him, and assured me, that at Barbados,
to which place he was bound, I should meet with all the Supplies, necessary for
the recovering of my Health; because there were certain able Jewish Physicians,
who were his particular Friends. Therefore I went on board his Ship, with all
my Men, notwithstanding all the Reasons alleged by the Governor of the
Island, to induce me to suspect the English Captain, who was without doubt one
of the most courteous and upright Men of his Nation: He was so kind as to
resign his Cabin to me, and to afford me all the Delights and Divertisements
that can be imagined, to mitigate the Pains I endured from time to time.

Ten Days after our Departure from St. Thomas, having lost the Rudder of our
Ship, we were obliged to set up a Mast in its place, which was put through the
Port-holes of the Gun-room, and we were forced to steer with it, during the
whole time of our Voyage, which continued three Months. When we stood in for
Barbados, our Provisions began to fail, and there only remained what was
sufficient for three Days, insomuch, that the Captain being much offended at
his being overcharged with my Men, ordered three quarters of their Allowance to
be retrenched; and as soon as we arrived in the Port, went to salute M. Russel,
who was Governor of the Island. He gave him a particular Account of the
Engagement I had with the Guard-Ship of Angola, and was very much blamed for
bringing me to Barbados. Afterward, returning to his Ship, he related to me
every thing that was discoursed between him and the Governor, who forbid him
under pain of Death, to suffer me to land: However, he did not acquaint me with
the Prohibition, but contented himself only to advise me not to go ashore, to
avoid giving any cause of Suspicion to M. Russell, which Order I promised
punctually to observe, not being sollicitous to take any further Cognizance of
a Place, which was well known to me a long time ago, and being unwilling to
give the least Offense to my Captain.

The next day, many Jews, who were turned out of Martinica, came to visit me
upon the Report of my Arrival; and perceiving me to be very much indisposed and
weakened, they sent to me diverse Physicians of their Nation, who told me that I
could not be cured, unless I were brought a-shoar, proffering at the same time
to solicit the Governor on my behalf, to give leave, that I might be
conveyed into a House on the Port. Whereupon I drew up a Petition to M. Russel,
in which I entreated him to grant me such a License, promising that I would not
stir out of the Chamber that should be appointed for my Lodging, only to
re-embark, and to cause my self to be transported to Martinica. However, the
Physicians themselves were obliged to be my Bail, and I was at last conducted
to the House of one M. Jacob Jews, where great Care was taken of me during the
whole time of my Abode in that Place.

Three Days after I was carried thither, the Major General came to see me by
the Governor's Order; very generously promised me his Protection, and offered
his Service, especially to procure me any thing that might be necessary for the
Restoration of my Health: Yet I was visited from time to time by the same
Major, and every day by a Captain of the Garrison; who came not so much to
enquire after the State of my Health, as to observe, whether I should ere long
be in a condition to be transported out of the Island. M. Russel himself came
in like manner ten or twelve Days after my Arrival, to know whether it were
true that I was really so ill as it was reported: He also gave me a second
Visit seven or eight Days after, in the Evening, and caused me to be removed
from the Jew's House where I lodged, to that of an English Merchant: He told me
at the same time, that I should be better accommodated there than I had been at
M. Jacob Lewis's; but the real Intention was, that I should be better guarded,
and that I might not have an Opportunity of discoursing with so many People.
The next day he came again to see me, and asked me how I liked my new Quarters.
I heartily thanked him for the good Offices he had done me, and to the end that
he might not have cause to suspect my Men, I entreated him to give Orders, that
they should be confined in the Citadel, to prevent them from straggling about
the Island, and from making their Escape.

Then M. Russel told me, that he intended to do so; but that I ought to
understand that they were Prisoners of War, as well as my self. I replied, That
I was not ignorant of it; and that I thought my self happy in falling into his
Hands; but that the English Captain, who brought me to Barbados, had passed
his Word that I should not be retained nor any of my Company: That upon his
Protestations of inviolable Fidelity, and the Offers of Service he made me, I
ventured to embark, relying on the marks of Friendship, which he had already
shown: Then I added, that my Request to him was only to grant me my Liberty,
and that of my Men, promising that I would ever be mindful of the Favor,
either, in restoring the Prisoners whom I might carry off from the Islands, if
I should take up Arms again, or in paying him what Ransom he should think fit
to reqire.

No, Sir, (said M. Russell) I will neither have your Ransom, nor your
Prisoners; for you are so gallant a Man, that your Misfortune and Illness
cannot but be pitied, and therefore on the contrary, I would entreat you to
accept of Forty Pistoles, of which I make you a Present, to supply you with
Necessaries. He gave 'em me in a Purse, which without doubt he brought for that
very purpose, and at his Departure acquainted me that he was going to give
Orders, that my Men should be got together again. The next day he sent me two
of 'em, who told me, that they did not know what was become of the rest, and
that they had Orders from the Governor to stay with me: I had the Liberty to
send 'em abroad, to procure any thing that I stood in need of, and at last
finding my self somewhat strengthened by the means of the extraordinary Care
that my Landlord took of me, I acquainted the Officer, who visited me every
day, that I would beg leave of the Governor to embark in the first Vessel that
should set out from Martinica.

Three Days after there arrived a Bark, which the Count de Blenac, General of
the French Islands, sent for the exchanging of Prisoners. M. Russel gave me
notice of its Arrival, and that I should prepare for my embarking therein. Then
I had the Liberty to go to his House to thank him for all the Kindnesses he had
shown me. He told me that he was sorry he was obliged by the Law of Arms not to
allow me more Freedom than I had, and that he entreated me to afford a
favorable Entertainment to the English Men who should fall into my Hands.
Afterward I went on board the French Bark, which was commanded by the Sieur
Courpon, formerly an Inhabitant of St. Christophers; but I could not regain any
of my Free-booters, except those two, who were sent to me by M. Russel, as I
have already hinted.

We disimbark'd at the Royal Fort of Martinica, and I repaired with my two Men
to the Town, to give a Visit to M. de Blenac, who was feiz'd with the last Fit
of Sickness, of which he died. I gave him a particular Account of all my
Adventures, and I perceived him to be much surpised to hear a Relation of so
great Disasters. Forasmuch as he was desirous that I should lodge in his House
all the time that I stayed at Martinica, he made me every day repeat the
particular Circumstances of my Engagement with the English Ship; and at last
having found an Opportunity of conveying me to France, he sent to enquire after
the Captain of a Vessel that was bound for that Kingdom, and recommended me to
his Care. He determined likewise to give me Recommendatory Letters for M.
Phelipeanx, to procure me, some Employment; but the day before my departure, he
fell into so great weakness, that he was no longer in a condition to write, and
died that very Evening, June 10. Indeed I had all the reason in the World to be
very much concerned at his Death; for M. De Blenac, who was a Person of
singular Qualities, took delight in being serviceable to all Mankind; and more
especially had a tender Compassion for those that were in a distressed
Condition, or lay under the Pressures of ill Fortune, as my Case was at that
time: He always endeavored to be beforehand with 'em, relieving 'em in their
Necessities, as soon as they came to his Knowledge, and made a voluntary
Proffer of the Favors he was ready to bestow, even before they could well be
sued for. In a word, he was a Man of an Heroic Courage, and a skilful
Navigator, well versed in Maritim Affairs; knowing all the Coasts and Latitudes
of the Continent of America, and highly esteemed by the King for his Integrity,
Jestice and Prudence, and for all the signal Services he had done the State, in
matters relating to Trade, and the discovery of the Islands.

The next day after his Death, I went on Board the Virgin, a Vessel of
Bordeaux, which was also built there, and after a few Days Passage; at last I
arrived safe in the Port of that City, with many different and contrary
Sentiments. I know not whether I shall bid adieu to the Sea for ever, having
been so much disheartened by my last Misfortune; or whether I shall embark once
again to revenge the Indignities put upon me by the English; or whether I shall
undertake another Voyage, to get a small Estate; or whether I shall stay at
home in Tranquillity, contenting my self with the peaceable Enjoyment of what
my Relations have left me. However, it is certain, that Maritim Voyages are apt
to create in Men almost the same Passions as Gaming: For as the losing
Gamester, notwithstanding the ill Luck he has so often had before, does not
believe that he shall always be unfortunate, but is still egged on by I know
not what Impulse to venture farther; so we Mariners, whatever Disasters may
have befallen us at Sea, are continually boy'd up with the hopes of meeting
with a fair opportunity to indemnifie our selves for all our Losses. Upon the
whole, I am apt to believe, that into whose Hands soever my Narrative may
happen to fall, they will find it very difficult to give me Advise as to the
Matter in Debate, and even to take it themselves.

FINIS.

