THE ABSOLUTE NECESSITY OF Spiritual Husbandry, In breaking up our FALLOW
GROUND.

Together with a DISCOURSE Of the Terrible Coming of CHRIST, To Execute
Vengeance on all that remain Fallow Ground, and Obey not the Gospel.

By SAMVEL TOMLYNS, M.A. and Minister of the Gospel in Marlborough.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheap Side, near Mercers-Chapel. 1699.

TO Richard Wollaston, Esquire Grace, Mercy, and Peace, be multiplied, from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
A Spiritual Lethargy is the reigning Disease of this Age: The Design of these
Discourses is, to Alarm the Secure, to Awaken the Sleeping World. Though Christ
has been a great while Invisible, yet he will Appear to the Confusion and
Terror of his Adversaries. Though he has long kept Silence, yet he will roar out
of Zion. Though his Sword has slept, yet it will awake; do Execution on, and be
Bathed in the Blood of Impenitent Sinners. The Sins of Men, and the punishing
Hand of Christ, will find out all his Enemies, Numb. 32.23. Psalm. 21.8. He that
came at first to sase Men from their Sins, yet being slighted, and rejected,
will come a second time to destroy Men for their Iniquities. They that have not
prized a Day of Salvation, shall Experience, and feel a Day of Vengeance and
Destruction. How woeful will the Estate of Sinners be, when their own Accusing
Consciences shall be as a fiery Oven, Psalm. 21.9. within, and the Vengeance of
God be as a Furnace of Fire without; and Sinners shall be Supported (though but
Tares and Chaff) to be Eternal Fuel to this Fire. It will be sweet to have a
Well of Spiritual Water springing up within, John 4.14. but it will be dreadful
to have a Well of Fire to be burning in his Soul. Alvarez de Semedo, in his
History of China, speaks of such Wells of Fire, kindled from Sulphurous Matter,
that burn and flame continually. The corruption of the Soul allowed will breed
that Worm that never dies. I shall Rejoice if the said Discourses do stir up
Sinners to escape the Corruption that is in the World through Lust, and to flee
from the Wrath to come. I have a due Respect to you, for appearing for
Nonconformists in your Station, that they might not be over-pressed with
Burdens. I shall be glad, if what I have written, may contribute to the
Advancement of your Salvation, and stir you up to prepare to meet the Lord of
Glory, and to stand before the Judge of the whole World, whose Eye, Book, and
Balance, will be dreadful to hardened Sinners at last. But that Christ may
appear as a Redeemer, to perfect your Liberty, and as a Bridegroom to marry
your Soul, is the earnest desire of,

Your Sincere, and Affectionate Friend, and Servant, Samuel Tomlyns.

2 These. 1.7, 8. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels,

In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.


IN these two Verses, there are several weighty Truths, 1. A Benefit that will
be bestowed on Suffering Christians, God will render Rest to those that are
Troubled. And Paul applies this sweet Truth to himself; he puts in for a share,
and claims an Interest in it, Rest with us. 2. We have the Time when this
Benefit shall be bestowed; it is when the Lord Jesus shall be Revealed from
Heaven. The full Deliverance of the Oppressed Saints, is Suspended till the
Revelation of Christ; he shall then do Right to the Oppressed, and execute
Vengeance on the Oppressors: It is but reasonable, that the Rest of the Members
should depend on the Rest of their Head, Psalm. 45.3, 4. Christ is now desired
to gird his Sword on his Thigh, and to ride prosperously on the word of Truth
and Righteousness. And Christ is set forth by one riding on a white Horse, with
a Bow in his Hand, and he went forth Conquering, and to Conquer. The Church is
compared to the Horses in Pharaoh's Chariot, Cant. 1.9. because by her
Ministers she draws the Spiritual and Victorious Chariot of Christ through the
World. Though Christ has a Rest, as to his Person, in Heaven, and is above the
reach and rage of his Enemies, yet he is contending with, and fighting against
his Enemies: He is winning the Hearts of his Elect, and gathering them into his
Kingdom; and he is breaking his Enemies to pieces, and putting them under his
Feet, 1 Cor. 15.25, 26. but at last Christ will perfect, and finish his Work.
He will appear as a Glorious and Triumphant Conqueror, as one that has won the
Field, and gained the Day: He will sit on the Throne of his Glory, Matt. 25.31.
This implies a perfect Rest; he shall fight, and make War no more, his People
shall enter into his Palace, Psalm. 45.14, 15. and sit down with him in his
Throne, Pet. 3.21. and his Enemies shall be adjudged to Tormenting Fire, and be
shut up in an Eternal Prison. 3. We have the Company that shall wait on Christ
at his Appearing; he shall come with his mighty Angels. 4. We have the terrible
manner of his Appearance, it shall be in flaming Fire. Christ is perfectly Holy
and Righteous; he can appear in flaming Fire, yet not be hurt by it, or suffer
any thing from it. This Fire will be hurtful to Christ's Enemies, but harmless
to himself. He that appeared at first as the Day spring from on high,
comfortably to direct straying Souls into the way of Peace: He that arises to
those, that fear God's Name, as a Sun of Righteousness, with healing under his
wings, Mal. 4.2. will now be revealed in flaming Fire, to punish obstinate
Rebels. They that have refused, and rejected Christ as a refining fire, Mal.
3.2, 3. shall now, to their cost, feel him to be a consuming fire. He that once
appeared encompassed with beams of Love, shall now a second time appear
surrounded with flames of Wrath. 5. We have the end of Christ's Revelation, or
why he will appear; it is to render Vengeance. It is in the Greek, (...),
giving Vengeance. O how dreadful and terrible a Gift is this! He that is God's
Almoner, to distribute God's Alms of Mercy to poor penitent begging Sinners,
will have no other Gift to bestow on impenitent, and unbelieving Souls, but
Vengeance. It is said vengeance belongs to me, and I will recompense, Heb.
10.30. Though to the Penitents and Believing, it is said, To the Lord belongs
Mercy, yet, as to obstinate Sinners, Vengeance belongs to God. Punishment is a
just Debt belonging to the Wicked, therefore it is said that God will repay
Fury to his Adversaries, Is. 59.18. he will render his Anger with Fury, and his
Rebukes with Flames of Fire, Is. 66.15. Paul charges Christians to render to
all their one, Romans 13.7. so Christ will render to hardened Sinners their due.
Sinners owe God glory, to be raised out of their Misery and Eternal Torments:
They will still be making Restitution, yet never will be able to make
Satisfaction to God: they will to Eternity be in debt to God, there will still
be an Arrear of Wrath, a Debt of Vengeance due to them; and this Vengeance will
come immediately from God and Christ. From God's angry frowning Face, 2 These.
2.8. from his punishing Hand, Heb. 10.31. his angry breath will blow up the
Fire that shall torment them, Isaiah 30: last. The weighty Feet of Christ, as
fine Brass, will bruise and crush Sinners as Grapes of Galls, as bitter
Clusters, when he shall tread the Wine Press of the Fierceness and Wrath of
Almighty God, Revel. 1.15. Rev. 14.15. 6. On whom shall this Vengeance be
Executed? It is on those that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus. This is an extensive comprehensive Vengeance, it will reach the whole
corrupt and unregenerate World. It is said that the Gentiles knew not God, 1
These. 4.5. and there are too many in the Visible Church that do hate Knowledge,
Prove. 1.29. and that through deceit, do refuse to know God, Jer. 9.6. lest
Light should discover their Deformity, awaken their Consciences, disturb their
Carnal Peace, obstruct and imbitter their Sensual Pleasures, and Carnal
Delights; therefore Christ Taxes and Censures the whole Unconverted World as
guilty of Ignorance, O Righteous Father, the World has not known thee, John
17.25. Those that obey not the Gospel, shall be the Objects of Christ's Wrath,
the Subjects of his Vengeance, where the Light of the Gospel has shined, where
the Hands of Wisdom have been stretched out; where Men have been beseeched to
be reconciled to God, have been wooed to be Espoused to Christ, but yet have
closed their Eyes against the Light, Matthew. 13.15. and have stopped their Ears
against the Call of the great Shepherd, and the Voice of the Blessed
Bridegroom; these shall have the heaviest Punishment, and the hottest Hell.

Doctrine 1. The Persecuted People of God shall have Rest at the Revelation of
Christ. Isaiah 14.3. The Lord shall give thee Rest from thy Sorrow, from thy
Fear, and from the hard Bondage wherein thou wast made to serve.
Saints shall have a Rest, 1. From their Enemies; they shall no more tread on
their Necks, or ride over their Backs, Psalm. 66.12. Isaiah 51.23. Enemies have
proudly said, Bow down, that we may go over, and the Bodies of Saints have been
laid as the Ground, and as the Street, to them that went over. The way that
Enemies have chosen is over the Necks and Backs of the Saints; but it is said
to the People of God, The Lord has taken away thy Judgments, he has cast out
thine Enemy; thou shall not see evil any more; the Plowers shall not always
Plow on the Backs of the Righteous; the Rod of the Wicked shall not rest on
their Lot, Psalm. 125.3. they shall not always reach out the Cup of their Fury
to Saints, because they will not stain their Garments, defile and inslave their
Consciences to their Lusts.

Two things evidence that Saints shall have Rest from their Enemies and
Sufferings:

1. That Enemies shall be Conquered and totally Subdued: Those that fear God's
Name shall go forth and tread down the wicked, they shall be as Ashes under the
Soles of their Feet, Mal. 4.2, 3. And the God of Peace will bruise Satan under
the Feet of Believers, Romans 16.20. so that Satan, and wicked Men, shall be
totally vanquished and disabled from hurting and offending the Saints, they
shall be shut up in the Prisons, and burn in the Furnace. The 92 Psalm has
this Title, A Psalm for the Sabbath day; in it the Psalmist affirms, That the
wicked shall be destroyed; and that the Enemies of God shall perish, Psalm. 92.
7, 9. This is a proper Meditation for the Sabbath day; God, and Saints too,
will not have a faithful, perfect, and delightful Sabbath, till all the Workers
of Iniquity are Conquered and Destroyed.

2. The Saints will be perfected in Holiness, and in the Life of God; so that
they will not need afflictions any more. Where there is no Dross, there needs
no Refining Fire: Where there is no Folly, there is no Rod of Correction
necessary; they do not need the Flail, nor the Fan, who are perfectly winnowed
from their Chaff. They that are fully freed from Sin, shall be no more liable
to Death, Pain, Sorrow, or Crying, Rev. 21.4. the corrupt Root that bears all
these Evils is withered and dead.

2. Saints shall Rest from their Labor, Rev. 14.13. Though the Son of Man give
the Spiritual Bread, Joh. 6.27. yet we are bid to Labor for it. It is hard to
persuade our selves of the Excellency and Necessity of this Bread, and that the
Son of Man can, and will, give it to Creatures so vile, unworthy, and
provoking, is a very difficult, hard, laborious thing; we need to wrestle with
God, and cry out, Lord, help our unbelief, Mark 9.24. evidence Spiritual,
Invisible Things to us.

3. Saints shall Rest from their Spiritual Journies and Travels. Jacob's Sons
took long Journies into Egypt to buy Corn, to procure Bread, but when Jacob and
his Family removed into Egypt, they ceased from such Journies; they were then
at the very Granaries of Corn. Joseph there nourished his Father, his Brethren,
and their Households, with Bread, without Traveling, or Payment for it; so
Saints shall have access to, and satisfaction, by eating of the Fruits of the
Tree of Life, that shall still be ripe, and ready to be enjoyed, Rev. 22.22.

2. As Saints shall have Rest by their Freedom from all Evils, Sufferings,
Enemies, Labors and Travels, so they shall rest in the enjoyment of the
highest, and best Good.

1. They shall rest by the Fountain of Life, where they may be satisfied, and
drink their fill as Caravans, or great Companies of Merchants do, Travel
through dry Deserts and Wildernesses, till they come to a Spring, and then, and
there, they pitch their Tents, and refresh themselves by drinking of the
Spring; so we must pass on through Creatures dry and barren, till we come to
God the Fountain of Life. Here we must stop and delight our selves in him, and
with him. Psalm. 36.9. With thee is the Fountain of Life, in thy Light we shall
see Light; that is, the Light of Joy and Consolation. The Lamb shall lead his
Sheep to living Fountains of Water, Rev. 7.17 as if every Saint had a Fountain
to himself, and did enjoy God as fully, as if he did solely, and only enjoy
him: How sweet is it to rest by the Fountain of Life for ever?

2. Saints shall rest in the House of a Father, and a Husband; in the House of
a Father, Christ says, In my Fathers House are many Mansions; I go to prepare
a place for you, John 14.2. and so they that rest in the House of their
Heavenly Husband. Naomi did pray her Daughters-in-Law might find rest, each of
them in the House of her Husband, Ruth 1.9.

3. Saints shall rest at the Table of Christ, they shall sit, eat, and drink
with him, at his Table, Luke 22.29, 30. in his Kingdom. There is no Good absent
at this Feast, to cause a wandering of desire; no Evil present to cause sighs
and sorrow under it: Here Saints may eat, and be satisfied for ever.

4. This will be a most Honorable Rest; Saints that sit in the Throne with
Christ, Rev. 3.21. and reign in life for evermore. As all Tears shall be wiped
from their Eyes, so Crowns shall be set on their Heads, a Crown of Life and
Righteousness, Romans 5.17. This is the highest Honor that Creatures can aspire
to, and therefore may be fully satisfied with, and rest in it. This Honor
shall never be forfeited, neither shall this Feast be disturbed and interrupted.

5. The Saints, that now are troubled, shall rest with the best Company, they
shall be where Christ is, Joh. 17.24. and they shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 8.11. As they have been
Companions with other Suffering Saints, in the Kingdom, and patience of Christ,
Rev. 1.9. so they shall enter into the same Joy, possess the same Inheritance,
and partake of the same Feast with them. If Servants shall be where their Lord
is, John 12.26. much more may they be assured of rest and refreshment with
their Fellow Servants. Though they be more eminent than they, for Gifts,
Graces, and Services, yet they shall rest in the same Bosom of Love, and sit in
the same Throne of Glory. What harmonious Melody, what sweet Comfort will there
be, when all Suffering Saints shall be gathered together, to sing the Praises
of their Father, to celebrate the Honor of the their Redeemer, and be
swallowed up for ever in the love of the Father, Son, and Spirit?

USE of the Doctrine. If Troubled Saints shall have rest, then be not afraid
of, do not start or recoil from the Cross of Christ, it will end, and issue in
a Crown of Glory. Your Sufferings are light, your Glory will be weighty; your
Afflictions and Sorrows will be momentary, but your Joys will be everlasting, 2
Cor. 4.17. Do not buy the Worlds Peace with the Trouble and Terror of your
Consciences: Some Apostate Protestants in France had such burdened Consciences,
such wounded Spirits, grew so weary of Life, that they came and offered
themselves to their Antichristian Enemies, and desired that they would kill
them. Do not slavishly dread Sufferings for Christ, did not your Lord endure
greater Troubles for you? John 12.27, 28. Now, says Christ, is my Soul
troubled; he made his Soul an Offering for Sin, he poured out his Soul to the
death, Is. 53.10, 12. You are but in shallow waters of afflictions, but Jesus
Christ was in a deep Sea of Sorrows: You have but some small drops that
sprinkle you, but he had a dreadful Storm that fell on him. You have but some
sparks that fly on you, but the Lamb of God was roasted by the Fire of his
Fathers Anger. Do not think it strange if siery Trials should be kindled
against you, and break out on you, 1 Pet. 4.12. Do not think to be Privileged
from Troubles, and to be Exempted from Hardships on Earth, and yet be secured
from Pains and Torments in another World. Satan will roar, and wicked Men will
rage against you. In the World you shall have Tribulation, but in Christ you
shall have peace, John 16.33. Though wicked Men do scorch your Bodies, yet your
Souls do sit under Christ's cold shadow, Cant. 2.3. And you shall have times of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.19. Though you are appointed
to Afflictions, 1 These. 3.3. yet God has not appointed you to wrath, but to
obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.9. You are now clouded
with Sorrows and Reproaches, but you shall shine out in the Kingdom of your
Father, Matthew. 13.43. Your smoking Furnace will issue in a burning Lamp, Genesis
15.17. your sighs will be succeeded by Songs, your darkness and shadow of Death
will end in a bright and glorious Morning. Persecutors will be cast into
Prison, and the Persecuted taken into the Palace. Enemies shall seel cruel
Bondage, and Saints be Translated into glorious Liberty. Wicked Men now Revile
and Reproach the People of God, but the Time is at hand when Christ will laugh
at their Calamity, and mock when their Fear comes, Prove. 1.26. but Saints
shall have praise from Christ, enter into the joy of their Lord, and enjoy a
rest that will abundantly recompense all their Troubles.

2. When shall this rest be enjoyed? It is said, when the Lord Jesus shall be
Revealed; Two things are here affirmed, 1. That the Lord Jesus shall be
Revealed. 2. That he shall be Revealed from Heaven. The words give this
Doctrine.

Doct. 2. The Lord Jesus shall be Revealed from Heaven. 1. The Lord Jesus shall
be Revealed. 2. He shall be Revealed from Heaven.
1. The Lord Jesus shall be Revealed: This is necessary on a double Account.

1. Jesus Christ was veiled and clouded in the World; the Sun of Righteousness
was in a continual Eclipse for about 33 Years. Though he was Rich, yet for our
sakes he became Poor, 2 Cor. 8, 9. Though he was full, yet he emptied himself,
Phil. 2.7, 8. Though he was Lord over all, God over all, Romans 9.5. yet he took on
him the form of a Servant; and this was as a thick Veil cast over all his
Glory, Phil. 2.9. The World saw no beauty in him, Is. 53.2. He was a Man of
sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Psalm. 22.6. He was trod on as a Worm, Ps.
10.9.23. and tossed up and down as a Locust by the Wind of his Adversaries
fury. From the Garden he was offend to Annas, from Annas to Caiaphas, from
Caiaphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate again, then to
Golgotha. Thus the Scripture was fulfilled, That he was tossed up and down as a
Locust: So mean was his Condition, and so low his Circumstances, that the World
did not know him, John 3.1. and therefore a glorious Appearing of his is
necessary, Tit. 2.13. to let all the World know who, and what he is, and how
they have been mistaken.

2. Jesus removed, and withdrew himself from the World; he is Traveled into a
far Country, Luke 13.12. He is gone within the Veil, Heb. 6.19, 20. He is hid
with God, Col. 3.3. Thousands do love him though they have not seen him; and
believe on him, though they do not yet see him, 1 Pet. 1.8. The Object of our
Faith is become invisible, and far removed from the Eye of Sense; and Christ
does stay so long, that Wise and Foolish Virgins do fall asleep, Matt. 25.5.
And his Rebellious Citizens send a Message after him, saying, We will not have
this Man to reign over us, Luke 19.14. All those they cruelly persecuted, and
wickedly slew, for Proclaiming Christ as King, and calling them to bow down to
his Royal Scepter, were sent in this Embassy, or with this Message, after
Christ, to tell him his Citizens, the Jews, would not admit him as their King
to Reign over them; and the Profane and Atheistical World do ridicule, mock
and scorn, at the Promise of his coming, 2 Pet. 3.3. They that walk after their
own Lusts, and place their Happiness in satisfying of them, would not have
Christ come to interrupt their Life of Sensuality, or to punish them for it.
They would never have Christ come, and hope he will not appear; and therefore,
with insulting Belief, say, Where is the Promise of his coming?

In the Prosecution of this Subject, I shall insist on these three Things. 1. I
shall demonstrate that the Lord Jesus will be Revealed. 2. What the Scripture
asserts about his coming. 3. When the Lord Jesus will be Revealed. Though we
cannot point out the particular Time, yet there are some general Intimations
given us in Scripture when he will come.

1. That the Lord Jesus will come, 1. God the Father will send him, Acts 3.20.
Peter says, That God would send Jesus, who before was preached to them. And
Paul speaking of the appearing of Christ, he affirms, that in his Times, he
shall show this Appearance, who is the blessed and only Potentate. The Father
will exhibit Christ again to the World; this will be the most wonderful
glorious show that ever was presented to Mankind: He that did stand as a
Criminal before the Tribunal of Pilate, Matt. 27.11. he that did hang on a
Cross of Ignominy, shall now sit on a Throne of Glory, Matt. 25.31. He will
Arraign Men for all the Acts of Time, and adjudge them to the Penalties and
Rewards of Eternity. All Nations shall be gathered before him, shall receive
their Sentence from him, and be disposed of either to a Blessed or Miserable
Eternity by him.

2. Jesus Christ himself has told us of his Return; he compares himself to a
Noble Man Traveling into a far Country to receive a Kingdom, and return. As
the Spirits of Men do return to God to be judged, Eccl. 12.7.3. so Christ will
return again to judge the World.

3. The Saints live in expectation of Christ's return; they wait for Jesus
Christ from Heaven, 1 These. 1.10. They look for him from Heaven, Phil. 3.20.
They look for the blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearing of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.14. Though the most of Men live, as if they
had no Concern in Christ's Appearing, as if it would be no Marriage-Day,
Feast Day, or Harvest-Day to them; as if they did not think, or expect to reap
any Harvest of Blessedness, or to receive any Reward of Happiness at Christ's
coming, yet it would be a great disappointment to the People of God if he
should not return. They look for him as a Bridegroom, as a Savior, as a
Redeemer; and he will appear a second time unto Salvation, to those that look
for him, Heb. 9.28.

4. The Angels have testified to this Truth, that Jesus Christ should come from
Heaven, as the Apostles saw him go to Heaven, Acts 1.11. And the Angels cannot
be false Witnesses and Deceivers.

5. Jesus Christ has work to do at his second coming: He has a Harvest to
reap, Matt. 13.30. A Floor to Purge, Matt. 3.12. A Wife to Marry, Rev. 7.25.
Servants to reckon with, Matt. 19.21, 30. The Diligent and Faithful he will
commend, and call to enter into his own joy; and the Idle and Slothful he will
adjudge to be cast into outer Darkness. The great Shepherd will gather his
Flock to him, and lead them to sweet and delicious Pastures in the Heavenly
Paradise.

2. Let us observe what the Scripture asserts concerning his coming.

1. Jesus Christ testifies, that he comes quickly, Rev. 22.20. Behold I come
quickly. Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry, Heb. 10.37. It is but a little time to the day of Christ's Appearing;
compared with the time that is run out, since the beginning of the World, it
will be quickly, considering how near our end is, and that Death is at hand.
Death is the end of the World to us; we pass into a fixed, unchangeable,
Eternal Estate, as those do who live to the end of the World. Time is folded up
to us, and the Door of Eternity is opened to us. Christ's coming to call us out
of the World, and to Summon us to his Judgment Seat, may quickly be; it may be
within a few Years, yea, within a few Months, yea, within a few Days. That
which is future will come, and be present; and our Souls should be affected
now, as if we saw the Judge appearing, the Throne set, the Books opened, and
our selves Presented before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

2. This Revelation of Jesus Christ will be sudden, surprising, and very
amazing to the greatest part of the World, as the Old World was, drowned in
Sensual Pleasures, Earthly Business, Carnal Security. They were poisoned with,
and hardened in unbelief; they did not look for the Flood, they knew not till
it came and took them all away, Matt. 24.39. They did not believe God's
threatening, or regard Noah's preaching and warnings, or consider what the
building of the Ark did mean; they would not know things by Believing, but only
by Seeing and Feeling. They did not know till the Rain did fall, the Fountains
of the great Deep were broken up, and the Waters did rise to swallow them up;
so shall the coming of the Son of Man be, Rev. 16.15. The World will not
believe, or prepare for it, till they see Christ coming in the Clouds; he will
as to most, come as a Thief in the Night, that is not thought of, or looked
for, Rev. 3.3. The World is as loose, as careless, as secure, as if they had
heard nothing of Christ's coming, as if they had not been informed of his
appearing, or been exhorted to look and wait for it, and been warned to prepare
for it; the evil Servant faith no more, but my Lord delayeth his coming, Matt.
24.48. Though yet he acts, and carries it, as if he would never come at all,
Christ's Appearing will come as a Snare on them that dwell on the Earth, Luke
21.35. Though they have often been taught, and told, that Jesus Christ will come,
yet they will be as stupid, and senseless, and foolish, as the Birds and
Beasts; they will take no warning, but will fall into the Snare, as a Bird
does, and be utterly ruined and destroyed by Christ's second coming. Though
Christ does bring Grace, and Glory to others, yet he will totally take away all
Good, all that is sweet and comfortable, from impenitent Sinners. Men are
woefully degenerate, that they will not know things by Faith, or the Testimony
of the Word of God, but only by Sense, and so will not discern dreadful Evils
till they fall upon them.

3. Jesus Christ will be Revealed in great Glory, and sit upon the Throne of
his Glory, Matt. 25.31. He will also cause his Redeemed to appear in glory,
Col. 3.4. Our Savior comes not only to be glorified himself, but to be
glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, 2 These.
1.10. therefore it is styled, The glorius Appearing of the great God, even of
our Savior Jesus Christ, Titus 2.13. Christ at his coming will be clothed with
such glory, that will put it out of doubt that he is the Son of God, that he is
the Son of Man, the true Messiah that was promised and exhibited to the World:
It is said, Then shall appear the Sign of the Son of Man, Matt. 24.30. Ferus
takes this Sign of the Son of Man to be the Sign of the Cross, but the Note of
Calvin on the Text is more solid and judicious. He takes that eminent and
transcendent Glory, that Christ will appear in, to be the Sign of the Son of
Man. Those that were not convinced, and persuaded, by all the Signs and
Miracles that Christ wrought, that he was the Messiah, shall, by his glorious
Appearing, by his Illustrious Majesty, as a demonstrative, and convincing Sign,
be assured fully, that he is the Son of Man, the Promised Messiah: None shall
doubt, none shall be left at uncertainties about it, no Unbeliever shall
remain. Though the Scribes and Pharisees would not regard Christ's Miracles, or
be induced by them to believe, yet he tells them of an invincible convincing
evidence, that should one day be afforded to them, but too late. He insists on,
and minds them of this very sign of the Son of Man, Matt. 6.64. Hereafter you
shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the
clouds of Heaven. You that now condemn me, for saying that I am the Messiah,
and the Son of God, shall one day see me as a Judge, coming to Arraign,
Sentence, and Condemn you.

4. The coming of Christ will be very open, and evident to the whole World.
When he first appeared, he showed himself to few but to the Jewish Nation.
After his Resurrection, we read of none of the unbelieving World that beheld
him. He appeared only to, and was seen by none, but by his Disciples, who were
to inform the World of this truth, that he was raised. The unbelieving Jews and
Gentiles, were not to see Christ's raised, and glorified Body, but to believe
his Resurrection; but Christ will so openly at last appear, that every eye
shall see him, Rev. 1.7. They also that pierced him shall behold him; Jews and
Gentiles, Heathens and Mahumetans, Loose and Profane Christians, shall see
him. Believers and Saints shall then point him out with joy, Lo this is our
God, we have waited for him, Is. 25.9. And he has not deceived our Faith, or
frustrated our Hope and Expectation. They that would not believe what they did
not see, shall now see, but to their terror. They that were averse from the
Life of Faith, and wholly devoted to the Life of Sense, shall now have Seeing
enough; they shall behold what will affright, dismay, and overwhelm them. God
does now require, and call for a high and noble Exercise of Faith, in relation
to invisible things (at which the Heathen of Old scoffed); yet he does, and
will condescend, to give evidence and satisfaction, as at Christ's first
appearing, he was visible to the eye of the Body, Is. 40.9. O Zion, that
bring glad tidings, lift up thy voice, and be not afraid; say unto the
Cities of Judah, Behold your God. This was a strange and wonderful truth, and
Zion might be afraid to publish it; yet she is twice bid to lift up her voice,
and that with strength, not to be afraid aloud to sound out, and proclaim this
amazing, and astonishing truth: Say to the Cities of Judah, Behold your God,
behold God is come down to you in a Humane Nature, God is walking among you in
a Body of Flesh, preaching, working Miracles, familiarly conversing with you.
The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory, John
1.14. So at his second coming, Christ will be evident to the eye, and, as it
were, pointed out by the Finger of Men: Behold he comes in the clouds, and
every eye shall see him, Rev. 1.7. Saints shall say to those that have
upbraided them with the invisible object of their Faith, Lo this is our God, we
have waited for him, Is. 25.9. Though the unbelieving World did Reproach
Christians, and say, Where is your God, yet Saints one day consute all their
Calumnies, and silence all their Insultings and Upbraidings; they shall point
out Christ coming in all his Majesty and Glory, and say, Lo this is our God, we
have waited for him, and he will save us, and we will be glad and rejoice in
his salvation, Is. 25.9.

5. This Revelation of Christ will cause Mourning to the greatest part of the
World; it will be a black, bitter, terrible day to most, Matt. 24.30. All the
Tribes of the Earth shall mourn, all the Kindreds of the Earth shall wail
because of him, Rev. 1.7. when they shall see the Son of Man coming in the
Clouds of Heaven, with power and great glory. They shall mourn when it is too
late to repent; they shall wail when their sorrow will not prevent, but begin
their Punishment and Hell. Now they shall, to their cost, know how great a
Person they have refused, and how high an Happiness they have rejected; that
they have turned from a Savior, and so forfeited true Blessedness; and
rebelled against the great God, and so have incurred the worst and severest
penalties. These three things shall be reviewed and reflected on, 1. What they
have done. 2. What they have lost. 3. What they must suffer and endure to
Eternity, when they shall bleed by the edge of God's Sword, and smart under the
Chastisement of the Scorpions of Revenging Justice, 1. Sinners that consider
what they have done, that they have turned away from him that spoke out of the
bosom of his Fathers love, and from the Throne of his own glory, Ps. 81.11.
That they would have none of him who is the true God, and eternal Life; that
they stopped their Ears, and hardened their Hearts against the wooings of the
best Bridegroom, against the call of the great Shepherd, and of the Captain of
Salvation, against the entreaties of a Savior and Redeemer. They will now
reflect on the frequent denials they gave to, and the many affronts they put
upon the Lord of Glory; how they hated and abhorred his Yoke, despised and
loathed his Feast; did not submit to, and come into his Righteousness, but
rebelled, resisted, vexed, and quenched the holy Spirit of God. 2. They shall
know now what they have lost; that the Treasury of Grace will now be locked,
the Fountain of Life sealed, the bowels of Christ will be for ever shut against
them, notwithstanding their extreme poverty and misery. The door of God's House
will be shut, never to be opened again: How woeful will this be, to be excluded
out of God's Palace, and to be thrust out of his Kingdom? They that should have
used violence to press into God's Kingdom, but now Christ will use force to
thrust them out of his Kingdom. They wish now to see the excellency and glory
of the Kingdom of God, that they would even, with violence, force into it, but
they shall be violently thrust out of it, they shall never taste of Christ's
Supper. They would not come into Christ's Righteousness, and this was their
great sin; and they shall not come into Christ's Righteousness, and this will
be their grievous punishment. They shall not enter into God's rest, Heb. 3.18.
They shall not partake of Christ's joy or glory: They would not open their
Hearts to Christ, and Christ will not open his Heaven to them. They would not
know Christ's voice, when he knocked and called, saying, Open to me: And Christ
will not hear their voice, when they cry, Lord, open to us. They would not give
entertainment and rest to Christ in their Souls, and Christ will not give them
entertainment and rest in his Kingdom.

3. This will cause wailing, when Sinners see what they must suffer and endure;
they that in their whole time did drink iniquity like water, must, during God's
eternity, drink the wrath of the Almighty, Job 21.20. They must be drunk with
the Cup of God's fury, feel the edge of his glittering Sword, and the weight of
his punishing hand. His face will be unveiled to frown and scorch, and his arm
be made bare to smite and wound. Christ will come to express his most fierce
resentments of Sinners slighting the Grace offered to 'em, and despising the
mercy pressed on them. Children of Disobedience shall be broken with Christ's
Iron rod, and Vessels of wrath shall be filled up to the brim with the fury of
God. This Mourning will be dreadful, because there is no comfort to be
administered; no peace to be spoken to these Mourners. There will be no
banishing of their fears, removing of their burdens, no sweetning of their cup,
or healing of their wounds, for ever. God will set his face against them, and
will never hide, or turn away his angry countenance from them. Those that have
been secure, stupid, hard-hearted, even till now, shall then begin to mourn,
but the first fruits of their sorrow will be the first fruits of their woe, and
prove the earnest, and presages of their eternal misery. They begin to sorrow
on the utmost confines and bounds of Time, and must continue sorrowing to an
endless and unbounded Eternity. Godly sorrow for sin may somewhat avail to
remove the Transgressor's burden; but Worldly sorrow, under the feeling of
present anguish, or the fear of further, future, approaching misery, will not
advantage Sinners to roll away their guilt, to prevent or diminish their
punishment, their mourning is a part of the punishment threatened, Prove. 5.11,
12. and thou mourn at last, and say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart
despised reproof? Therefore this punishment shall never cease, shall never be
taken off. Saints have but days of mourning, and these shall have an end, Is.
60.20. but Sinners shall have an eternal mourning, which shall have no end. The
day of Christ's Revelation will be a time of joy to his Loyal Spouse, to his
Living Members, to his Faithful and Sincere Servants; when he appears, they
shall rejoice with exceeding great joy, 1 Pet. 4.13. But this appearing will
cause eternal sorrow to Rebels and Enemies, when their sins shall be remembered
and revenged.

3. When will the Lord Jesus be Revealed? Though the end of the Old World, and
the punctual time of its destruction was foretold, that after a hundred and
twenty Years the Flood should come, yet the exact day or time of the end of the
second World none knows, no not the Angels of God, Matt. 24.36. yet the
Scripture gives us some general hints, and intimations, when Christ will come.
1. When he has received a Kingdom, Luke 19.12. He was to travel into a far
Country to receive a Kingdom, and to return. Jesus Christ has not yet fully
received his Kingdom, all the Elect are not yet born, they are not all gathered
and converted, they have not all yet visited the Son, Psalm. 2.12. performed
their homage, and yielded obedience to him. It is a Work for a long time for
Christ to ride forth prosperously, conquer a Kingdom, and subject Rebels to
himself, and then to reign prosperously over them, Jer. 23.5. more to refine,
sanctify, and fit them for himself. All Christ's Servants must have time to
occupy, and trade with his Pounds and Talents, before he will come, call them
to an account, and reckon with them, Matt. 25.16, 19. Christ must wound the
hearts of his Enemies, and cause them, as foiled, to fall under him, and as
worshippers to fall before him. Christ must also show his glorious power for
some time, in ruling in the midst of his enemies, Ps. 110.2. 2. That
notwithstanding all their rage, they cannot hinder Christ's Kingdom to rise, or
cause it to fall, but Christ will go on more Levening the World with his
Doctrine, more subduing the Nations by his Word, till this stone did fill the
whole Earth, and the Name of this Shepherd was great to the ends of the Earth.

2. Jesus Christ will come, when all his Members are complete, and he has the
fullness of his Body, Ephesians. 1.23. When his Spouse has made her self ready,
Rev. 19.7. The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self
ready. When she is clothed in fine Linen, white and clean, and adorned with
Clothing of wrought Gold, and Raiment of Needle Work.

3. Jesus Christ will come, when he has prepared a place to lead and bring his
people to, John 14.3. If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again,
and receive you to my self, that where I am you may be. But when may Christ be
said to have prepared a place for all his Members? Surely when Christ has
sprinkled the Throne, and the Heavenly Sanctuary with his Blood, when he has
pleaded his Sufferings and Death for each of them, that they may be let into
the glorious Presence and Kingdom of God, then he may be said to have prepared
a place for them.

4. When Christ's Corn and Harvest is fully ripe, then he will come to reap,
Mark 4.28, 29. When the earth brings forth the blade, then the ear, then the
full Corn in the ear; but when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he
puts in the sickle, because the harvest is come. Christ will not delay, or
lose time, when the Harvest is ripe, when the Members are grown up to a perfect
man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.

2. Jesus Christ will be Revealed from Heaven, 1. To justify the History and
Doctrine of the Gospel, that he was received up into Heaven, and sat on the
right hand of God, Mark 16.19. That he entered into Heaven, Angels,
Principalities and Powers, being made subject to him, 1 Pet. 3.22. that he was
received up into glory.

2. To answer the hopes and expectation of his People, they wait for a Savior
from Heaven, Psalm. 3.20. and look for God's Son Jesus from Heaven, 1 These. 1.10.

3. Christ will be Revealed from Heaven, to show the Spiritual Nature of his
Kingdom, that it is a heavenly Kingdom; That he has had his Throne in Heaven,
and from thence his Kingdom has ruled over all. He has observed all the rage
and actings of his enemies, and all the love and obedience of his friends. He
has inspected all the concerns of his Members, and transacted all the affairs
of his Kingdom. This has been honorable and glorious to Christ, that he has
had a rest, Is. 1.10. in Heaven, and yet neglected none of his work in
repressing the rage of his enemies, and in reviving the fainting spirits of his
friends, and steering all the affairs of his Church to a safe and happy Port.
He has supplied his poor, and supported his weak Members.

4. Jesus Christ will be Revealed from Heaven, for the greater confusion and
terror of his Enemies. How will this affright and amaze them, that he, who they
thought slept under the clods of the Earth, should appear riding on the clouds
of Heaven, Rev. 1.7. that he, who the Jews thought was suffering in Hell, for
deluding and deceiving the World, should come to Judge the World, and to
Condemn Men to Hell, for not believing on him, Mark 6.16. Joseph was thought by
his Brethren to be lost, or dead, but how were they confounded and troubled,
when they found him alive, Genesis 45.3. heard him speaking to them, saw him under
Pharaoh Ruling over all the Land of Egypt: So how will it dismay, and overwhelm
the unbelieving World, when Christ that was thought to remain dead shall be
presented to their eyes as alive? When he that was ill treated by Men in the
form of a Servant, shall appear in the glory of a Lord, to judge both the Quick
and the Dead, and shall be manifested as having all Power in Heaven and Earth
committed to him, and can justify and crown those that have believed on him;
and condemn and punish those that have rebelled against him, who neither have
believed his Doctrine, or obeyed his Commands.

USE of Examination. Examine your selves under what Notion Christ will be
Revealed, and come to you at last. Whether he will appear as your Friend, or as
your Enemy; To your joy or sorrow: As a loving Bridegroom to receive you to
himself, John 14.3. Or as an incensed Judge to Sentence and Cast you from
himself, saying, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, Matt. 25.41.
Will Christ come to give you any thing? Will he bestow a Crown of
Righteousness? 2 Timothy 4.18. A Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. Will he call you to
inherit an everlasting Kingdom? Matt. 25.34. Or will Christ come upon you as a
Thief in the Night, to impoverish, spoil, deprive you of all the good things
you now possess and enjoy? Will not your Cisterns then be broken, your Candles
and Lamps be put out? Will not your whole Paradise of sensual and sinful
delights be lighted and blasted? Will not Creatures be withdrawn from you, and
God himself also depart? The floor and the Wine Press shall not feed you, and
God himself will leave and forsake you, Hos. 9.2, 12. Will you not at once be
turned out of your Stewardship, and also be cut off from all hope of the
heavenly Inheritance? Will not Christ's coming be your utter undoing? Will you
not sustain a damage and loss never to be repaired? For your wooing and buying
time will be over; the Spiritual Market will be at an end. Will it not be sad,
when others are rich Heirs, for you to be poor Bankrupts, emptied and stripped of
all valuable and desirable good for ever? Inquire therefore seriously and
diligently, how it stands with you, in relation to Christ's coming. Is Jesus
Christ Revealed in you, and to you; and is his new Nature formed in you? It is
not Flesh and Blood, but our Father that is in heaven, that must reveal Christ
to us, Matt. 16.17. he that has heard, and learned of the Father, comes to the
Son. Has the spirit ever glorified Christ in your eyes? Is he most precious to
you? If Christ be not Revealed to you while you are on Earth, he cannot be
Revealed from Heaven, to your joy and comfort. Have you an understanding to
know the worth, excellency, and preciousness of Christ, so that you give your
selves to him, and are in him? If Christ do dwell in your hearts below, you may
be assured that you shall dwell in his House above. Are you related to Christ?
Are you really his? Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh.
They that are Christ's shall be made alive at his coming, 1 Cor. 15.23. Is the
Match made up between Christ and you, by a mutual Spiritual kiss? Does Christ
kiss you, expressing his servent love toward you, and speaking powerfully and
effectually to you the Doctrine of Grace, the Word of Reconciliation? The
Gospel of Salvation is your own Interest in Christ's precious Promises, sealed
and delivered to you.

2. Do you kiss Christ the Son of God? Ps. 2.12. Cant. 8.1. When Ishould find
thee without I would kiss thee. And Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, are said to
salute, kiss, or embrace the Promises, (...). Where the mouth of Faith does
meet, with the mouth of Christ speaking the Word of Life, and the promises of
Spiritual Benefits, is persuaded of them, does embrace them; then the Soul
kisses Christ. There is also a kiss of Homage, as Samuel kissed Saul,
acknowledging him as the Lord's Anointed. When we receive the Law from Christ's
mouth, and profess our subjection to his Scepter, and obedience to his Laws,
then we kiss Christ. 3. Are you willing that Christ should come? Do you desire,
long for, and love Christ's appearing? The Church says, Make haste my beloved,
Cant. 8.14. When Christ said, I come quickly, she adds her Amen; Even so come
Lord Jesus, Rev. 22.20. Christians are said not only to look for, but to hasten
the coming of the day of God, 2 Pet. 3.12. (...): that is, by their wishings,
longings, earnest desires. Do you fervently love the appearing of Christ, as
that which will be exceeding honorable to him, comfortable and beneficial to
you? Do you love Christ's appearing, as that which will be exceeding glorious
to him? For by his voice he shall quicken, raise, call forth all that are in
their Graves, John 5.28. That Christ knows all that ever lived, can distinguish
their dust from the dust of one another, and from the dust of the Earth: That
he knows all their thoughts, words and actions, remembers them, and will call
them to an account for them, 1 Pet. 4.5. Then Christ will sit on the Throne of
his glory, and all Nations shall be gathered before him, to be judged by by
him. This is the perfection of Christ's Kingdom, and his highest act of
Royalty, to sentence all Men to their eternal state: It is said he shall judge
the quick and dead at his Appearing and Kingdom. Now is his Kingdom most highly
magnified and exalted, when the quick and dead must be Judged by him.

2. This appearing of Christ will be most comfortable to his People; he will
come to bestow Crowns, to give Rewards, to divide eternal Portions and
Inheritances to them. he comes with the Keys of Hell and Death in his Hand: He
has the Key of Hell to shut it, that the Souls of his People may not enter in,
else the mouth of the bottomless Pit, and of the roaring Lion, would gape for
them, and swallow them up. And Christ has the Key of Death to open the Graves,
that the Bodies of Saints may come forth. May not Christians well love the
appearing of Christ, who has delivered them from the wrath to come, and as a
Captain of Salvation will lead them to glory? Do you long for Christ's coming,
as that which will be a Harvest-day, a Marriage-day, and a day of full
Redemption? Or are you averse from Christ's coming? Do you not loath and dread
the thoughts of it? Is not Christ's coming full sore against your Will? There
is a vast difference between these two expressions; the breaking up the House,
and the opening of the door to Jesus Christ, Luke 12.36. The House of a carnal
unbelieving Man is broken through; Christ breaks in upon him irresistibly,
unavoidably: a force is put upon Sinners. If they could Fetter Christ's feet,
obstruct his way, clog and stop his Chariot-wheels, Christ should never come or
be Revealed; but Saints that hang their hopes, and put all their happiness in
Christ's Appearing, do readily open the door, and joyfully will come and
entertain Christ. Do you look for his coming, as a beloved Bridegroom, as a
desired Guest? Or do you not mind, or desire Christ's coming, but will be as
much surprised by it, and astonished at it, as at the coming of a Thief, that
was not thought of at all?

4. Do you prepare, and make ready for Christ's coming? Is all your Week day of
life nothing but a preparation for the eternal Sabbath? Are your Loins girded,
that you may do the Work of your heavenly Calling? Are your Lamps burning, that
you may do your Work skilfully and diligently? Persevere in it continually. It
is said of the good Woman, that her Candle goes not out by night, Prove. 31.18.
Do your Candles continue burning through this dark night of Time? Others have
put out their light, and given themselves up to sloth and sleep. It is a great
thing to watch, and keep our Garments on and about us, Rev. 16.15. Blessed is
he that watches, and keeps his Garments. Christ may suddenly come, and
surprise Sinners, that they may not have time to put on Spiritual Garments to
put on Christ, Romans 13.14. and the new man, Ephesians. 4.24. We are too apt to put
off our Coat, Cant. 5.3. to lay aside a gracious, spiritual holy, and heavenly
frame, and to give way to sloth, sleep, and carnal security. This Spiritual
Garment is soon put off, but it is hardly recovered. I have put off my Coat,
and how shall I put it on? It is highly commendable to have our Lamps burning,
when the Candles of others are put out; and it is a Night of gross and thick
darkness with them. It is to the Honor of Christ the Bridegroom to be
expected, waited for, and to be lighted to his Fathers House, with bright and
burning Lamps, with Graces active, and in a most vigorous and lively Exercise.
Is this NightLight of Time, as a Passoever Night to you? Are your Loins girded?
Are your Shoes on your Feet? The Feet of the Church are said to be beautiful
with Shoes; she was fit to Journey, to Travel. Are you waiting for God's Call
out of the Egypt of this World? Are you fitted, and ready to Travel hence into
the Heavenly Canaan? Christ says, Come with me my Spouse, with me from
Lebanon: Are you willing and ready to follow Jesus Christ? Are you like
Servants, that look for the return of their Lord from the Wedding Feast, to
have you a way as Guests to his Table in his heavenly Kingdom? Luke 22.29, 30.
There is much in these words, And be you like such as look for the return of
your Lord, Luke 12.36. The watchfulness, diligence, the constant labor,
activity and zeal of some Christians, does evidence to themselves, and
demonstrate to others, that they look for the coming of Christ: That they
prepare, make ready, set all things in order, for their receiving and
entertaining of the Lord Jesus. Their great care and endeavor is, that they
may not be found sleeping and undressed; that they may not walk naked, and
their shame be seen for ever, Prove. 16.15. It will be the greatest reproach, to
have had a long time to adorn the Soul allowed to Men, and yet to neglect and
trifle it away, and their Souls to be found dead without the life of God, and
to be found naked without the Image and Righteousness of God. Do you trim your
Lamps, dress your Souls, and finish the Work which God has given you to do,
and that Christ has appointed you, that you may open to Christ immediately,
without put offs, or delays, or excuses, as those that are not surprised or
unready, as those that would stay here no longer, that would have Time end, and
Eternity begin? As those that would have shadows fly away, and the everlasting
day to dawn? These are great words, that Christ will knock for a full entrance
into us, and a total possession of us; and we must open immediately as those
that are ready to let Christ in, and to go away presently with him: But are you
not rather minding earthly things, scattering your ways and affections to
unlawful Beloyeds? Do not your thoughts creep on the ground, and your Hearts
dwell below? Would you not stay in a Natural Body? Would you not continue in,
and be contented with a Stewardship? Would you not dwell on Earth? Do you not
eagerly drive the Chariot of your Trade? Do you not indulge your Carnal
Affections, and give the Reins to your Sensual Appetites? So that there is no
evidence that you look for Christ's Appearing; for you are not like those that
wait for the return of Christ from Heaven.

3. With what Attendance Jesus Christ will come from Heaven? What Retinue will
accompany him? He will be Revealed with his mighty Angels. How much does the
first and second coming of Christ differ? He came first attended with weak
Fishermen, but now he is surrounded and compassed with mighty Angels to wait on
him. Two things are here observable, 1. That the Angels are called Christ's
Angels. 2. That they are Styled mighty Angels. 1. The Angels are said to be the
Angels of the Lord Jesus. This is an high Honor to Christ, that all the Angels
of Heaven are his Angels; He is Captain of God's Militia, and General of all
the Hosts of Heaven. They are Ministers to attend on him, and his; and Hosts to
fight against his, and his Churches enemies. And well they may be called his
Angels, for he made them; they were created by him, Col. 1.16, 17. and for him;
and by him they do subsist, and have their Being upheld and continued to them,
else they would cease to be, and return to nothing. 2. God therefore called the
Angels to worship his Son made Flesh, come into the World in our Nature. When
he brought the first begotten into the World, he says, Let all the Angels of
God worship him, Heb. 1.6. It may be inquired whether they do not owe the Son
of God adoration, on the account of their being graciously supported, and
preserved in their Integrity. The two Cherubims that figured the Angels, were
made out of the Mercy-Seat, as well as stood upon it, Exodus 25.18, 19. There
are Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. as well as Elect Men. Herein did the various and
manifold Wisdom of God shine, Ephesians. 3.10. in keeping Elect Angels standing,
and in raising up Elect Men when they are fallen. 3. The Angels Ministered to
Christ, and probably brought him Food, after the Devil had tempted him, taking
occasion from his hunger. And an Angel came from Heaven, and strengthened Christ
in his Agony, Luke 22.43. 4. Jesus Christ is the Ladder, that joins Earth and
Heaven together, and it is on this Ladder the Angels of God ascend, and
descend, John 1.51. All Correspondence, all Commerce, and Communion, between
the upper and lower World, is carried on by this Ladder. The Angels descend to
serve the Members of Christ, and then ascend to give an Account of the faithful
discharge of their Office and Trust.

2. These Angels are called mighty Angels. And it is a great and mighty Work
they are to undertake and execute; there is a multitude of Malefactors to be
Arrested; there are great and mighty Enemies to be Apprehended; there is a
great and mighty Harvest to be cut down, to be reaped, and separated from the
Field of the Church: There are Goats to be separated from the Sheep, and bad
Fish to be taken out from among the good. The Angels shall come forth to honor
Christ, Heaven shall be emptied of Angels and Saints, to wait on Christ. The
Angels, when they come forth, shall sever the Wicked from among the Just; the
Harvest is the end of the World, the Wicked are the Tares, and the Reapers are
the Angels, Matt. 13.38, 39. Sinful Men and Women are as weak and feeble Tares,
they cannot stand against, or before the Hook of these mighty Reapers, they
shall be easily cut, they shall quickly fall before a sharp hook managed by
such mighty Arms. The far greatest part of the World will be found Tares,
therefore there needs many mighty Reapers to cut down so vast a Harvest; and
skill will be requisite to discern and distinguish some of the Tares, some
close and refined Hipocrites, from the good Corn. 2. They are to bind the Tares
fast in bundles, Matt. 13.30. that they shall none of them escape. He that had
not a Wedding Garment was to be bound hand and foot, Matt. 22.13. His hands
were to be bound, that he should not fight or resist; his feet were bound, that
he should not fly or run away. 3. These Angels are as mighty Sergeants, to
present Malefactors to the Judge. As for those mine enemies (says Christ)
which would not that I should reign over them, bring them before me, Luke
19.27. The Angels are to execute this Order, and fulfill this Command: They are
to present Criminals at the Bar of the Judge. 4. When Christ does Sentence and
Condemn wicked Men, the Angels are ready to execute the Sentence; They gather
those that offend and commit iniquity; they pluck out the had Fish, and cast
them into a Furnace of unquenchable fire, Matt. 13 40, 50. Christ says of his
enemies, Let them be slain in my presence, Luke 14.27. These condemned
Malefactors may be said to be slain by the Angels, when they cast them into the
Furnace; for then all this sweet, pleasant, and desirable Life and Being, is
consumed and gone, those are no better than woeful, stinking Carcasses, that
must be Food to the Worm that never dies, and fuel to the Fire that never goes
out, Is. 66.24. 5. The Angels are to gather the Elect: It is said that Christ
shall send forth his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and shall gather
his Elect from the four Winds, and from one end of Heaven to the other.
Observe, 1. That the Elect are called Christ's Elect, he chooses as well as the
Father; the Lamb has his Book of Life, Rev. 13.8. Those that the Father gives
him, the Names of those he writes down in his Book. These Christ chooses to
redeem, reconcile, and satisfy for: With the Salvation of these he charges
himself. These he must bring to his Fold, and they shall hear his voice, John
10.16. These he must keep, and lose none of them, John 17.1.2. The Angels are
to gather these, as a Spouse to Christ her Husband, Ps. 45.14, 15. with joy
shall she be brought in Raiment of Needlework to the King: The Virgins her
Companions shall be brought, they shall enter into the Kings Palace. When
Abraham employed his Servant to fetch a Wife out of Padan Aram for Isaac his
Son, he said the Lord God of Heaven should send his Angel before his Servant,
and he should take thence a Wife for his Son, Genesis 24.7. As an Angel was
employed to prosper the Work and Way of Abraham's Servant, and to bring a Wife
to Isaac: so the Angels of God shall bring, and present Christ's Wife to him;
they shall know who are the Elect, find them out, and distinguish them from
others. 2. They shall gather the Elect as Members to their Head, as Loyal
Subjects to their King, 2 These. 2.1. The Apostle Paul speaks of the coming of
the Lord Jesus as a most desirable thing, and the gathering of the Elect to him
as a most sweet, and comfortable thing; and the Angels shall do this Work to
gather Saints to Christ.

USE. We may learn from the ATtendance of Christ, what Honor shall be put on
Christ at his Appearing.
Heaven shall be emptied of the Angels and glorified Saints to follow Christ;
the Graves shall be emptied of the dead Bodies of the Saints to meet Christ. 1
These. 4.14. Those that sleep in Jesus, shall God bring with him. They shall be
brought from death to life, to be presented to Jesus Christ. Christ shall come
in his own Glory, as he is the Son of God; and thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, Luke 9.26. And he shall come in the Fathers glory; that is, he
shall come in that Glory the Father has put on him, as his Righteous Servant.
Phil. 2.10, 11. God has exalted Christ, and given him a Name above every Name,
that at the Name of Christ every knee should bow, and every tongue should
confess that Jesus is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. The Father is
glorified in the glory of Christ. And it is further said, Luke 9.26. That he
shall come in the glory of the holy Angels. They shall be Christ's Servitors,
shall attend on his Nod, and wait at his beck, and be ready to fulfill his
pleasure. And what terror may this truth speak to the wicked, that mighty
Angels shall be Reapers to cut them down, and execute the Sentence of Christ
upon them? And what comfort may this truth administer to the Godly, that mighty
Angels shall gather them to Christ? They shall not miscarry, because the Angels
shall find them out and present them to Christ, as those that will be justified
by him, and enjoy communion with him. 4. In what manner will Christ appear? It
is said in a flame of fire. Our Translators render it, in flaming fire.
Christ's coming will be terrible to the Unbelieving World; his frowning Face
will then be unveiled, his punishing Arm will then be made bare. His fury will
then come up into his Face, Ezekiel. 38.18. Long meekness and patience will end in
severity. Sinners do weary out the patience and Long-Suffering of God, that he
can bear no more, no longer, Jer. 44.22. He is even weary of repenting, Jer.
15.6. because Sinners are not weary of sinning.

Doct. 4. Christ will be Revealed in flaming fire. 1. That he will be so
Revealed in flaming fire. 2. The Causes of it. 3. The dreadful Effects of it.

1. That the Lord Christ will be Revealed in flaming fire. 1. His eyes will be
as a flame of fire, Rev. 1.14. to discern and discover the most secret
wickednesses, and the hidden things of darkness, Eccl. 12.14. He will come
burning with anger, his lips will be full of indignation, and his tongue as a
consuming fire, Is. 30.27, 28. He will speak to Sinners in his anger, and vex
them in his sore displeasure; he will speak hot, burning devouring words. Let
them be slain in my presence, Ps. 2.5. Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire.
In this Sentence his Tongue is like consuming fire. Behold the Lord will come
with fire, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire,
Is. 66.15. His Throne will be like the fiery flame, and his Wheels as the
burning fire. Christ's Throne has Wheels of Fire, to pursue fugitive and
guilty Offenders. 4. From this Throne a fiery stream issues, and comes forth
to punish the Wicked; as from the Throne of God, and the Lamb, a pure River of
Water of Life proceeded, clear as Crystal, to refresh the Saints. As the same
Sun, at the same time, scorches some parts of the World, and revives and chears
other parts with his more benign beams and rays, the Heaven of the Blessed, and
the Hell of the Damned, will come from the same face of God, as smiling, or as
frowning, Ps. 16. last.

2. Why will Christ come in flaming fire? It is because his abused Grace is
turned into fury; he knocked, but Sinners would not open to him. They have shut
out Righteousness, Salvation, and Eternal Life, from themselves; and they have
detained Sin, Satan, and Death, and shut them into their own Souls. Christ
called, but they would not answer; he stretched out his hands full of Gifts,
and Spiritual Blessings, and no Man regarded. They would not come to Christ,
that they might have life, John 5.40. They would not be gathered under his
Wings, that they might have safety. They would not enter into his Fold, that
they might be saved; go out and in, and find Pasture. They would not repair to
his House, that they might find rest; or press into his Kingdom, that they
might obtain a satisfying Feast at his Table, and an eternal Glory in his
Throne. They would not kiss the Son with a kiss of Faithful Homage and
Obedience, therefore he becomes angry; yea, his anger rises up to fury, and
breaks forth as Fire, so that there is no quenching of it. Sinners have been
loading Christ with contempt, affronts, provocations, all their days: They have
been Treasuring up Wrath, the Storm has long been a gathering; Offenders have
long been bringing Fuel to the Fire during their whole time, and God will be
blowing it up during his Eternity. They thought Christ did not see, or observe
their Iniquities; that he would not resent, and could not punish their
Transgressions: But Christ comes now in flaming fire to show the height of his
anger, his fixed purpose to punish, and his power to revenge. As God turned
Fallen Adam out of the Earthly Paradise, a second Adam comes in a flame of
Fire, to exclude Unbelievers, and Impenitent Sinners, from the Heavenly
Paradise. 3. Consider the dreadful effects of this flaming Fire; it will break
forth, and take hold of the Creatures, and kindle a Conflagration both in the
upper and lower World. The Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat; as if Metal should be melted, and distill
in scalding burning drops. The Earth, and the Works of it, shall be burnt up:
The Earth is the Home of the Wicked, the Creatures they have doted on, and made
them as their Idol Gods. And how dreadful will this be to the Ungodly, to see
their House, their Home, their Heaven, their Idol Gods, to be burnt up
together? That the Creatures that were once Food to their Lusts, shall now
become Fuel to the Fire of God's Anger? As the Philistines left their Images,
their Idols, and David and his Men burnt them, 2 Samuel 5.21. so Sinners must
leave their Heaven, and all their Idol Gods below, and God will burn and
consume them.

2. This Fire will not stop here; the Scripture joins the burning of Heaven and
Earth, and the Perdition of ungodly Men together. 2 Pet. 3.7. The heavens; and
the earth, that are now by the same word, are kept in store, reserved unto
fire, against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men. Shall the
Traitors House be burnt, and the Traitors themselves escape? Shall the
Creatures, that have been but passive Instruments of sin, be consumed? And
shall the active Agents go Scot-free? Shall those that have been Pressed,
forced Soldiers, suffer such hard things? And shall the Volunteers in this
wicked War against God be exempted from punishment? The Heavens and the Earth
fly from the face of the Judge sitting on his white Throne, and their place was
found no more. If the defiled Creatures could not brook or bear the angry face
of the Judge, what shall become of the defilers of them? It is Men that have
perverted and abused the Creatures, contrary to their natural inclinations and
tendency, to serve their Lusts, and fight against God, therefore the most
dreadful, scorching, and lasting Fire, must be their Portion and Punishment.
God says, Deuteronomy. 32.22. A fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn to the
lowest Hell; it shall follow and pursue its fuel thither. God says further,
This fire shall consume the earth and its increase. These words may well
expound the Text of Peter, 2 Pet. 3.10. That the earth, and the works of it, or
therein, that is, its fruits and increase, shall be burnt up. This Fire shall
inflame, and burn the very Foundations of the Mountains. If strong Mountains
cannot withstand this Fire, how shall weak Sinners resist it? The same Fire
that burns Heaven and Earth, shall pursue Transgressors, as its most proper,
kindly, and perpetual Fuel. Immortal Criminals ever dying, yet never dying
Sinners, shall be the Fuel of it, and an eternal God shall blow up the flame
over them, Is. 30.3.3. This fire will be dreadful: For, 1. It is the Fire, this
is proper to, and will go forth against the Enemies, Is. 26.11. The fire of
thine enemies shall consume them; that is, the Fire that shall burn against,
and prey on Enemies. So it is said, Fiery indignation shall devour the
Adversaries, Heb. 10.27. Those that are the Fuel of this fire, they are such as
were God's Enemies in time, and will continue his Adversaries to Eternity, and
so be fit objects of his Fury. 2. This Fire shall burn to the utmost, it shall
put forth its zeal to the utmost, (...), Heb. 10.27. The zeal of Fire, as the
blackness of darkness, Jude 13. does terribly set forth the privative part of
Hell; so the zeal of fire does dreadfully express the positive part. God will
punish with the glory of his power, 2 These. 1.8. that is, with his power put
forth most gloriously. These expressions, the zeal of fire, and the glory of
God's power, do illustrate one another. 3. This fire it will torment, but it
will never refine. Never was, nor can any be brought to repentance by the fire
of Hell. Sinners will continue obstinate in Sin, and God's heart will be
hardened, his bowels be shut up; he will be fully resolved to punish. 4. This
Fire will come immediately from God and Christ, 1. From the face of God, 2
These. 1.4. (...), from the face of the Lord. So they are said to fall into the
hands of the living God, Heb. 10.31. He does punish them immediately. God has
to do with them, Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thy hands be strong, can thy heart endure in
the day that I shall have to do with thee? The hands of Sinners cannot be
strong to resist or keep off punishment; neither can their hearts be stout
enough to endure and stand under it. Can Stubble, Chaff, Tares, resist a God
that is consuming fire? Heb. 12.29. Christ will kindle this Fire, and heat the
Souls of Sinners, as an Oven. As Satan's temptations, as his suggestions, as a
Baker, Hos. 7.4, 6. and Men's own Lusts, did sinfully heat this Oven, so
Christ's wrath will, in a way of Righteous punishment, heat it. It is said of
Christ, Psalm. 21.8, 9. That his hand shall find out all his enemies; his right
hand shall find out all that hate him; thou shall make them as an fiery Oven in
the time of thine anger. 5. This Fire will. eat up the Adversaries, Heb. 10.27.
it will be eating of Adversaries continually, yet never totally devour them. It
will be eating of them to Eternity, and never make a full end of them. That
Fire that devoures, will also salt the Subject it preys on, that it shall be
preserved to Eternity. Sinners are said not to fall into the hand, but the
hands of God: Both his hands, all his power is employed for their misery. As
there is a punishing Hand, so there is a supporting Hand, to bear up the Sinner
to endure torments to Eternity; Stubble and Chaff, Tares and Thorns, could
never hold out as Eternal Fuel to the Fire of God's wrath, were there not an
Eternal God, and an Eternal Power to support the Damned. 6. Sinners shall be
tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14.10. This
answers those words of Christ, Let them be slain in my presence, Luke 19.27.
Though Christ be a Lamb, yet we read of the wrath of the Lamb; and that great day
of his wrath will come, Rev. 6.16.17. The Lamb will look on the torments of the
wicked, and will not commiserate them, or relent in the least toward them. The
Lamb will look on their torments, and will rejoice at them, and be much pleased
with them, Rev. 7.14. They that neglected to wash their Robes white in the
Blood of the Lamb, Christ, in honor to himself, will stain all his Raiment;
their blood shall be sprinkled on his Garments, and this will render his
Apparel as a Victorious Conquering Captain, glorious, Is. 63.1.3. Christ will
never lessen, or put out this Fire: It is a Fire to punish perverse Rebellious
Creatures, hardened and Implacable Enemies; a Fire of Jealousy against
Adulterous Souls.

USE 1. This Truth may inform us how much Men's Sins, and obstinate Unbelief,
does alienate, and transform the Lord Jesus Christ: That he, that is styled
Love, should be Revealed in flaming Fire: That he, whose Office is to be a
Mediator, to quench Wrath, to make Peace, should come to pour out Fury: That
he, who beseeched Men to be Reconciled to God, and wooed them to be Espoused to
himself, should now come to Execute Vengeance: That he that long and often did
knock, and call Sinners to open to him should now rise up, shut the Door, and
be deaf to all the knocks and beseeching of Sinners, Luke 13.26. That he who
spread out his Hands, and stretched out his Wings, to call and gather Sinners
to himself, does now shut them out from himself, and expose them to an Eternal
Storm of Vengeance: That he who once acted as a Physician, to heal, should now
come to destroy: That he that is a Redeemer to others, should come now to bind
obstinate Sinners in Chains, and cast them into Prison, and subject them to
Eternal Bondage under the second Death.

USE 2. This may strike a Terror into Impenitent Sinners.

If Christ will come in flaming Fire, what then will become of Stubble fully
dry? What will those suffer that are but Chaff? That are Reprobate Silver? And
that are but Dross? Ps. 119.119. Vessels of wrath fitted for Destruction? When
the Harvest of the Earth is ripe, when the Grapes of the Vine of the Earth are
fully ripe, the Sickle must be thrust in, and made use of, to reap the Harvest,
and cut the Grapes, that they may be cast into the Wine Press of the wrath of
God, Rev. 14.15, 18. Tares, barren, and dry Trees, must be fuel to this flaming
fire, Matt. 3.10.

USE 3. Endeavor to prevent destruction by this flaming Fire.

O make sure that you shall not dwell with Consuming Fire, that you shall not
inhabit with Everlasting Burnings. O come to the Mediator, that he may make
peace. O come to the Blood of sprinkling, that it may speak, and plead for your
Pardon. Fly to Christ, that you may be found in him, Ps. 3.9. and so may find
mercy with God, and may be found in peace, and your Faith may be found to Honor
and Glory at the Appearing of Christ. It is the Blood of Christ that must
quench the Fire of God's wrath; and it is the Spirit of Christ, as mortifying,
as sanctifying, that must pull away the Fuel of this Fire. There is a sweet and
gracious Promise, Is. 1.25. I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge
away thy Dross, and take away all thy Tin. How full, how rich, and
comprehensive, is this Promise, that the Dross of Profaneness, and the Tin of
Hypocrisy, shall be purely purged away? If open Sin, and secret Hypocrisy, be
removed, the Euel of this Eternal Fire will be put away. We must be put into
Christ's Refining Fire, that we may not be exposed to God's Consuming Fire. If
Christ now appear for you in Heaven, Heb. 9.23, 24. he will not appear against
you in the great Day. Those he has made Righteousuess and Sanctification to, he
cannot Condemn; he will not destroy at his Appearing.

5. For what end will Christ be Revealed in Flaming Fire? It is thus expressed,
He comes in a Flame of Fire, (...), giving Vengeance. 1. He that is a merciful,
and gracious God, yet will have no other gift to bestow on impenitent
Unbelievers. Though Mercy belongs to God, which he will Exercise toward his
People; though Forgiveness belong to him, which he will bestow on penitent
Believers, yet only Vengeance belongs to God, to be executed on hardened
Transgressors, Heb. 10.30. Ps. 94.1, 2. He has no other Attributes but Justice
and Power, Romans 9.22. to be glorified in them. 2. This is an Impoverishing
Gift, when Christ gives Vengeance, the one Talent shall be taken away, Matt.
25.28. All that the Souls of Sinners do Lust after shall depart; all the things
that are dainty and goodly shall depart, and they shall find them no more at
all, Rev. 18.14. 3. This is a Formenting Gift; it is a Cup of trembling, a Cup
of fury, If, 51.21, 22. it is a Cup of red Wine, and full of mixture; all
bitter, all fatal, deadly Ingredients, are squeezed into, joined, and are
rempered in this Cup, yet it is without mixture, not one drop of Mercy or
Kindness in it, but it is pure Wrath and Severity, as if all the strongest,
most griping, tormenting Poisons, did meet in one Cup, Rev. 14.10. and there
was nothing to antidote or allay their deadly force and operation. 4. This is a
Gift they must receive, they cannot decline, avoid, or refuse. Jer. 25.15, 28.
Take the Wine-cup of this fury at my hand, and cause all the Nations, to whom I
send thee, to drink it. If they refuse to take the cup and to drink, then shall
thou say unto them, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, ye shall certainly drink. I
may allude to this Text, Though Condemned Sinners do loath the bitter and
dreadful Cup, that God gives to them, though they may recoil, start from it, and
refuse it, yet they shall certainly drink it. 5. This is a Gift that is Debt
and Wages, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. So God is said to repay fury,
to repay recompense, Is. 59.18. and to render his anger with fury, and his
rebuke with flames of Fire. We are commanded to render to all their dues, Romans
13.7. Misery and punishment is due to Sinners, if Christ should not pay it he
would not be true to his Word, or just to himself. Tribulation and anguish
belongs to every Soul that sins, Romans 2.9. We are bid to owe nothing to any man
but love, Romans 13.8. And this is a Debt that must be always paying, and yet can
never be fully discharged; so God owes Sinners enmity, and vengeance, and this
Debt will be paying, and yet never be wholly paid off, or discharged to
Eternity. What Presents do Sinners make to, or what Gifts do they bestow on
God? What Fruit did God's Vineyard yield to him? Were they not sour, and wild
grapes, grapes of gall, and bitter clusters? Wine that is the poison of
Dragons, the cruel venom of Asps? Deuteronomy. 32.32, 33. What crop, or harvest, does
barren, and bad ground, yield to the Husbandman, but briers and thorns? Heb.
6.8. How Righteous is it then, that Christ should give vengeance to them? Deal
out blows, stripes, and wounds to them, and that for ever? Christ offered them
Mercy once, and they would not receive it, but he will give them Punishment, he
will show Severity to them, and they shall not be able to decline, refuse, or
reject it. Sinners would not do Christ right, would not give him their hearts,
Prove. 23.26. They would not give him glory Jer. 13.16. Christ must therefore
inflict punishment on them, and give vengeance to them. If Men will not give
God, and Christ glory, Christ will get honor on them whether they will or no.
Compare those two Scriptures, Jer. 13.16. Give glory to the Lord your God. And
that in Exodus 14.17. I will get me honor on Pharaoh, and all his Host. Those
that will not give Christ glory by repenting and believing Christ will get
Honor by pouring out his fury, and executing vengeance on them. Ezekiel. 28.22. O
Zidon, in thee I will be glorified, they shall know I am the Lord, when I shall
have executed judgments in her. The day of vengeance is in Gods heart, Is.
63.4. And the strokes of Justice shall shortly be dealt out by Christ's hands.
The whirlwind of the Lord will go forth in fury, it shall fall grievously on
the head of the wicked, Jer. 23.19. 6. But on whom will Christ take vengeance?
This Text informs us, it is on all that know not, and obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ. As it is life eternal to know the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John 17.3. so this causes death eternal to be
ignorant of the true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Those that hear
the Gospel, and do not listen to it, and receive it, are guilty of a wilful and
affected Ignorance of God, and Christ. The light shines, but they come not to
it; yea, they shut their eyes against it, Matt. 13.15. and so concur with Satan
to promote their own destruction. The Devil blinds their minds, 2 Cor. 4.4.
lest they should believe, and they close their own eyes, lest they should see
with their Eyes, hear with their Ears, understand with their Hearts, and so
should be converted, and God should heal them. How guilty are Men before God,
who imprison, and shut in Natural Light? Romans 1.18. and exclude, shut out,
Supernatural Lights. The natural man receives not the things of the spirit,
for they are foolishness to him, 1 Cor. 2.14. The blindness, folly, and vanity
of their minds, is as a dark Lanthorn about the Candle of Natural Light, to
hinder it from shining out in their Words and Actions: They detain, and hold it
under unrighteously: Their Lusts are too hard for their Light, and do Rebel
against it. And Men come not to that Supernatural Light, that shines in the
Gospel, lest their deeds should be reproved, and themselves condemned. Though Men
may please themselves with Notional, and Speculative Knowledge, as it may swell
their Pride, and commend them to the Esteem of Men, yet when it should touch
and wound Conscience, affect the Heart, be reduced to Practice, and reform the
Life, then they hate knowledge, Prove. 1 29. Thus those two Texts are to be
reconciled, Is. 58.2. They seek me daily, and delight to know my ways. Yet this
is charged even on Israelites, That they hated Knowledge, and would not choose
the Fear of the Lord; they did not like to please, fear, worship, and serve God
in sincerity.

Quest. But is there no distinction of Persons meant in these words? Are they
to be understood of the same Unregenerate Persons within the visible Church,
that both know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ?

Answ. It is true, that there are Carnal, Unconverted Persons within the
Church, that may be said neither to know God, nor yet to obey the Gospel of
Christ. Eli 's Sons, though they were Priests, are said not to know the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.12. And the Jews are thus charged, Through deceit they refuse to know
me, says the Lord. Jer. 9.6. Either they thought they had found some better
Good, some sweeter Portion than God, or that the knowledge of God would disturb
their Peace, and imbitter their Pleasures and Lusts to them; and thus through
deceit they did refuse to know God. God complains, That his People are
destroyed for lack of knowledge, Hos 4.5, 6. It may be Day without, as Men are
under a clear dispensation of the words of Reconciliation, Righteousness and
Salvation, yet it may be Night within, by reason of the blindness of the Mind,
and obstinacy of the Will. If Men did rightly know God, they would trust in
him, Ps. 9.10. and set their love on him. Ps. 91.14. They that know Gods name,
are said to give their hearts to him, to set their love on him. But it is
apparent, that the Trust of many, called Christians, is withheld, and their
love withdrawn from God. They cast God himself, and his Word too, behind their
backs, Psalm. 50.17. and therefore do not know God. If they did indeed know the
perfect Holiness of God, the Purity of his Word, the strictness of his Law, the
Severity and Terror of his Threatenings, they would fly to Christ, submit to the
Righteousness of God, obey the Gospel, and Trust on the Lord Jesus, both for
Reconciliation and Sanctification, Matt: 5.6. It is too evident, that all
Unconverted Persons in the Church, though called Christians, do not know God,
Their Light does not shine before men, Phil. 2.15, 16. And they do not hold
forth the Word of Life in their Conversations, Psalm. 10.4, 3. They do not think
of God, he is not in all their thoughts, Ephesians. 2.2. They do not trust in him.
They do not love God. Christ says to the Jews, I know you, that the love of
God is not in you, John 5.42. They delight not in the Almighty, Job 27.10. they
fear not God. My fear, says God, is not in thee, Jer. 2.19. There is no fear
of God before their eyes, Romans 3.18. They lightly esteem of God, are unmindful
of him, and forget him, Deuteronomy. 32.5, 18. They do not seek after God, draw near
to him, converse and enjoy communion with him, Romans 3.11. If Men designed to
please God, would they pass the bounds that he sets to them? Ephesians. 2.2. break
the yoke he puts on them? Would they affront and reject his Authority? Would
they make God's Laws void, and live in the open and notorious breach of his
Commands? If Men did know God, could they allow themselves in Envy, Hatred,
Malice? In Cursing, Swearing, Lying, Stealing, Whoredom, Adultery? Could they
go on in vain, unprofitable Talks; yea, in filthy and rotten Communication, in
Wanton and Lascivious Language? Could Men be so unjust one to another, as to
Plow away one another Land at Seed-time, and to cut over their Furrows, and
take away their Neighbors Corn at Harvest? Could Men so gripe, and oppress one
another? Could they live without Prayer, and not call upon God in their
Families? Would they so neglect their Children? Not Teach, Instruct, and
Educate them for God, but rather yield, and give them up to Satan, by leaving
them under the Power of Darkness, and the Law of Sin? Could they so connive at
their Sins, and not severely check and chastize them for, and restrain them
from their Vices, if they did know God? If Men neither own God as a Father, and
do not acknowledge Men as Brethren, do not all these Evils loudly proclaim, and
strongly evidence, that many, called Christians, do not know God? Therefore
Christ will come to Execute Vengeance on them; to thrust them into a dark,
dreadful Prison, and to cast them into a Furnace of unquenchable Fire.

But this expression, those that know not God, does mainly and chiefly concern
the Heathen World, Galat. 4.8. While the Galatians did not know God, they did
service to them that were no Gods. And the Corinthians were carried to Dumb
Idols, even as they were led. They did not know the right Object of Adoration,
but did Service to them that were no Gods by Nature. They did endow a false God
with their Religious Adoration. Many of the Heathen did think the World was
from Eternity, and never made: They did not acknowledge the Author of their
Being, or the end for which they were made. They sought after nothing but what
they should eat, what they should drink, and wherewithal they should be
clothed, Matt. 6.32. as if they were all Body, and there were no other Life but
this present Life. Now this is a heinous Sin for Heathens, not to know God, not
to seek after him. This is a great and inexcusable sin not to know, when there
are so many Witnesses that do testify for God. He has not left himself without
witness, Acts 14.16, 17. These Witnesses should be called and examined, Job
12.7, 8. Ask now the Beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the Fowls of the
Air, and they shall tell thee; or speak to the Earth, and it shall teach thee;
and the Fishes of the Sea shall declare unto thee. There is a great Cause
depending about the Being of God. When this weighty Matter is to be tried,
surely we should, by Meditation, call and ask the Witnesses, what they can
testify for God, his Being, Power, and Goodness?

2. There are so many Preachers that declare his Glory, and show forth his
Handiwork. As this is Engraven on the Scriptures, God spoke me, so this is in
Capital Letters written on the Creature, God made me. That Hand that stretched
out that spangled Canopy above our Heads, and that has spread this flowery
Carpet that is under our Feet, day unto day utters speech, Psalm. 9.2. Every
day does abundantly utter something of God. And the same word is used of the
Righteous, Psalm. 145.7. I shall abundantly utter the memory of that Goodness.
Two things are here to be observed, 1. That the Creatures are such Preachers,
as never do keep silence, day unto day utters speech. It offers new Matter of
Contemplation and Admiration, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge. Every
succeeding Night instructs the preceding Night, and makes some farther and new
Discoveries of God, that should more enlighten the Minds, and affect the Hearts
of Men toward God. 2. The Creatures preach God in a Speech and Language, that
all Nations may understand, though their Languages are so confounded, and are
not understood by other People and Nations; there is no Speech, or Language,
where their voice is not heard. The most ignorant and brutish Barbarians, may
understand the Speech and Language that the Creatures do preach in. The
confusion of Babel does not hinder the Creatures from being understood in what
they publish, and declare of God.

3. There is a great Book in which Men may read God, Psalm. 19.4. Their Line is
gone forth into all the Earth, and their Words to the end of the Earth. The
Pages of this great Book are the Sea, the Heavens, and the Earth. And this Book
still lies open, and the most ignorant, illiterate, and unskilful, may read in
this Book, and understand somewhat of its Contents. This is a long Line that
reaches to the ends of the Earth; and it is written in such great and Capital
Letters, that all may read it.

4. Men are in the World as in a great Room all hung round with Glasses; he
that is in such a Room, may clearly and plainly see the Attributes, and
Excellencies of God. The invisible things of God, from the Creation of the
World, are clearly seen, Romans 1.20. They are evidenced and demonstrated to
Sense; yet so, that the Understanding does help the Senses, (...). They are
understood by the Mind, that contemplates the things that are made; and so
Sense, by the assistance of the Mind, does clearly see invisible things.

5. There are Garments, with which God is Clothed, and in which he may be seen,
Psalm. 104.2. David says to God, Who coverest thy self with Light, as with a
Garment. The Psalmist plainly refers to God's Creation of Light. Genesis 1.3. God
said let there be Light, and there was Light. God did then put on this bright
and glorious Creature as a Garment. As the Greatness, Majesty, and Glory of
Kings, is seen in their Clothing, so God is known how Powerful, how Good, how
Wise, he is by his Works. Scultetus says, (on Psalm. 104.) Vestis Dei
Contemplanda, si Deum Contemplari volueris; You must view God's Garment, if you
will Contemplate God himself, for God himself otherwise is invisible. We cannot
come to the naked Divine Essence, but we must see the first Cause clothed with
Effects in the Works of Creation and Providence: As when God comes forth to
execute Justice, he is said to Clothe himself with the Garments of Vengeance.
Isa. 59.17. He puts on the Garments of Vengeance for Clothing, and was clad
with Zeal as a Cloak. Has God Clothed himself with so many, and such glorious
Garments? Are his Attributes so visible in his Creatures? And are not Men
inexcusable, that know not God, who daily comes forth to us Clothed in his
Works of Creation and Providence, and thereby renders himself visible to us?

Quest. But what do these Witnesses, Preachers, Books, Glasses, Garments of
God, discover and make known?

Answ. The Being, the Eternity, Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God.

1. The Being of a God, the invisible things of God from the Creation of the
World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
Eternal Power and Godhead, or his Divine Being. Where there are Effects, there
must be a Cause; where there are Streams, there must be a Fountain. If you will
trace, follow, and pursue the smallest stream, it will at last bring you to the
Ocean; so follow the smallest Rivulet of Creature-Beings, and it will bring you
to God, the infinite Sea of Being. Where there is so great a House raised with
so much Art and Skill, there must needs be a Builder: None ever saw a House
built by Chance, or Accident, and what Folly and Madness is it to think, that
this great House of the World was built by a Casual, yet Lucky meeting of
Stones together? The Creatures are not of themselves, and therefore cannot be
from Eternity. That only that is Infinite, Omnipotent, All wise, can be from
Eternity; Creatures are not so, and therefore cannot be from Eternity. Ask any
Man living, did you make your self, none can be so impudent to affirm that he
made himself. And there is the same Reason against his Father; or any other
Man, that he did not make himself; therefore Men must necessarily come to a
First Man, and to a God that made him. Thus the Creatures do demonstrate the
Being of a God.

2. The Creatures declare the Eternity of God. He that made all things must
necessarily be before them. Col. 1.17. He is before all things, and by him all
things were made and consist, Col. 1.16, 17. From everlasting to everlasting he
is God, Psalm. 90.2. If God were not from Eternity, the World could not have had
a beginning, or any Creature have been formed.

3. The Creatures proclaim the power of God, Romans 1.20. his eternal power. Men
speak words, but God speaks things; by his word he calls things that are not,
Romans 4.17. And their answer is to rise, spring up, and exist; that which is
nothing, yet hears and obeys God. God said let their be Light, let the Earth
bring forth Trees, Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, and it was so; and yet the Earth
had no Seed of these things in it self, Genesis 1.11, 12. And as God speaks
Creatures, so he breaths the Soul, Genesis 2.7. God breathed into man's nostrils
the breath of life, and he became a living soul. And God writes in the Minds
and Wills of Men; none but he can reach, or come at these Tables, and write in
them. And God does not as Men, write Syllables, and Words, but he writes new
Principles, Habits, Dispositions, and Inclinations; he writes Light in the
Mind, and Love in the Will. Consider of these three glorious Effects of the
power of God, That he speaks Creatures, breathes Souls, writes new Principles
and Inclinations in the Soul. The power of God gloriously shines in the Work of
Creation.

1. That he made all things out of nothing. Heb. 11.3. Things which are seen,
were not made of things which do appear. That is, They were made out of
nothing. There did not appear any eternal First Matter, out of which God made
all things. Other Artists do not make their Matter, but they must have it made
to their Hands, but God made all things out of nothing.

2. God made all things: By the Word of his Power, Psalm. 33.6. were the heavens
made, and all the host of them, by the breath of his mouth. Psalm. 33.9. He
spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast.

2. God made all things without any Assistant or Heiper, Isa. 44.24. I am the
Lord that makes all things, that stretches forth the Heaven alone, that
spreads abroad the Earth by my self.

3. There was none that invented a Pattern, or drew a Scheme or Draught, to
direct God to Work by.

4. None gave God Counsel, or Instructed him, what he should do, or how he
should Work. Who has directed the spirit of the Lord, or being his counselor
has taught him? With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught
him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and showed to him the
way of understanding? Isa. 40.13, 14.

5. God hangs the earth on nothing, Job 26.7. This amazed Aristotle, (de
Mundo.) That if you did throw up a clod of Earth into the Air, it would not
hang there; and that yet, the whole Globe of the Earth, and Water, should hang
in the Air, and all things be born up by the Word of God's power, Heb. 1.2. It
is said of God, in Psalm. 95.4. In his hand are the deep places of the earth.
God's Hand carries the whole Globe of the Earth; its Foundation is laid in his
Hand, and is supported by him.

6. There is a daily strong confirmation of the History of the Creation, and
such an evident demonstration of the power of God, it plainly appears that it
is true, That all things came from nothing at first, because they daily spring,
and rise from such small, contemptible beginnings, as are next kin to nothing:
As that from an Acron should grow an Oak of above twenty four Tun of Timber. In
the New Forest it is said there was cut an Oak, that Top, Lop, Root, and Body,
was eight and twenty Tun of Timber. That from a small Grain of Mustard Seed,
such a Tree should grow as Christ speaks of, Matt. 13.31, 32.

4. The Creatures declare the Wisdom of God: That out of a Chaos, without Form,
Beauty, or Order, God should draw forth, and raise so beautiful a World.
Athenagoras (in his Legate. for the Christians) tells us, That Plato called the
World (...), The Art of God. The Apostle Paul uses a Word much to the same
Sense, 1 Cor. 1.21. The World, (...), in the Wisdom of God; that is, in the
Frame of Heaven and Earth, in which the Wisdom of God does so eminently shine,
by their Natural Wisdom, or Understanding, did not know God. The Wisdom of God
appears in the making of the World.

1. In making such various sorts of Creatures. Sixteen hundred sorts of Herbs
are said to grow in England; and four thousand distinct Vegetables, Plants, and
Trees, are reported to be, and grow in the Physic Garden at Oxford. None but
an Infinite Understanding could form the different Ideas of so many thousands
of sorts of Flowers, Trees, Birds, Beasts, and Fishes.

2. That Objects should be so exactly fitted to the Senses of Men; Colors to
the Eyes, fragrant Smells to the Nose, sweet and grateful Relishes to the
Taste, Sounds to the Ear; this could not be a Work of Chance, but of Infinite
Wisdom.

3. That God should form several Creatures, one higher than another, and
subordinate to another. God is said to build his Stories in the Heaven, Amos
9.6. There is the lowest, the middle, the highest Heavens, as several Stories,
in a great and high Building; so God builds up Stories of Creatures on the
Earth. There are Plants that are the lowest Story, Beasts that are a higher
Story, and Man that is the highest Story in this lower World; and these are
subservient to each other. The Plants and Grass seed the Beasts, and Beasts do
nourish Men; and they should devote themselves to the Service and Worship of
God.

4. That God should put such Shapes and Signatures on Herbs, to show something,
what they were made, and are good for. Eyebright has the figure and shape of
an Eye, and is an excellent Herb to cure the Maladies of the Eye. Pimpernel
has something like the Plague-spots under its Leaves, and is of excellent
Virtue against the Plague.

5. That Herbs, proper to cure Diseases, do naturally grow in the Country,
where the Disease reigns: As Scurvy Grass in England, and in other Northern
Countries, does spring up Naturally. And yet an Experiment has been made, and
much Art used, and Care taken, to Plant and Cultivate Scurvy Grass in some
parts of France, where the Disease is not known, and it would not grow.

6. Some Herbs do Figure the Part that they are good to Heal: As Adders-Tongue,
Hearts-Tongue, Rib-wort, Wood Sorrel, that has the shape of a Heart, is
accounted a good Cordial Herb.

7. How does God's Wisdom appear in placing the Sun, Psalm. 19.4. In the Heaven
God is said to have made a Tabernacle, or Dewlling Place for the Sun. That part
of the Heavens that is between the two Tropicks of Cancer and Capricorn, in
which the Sun still moves, or is, may be styled the Tabernacle of the Sun. This
is wonderful Wisdom, that the Sun should be so situated in the midst of the
Heavens, to communicate Light and Heat to the whole World successively: That
the Sun never goes beyond the Tropicks, but does in so orderly a way return to
us again, and observe such an exact Course in the lengthning or shortning of
the days, the Sun does not Rise or Set two days in the same place. God puts
this Question to Job, Job 38.12. Have thou commanded the morning? Have thou
caused the dayspring to know its place? And Psalm. 104.19. The Sun knows his
going down. The Sun does Rise and Set in different places every day, yet it is
said to know the place of its Rising and Setting, as if it had a Principle of
Reason and Understanding, that the Days and Heat should increase and decrease,
in such a stated course. That we do not pass from the extremity of Cold into
the scorching Heat of Summer, but through a Spring, that does partake of Gold
and Heat mixed: And that we do not pass out of the heat of the Summer, into the
extremity of Winter cold, but through an Autumn, that has a mixture of some
heat and cold. This is wonderful Wisdom, that God has clothed and beautified
the Sun with such a glorious Garment of Light, Psalm. 19.5, 6. Which is as a
Bridegroom coming out of his chamber; that God has given him so swift a
motion, that he rejoices as a strong man to run a race. His going forth is
from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it. O how
wonderful is God's Wisdom and Power, to make a Sun that should run round the
World every day with so swift a motion! That God should furnish the Sun with so
great a heat, that it is said there is nothing hid from the heat of it! It
pierces even to the Roots of Plants and Trees, and reaches into the bowels of
the Earth. This also is wonderful, That the Sun rising every Morning, does give
a new stamp and beauty to the Earth, and the Creatures in it, Job 38.13, 14.
The daylight takes hold of the ends of the earth; that is, the earth is turned
as clay to the seal. The Light is as a Seal that stamps the Earth; the Earth by
darkness loses its luster, (for then we cannot discern it) but by the Morning
light does (as to our sense) recover a new luster, as if Clay were new stamped,
and received a new impression by a Seal: and as if the Earth were decked with a
new Garment, and variety of Ornaments, and had a new beauty and luster put on
it. Manifold are Gods works, and in wisdom he has made them all, Psalm. 104.24.

5. The Goodness of God eminently appears in the making of the Creatures. The
earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 33.5. The Earth is said to be
full of the Mercy of the Lord, Psalm. 119.64. The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. This was wonderful
Goodness, that God prepared a place for Man's Habitation before he was made. God
commanded the Waters to be gathered together into one place, and the dry Land
to appear, that Man might have a place of Abode: The waters stood above the
mountains, they covered all, Psalm. 104.6, 7, 8. But God rebuked this as a
disorder; he gave forth a thundering Command to the Waters, at which they fled,
and hasted away. Two things here are observable:

1. That God brake up a deep and hollow place in the Earth, large enough to
receive such vast quantities of Waters, Job 38.10. I brake up for it my decreed
place, that the Earth should sink so deep as to entertain these huge Treasures
of Waters. It is somewhat probable, that as the Earth was depressed so low in
some places, so it did proportionably swell, and rise high in other places. The
low Valley, in which the deep Sea does lie, is answered by high Mountains, that
ascend so much above the plain ground.

2. This is observable, That God shut in the Sea; he sets bars and doors. God
commanded the Sea, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further; and here shall thy
proud waves be stayed, Job 35.10, 11. This is wonderful Power and Goodness, for
God to Park in, and Enclose, so wild and furious a Creature as the Sea is; and
when its Waves rise to be as high Mountains, God is said to tread on the Waves
of the Sea, Job 9.8. And God treads these swelling and mountainous Waves into a
Plain when he allys the Wind; causes the Storm to cease, and makes a Calm. God
has set a bound, that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to
cover the Earth. The sand is fixed as a bound to this furious Creature by a
perpetual decree, Jer. 5.22.

2. Here is more Goodness, that restrains the Waters that are over our Heads:
God binds up the waters in his thick clouds, and the clouds are not rent under
them, Job 26.8. We dwell between two Seas, a Sea below, and a Sea in the
Clouds. There are vast quantities of Waters in the Clouds, that would fall down
and overwhelm us, did not the power of God bear them up. For this reason, as
well as others, Gods strength is said to be in the clouds, Psalm. 68.34.

3. That God has made such variety, and abundance of Creatures, for Man's use:
Bread to strengthen, and Wine to cheer his Heart, Psalm. 104.15. Birds, Beasts,
and Fishes, for his use. God did not make Man till he had stocked a Farm, and
furnished a House for him. The earth is full of Gods riches, Psalm. 104.24.
which were made not to advantage, or enrich God, for he has need of nothing,
Acts 17.25. but Man was to be enriched by being made Proprietor and Possessor
of this great House and Farm.

4. That God should so graciously share, and divide the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and by turns communicate their light to all Nations, Deuteronomy. 4.19. The Sun shines
to some, and makes a day with them, when it is night with others. The Sun gives
a six Months day to some, and a six Months night to others; so the Moon and
Stars do by turns afford light to several parts of the Earth.

5. That God has made Beasts for burden, to carry Men, and their Goods, up and
down; to Draw and Plow their Ground. And God has made other Beasts, Birds and
Fish, to feed Men.

6. That God has not only made Herbs and Plants for Food, but also for
Medicine, Healing of Diseases, and Curing of Wounds.

7. That the Earth does not only serve us, with its surface and outside,
bearing under-Wood, Trees, Broom, Furzes, and Turf, but with its inside, Heart
and Bowels. There are several rich Mines, precious Stones, Peat and Coals,
growing in the Bowels of the Earth for Fuel. The Earth serves us with its
outside and inside, which should oblige us to serve God with our Souls and
bodies, with our Hearts and Lives.

8. Though particular Creatures, as Men, Beasts, Birds, Fish, Flowers, Herbs,
Trees, do die, yet God does not suffer any Species of Creatures utterly to
perish, and be extinguished, but new Creatures do spring up and rise in the
room of those that decay and perish, and so do fill up their place. Thou
sendest forth thy spirit, and they are created, thou renewest the face of the
earth, Psalm. 104.30. God's Spirit gives Life to the Creatures, he brings forth
a new Stock of Men, Beasts, Birds, Trees, and Plants, so that God's great Farm
is not left unstocked and unfurnished; God may be seen and felt in his
Creatures. Those that do not see God's Glory, that do not adore his Wisdom and
Power, that do not admire his Goodness, deserve to be consumed out of the
earth, and to cease their being here, Psalm. 104.4. yea, that Christ should come
in flaming Fire, to take Vengeance on them for their Ignorance of God: That
they close their Eyes against such a light as shines through the World, spreads
and diffuses it self among all the Creatures. Man was made to seek God, Acts
17.26, 27. And God endued Man with a Life of Light, John 1.40. Taught him more
than the Beasts of the Earth, and made him wiser than the Fowls of Heaven, Job
35.10, 11. and this was to fit Man to ask and inquire after God. Every Rational
Creature should say, Where is God my Master, that gives Songs in the Night? God
did not breathe a Soul into Man, that he should pant after the dust of the
Earth, Amos 2.7. but should breathe and pant after God, Psalm. 42.1, 2.

2. Christ will come in flaming fire, to take Vengeance on those that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Three things here I shall insist upon: 1.
I shall show what the Gospel is. 2. What it is to obey the Gospel. 3. How great
and heinous a sin it is, not to obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. What the Gospel is, I Answer, It is not only (...), a Promise, but (...),
Good News that this Promise is performed, Acts 13.32, 33. We declare unto you
glad tidings, how that the promise, which was made unto the fathers, God has
fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he has raised up Jesus
again. These glad Tidings are brought by the Son out of the bosom of the
Father, John 1.18. It is good News of the best Good, the sweetest Feast, the
richest Inheritance, the most Noble and Honorable Relation to God; and that
when a Sentence of Death might have been dreaded, and an Eternal Vengeance
felt. It is a Gospel of grace, Acts 20.24. A Gospel of salvation, Ephesians. 13.1,
24. The gospel of the kingdom, Matt. 4.23. Here is Salvation from the most
dreadful Evils, the possession of a glorious and everlasting Kingdom, and all
bestowed in a way of pure Grace.

2. What is it to obey the Gospel: we read of obeying the Truth, Gal. 3.1. and
what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God, 1 Pet. 4.17.
These expressions of obeying the Truth, and obeying the Gospel, do seem to
intimate that the Gospel is something more than a mere Promise. To obey the
Gospel, is to Believe and Repent; we must credit God's Testimony, 1 Cor. 2.1.
Is. 5.3. Romans 15.17. Believe the Report he gives, receive the Gifts that he
offers, else we reject the highest Mercy, and make God a Liar, 1 John 5.10. if
we believe not the Gospel.

2. We must also Repent of our Sins. To be called to Repent of our Sins, and to
have such sweet, great, and strong Encouragements to Repent, is certainly
Gospel Grace. Musculus (on Matt. 10.5.) says, He does not preach the Gospel
that does not preach Repentance. That Repentance is a Gospel Duty, these three
things do evidence and demonstrate.

1. It is a Call from an offended provoked Husband, to return from our
Whoredoms, and to be Loyal to him. Thou have played the harlot with many
Lovers, yet return again to me, says the Lord, Jer. 3.1. God acting according
to the Covenant of Works, would for ever divorce, and eternally punish Sinners
for their Adulteries, not call 'em to be reconciled.

2. The Call to Repentance is a Call from Christ as a Physician, Matt. 9.12,
13. The whole have no need of a Physician; I am come to call sinners to
repentance. Christ in this acts as a Physician, in calling Sinners to
Repentance, that they may be his Patients, and that he may heal and recover
them from their Diseases.

3. A Call to Repentance flows from God, and Christ as a Shepherd: He seeks out
that which was lost, and brings back that which was gone astray, Luke 19.10.
These are Acts proper to Christ as a Shepherd, and therefore Repentance must
needs be a Duty of the Gospel, Zech. 10.8. I will hiss for them, and gather
them, for I have redeemed them. Here is a plain Allusion to the Shepherds hiss,
to gather the Sheep that are scattered; and he gathers them, because he has
Redeemed them. This still more evidences, that a Call to Repentance is grounded
on the Gospel.

3. I shall show you what a heinous Sin it is not to obey the Gospel. 1. The
Gospel requires us to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 1.20. O what Mercy is it,
that Reconciliation is possible; we could not be Reconciled but by the death of
God's Son. We could not be healed but by his stripes, Isa. 53.5. God could not
make Peace with us, but he must make War with his Son, Zech 13.7. Awake, O
sword, against my shepherd, and smite the man that is my fellow. Devils are not
invited to be Reconciled, the blind Heathen World are not called to be
Reconciled. Let Heaven and Earth be Witness and Judge, whether it be not
reasonable that Sinners should be reconciled to God; that is Love, and
Goodness, that never did them any wrong; that is their Creator, Preserver, and
Benefactor: Is not the enmity of Men unjust, foolish, and pernicious to
themselves? Shall Grasshoppers leap up against Heaven? Is. 40.22. Shall Worms,
Job 25.6. contend with the Almighty? Shall Potters Vessels challenge a Rod of
Iron? Ps. 2.8, 9. Shall Stubble and Chaff, Briers and Thorns, set themselves in
Battle against devouring Fire? Has God found out a way to appease his own
wrath? Is. 27.4, 5. To cut off his own plea and advantages against us? Nahum
10.3. To end the dreadful Controversy between Heaven and Earth, and to sheath
his glittering Sword, and will you yet persist in your enmity, and continue the
War against God? Do you resolve to pluck down his wrath and vengeance on you?
Will the short, momentary pleasures of Sin, countervail eternal Torments? When
God calls you to be Reconciled, what is contained in it, but that you should
lay down your weapons of Hostility, and lay hold on Christ's atoning Sacrifice,
as the only means of Reconciliation? O shall not your Scum go out of you? Shall
not your Dross be separated from you? Shall not all the Transgressions be cast
away by you? Should you not return to your place, submit, and be subject to
God? You must turn from your Iniquity, God will never change and depart from
his Holiness. 2. The Gospel calls men to be Espoused to Jesus Christ, Cant.
8.8. The little Sister, that is, the Gentiles, are said to be spoken for; that
is, to give her Heart to, and set her love on Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 6.17. Christ
does woo you to be joined to him, to give your selves to him, and to be his, 2
Cor. 8.5. Is not Christ the most beautiful, rich, loving, and glorious
Bridegroom? Can you find any other Match, that may compare with him? He is
fairer than the children of men, Psalm. 45.2. He is white, and ruddy, and the
chiefest of ten thousands, Cant. 5.10. He has unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8.
He is love it self, Cant. 3.5. All power in Heaven and Earth is given to him.
He was dead, but he is alive, and lives for more, Matt. 28.18. Rev. 1.15. He
will never put you away or leave you a desolate disconsolate Widow. Is it not
amazing, that Beauty should woo Deformity? Riches solicit Poverty? Nobility
suit Vileness and Baseness, and yet be rejected? If you match not with Christ,
who shall pay your Debts? Protect and cover you from Arrests? Who shall make
you a Jointure, or provide you a House and Home in another World? Who shall
wash away your Guilt and Filth? Supply your Wants? Cloth and Cover your
Nakedness? If Jesus Christ be not your Husband, will you still dote on base and
beggarly Objects? Will you still go a Whoring from God? Psalm. 13.27. Will you
continue Aholah, dwelling in your own Tent, and broken off from the House of
God? Those that slight, and spurn at Christ's love, are they not worthy to feel
the scorching Fire of his wrath? Carnal Creatures do not love a Spiritual
Bridegroom; they rush into the embraces of carnal and present Objects, but
Souls consider not they must shortly be snatched out of the bosom of beloved
Objects, must be separated from them, and be for ever punished for their
Adulterous Embraces of them. 3. It is a heinous sin not to be willing to be
Christ's Patients. He is a Physician, Matt. 9.12. His Blood is a Sovereign
Medicine against the guilt of Sin, his Spirit is a mighty Antidote against the
power of Iniquity. Never was there such a Physician as Christ, that did Die to
provide the Medicine, and then rose again, and visits the Dead to apply it,
John 5.25. None can visit and recover the Dead but Jesus Christ; but who
regards, or minds, a cure for his Soul? Do not the wounds of Sinners more
rankle, fester, and putrify? Do not their Diseases grow stronger on 'em? Do not
their Lusts root deeper? Yea, are not Sinners so blinded, that they think their
Diseases to be Members necessary and profitable? How many do not account
themselves sick, but rather whole? Matt. 9.12, 13. The Jews, thought themselves
to be sound, and free from Spiritual Diseases. This highly provokes Jesus
Christ, that on such costly terms he became a Physician, and yet Men seel no
want, or need of him, John 3.14, 15. Though our diseases are dangerous, and
threaten us with eternal Death; though the cure seems to be so easy, that
Persons may look to Christ, and be rid of the deadly Poison of the Old Serpent;
a touch of Christ may heal the Spiritual Leprosy and our touching of Christ by
Faith, may cause our issue of Blood to dry up, yet Sinners see not, know not
the plague of their own hearts, they are pleased with their Dropsy, with
Thirst, their Feverish Fire, and burning Lusts; they think they should be
maimed, if their Members on Earth were cut off; and that their Lives would be
uncomfortable, if bereaved of the Pleasures of Sin; though their condition
without Christ be wholly desperate, yet they will not part with their Diseases,
but languish under them, pine away in them, and die eternally.

4. It is heinous Disobedience against the Gospel, that Men will not be
Christ's Guests, Mat. 22.1, 2, 3. The Jews were invited to a Marriage Feast,
made by the Father for his Son Jesus Christ, Mat. 22.1. Psalm. 18. ult. Psalm.
22.26. to partake of his Rest, his Pleasure, his Joy, his Glory; but Sinners
make light of the Cheer, though it be spiritual, suited to the nature and
duration of the Soul; though it be satisfactory, and will make the Hearts of Men
to live for ever, yet, as sick Persons, they abhor this dainty Meat, Job 33.20.
They lust after the Dainties of Carnal Delights, they are prepossessed with the
love of the World, and so do hasten to the Feast that Satan bids them to, but
they invent and make Excuses to blind their own Minds, and harden their own
Hearts, and to hold themselves back from this Feast; they lay out their Money
for that which is not Bread, and their Labor for that which satisfies not;
they must shortly fall under an eternal Famine of all Good, and then must eat
the bitter Fruit of their own ways and doings, and drink the Wrath of the
Almighty. This is a heinous Sin, that Men will not come to Christ's Feast, 1.
when they are not able to keep alive their own Souls, Psalm. 22.29. they have
nothing to sustain and support their languishing and dying Souls, but, as the
Prodigal, they are ready to perish with Famine. 2. This is a Feast made on a
Sacrifice, Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, let us therefore keep the
Feast, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Isa. 25.6. How precious, how costly is this Feast! 3. It
is a Feast of Marrow and fat things: here is Pardon and Justification through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ: here is Adoption, Salvation, a Kingdom of
Glory; God himself will be the Father and Portion of those that come to this
Feast; here are Wines well refined from all dross and dregs. 4. It is a Feast
made for all Nations, Hedges are plucked up, and Enclosures are thrown open,
this is a common Salvation, Isa. 25.6. Luke 14.23. 5. Christ's Ministers, as
they are to pluck secure Sinners out of the Fire, so they are to strive, and
compel them to come in to the Feast, Jud. 23 Luke 14.23.

5. This is affronting and highly provoking Disobedience to the Gospel, that
Men will not traffic and trade with Christ, that they will not be Christ's
Chapmen and his Customers, when 1. Christ's Goods are excellent and necessary:
We must be poor, without his Gold tried in the Fire; we must be shamefully
naked, without his white Raiment; we must be eternally blind without his
Eyesalve; we must starve, if we do not eat of his good things, and delight our
selves in the fat things offered: here is Milk for nourishment, and spiritual
Wine, as a most noble and generous Cordial; we may eat and not die, John 6.50.
Psalm. 22.26. we may eat and be satisfied, and our Hearts will live for ever. 2.
These Goods are brought near, Isa. 55.1. Come down to the Waters, as Goods
brought from a foreign Country to the Wharf, Key, or Shore of a Town or City;
and some are sent up into the City, to proclaim that the Goods are arrived, and
are to be had at the Waterside: The Blood of Christ is the Red Sea, by which
all Christ's spiritual Goods are imported into the World. 3. Christ keeps a
Market for the Poor, and none but he does so, Isa. 55.1. buy Wine and Milk
without money and price. Trade is driven by Money, or exchange of Goods, but here
neither Money nor Price, we part with nothing that does impoverish us or enrich
Christ. If there were Markets and Fairs kept for the Poor here in the World,
how would they be frequented? what flocking, what crowding would there be to
get to such Markets? yet how do Christ's goods lie by, as slighted and
neglected! 4. Christ counsels us to buy of him, and his Counsel should be a
Command to us, and lay a Necessity on us, but (alas!) how stupid and senseless
are Men, that provide no Treasure for their Souls or Eternity? they have no
Good to carry away with them, or to enjoy for ever, they seek not for their own
things, Luke 16.12. but content themselves with the things of another; so they
are only Stewards, not Proprietors; Riches are the things of another, but
Graces are our own things: but Sinners see not their own Wants and Poverty,
they understand not, prize not Christ's Riches and Fullness, Rev. 3.17. they are
contented to continue poor, as destitute of an inherent, and naked, as void of
an imputed Righteousness.

6. This stirs up Christ's Anger against, and plucks down his Vengeance on
Sinners, that when Christ comes near to them, knocks with Importunity, and
waits with much Patience, yet they will not open to Christ; He came to his own,
yet his own received him not, John 1.11. Luke 2.7. If Christ with his Body were
on Earth, would not they be accounted very unkind and inhuman, that would not
entertain and lodge Christ in their Houses? But yet do not thousands of nominal
and titular Christians shut Christ out of their Hearts? they suffer Sin, Satan,
and the World to keep possession, but they shut out the Prince of Life, the
King of Glory, the Heir of all things: they are not willing that Christ should
come in, subject all to himself, order and govern all for himself: Guilt,
Poverty, and Misery are shut into their Souls; Righteousness, Riches, Life are
shut out.

7. This is grievous Disobedience to the Gospel, that Men are not willing to be
made clean, or set free. 1. They are not willing to be made clean; As a
Fountain casts out her waters, so Jerusalem casts out her wickedness: O
Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? Jer. 6.7. When shall it once be? Is it
not most reasonable that Souls should be made clean? yet they return as the Dog
to his vomit, and as the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, 2
Pet. 2. last. God pronounces woe to those that will not be made clean, and will
you deceive your selves, and say, it shall be well with you? Christ tells us,
Except he washes us, we can have no part with him in the Kingdom of Glory, John
13.8. and will you give the Ly to Christ, and credit Satan, that you shall go
to Heaven though you are not washed? Can you thrust into the new Jerusalem, into
which no unclean thing shall enter, Rev. 21. last? Men sometimes promise fair,
and faintly resolve to cleanse themselves, but when shall it once be? they that
cleanse not away their Filth, must themselves be washed away, as Spots from the
Face of the Church, and be abhorred by God for ever. 2. Men are highly
disobedient to the Gospel, in that they will not be made free; they are fond of
their Fetters, and hug their Chains, as the Servant that rejected the benefit
of the Year of Release or Jubilee, saying, I love my Master, I will not go out
free, Exodus 21.5, 6. So Men love Sin, their old Master; when a better choice is
offered, they stick to their old and first choice; yea, they have chosen their
own ways, and their Soul delights in their abominations, Isa. 66.3. The most of
Men are like the carnal Israelites, satisfied with their Slavery: They said to
Moses and Aaron, Let us alone to serve the Egyptians, Exodus 14.12. So Sinners
would not be disturbed, they would be let alone to serve the Devil, and enjoy
their Lusts.

8. This is high disobedience to the Gospel, that Men will not have Christ to
reign over them; they are incensed, Isa. 45.24. they rage against Christ, Luke
19.14, 27. Psa. 2.1. but I may renew the Question that Pilate put to the Jews,
when they were so inflamed against Christ, What evil has he done? Mat. 27.23.
Christ calls Souls out of Prison, and from their wanderings and strayings, he
makes Men free from the Law of Sin and Death, and is this to do Evil? how
unreasonable is it that Men should be so disaffected toward, and so prejudiced
against the Kingdom of Christ, when he reigns to destroy the reigning power of
Sin, Satan, and Death, and to exalt his Subjects now to reign with him in the
Kingdom of Grace, and hereafter to sit in the Throne, and reign with Christ in
the Kingdom of Glory. O that Sinners should ever be so ungrateful to Christ,
and so injurious to their own Souls! how mild, benign, and gracious is the
Government of Christ? he rules not only as a Political Head that gives Laws,
but as a Natural Head that gives Life, and influences; he governs as a Husband,
Brother, and Savior: how reasonable therefore is it, that our homage and
subjection to him should begin in a Kiss of Faith and Love? Psa. 2. last. But
how provoking is this, that Men choose Sin and Satan a Murderer, and prefer him
Before a Savior? This is to renew and revive the Affronts put on Christ at his
Passion, and to choose Barabbas rather than Jesus. Those that would not have
Christ to reign over them for their Salvation, do set up Satan to rule over
them for their Destruction.

9. This is ungrateful, and highly provoking Disobedience to the Gospel, that
Men would have Christ to buy, yet to possess and enjoy nothing: They can be
willing Christ should hire them, and promise them a reward, but they stand idle
all the day long, will do no Work for Christ, they are idle, and barren in the
knowledge of Christ, yea, walk as Enemies to the Cross of Christ, while they set
up what he came to pull down, and keep alive what he came to destroy. Christ
has acted as a Shepherd, and does demand his price, Zech. 11.12. Surely Love,
Service, and Obedience is due to him, but Men put off Christ with an empty Name
of Lord, and with a dead form of Religion; they do not render the Fruits of a
Vineyard, or bring forth the Fruits of God's Kingdom; their Knowledge is cold,
idle and barren, as the light of a Glowworm, that is not sufficient to direct
a Traveller in his way. The Gospel should bring forth Fruit, from the first day
that Men know it, Col. 1.5, 6. it should be a Seal, to stamp the Image of God
on Men; it should be a Mould, to shape and fashion Men's Hearts and Lives, Romans
6.17. as the Sun rises, and Man goes forth to his work, Ps. 104 23. so when
Christ arises and shines in any Country, Men should go forth to all the work
of their heavenly calling; Knowledge should not only float in the Head, or be
imprisoned in the Mind, but should be a light to Men's Feet, and a Lamp to their
Paths, Psalm. 119.105. But how many nominal Christians do love darkness and hate
the light? they still love to wander, and in the broad day to follow Sin and
Satan; they do nothing of all that God commands them; they only stray, and work
Iniquity, and so deserve to be cast into outer darkness, Jer. 14.10. Jer.
32.23, 30. Mat. 8.12.

JEREMIAH IV. 3. For thus says the Lord to the men of Judah and Jerusalem,
Break up your fallow Ground, and sow not among Thorns.


IN the words we may observe, 1. a Speaker, the Lord: All Men should have an
Ear to listen, when the Lord has a Tongue to speak. 2. The Persons spoken to,
the Men of Judah and Jerusalem. 3. The Exhortation or Counsel given to them,
Break up your fallow ground. Three things are to be remarked in these words, 1.
That there were fallow grounds in Judah and Jerusalem, that were a People
chosen to be holy to the Lord, and that might seem to themselves a fruitful
Field, a pleasant and delightful Paradise. 2. This may also seem strange, that
they should be called to break up their fallow ground. What an humbling,
abasing Expression is this! they might think they had made a great progress in
Religion, and were advanced far toward a ripe Harvest of Righteousness, and
was not this to lower and set them back, to call on them to break up their
fallow ground? as though they had yet done nothing, had not yet begun or done the
first work in Religion, or taken the first step in the way of God, but were to
begin all anew, and set their hand to the Plough, to break up their fallow
ground. 3. This is observable, that this Exhortation is given to the Men of
Judah and Jerusalem, that were then the only Church of God: this intimates,
that in the Church only there is the spiritual Plow, the Plow-men, and the
right Seed to sow the Soil, and no where else; there is a direction and
dehortation, Sow not among Thorns. Some do think that if they hear Sermons,
read the Scriptures and good Books, and do some Actions materially good, that
this is Seed sown for a Harvest of Glory; but yet all is labor lost, if the
Ground be not cleansed, if the Soul be not purified from base Lusts and
Affections: these Thorns do bedwarf, rob, starve the good Seed, so that no
Fruit is brought to perfection. Holy Duties do not sanctify a carnal Man, but
are defiled by him. Hag. 2.13, 14 they that are unclean themselves do pollute
all they meddle with; the Plague that is in the heart infects thoughts,
intentions, words and actions, 1 Kin. 18.38. The foreskin of the Heart will
carnalize all we meddle with, Jer. 4.4. The words may vield us these two
Doctrines; 1. That the Hearts of unregenerate Men are like to fallow Ground. 2.
That it is their Duty to break up their fallow Ground. For the prosecuting of
the first Doctrine, I shall show why the Hearts of unregenerate Men are compared
to fallow Ground. 1. A fallow Ground is that which once was plowed and sowed:
Mankind in our first Parents were once sowed with original Righteousness,
beautified with the Image of God, and enobled with a divine life. The first
Tables that Moses received were the Work of God; and the Writing was the
Writing of God, Exodus 32.16. The Writings and the Tables seem to be created
together: so our first Parents had their Soil and spiritual Seed created
together; the Tables and the Writing were framed at once; the Law of God was
engraven on the Mind and Will of Adam and Eve: the Meal of the faculties of
their Souls was always leavened with holiness and righteousness; Man's Soul was
once sowed by, and became a fruitful field to God. 2. This is implied, that now
this holy Seed is killed or rooted out; as when Wheat and Barley is ripe and
cut, the stalks and root dies, and it will never bring forth any more Wheat or
Barley; so the Law of God is blotted out of, the Image of God defaced from, the
Life of God extinguished in our Souls, so that we shall never please God, or
bring forth any acceptable Fruit to him, if we are not broken up and sowed
anew: our Souls are like the second Tables that Moses brought to God, mere
blanks, till God does again write his Law in them.

3. As a fallow Ground ordinarily brings forth only Briars, Thistles, Thorns,
and so is useless and unprofitable to the Husbandman; so our Nature is so void
and destitute of what is good, so prone and inclinable to that which is evil,
that they that are in the Flesh cannot please God, To. 8.9. A corrupt Tree
cannot bring forth good Fruit, Mat. 7.18. Original Sin dwells in us, it dwells
alone, has possession of the whole Soul, and all its faculties, and it has
not only a House, but a Throne in us naturally; it works in us all manner of
Concupiscence, Romans 7.8. but in this Flesh of ours dwells nothing that is
good, Romans 7.18. but the Spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy and all
unrighteousness, Jam. 4.5.

4. As a fallow Ground must be plowed and sowed, else 'twill not bear Wheat, or
yield Bread, so our Hearts must be broken, and sowed with good Seed, else
Holiness will never root deep in the Heart, and spring up in the Life; we must
have the Law of God written in us, Jer. 31.33. we must have the Fear of God put
into us, Jer. 32.39, 40. and the Spirit of God, Ezekiel. 36.27. or else we shall
yield no Harvest of Righteousness or Obedience to God.

Use. 1. Be convinced of this, that you are a fallow Ground, that you have
Souls poor and empty of that which is good, and that your carnal Minds are
Enmity to God, are not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans
8.7. yea, though in some sense you may be said to be sowed, as the
Highway-ground, the Stony, the Thorny Ground were, Mat. 13.20, 21, 22. yet you
may be said still to be a fallow, because the Seed withers, is starved and
choked, so that no Fruit is brought forth to please and delight the heavenly
Husbandman.

2. Be humbled deeply for this, that you have so long continued a fallow, so
that God has had no Harvest of Righteousness, no sheaves or gleanings of good
Works: you have done nothing of all that God has commanded you, Jer. 32.23.
have only done Evil, and wrought Iniquity, Jer. 32.30. your thoughts have been
only evil, Genesis 6.5. your words evil, How can a corrupt generation speak good
things, Mat. 12.34? your actions evil, a corrupt Tree brings forth corrupt
Fruit, Matt. 7.17. The Prodigal that went into a far Country did neither
perform service to his Father, nor enjoy communion with him, Luke 15.13.

3. Do not remain a fallow Ground, it will be sad to enjoy no good hereafter,
for God to reap no Fruits of Righteousness from you, and you to reap no fruits
of Mercy from him: therefore be not contented to lie in the ruins of your
Falls, and not to be bettered or benefited at all by the Word of Grace, the
Gospel of Reconciliation: It will be bad for the Founder to melt in vain, Jer.
6.29. Because wickedness is not separated from you, and you refined from your
Dross, it will be sad for Christ and his Ministers to labor in vain, because
you are not gathered in; for the Dew and Rain to come often on you, and yet you
bring forth only Briars and Thorns, Heb. 6.8. O consider these following things:

1. Your fallow Ground is capable of manuring and improvement; as Isaac by
plowing and sowing in Canaan did make a great advantage to himself; that Land
which before did only yield Herbage, and feed his Flock, did now bear Corn, and
did nourish himself and his large Family; he sowed in that Land, and received
in the same year an hundred fold, Genesis 26.12. that is, he had reaped a hundred
bushels of Corn for one that he sowed: how was the ground advanced, from
feeding Cattle, to feed Isaac and his Family! so how is a Soul exalted and
enobled by spiritual Tillage, by being plowed and sowed! it brings forth Fruit
for Christ to gather and eat; Cant. 4. ult. Let my beloved come into his
garden, and eat of his pleasant fruits. Acts of moral Justice may profit Men,
may be beneficial to the Commonwealth and human Society, yet if they flow not
from a spiritual Spring, grow not on the root of love to God, they do not
please God, they are not accepted with him: The Fathers (as Vossius in his
History of Pelagianism tells us) did call these Opera Sterilia, barren Works,
because they had no tendency to, no influence on Eternal Life: but if you break
up the fallow Ground, are renewed by and sow to the Spirit, you may receive in
this life an hundred fold, and at last reap and inherit everlasting life, Mat.
10.29. Gal. 6.8. Judgment may dwell in your Wilderness, Isa. 32.16. and you
that were formerly altogether unprofitable, Romans 3.12. Philemon's Epist. may
become profitable, highly serviceable to God, greatly beneficial and useful to
Men; unclean Creatures may be washed, old and corrupt Creatures may be renewed,
Tit. 3.5.

2. Consider how bad it will be not to be plowed and sowed: This is threatened
as a terrible Judgment, That the Land of Canaan should keep its Sabbaths as
long as it lies desolate and cease from Tillage. Is it bad for the Ground to
lay desolate, to keep a Sabbath, to cease from Culture? how much worse is it
for the Soul to keep its Sabbaths, (not holy, but) carnal and profane
Sabbaths, while God's Plow does not break it up, nor his Seed be sowed in it?
Men then will be far from Righteousness, Isa. 46.12. will serve diverse Lusts
and Pleasures, and be without God in the World, they will choose their own ways,
and their Souls delight in their abominations. The Adversaries of the Jews, in
the Babylonish. Captivity, saw their Sabbaths, and mocked at them, Lam. 1.7.
but the great Enemy of Souls will rejoice at the idle and profane Sabbaths
that wicked men keep, when they cease to do good, and leave off Righteousness
in the Earth, Amos 5.7.

2. Those that are not broken up and sowed, will be Satan's Possession; as he
claims Strays as his, so he is the Lord of fallow Ground; Such are of their
Father the Devil, and his lusts they will do, John 8.44. It is sweet and
honorable to be God's Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9. but how dreadful is it to be
Satan's Husbandry! Satan will still be working in them, Ephesians. 2.2. and filling
of their Hearts, Acts 5.3. he will be sowing, planting, and grafting in and on
them; he will tutor his Nursery by continual suggestions and temptations; Satan
will still be serving his turn on, promoting his interest by, and accomplishing
bis designs in Souls that lie fallow: how bad will it be to keep Sabbaths, as
resting from spiritual tillage? This is to keep Sabbaths to gratify and
worship Satan; these Sabbaths are working days to please the Flesh, and rejoice
the Devil; such do the Devil's Will in time, and if Grace does not prevent,
they must suffer God's Will to Eternity.

3. Those that are as a fallow Ground do bitterly provoke God to anger, Hos.
12. last, They bring forth Grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter, Deuteronomy.
32.33. Can the heavenly Husbandman feed on and delight in such Grapes? does not
his Soul loath and abhor them? but as to good Grapes, are they not empty Vines?
Hos. 10.1. These fallow Grounds are like the barren Fig Tree; Christ hungered
and came to this Fig Tree, and found nothing on it but Leaves; this so provoked
Christ, that he cursed it, Mat. 21.18, 19. and said unto it, Let no fruit grow
on thee henceforward for ever; and presently the Fig Tree withered away. In
what danger are Souls that are barren Fig trees? Christ may curse them so, that
their Leaves may wither, their form of Religion decay and be utterly lost, a
Sentence may go forth against them, Cut them down, why should they any longer
cumber the ground? Luke 13.7. Those that are not Trees for Fruit, shall be
Trees for Fuel; The Tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire, Mat. 3.10. The Ground that after Rain and Dew have come
often on it, and yet it brings forth only Briers and Thorns, it is nigh to
cursing, and its end is to be burnt, Heb. 6.8.

4. If you continue a Fallow Ground, you will bring forth Fruit only to Death,
and fit your selves for Destruction, Romans 7.5. You will pile up fuel in the
Infernal Tophet, and fill the Treasury of God's wrath, Romans 2.5. as the
clusters are bitter, and so abhorred by God, so your Wine is the Poison of
Dragons, and the cruel venom of Asps, and so most fatal, pernicious and
destructive to your selves. As Men now drink in iniquity like water, Job 15.16.
so they must shortly drink of the wrath of the Almighty, Job 21.20. O therefore
cry mightily to God, that he would remember you in your miserable and lost
Estate. There is a sweet Promise that God makes to the Mountain of Israel,
Ezekiel. 36.8, 9. Behold I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and you shall be
tilled, sown, and yield your Fruit. O plead this word with God, put him in
remembrance of it: Confess you have long lain Fallow. Perhaps some of you have
kept a Sabbath of Years; yea, are come to a great Sabbatical Year. Forty nine
or Fifty Years you have ceased from Spiritual Tillage; you have been idle all
this while and done no work for God; you have been barren, and have brought
forth no Fruit to God; O will you not now send up strong cries to Heaven? Will
you not now wrestle mightily with God, that he would be for you, and turn to
you in Grace and Mercy, that you may be effectually filled, skilfully sown, and
plentifully bear Fruit to God?

Doct. 2. It is the Duty of Unregenerate Men to break up their Fallow Ground:
They should not be idle, or stand still, or be contented with their present
Barrenness, that God, who calls you to Act, can breathe Life, and put Strength
into you, to enable you to work. As God in the first Creation spoke to the
Earth, and said, Let it bring forth Grass, Herbs, and Fruit-bearing Trees, and
it was so as the Father commanded, and the Son was the Word; so the Holy Ghost
executed all. The Earth had no Seed of Grass, or Herbs, or Roots of Trees,
within it self, or power to bring them forth, yet Gods Word was as Seed then,
and gave a productive Power to the Earth: So God said, Let the waters bring
forth Fish to move in them, and Fowl that may fly above the waters and earth,
in the open Firmament of Heaven; and though the waters had no spawn of Fish, or
Eggs of Fowl in them, yet the Word of God was powerful, effectual, and soon
fulfilled. So Christ is the Resurrection and the Life, and the beginning of the
Creation of God; he can quicken dead Souls, recover and heal a withered arm and
hand, Mark 3.5. so that it shall be stretched out, and enabled to hold the
Plough, and carry on this Spiritual Tillage, that is required and called for in
the Text.

For the prosecuting of the Doctrine, three things are to be inquired into. 1.
What it is to break up our Fallow Ground. 2. How, or by what means it must be
broken up. 3. Why it is necessary it should be broken up.

1. What is it to break up our Fallow ground? I Answer: It is to be soundly
convinced of, deeply affected with, thoroughly to be broken and humbled for Sin,
and the danger and misery of our Natural State. This is a Work hard, bitter,
and grievous to Nature, to set God's Plow into our very Souls; to cut and wound
them, to make deep and long Furrows in the very Soil of our Hearts. We read of
renting of the heart, Joel 2.13. and of a broken heart and contrite spirit, Ps.
51.17. This breaking up Fallow Ground, is expounded in the next Verse to the
Text, by men's circumcising themselves to the Lord, and taking away the foreskin
of the heart. Jer. 4.4. This cutting off the foreskin of the Heart, is cutting
up the Turff of our Soil, that hinders the good Seed from taking deep root
downwards, and springing upwards. The Jews were circumcised in Infancy, but the
thing signified does not always go along with the Sign, they yet wanted the
internal and noblest part of that Ordinance, they were circumcised in flesh,
but yet uncircumcised in heart, Jer 9. last. Though Circumcision in the Flesh was
an external act, whereby Men did acknowledge them Jews, and Members of the
visible Church, yet the Circumcision of the Heart is the Sign, and internal
Note, whereby God does recognize, and own Men to be vital Members of his
Church. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, that love the Lord thy
God, Deuteronomy. 30.6. God would give the inward and noblest part of this Ordinance.
And if Circumcision was a Sign and Seal of God's Circumcising the Heart, it
must needs be a Sign and Seal of the Covenant of Grace. Those that do partake
of the outward Sign of the Covenant, are thereby obliged to seek after the
inward, and best part of that Ordinance they have passed under, and have been
the Subjects of. They are not to rest in this, That they are circumcised in the
Eye, and account of Men, but they are to pass further, and circumcise
themselves to the Lord; that is, so to circumcise themselves, that they may
appear to, and be owned by God as circumcised. So they were to circumcise
themselves, that they may be inclined toward, and devoted to the Lord. This
Soul Circumcision, this taking away the Foreskin of the Heart, is the right
breaking up of our Fallow Ground. The Act of Repentance and Faith is ours, but
the Grace whereby we Repent and Believe, is from God and Christ, 2 Timothy 2.25.
Acts 5.31. So it is our Duty to Circumcise our Hearts, but in all our
Endeavors to perform it, we must look to the Promise of God, Deuteronomy. 30.6. and
eye the Grace of our Lord Jesus, who circumcises the Heart, in causing it to
put off the Body of the sins of the Flesh, Col. 2.11. Jesus Christ, though he had
no Foreskin on his Heart, yet he was Circumcised, Luke 2.21. that he might
fulfill all Righteousness in himself, and be obliged by this Ordinance to the
great Work of Circumcising the Hearts of others, Col. 2.11.

2. How must Men break up their Fallow Ground? I Answer: There must be a Plough
to do this Work: There must be a keen and sharp Plowshare, that Men may be
Converted, and return to be God's Husbandry. The Word is the Plow,
considerations taken both from the Law and Gospel, must break and wound the
Hearts of Men. Moses is indeed a Plowman, but Christ is said to be the
Seeds-man; he is the Sower that went forth to sow, Matt. 13.3. He that sows the
good seed is the Son of Man, Matt. 13.37, 38. He does not only sow Doctrines,
but Persons. He does beget a holy Seed, Isa. 9.6. He washes and renews by his
Spirit. If Men were convinced of Sin by the Law, and not of Righteousness by
the Gospel; if they were wounded, but had no knowledge of a Physician, of a
Remedy, of a way of Salvation, this would drive Men to despair, sink and
overwhelm them with terrors. The Word must cut deep, it must prick the heart,
Acts 2.37. It must wound the Soul to the quick, that Men may be prepared for
the healing Remedies, and sweet Consolations of Jesus Christ: Weighty,
humbling, awakening Considerations, must be put, and kept on the Heart, and
sink deep into the Soul; such as these following Truths.

1. This should affect and wound the Heart, that as we descend from the First
Adam, we are all born Flesh. John 3.6. That which is born of the shesh, is
flesh. Though the Soul be a spirit in its nature, yet it is flesh in its
inclination, disposition, ends, and aims. What a debasing, humbling expression
is that, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh,
Genesis 6.3. The Mind of Man is strangely Carnalized, sunk into, and swallowed up
in the Flesh; it does not mind its own Concerns, or remember its own Interest,
it is only a servant to, a Steward and Caterer for the Body; as if a Man should
be wholly taken up in thatching, supporting, repairing of his Cottage, but
should neglect or forget to provide Food and Raiment for himself. O that Men
should gratify their senses, please, pamper, and indulge their Flesh, and put
all their happiness on an inch, on a moment of Time, and not regard Spiritual
Blessings in Heaven, Ephesians. 1.3. or value a Feast in Glory. How dreadfully bad is
it to make light, Matt. 22.5. of the Feast, that infinite Wisdom contrived, and
infinite Love has provided? For Men not to regard the Purchase the Son of God
has made, the Ransom he has paid, the Legacies he has bequeathed. A Carnal
Creature sees no worth or excellency, tastes no sweetness, takes no deught in
Spiritual and Eternal Things; they are dry, sapless, hungry Notions, yea, as
vain fancies to him. Men understand only Carnally, there is flesh in the mind,
Col. 2.18. Nicodemus, though he was a Master and Teacher in Israel, yet did not
understand the Doctrine of Regeneration, but thought Christ meant a Man must
enter a second time into his Mothers Womb, and be born again from thence, John
3.3, 4, 9. The Will and Affections also are Flesh. When Christ did discourse
with the Woman of Samaria of Water for her Soul, she puts a Carnal sense on
Christ's words; she desires that Christ would give her of this water, that she
might come no more to that Well to draw, but might be eased of a great labor
and trouble.

2. This Truth should wound the Heart, That by Nature we are spiritually dead
in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1, 4. not only sick, but dead in sin. That
foreskin that is on our Hearts, is the very death of our Souls, Col. 2.13. You
that were dead in the uncircumcision of your flesh. This foreskin disaffects us
to, alienates us from, prejudices us against God, and spiritual things. The
body is dead by reason of sin, Romans 8.10. And the Soul is dead in sin. By the
offense of one, that is, the First Adam, many be dead. These many are all that
descend from Adam by Natural Generation, Romans 5.15. By the offense of one
judgment came upon all men to condemnation, Rom 5.18. Men are dead under a
spiritual, and condemned to an eternal death. Men walk indeed (though spiritually
dead) but it is only contrary to God, Levit. 26.40. Men act indeed, but they
only do dead Works, Heb. 6.1. Heb. 9.14. Men must repent of, and from these
dead works, and the blood of Christ must cleanse Conscience from them. O what a
dreadful State is this, for Conscience to be loaded with, and burdened under
dead Works! Those may well be called dead Works, that are the fruits of
spiritual Death, and the seeds of eternal Death; as we call Pond, or Ditch
Water, dead Water, because the Pond or Ditch have no spring in them to feed the
Water, so the best Works of unregenerate Men may be called dead Works, because
they have no Holy Spring, or Fountain, of their Actions. They are destitute of
Knowledge, there is none that understands, Romans 3.11. Hos. 4.1. They do not
trust in God, Zeph. 3.2. They have not the love of God in them, John 5.42.
Knowledge, Faith, and Love, are the root and spring of all living works, but
for want of these, the Works of unregenerate Men are dead, they are empty
Vines, sinfully barren, Hos. 10.1. yet abound in corrupt fruit, Deuteronomy. 32.32,
33. they only bring forth fruit to death, Romans 7.5. such as renders them more
guilty of, liable, and obnoxious to death. When Adam fell, contracted guilt,
and corrupted our nature; thence we were made sinners, Romans 5.19. and
unregenerate men, while they continue so, ever since they were born, have been
Sin-makers. This is their only Trade and Employment, 1 John 3.4. (...); it is
properly rendered, He that makes sin is the servant of sin. The word in
composition signifies to work at a Trade..Aquila, Priscilla, and Paul, were
(...) Tentmakers. This is a shameful and woeful Trade, in Thought, Word, and
Deed, to be a Sin maker. O reflect on this with Self-abhorrency, that as soon
as you were born you were made Sinners, and ever since have been Sin-makers. An
unregenerate man, is still out of the evil Treasure of his heart bringing forth
evil things, Matt. 12.34. Out of the Bullion of Original Sin, is still coining
Actual Sin; and though evil things in Words and Actions, are still brought forth
out of this evil Treasure, yet this does not lessen, waste, or diminish, but
still more increases the evil Treasure of the Heart.

3. Unregenerate Men are Children of Wrath by Nature, Ephesians. 2.3. They are
conceived in sin, shapen in iniquity, Ps. 51.5. Born flesh, John 3.6. God has
therefore a Controversy with them, and just displeasure against them. As soon
as they live Temporally, God has provocations to destroy them Eternally; God
sees then the malignity that lurks, the enmity against him that is lodged in
the Soul. As the Potters Vessel, mentioned in Jer. 18.3, 4. was marred in
making, so when men are shapen, and formed in the Womb, they are marred,
defiled, and deformed with sin; a Leaven is then laid in the very Meal of our
Faculties, Poison is then dropped into our Souls: a Disease, a Plague of
Leprosy, is derived to us, together with our Nature, so that we are hateful
to, Ps. 3.3. and haters of God, Romans 1.30. By reason of that Traitorous and
Rebellious Nature that God then saw in us, it had been no injustice in God, or
wrong to us, if Children of wrath had soon been made Vessels of wrath for ever,
Romans 9.22.

4. Sinful Men heap up more wrath, more inflame, and increase Divine
Displeasure against themselves. The Hipocrites in heart do heap up wrath, Job
36.13. Those that remain hard-hearted, and impenitent, do treasure up wrath
against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God,
Romans 2.5. Such do bring more Fuel to the Fire, and Oil to the flame of Divine
Displeasure, that it may burn more hotly, and fiercely against them. God is
angry with the wicked every day, or, as some render it, all the day long, Ps.
7.11. They are still doing somewhat more to grieve and provoke God. Sinners are
altogether become filthy, or stinking, as it is in the margin, Psalm. 14.3. What
stinking thoughts, desires, words and actions, do daily come up into God's
nostrils. God complains, Is. 65.5. that they were a smoke in his nostrils, a
fire that did burn all the day; as when something very noisome and stinking is
burnt, it gives great offense to the Nose. And as the sins of men do always
stink in God's Nostrils, so they cry loud in God's Ears, to kindle more wrath
against them, and pluck down more vengeance on them. As the sins of Sodom did
make a great cry in God's Ears, Genesis 18.20. the sins of men are as so many
Accusers of, and Witnesses against them, before the Tribunal of God. Is. 59.12.
Our sins testify against us.

5. Men are unmindful of God, and Enemies to him, 1. They are unmindful of God,
Deuteronomy. 32.18. Of the Rock that begot thee, thou art unmindful, and have
forgotten God that formed thee. God is not in all their thoughts; they are
without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. they call not on him, they draw not
night to him; they have no delight in him. They are Atheists all the day long;
yea, all their life long, as if there were no such Being as God, or they had no
need of him, had no business or concerns with him. Men and Women remember small
matters, but yet forget God. Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her
attire? yet my people (says God) have forgotten me days without number, Jer.
2.32. How great a sin is it to forget God that is so near to us? Acts 27.27,
28. Those that are blind Creatures, may grope, and find out God, by feeling of
him; for in him we live, move, and have our being. All the Creatures do
declare, and preach God to us, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3. These, as continual
remembrancers, may present God to our thoughts. How great a sin is it, that men
allow no room to God in their minds, and shut him out of their hearts, who
fills heaven and earth? Jer. 23.24. That the precious Cabiner of the Mind
should be filled only with the Dung of unclean, vain, worldly thoughts, but not
entertain Meditations of God and Christ. 2. Men are enemies to God, Romans 8.7.
The Carnal Mind is not said to be an enemy, but enmity to God. Enemies may be
reconciled, but enmity can never be reconciled, but must be destroyed. Men are
Enemies to God in their minds, through wicked works, or by their minds being
set wholly on wicked works, Col. 1.21. The mind is either inventing of evil
things, and finding out new sins, Romans 1.30. or projecting and contriving how
to justify the flesh, and to fulfill the lusts of it, Romans 13. ult. Or the mind
is taken up in cloaking and covering of sin; it finds out excuses, it sews the
Fig Leaves of Pretenses together, to hide the filthiness and deformity of sin
from the Eye of Conscience, and so to blind and deceive their own Souls. How
should this afflict and wound our Souls, that we have been enemies to him, that
is the chief good, to a glorious, infinite, eternal Being? who spoke the World
out of nothing, and could as easily speak us, and all things else, into their
First Nothing again? But because men are ready to deny this Charge, and plead
not Guilty to it, Paul proves men's enmity against God, by their opposition to,
and rebellion against the Law of God. The carnal mind is not subject to the law
of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7.

6. Men are Children and Captives of the Devil. 1. They are Children of the
Devil. But Men will start, and deny such an Accusation. The Jews affirmed, That
God was their Father, John 8.41. but Christ asserted that which was very
different from, and contrary to this, John 8.44. Ye are of your father the
devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. Was not Christ's Testimony to
be credited rather than theirs? Though Men, as to their natural Life, proceed and
descend from their Parents, yet as to their corrupt Life, they issue from
Satan. The enmity, and malignity of their Souls against God, his People, and
his Laws, this is the very image and likeness of Satan. The Jews hated the
Truth that Christ preached, abhorred him, and were inclined to murder him; and
these were the very Lusts of Satan. Whoredom, Gluttony, and Drunkenness, are
gross and brutish Lusts; but the most Spiritual sins, as Pride, Envy, Hatred,
are properly the Lusts of Satan. In these Men do most resemble him; these are
the very Lineaments of his Face. It is said of wicked men, Psalm 58.4. That
their poison is like the poison of a serpent. This seems to be a plain allusion
to the first sin: When the Devil under, and by a Serpent, tempted our First
Parents, then he did distill his Venom, and drop his Poison into them, when his
word was believed, and his suggestions embraced. He misrepresented God as
envious of their Good, of their higher Knowledge, and of their sweetest
Pleasures and Delights. He did set forth the Fruit of a Tree as the best, and
most desirable Good, and to be preferred before the favor of God, and as if
God's threatening was but a vain, and false word. This Poison of the Serpent we
may discern, and find in our own Souls, and therefore while unregenerate may be
justly charged to the Satan's Children, yea, the Souls of Sinners are the House
that Satan dwells, and the Shop that he works in, they have Members, Col. 3.5.
that God never made, they have Lusts that he never kindled, 1 John 2.15, 16.
and are under a Law, Rom 7.21, 23. that God never enacted; but these Members,
Lusts, and Law, came from Satan. 2. Unregenerate Men are the Devils Vassals,
Slaves, and Captives. Satan did but present Job's Cattle as a desirable Booty
and Prey, and blow up the Fire of their Lusts, and the Chaldeans and Sabeans
quickly make an Inroad, Invade Job's Possession, and take away his Cattle, Job
1.15, 17. Satan carries Men on in the Chanel of their own corrupt Nature, and
on the violent stream and torrent of their own Lusts. Men are said to walk
according to Satan, Ephesians. 2.2. but how is this? The Apostle tells us in the
next Verse, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind.
They think they have nothing to do with Satan, when they obey him in serving of
their Lusts. The Devil takes men captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2. last. yet he
leads men captive by their own Wills. The very liberty of their Wills is
inslaved. Sinners yield, and give up their own corrupt Wills, and carnal
Affections, as so many Cords for Satan to lead them by to. Hell. Satan finds
Lusts in us, as Chains to bind us, as Snares to hold us; shall not this
consideration deeply wound the Souls of Men, that they side and join with
Satan, to seduce and destroy themselves? Men close their eyes, Matt. 13.15. And
Satan blinds their minds, 2 Cor. 4.4, 5. and so they put the greatest cheat on
their own Souls. They see not the Good that Satan deprives them of, and the
Misery and Destruction he brings on them.

7. Unregenerate Men are Prisoners, Is. 42.7. Is. 49.9. they sit in darkness;
and are bound with chains, Is. 61.1. and dwell in the Prison House. They are
under a sentence of condemnation, John 3.18. He that believes not is condemned
already. And they are under a fear of a day of Execution, Heb. 2.15. Through
the fear of death they are all their life time subject to bondage. How much are
Sinners and Hipocrites affrighted? What dreadful Exclamations do they make? Who
among us shall dwell with devouring Fire? Who among us shall dwell with
everlasting Burnings? O what bitter cries of destruction, Is. 35.5. will
Sinners lift up, when they shall see the whetted Sword of Justice hanging over
their Heads, and their Feet at the brink of the bottomless Pit! When their eyes
shall see their destruction, and they shall be brought forth to the day of
wrath, Job 21.20, 30.

8. O let this wound your Souls, that you go so far from God, Jer. 2.5. and fly
so fast. Hos. 7.13. Woe unto them, 1. For they have fled from me; as if they
could not go too far, or hasten too fast, from the Father of Mercies, from the
Fountain of Life. And Sinners are very unwilling to return; they hold fast
deceit, they refuse to return, Jer. 8.5. They stop their ears, and make their
hearts like an adamantstone, lest they should hear the words of the law of the
Lord of hosts, Zech. 7.11, 12. They have an Iron Sinew, a Brow of Brass, and a
Heart of Stone, that will not melt or relent, Is. 48.4. when God draws near to
them with beams of Light, commands of Obedience, and offers of Grace. Job
21.14. They bid him depart, as if they had no need of God, owed no homage,
obedience, or subjection to him; as if they could stand, though he did not
support them; as if they could choose their own way, and order their steps, though
he did not direct them, and they could be happy though they did not enjoy him.
They cast God himself, and his Word too, behind their backs, Ezekiel. 23.35. When
Men bid God depart, is not this to pluck away his props and supports from their
Building? To banish Heaven from themselves, and to execute a great part of Hell
on themselves? And to provoke God to bid them depart from him, as cursed
Creatures, into everlasting Fire? Matt. 25.41. They that are alienated from the
Life of God, and estranged from Communion with him, how can they hope to be for
ever with him? 1 These. 4.17.

9. This should affect, and awe your Souls, that you are still under God's Eye,
and do evil in his sight, Psalm. 51.4. The ways of a man are before the eyes of
the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings, Prove. 5.21. There is no darkness, or
shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. Job 34.22.
This is peculiar to God, that Malefactors are always in the presence, and under
the eye of him as their Judge; and he is a Witness against them for all the
Crimes they commit. The Lord be witness against you, 1 Samuel 12.5.

10. How should this cut your Hearts, that all your sins are marked, Jer. 2.22.
and all your crimes are written before him, Is. 65.6. The great King of the
whole World, writes the Chronicles of all the Lives and Actions of his
Subjects; all that Men speak, think, or do, is Recorded in his Book, Rev.
20.12. and Conscience keeps a Counter-part of the Record. Their sin is graven
as with a pen of iron, and the point of a diamond, in the table of their heart,
Jer. 17.1.

11. God can make Malefactors to appear, and present Delinquents before his
Tribunal, they cannot fly, they cannot hide; As for those mine Enemies, that
would not have me to reign over them, bring them before me, Luke 19.27. This is
proper and peculiar to God, that he can make all transgressors to appear; and
how dreadful will this be, that they must appear, 2 Cor. 5.10. where yet they
cannot appear with any hope or confidence? 1 Pet. 4 15. where shall the ungodly
and the sinner appear? They must stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Romans
14.10. yet the ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment, Psalm. 1.5. O what
terror may this strike into Men, that God will bring them into judgment,
Eccles. 11.9. and God will also bring all their secret actions into judgment,
Eccl. 12.14. God will bring all the hidden things of darkness to light.

12. Impenitent Sinners shall be punished with an everlasting destruction,
which shall come from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power, 2
These. 1.9. The same Face that shines a Heaven into the Souls of Saints, shall
frown a Hell into the Consciences of the Wicked; the same Arm that punishes,
shall support the punished still to endure more Torments: as God will burn
against, and on Chaff, Briers, Thorns and Taras, so he will preserve the Fuel,
and uphold it to Eternity. Who knows the power of God's anger, Psalm. 90.11? how
miserable he can render a Creature, that he fills up as a Vessel with his
Wrath, that he treads on as a footstool, and shoots at as a Mark? God asks Job,
Have thou entered into the Springs of the Sea? or have thou walked in the search
of the deep? could he tell how deep the great Sea was? could he come to the
bottom of it? Job 38.16. So it will be said to us, Can you by the line and
plumbet of your Reason sound and find out the bottom of the deep Sea of the
Wrath of God? Tophet is deep, there is no coming up out of it, Isa. 30. ult.
The Gulf that is fixed is wide, there is no passing over it, Luke 16.26. And
these things are near, our breath is in our Nostrils, ready to go out, and the
Judge stands at the Door ready to come in. As the accusations and threatenings
of the Law should be a Plough, striking home and cutting deep into our Hearts,
so the Mercy of God in Christ, and the Grace revealed in the Gospel, should
exceedingly wound and break our Hearts. How amazing is this, that when we had
made God to serve with our Sins, and wearied him with our Iniquities, Isa.
43.24. that the Son of God should take on him the form of a Servant, to suffer,
to satisfy for, and purge away our Iniquities Psalm. 2.76. Heb. 1.3? O, that
when God, as a Creator, Preserver, Benefactor, had been by our Lusts debased to
be a mere Servant, and Satan exalted to be the Prince, yea, the God, of the
World, John 12.3. 2 Cor. 4 4, 5. that the Son of God should humble himself to
be a Servant to his own Law, as a Sacrifice to his Father's Justice, to make an
end of the guilt of Sin! O that Christ should be sold to redeem us! that he
should be wounded to heal us! that he should be arrested, arraigned and
condemned to justify us! should not this make Hearts of stone to relent and
break? O, that God should complain, that he is broken with our whorish Hearts,
Ezekiel. 6.9. yet Christ, to expiate and put away the guilt of these Whoredoms,
should complain, that Reproach had broken his heart, Ps. 69.20. We had loaded
God with our sins and provocations, as a Cart is pressed under the sheaves,
Amos 2.13. O how amazing is it, that God should lay all our sins on Christ,
Isa. 53.6. and load him with our penalties and punishments! that our Debt
should be exacted of him, our Curse executed on him! that he should be as the
Manna pounded in the Mortar! that as a cluster of Grapes he should be bruised
in the Wine Press of the Wrath and Justice of God! that as a Porter, or bearer
of burdens, he should have our Iniquities bound on him and then bear them quite
away. The Hebrew word (...) is used of Christ, Isa. 53.4. He has carried our
sorrows; and hence he that is a Porter, or bearer of burdens, is called, 2 Chronicles. 2.27. (...) a man of burden. This Name fitly does agree to our Lord
Jesus, that he was a Man of burden: Never did any one bear so vast a load, so
great a burden: We found out Inventions to inslave our selves, Eccl. 7. ult.
and God found out a Ransom, to redeem and set us at liberty, Job 33.24. We
hated him without a cause, and he loved us freely, and without a cause; how
should this Grace melt our hard, and warm our cold Hearts with love to God?
shall we continue in the torrid Zone of Enmity and Lust, when Believers are
brought into and dwell in the torrid Zone of Love? It is now possible that our
Wilderness may blossom as a Rose, that our dry Ground may be watered, improved,
and enriched, Isa. 35.1. and 44.3, 4. Enemies may be reconciled, dead Souls
quickened, and such as have been Satan's Children and mere Strangers to God,
may be adopted, and taken into his Family.

3 Q. Why must our fallow Ground be broken up? I answer, 1. That our carnal
Confidence in our selves may be mortified and rooted out; our Pride must be
abated, our high Mountain of carnal Confidence must be levelled, Isa. 40.4. How
many do trust in themselves that they are righteous, Luke 15.8. and this is
directly contrary to believing in Christ, Gal. 2.16. that they might be
justified: Those that have some Planks, some pieces of the wreck of the Fall,
to float and swim on, will not desire and cry to be taken up into Christ, God's
Ark of Salvation; they that build on their Morality, Form of Godliness, and
Religious Performances, are too rich to beg an Alms and receive a gift of
Righteousness from Christ, Romans 5.17. Those that are shut up under Sin and
Condemnation, will lay hold of and embrace the free Promise of Salvation and
Life, Gal. 3.22. Those that highly account of their own qualifications and
seize, do think they have valuable Gains, Phil. 3.6, 7, 8. that they have
that which will gain them the favor of God, acceptance with him, a Right and
Title to Eternal life: They judge themselves to be whole, that their Souls were
never sick or diseased, Mat. 8.12. they think they have lived in subjection to
God their Father, and in obedience to his Commands, Luke 15.29. that they have
served him when others did rebel against him, and that therefore they need no
Repentance, Luke 15.7. How many do account themselves as fruitful and
flourishing Meadows, that naturally bear a Crop without plowing or sowing.
Those that do value their own civil and unblamable life, and highly account of
their form of godliness, they think it very hard, yea, judge it very
unreasonable and injurious to them, that their green and flourishing Turf
should be plowed up and turned in, as if it were of no worth and value; they
think they have something of their own to recommend them to God's Holiness, and
secure them from his Justice; their fallow Ground must be therefore broken up,
to root out this carnal Confidence, and to convince them, that they are far
from Righteousness, and that nothing they have done will be approved by God's
Touchstone, or hold in his Balance.

2. Our fallow Ground must be broken up, that the Briers and Thorns that grow
in us may be wounded, cut, and rooted up. The Word of God should be a grubbing
Plough, to tear up our Thorns; a circumcising Knife, to cut off the foreskin
of our Hearts, Jer. 4.4. we must suffer in our Flesh, even in our corrupt
Nature, 1 Pet. 4.1. Satan's works in us must be destroyed, 1 John 3.8. our
Navel must be cut, Ezekiel. 16.4. we must be separated from the first Adam, we
must be as Branches cut out of the wild Olive, Romans 11.17, 24. To break up our
fallow Ground, is thus expounded in the next Verse, Jer. 4.4. Circumcise your
selves to the Lord, take away the foreskin of your heart; this is as Thorns
that choke the Word, that draw away the strength and vigor of the Heart, and so
starve the Word of God.

3. Men must break up their fallow Ground, that they may be meet and fit
Patients for Jesus Christ. This Heavenly Physician has no Practice, but on
humbled and brokenhearted Sinners, these are they he applys his Remedies to,
and works Cures on: He was appointed and designed to bind up the broken in
heart, Isa. 61.1. none others do think they need Christ's Help, prize his
Remedies, or value his Consolations: Those that are whole, that never saw the
Plague of their Hearts, or groaned under the weight of their Guilt, the burden
of their Sins, do not think they need a Physician. Christ has few Patients and
little Practice in the World, because Men are not sick of Sin, wounded or
broken for it.

4. Our fallow Ground must be plowed and broken up, that our Soil may be fitted
to receive the good Seed of the Gospel: a broken Christ is both suited and
welcome to a broken Heart. Christ crucified is the grain of Corn that sows the
whole Field of God, John 12.24. with 1 Cor. 1. We preach Christ crucified,
says Paul: Christ is the lilly of the valleys, Cant. 2.1. His Seed grows and
thrives only in poor Ground; the Poor have the Gospel preached to them, Mat.
11.5. these taste the sweetness of it, are cheered by its comforts, are cast
into its mould; the Seed takes root in broken Ground, it prospers, it thrives
in humbled Souls: how do sinking and drowning Sinners catch at and hold fast
the Cord of the Promise cast out to them? Those that are pursued by their own
Guilt, the Wrath of God, the Threatenings and Terrors of the Law, how much do
they hasten their pace, and fly for refuge, to take hold of the Hope set before
them? Those that are scorched by the sense they have of the Wrath of God, how
highly do they prize, and how joyfully and delightfully do they sit under
Christ's shadow, Cant. 2.3.

5. Men must break up their fallow Ground, that they may seek the Lord in good
earnest. We may observe how these two things are joined together, Break up your
fallow Ground, for it is time to seek the Lord, Hos. 10.12. These two things
seem to be intimated in the words, 1. That in breaking up our fallow Ground we
do seek the Lord. 2. That none will seek the Lord sincerely and fervently, but
those that break up their fallow Ground; such are quickly convinced, and soon
made sensible how necessary it is to seek the Lord, that vile Weeds, that Vices
natural to us may be rooted out, and that supernatural Graces and Truths may be
grafted on and planted in them. The Pelagians (as Austin tells us) asserted.
That Vitia ingenerata extirpari prorsus incredibile est: they argued thus
against Original Sin, That if Vices were naturally bred in us, and born with
us, it was altogether an incredible thing that they ever would or could be
rooted out. But God, the great Husbandman, can cleanse the Soul of them, and
mortify Vice and Lusts that are natural to us, John 15.3. You are clean,
through the word that I have spoken to you. Whoredom was a Vice so natural to
the Corinthians, that (...), to act the part of a Corinthian, was to be a
Whoremaster; and the Apostle Paul, in his Epistle to them says, Some of you
were Fornicators, Adulterers, but you are washed, you are sanctified, 1 Cor.
6.10, 11. Austin himself was naturally much inclined to Fornication, yet the
Grace of God so changed him, that he ever after became chaste in a single life.
God can unmake Men, as to their sinful frame, 1 Pet. 2.24. (...), being unmade
to sin, you may live to righteousness. God can create Men in Christ Jesus to
good works, Ephesians. 2.10. He can put his Law, his Fear, his Spirit into the Hearts
of Men, that natural Vices shall be rooted out, and supernatural Graces shall
be planted in the Soul. They that break up their fallow Ground will seek the
Lord, and continue seeking of him, till he come and rain Righteousness on them:
this is a Rain of Seed-Righteousness; it is wonderful that God can rain Seed,
rain Righteousness that will sow the Soul, and make it fruitful: as when the
Husbandman has plowed and sowed his Ground, he needs to seek the Lord to rain
on it, that the Seed may root and spring up, so those that plow and break up
their fallow Ground have need to pray, that God would rain Holiness and
Righteousness to sow them. Hos. 2. ult. God says, I will sow them to my self
in the Earth.

6. Men must break up their fallow Ground, that they may abound in the Work of
the Lord, and be filled with the fruits of Kighteousness, 1 Cor. 15. ult. Psalm.
1.11. A fallow Ground is in a great measure unprofitable; it bears Thorns and
Thistles, but a plowed and sowed Ground yields a good crop of Corn: none do
bear Fruit to God but those that are born again of the Word and Spirit, and
made Trees of Righteousness, Isa. 61.3. will be filled with the Fruits of
Righteousness, walk with, and live to God, Genesis 5.24, 25. If our fallow Ground
be not broken up, our form of Godliness will wither and decay, Thorns will
famish and starve the good Seed, that at last they will be twice dead, plucked
up by the Roots. Jude 12. The Israelites that did not conquer and root out the
Heathen Nations, are said to dwell among the Canaanites, Judge. 4.33. these did
cut the Israelites short, and much annoy them, and keep them down; so the
natural crop of Thorns does much annoy, and hinder any good Seed that is cast
in among them, obstruct its growth, that it neither roots deep, nor springs up
to any height.

7. Men must Plow up their fallow ground, that they may have a plentiful and
joyful Harvest at last. It is very desirable to sow to the Spirit, and to reap
Everlasting Life, Gal. 6.5. To have our fruit to holiness, and the end
everlasting life, Romans 6.22. to bear Fruit that will abound to our account,
Phil. 4.17. Though we have not evened with God, and discharged our Debt, yet God
begins a new Account, and writes himself Debtor to his People for their Fruits
of Holiness, and of Love; Saints that sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy; they
that go forth weeping, bearing precious Seed, shall come again with Joy, and
bring their Sheaves with them, Psalm. 126.5, 6. Though Religion may seem not
only a barren and unprofitable, but a hurtful thing in the Eye of the World;
yet at last there shall appear a vast difference between those that fear God,
and those that fear him not, Malac. 3. ult. when the Righteous shall shine
forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, and the Tares shall burn in a
Furnace of unquenchable Fire; when Christ shall be glorified in the Salvation
of the Saints, and in the Destruction of the Wicked, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. Ezekiel.
25.22. Those that please God do sow in a fruitful Soil; they will in this life
receive a hundred fold, notwithstanding Persecutions from the World, and at
last will inherit eternal joy and life, Mark 10.30.

9. If we plow not up our fallow Ground, God may let loose dreadful and cruel
Plowmen on us. It is said, Zion shall be plowed as a Field, Micah 3. ult.
Enemies may plow on our Backs, and make their Furrows both deep and long, Psalm.
129.3. How have the Backs of Protestants been cruelty plowed in France for
about Twelve Years last past? God threatens, in Hosea 10.11. that Judah should
plow; they should serve their Enemies in and under hard bondage. I have been
credibly informed, that in Barbary some Christian Slaves have been put into
Harnesses, and being locked in, have been forced to plow the Ground. God seems
to allude to such a thing, that Judah shall suffer as hard and grievous things,
as if he were put to Plow. To draw God's Plow is beneficial and honorable
Work, but to draw men's Plow will be bitter and grinvous: yea, if you neglect to
break up your fallow Ground, God will plow your Souls, make deep and long
Furrows in Conscience to Eternity.

10. Those that will not plow up their fallow Ground, shall at last beg for an
Alms of Mercy, and be rejected. The Sluggard will not plow, by reason of the
cold; therefore shall he beg in Harvest, and have nothing. Spiritual Sluggards
have many Excuses and Pretenses to shift off this plowing Work, but when the
Harvest comes they will be in a very bad and woeful state. Solomon speaks of it
as a great Evil for a Father to waste his Estate by evil Courses, and to beget
a Son, and there is nothing in his hand, Eccl. 5.14. he is Heir only to Poverty
and Beggary. But it is a great deal worse for a Man to be born into Eternity,
and to have no Good in his Hand, in his Soul. Those that toil about the World
shall carry away nothing of their labor in their hand, Eccles. 5.15. but if
you labor for God, your Works will follow you, Revel. 14.13. and the sweet
Fruit of them will be enjoyed for ever. But this is not the only Evil, that
spiritual Sluggards will have nothing of Good, but God will thunder against
them, and rain fire and brimstone on them for working of Iniquity, Psalm. 11.6.
As when God was displeased with Israel, he sent Thunder and Rain in
Wheat-harvest, 1^. ^^n. 12.17, 18. So when Sluggards have vainly hoped to reap
a Harvest of Happiness, God will thunder against them, pour down his Wrath, and
execute Vengeance on them. How earnestly and importunately will Sluggards beg
for Mercy, but all in vain, they will cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, Matt. 7.21,
22, 23. but He will profess that which is very contrary to their Professions
and Hopes, Then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me ye
that work Iniquity. In the 13th of Luke, v. 27. it is thus expressed, Depart
from me all ye workers of Iniquity: which intimates, that Christ will be most
just and impartial; he will no more regard, yea, he will rather much more abhor
workers of Iniquity, than those without the Church; both shall be disowned and
rejected by Jesus Christ. These Sluggards will begin Harvest for some spiritual
Bread, for a Place in the Kingdom, but they shall be thrust out, and enjoy no
Good to Eternity.

10. It is a dreadful Curse denounced on the Ground of Mount Gilboa, by David,
2 Samuel 1.21. Let there be no fields of Offerings there: that is, let those
Mountains never be sowed, or if sowed, let them be barren: Let there be no
fields of Offerings there. The fine Flour was offered on the Altar to God, of
this the Meat Offering did consist, Levit. 2.1, 2. This was a great honor to
the Creatures, for Meat Offerings to be made to God of the fine Flour, and
Drink Offerings of Wine. In this sense the Vine says in Jotham's Parable, that
it did by its Wine cheer the Heart of God, Judge. 9.13. Now if it be a Curse on
the Ground not to bear Wheat, which will yield fine Flour, fit to be offered to
God, how much sorer and more grievous Curse is it for the Souls of Men to be
barren, not to be plowed and sowed, not to yield any Fruit that may be offered
to God, and that he can take pleasure and delight in? Will you make light of
this dreadful Curse? Will you pluck it, and continue it on your selves? Will
you do nothing to please and glorify God?

Use 1. This may reprove many formal and titular Christians, that do neglect
this excellent Command, and do slight and omit this necessary Duty and Work of
breaking up their fallow Ground: Instead of wounding and breaking their Hearts,
they live in Pleasure, are wanton, and nourish their Hearts, as in a day of
slaughter, that is, as in a great Feast Day, when there is a slaughter of the
Creatures made to feast the Body, Jam. 5.5. they please their Flesh, they
gratify and indulge their sensual Affections, they cannot bear or endure such
hard and grievous Work as this, to draw God's Plow, and with its Shear to cut
deep Furrows and sorely wound their own Hearts; they think it very unreasonable
to banish carnal Joy out of their Souls, to cloud their Souls with Sorrows, to
load their Spirits with a sensible feeling of the Evils that they have done,
and with the fear of the Punishment they have deserved: how few do take God's
part, do side with him, do plead his Cause against themselves and their Lusts?
Who do charge their Sins home on themselves, and set forth their heinous and
horrid Aggravations before God? Do not Men deal gently and tenderly with
themselves? Do they not lessen and extenuate, rather than heighten, their Guilt
in Filth, and careless of their Transgressions? If the Word does perhaps touch
or wound them, does not Self-love, (as that natural Balsam Chyrurgeons and
Physicians say is in the Body) quickly heal it again? Does not Self flattery
soon cheer them again, and so cheat them? Their plowing is rather scratching
the Earth, than striking a deep Furrow; they know not the meaning, or they have
no Experience of a broken Heart, of a contrite Spirit. This is indeed a great
thing, for the Spirit of a Man to be bruised, and, as it were, ground to
powder, under the weight of Sin committed, and the sense of Punishment
deserved. It is said, Hos. 5.2. The Revolters were profound to make slaughter;
but, alas! where are the Men and Women that are profound in wounding their
Souls for Sin, and in making a slaughter of their Lusts? How is it to be
lamented, that the Sword of God's Word does not pass through the Heart of the
Old Man? that the Arrows of God do not cleave the Reins of Sinners, and pour
out their very Gall? how few do outlaw their corrupt and vile Affections, and
put them out of their protection, that they may be killed when or wheresoever
they find, meet with them, or see them? But do not Men act quite contrary to
this? When God shoots his Arrows, casts his Darts at them, do they not take the
Shield of Unbelief, and guard their base Lusts? Do they not quench the fiery
Darts that God casts at them? Is there not a great deal of Art and Labor used
to enervate, to blunt, to dispirit keen and cutting Truths, that they may not
enter deep, that come too home and close to their Hearts? They cannot endure
that Conscience should be enlightened and awaked, that its Tongue should be
loosed; this they think is intolerable, to raise a Storm within their own
Breasts, to disturb their Peace, to destroy their Hopes, to let in Terrors to
arrest and overwhelm their Souls: They think they shall never recover Peace and
Comfort, or have their Wounds healed again, if God's Plough should cut them to
the very Heart: Does not a shallow Furrow produce a slight Religion, and a
superficial Christianity in the World? Instead of putting convincing Truths,
instead of keeping awakening Thoughts and Meditations on their Hearts, they
rather keep them off at a distance, and shut them out of their Souls. O where
shall we find an humbled Sinner crying out thus, I am the man that has risen
up against God, I have broken his Yoke, and made his Laws void; I have burst
his Bonds, and cast away his Cords from me; I, that am but a Worm, have dared
to walk contrary to God, and have entered the Lists with the Almighty; I, that
am but a Potter's Vessel, have challenged a Rod of Iron; I, that am but Chaff,
Briars, and Thorns, have contended with devouring Fire, with eternal burnings;
I have exalted my Folly against Infinite Wisdom, and set up my perverse,
wicked, rebellious Will, in opposition to the holy Law, the righteous Will of
God: though God bears up the frame of Heaven and Earth by the Word of his
Power, and does not faint under this great weight, yet I have laid a heavier
burden on him, and caused him to complain, that He is wearied by my Sins, Isa.
43.24. and is pressed under my Iniquities, as a Cart is pressed under the
Sheaves, Amos 2.13. How few Ephraim; are there found thus bemoaning or
impeaching themselves? Men do indeed like to tread out the Corn, and eat the
Fruits of Mercy, but will not follow the Plough, to convince and humble
themselves for Iniquity. How strange is it, that Persons will nourish in
themselves hopes of a comfortable and plentiful Harvest hereafter, yet will not
now plow and break up their fallow Ground? Is it not an unreasonable
Presumption, to look for a Harvest, when there has been no Ground plowed, or
Seed sown?

Use 2. Examine your selves, Is your fallow Ground broken up? have you inclined
your Hearts and set your Hands to God's Plough? Though the Earth does not feel
the Ploughshear, does not know when the Husbandman does till the Land, yet a
Soul cannot be both a Plowman and a plowed Ground, but it must needs be
sensible of what is done on, and wrought within it self. Have you ever been
pricked in Heart? Acts 2.37. Have God's Words been as Goads to prick you, as
Nails to pierce you? Have the Truths of God been as a sharp Plow-shear, cutting
and wounding your Souls?

1. Did you ever come to your selves, and so make a right judgment concerning
your selves and your own Estate, with respect to God and Eternity, Luke 15.17.
that you are poor, empty, naked Creatures, that you are but a dry Ground and
barren Wilderness, like the Vineyard of the sloathful Man, all overgrown with
Thorns and Nettles, Prove. 24.30, 31? It would be bad for a Man to rent a great
Farm, and yet not to have one Acre of Corn sowed on it; but is it not worse for
us, that hold our Souls and Bodies of God our great Landlord, to whom we owe a
great Rent of universal Obedience to his Laws, and yet not to have one Faculty
of our Souls sowed with precious Seed? For our Minds and Wills not to be Tables
with the Law of God; for our Vessels to be empty, and destitute of spiritual
Oil; for our Meal not to be leavened by the Gospel, and the Houses of our Souls
to be empty, and not inhabited by the Spirit of God? Have we discerned our
selves to be empty Vines, barren Fig trees, unprofitable Servants? Our fallow
Ground will never be broken up, till we are convinced how much we need to be
plowed and sowed.

2. Were our Souls ever rightly, duly, deeply affected with our woeful and
wretched State? Are Hearts broken, our Spirits wounded, our Souls as a bruised
Reed? Isaiah 42.3. Has the sense of our guilt, and God's wrath, so fallen and
seized on our spirits, as to grind them as it were to Powder? A prick in the
heart is both painful and mortal, Acts 2.37. this wounds the Old Man to death.
How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? Rom 6.2. If an
Earthen Vessel be broken to pieces, it can no more hold any Water, or serve for
any use, as when it was whole. If our Old Man be Crucified, if the Body of Sin
be Destroyed, we cannot serve sin as before. If a Ground be Plowed deep, and
the Roots of Weeds, that grew in it, be cut, they cannot flourish in that
Ground as before.

3. Have you received the seed of the Word, the Doctrine of the Gospel gladly?
Acts 2.41. Have the Tidings of Redemption, the News of Salvation, been welcome
to you? And as a Noble, and Generous Cordial, revived your fainting and
languishing Spirits? And as a Sovereign Balsam, healed your bruised, broken
Hearts? Have you, as drowning Men, laid hold on the Promise of Salvation? As
famishing Men, have you catched at the Bread of Life? Have you as weary, and
heavy Laden Sinners, leaned on Christ? Cant. 8.5. and taken hold of the Hope
set before you? Have you, as a dry and thirsty Ground, drank in the spiritual
Rain, and Dew from Heaven? Heb. 6.18. And does the seed, so received, sanctify
you? Does the Word work effectually in your Souls? Heb. 6.7. Does it Leaven
you, John 17.19. with Holiness, Spirituality, and Heavenly-mindedness? 1 These.
2.13.

4. Does the seed of the Word bring forth fruit in your hearts and lives? Col.
1.5, 6. Do you shine in the world as lights, and hold forth the word of life?
Phil. 2.15, 16. Is the sweet odor of your Ointments, and Garments smelt? Cant.
4.10, 11.

USE 3. I would Exhort you to this great Duty, O break your Fallow Ground.

When Adam fell, and was turned out of the Earthly Paradise, it was necessary
for him to become a Husbandman, and a Plowman. Genesis 3.23. God sent him out of
the Garden of Eden to Till the ground, from whence he was taken. Bread could
not be had without Plowing and Sowing; our Nature was corrupted and depraved;
all Holiness and Righteousness so rooted out, that if we break not up our
Fallow Ground, no seed can be sowed, or Fruit brought forth to God. To be
spiritual Plow-men, is an Employment necessary for all Rich and Poor; Princes
and Peasants, Noblemen, and those of low Degree, must all follow the Plow,
must all attend to break up their Fallow Ground; this is a Work to be neglected
by none, Men and Women must all prosecute and pursue it. For,

1. We are wholly useless, and altogether unprofitable, if we continue a Fallow
Ground. It is worse with us, than with a Field that lies Fallow, that may bear
some Herbage. I have been credibly informed of some Land, that have been sowed
once a Year, and mowed the next; so serviceable is the Earth to Man, but if Men
lie Fallow, they do no good, Romans 3.12. They bring forth no Fruit to God; all
their Religious, and Common Actions, are grievous and displeasing to God. The
prayer of him that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, is an abomination
to God, Prove. 28.9. Yea, the plowing of the wicked is sin, Prove. 21.4. The
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination, Prove. 15.8. And the way of the
wicked, that is, his common Actions, are sin, Prove. 15.9. That which they offer
is unclean, and so is every work of their hands, Hag. 2.14. Thus they are
altogether unprofitable, Romans 3.12.

2. If you lie Fallow, you will grow worse and worse. The Old Man grows more
corrupt, Ephesians. 4.22. As a dead Carcass does putrify more and more, and become
more noisome, unsavory, and stinking, so it is with the Body of Death in us,
Romans 7.24. The more a ground is neglected, the longer it lies Fallow, the more
it is overrun with Briars and Thorns; The deeper the Weeds root in it, the
more they overrun, over spread, and eat out the heart of it: So here, the Mind
grows more vain, more blind; the Heart is more hard, the Affections more
sensual and carnal. It is said of some, That they have left off to take heed to
the Lord, Hos. 4.10. And that they leave off Righteousness in the Earth, Amos
5.7. Evil men, and seducers, wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13.

3. If you Plow not for God, you Plow for Satan. It is a woeful thing to drive
Satan's Plow. Isaiah speaks of some, That draw iniquity with cords of vanity,
and sin as it were with a cart-rope, Isaiah 5.18. It is a plain Allusion to
drawing in a Cart, or drawing of a Plow. O how sad is it to be Satan's slaves,
to draw his Plow? All the corrupt Reasonings of Men, that God does not see,
observe, resent their sins; That he will never revenge them; that God's
threatenings are but vain words, as a despicable echo, and the sounding again
of the mountains, Ezekiel. 7.7. These are the Cords of Vanity by which Men draw
sin to themselves; but though they are but Cords of Vanity, yet they draw as
strong, as if they were a thick Cart-rope. What bad Work do Satan's Plow-men,
instead of breaking up their Fallow ground? They break God's yoke, burst his
bonds, Jer. 5.5. They brake the everlasting Covenant, Isaiah 24.5. Break God's
Statutes, Psalm. 89 31. Yea, God himself complains, That he is broken by their
whorish heart, Ezekiel. 6.9. Thus ill are Men employed, that break not up their
Fallow ground.

4. It is honorable to yield Fruit to God. It is said, The profit of the earth
is for all; the King himself is served by the Field, Eccles. 5.9. It is most
true, That the King of Glory is served by a Field broken up, and sowed. How
honorable is it, when our Prayer is the delight of God? Prove. 15.8. And God
delights in our way? Psalm. 37.23. When our Offerings are pleasant to the
Lord? Mal. 3.4. When we can invite Christ to come into his Garden, and eat of
his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4. last. When we treat him with the spiced Wine of
the juice of our Pomegranate, Cant. 8.2. When our voice is sweet in Christ's
ears, and our countenance is comely in Christ's eyes, Cant. 2.14. It is for the
glory of the Church, that Christ goes down to feed in the Gardens, Cant. 6.2.

5. It will be our advantage to break up our Fallow ground. God bids our first
Parents, to replenish the Earth, and subdue it, Genesis 1.28. That it is by
Tillage they were to master the Earth, and compel it to serve them, and bear
Fruit to them; so by breaking up our Fallow ground, we subdue it to yield Fruit
to God, and we more appropriate it, and render it useful to our selves. One
that writes concerning Government and Obedience, (in opposition to Sir Robert
Filmer) conceives that this was the way at first to divide, and appropriate
parcels of the Earth to particular Persons: That as much as a Man had need of,
and could Plow and Sow, that became his own. And he says it is so in Spain at
this day, That any Man may Plow Land, Sow, and Reap it for his own use, without
opposition, or contradiction from any. It is by plowing, and breaking up of our
Fallow ground, that we become more Masters of our selves, do more possess our
own Souls, as Proprietors use them, and as Kings command, Rev. 1.5, 6. in them.
So much of our Souls as we Till, as we break up, is devoted to God, and is a
Portion profitable to our selves. As it is the Riches of a Husbandman, to have
many Acres sowed with good Corn, with useful Grain; so it will be both our
Honor, and Advantage, to have many Years of our Lives sowed with the Fruits of
Holiness, and Righteousness. If every Day, Month, and Year, be sowed with
Fruit, that will abound to our account, Deuteronomy. 4.17. how Rich, how Honorable are
we?

6. Consider how infamous, and miserable we shall be at last, if we break not
up our Fallow ground. We shall neither sow to our selves in righteousness, nor
reap in mercy, Hosea 10.12. We shall lose our Seed time of Grace, and our
Harvest of Glory. We shall only reap corruption and destruction, Gal. 6.8. and
be reaped as Tares, to be cast into a Furnace of unquenchable Fire, Matt. 3.12.
Matt. 13.42. If we continue dead in sins, Ephesians. 2.1. and do no good, we shall
at last be Carcasses desolate of all life and comfort, and enjoy no good to
Eternity, Isa. 66. last. Yea, Christ will fall on you as a weighty stone, and
grind you to powder, Matt. 21.44.

7. When we break up our Fallow ground, we begin to do something in Religion.
All is nothing that we do, yea, we are nothing as to pleasing of God, till we
break up our Fallow ground. The Seeds man will not go forth to sow, till the
Plowman goes forth, and breaks up the Ground. As a Man cannot Graft, till
the Stock be cut to let in the Graft, so a Husbandman cannot Sow till the
Ground be Plowed, and fitted to receive the Seed. Corn will not thrive, that is
sown on whole Land; the Grass and Weeds will kill and choke it. So
Gospel Truths will not root deep, thrive, or prosper kindly, if our Hearts are
not broken. Till we lie down in our shame, Jer. 3. last. We cannot stand in
grace, Romans 5.2. Till we are convinced that we are enemies, we shall not take
hold of the word of Reconciliation. Till we find, and feel our selves shut up,
under Sin and the Curse, we shall not listen to Christ as a Redeemer, calling
us out of Prison, Isa. 49.9. into the Kingdom of God. And a vain show of
Religion, will yield no more than a vain show of Happiness; if we bring forth
no Fruit for Christ to eat, there will be no Feast for us to enjoy.

That you may break up your Fallow ground, observe these following Directions:

1. Be convinced of this, and be humbled for this, That you have so long lain
as a Fallow ground. How evil is it, that Men have continued, perhaps twenty,
thirty, forty, fifty Years, or more, a fallow Ground? If a fallow did not serve
a Husbandman any other way, but by being plowed, sowed, and bearing Corn, would
it not be a great shame and loss to him, to see a Fallow to lie thirty, forty
or fifty Years, and never to plow it all this while? And should it not grieve
and afflict your Souls, that you have for many Years lain fallow, and have
brought forth no Fruits of Righteousness to God? Jeremiah says of Israel to
God, They have done nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do, Jer.
32.23. Sinners are wholly at Satan's beck, dispose, command; he has been
sowing, grafting, and nursing up his Tares in them. O let this humble you, That
the Devil has been watering, improving, strengthening your vile Lusts and
Affections. O that God should spare you so long, support you by his arms of
Power, and supply you out of the Treasures of his Goodness, when you were not
only without him, Zeph. 12. but also against him in the World! It is a great
Evil to be without God, as if there were no such glorious Being, or you had no
need of him; but it is worse to be against God, to walk contrary to him, to
fight against his Laws, and Kingdom, as if he did bereave you of your Liberty
and Pleasure, and enact Laws contrary to your Freedom, Comfort, and Happiness.
How have your Lusts consumed your Time, and eat up those Years that should have
been Fruitful to God? O be sensible that you have defrauded God, by not bearing
good Fruits; and have burdened him by the abundance of your evil Fruit.

2. When you begin to break up your Fallow Ground, O call for, and seek after
the Assistance of the spirit of God, to direct the Plow, to put his Hand on it,
that it may cut deep. You need that God should speak with a strong Hand, Isaiah
8.11. That the Hand of the Lord should be with them that preach, Acts 11.20,
21. That when Ministers do strike the Rock of your hearts, that the Lord should
stand on the Rock, (as he Promised Moses) and cause it to cleave, and to give
out Waters of Penitential Tears, Exodus 17.6.

In vain do Ministers Thunder, and Lighten in the Conscience, if the spirit of
God does not set home Convictions, and seal up Instructions on the Soul. The
Holy Ghost must Arrest, seize upon, and shut up the Soul in Prison, that else
will go at Liberty, and be under no Restraint, either from the Command, or
Threatenings of God. If Guilt, and Wrath, do not lie hard, and heavy, on the
Soul, Men will not regard Reconciliation, Redemption, and Salvation. Those that
make light, yea, a mock at sin, Prove. 14.9. will make light of Christ's Feast,
and Salvation, Matt. 22.5.

We need the spirit of Christ to cast Chains of Light, and Conviction, about
us, and to shut us up under the bitter sense of our Transgressions, and to make
us such close Prisoners, as to shut out all the Worlds Comforts from us, that
they may be able to administer no support, relief, or refreshment to us, that
we may wholly have recourse to Christ, and listen to him for Consolation. It is
very contrary to Flesh and Blood, for Men to acknowledge themselves worthy of
the Curse, and to say Amen to it, Deuteronomy. 27. last. But if it be not thus, how
can we run to Christ, that all the Promises may be Amen to us through him? We
cannot subdue our Souls to Spiritual Tillage, if the Holy Ghost does not subdue
our Iniquities, Micah 7.19.

3. We must take hold of God's gracious and free Promises, to encourage us to
set on this Tillage, and breaking up of our Fallow ground.

Adam was sent out of the Garden of Eden to Till the Ground; but this might
much dishearten him, That the Ground was Cursed for his sake: And that God did
threaten him, That it should bring forth Thorns and Thistles to him: That these
should spring up in his Plowed Land, and grow among his Corn. It is grievous to
plow and sow under a Curse; to break the Ground, and sow Wheat, and yet to Reap
Thorns, Jer. 1.2, 13. They sowed wheat, but reaped thorns, and so were ashamed
of their Revenues. A Harvest of Thorns was a very sad, and shameful Crop; but
do not Men disappoint God? He sows good Seed, yet the Souls of Sinners do
bring forth Briars and Thorns, Heb. 6.8. Justly therefore may the Earth
disappoint Man, when Man frustrates God. I looked for Grapes (says God) but
his Vineyard brought forth wild grapes, Isa. 5.4. But this is a great
encouragement to our Spiritual Husbandry, That there are so many great and
precious Promises, that God's own Power and Grace will accomplish and fulfill.
It is said, The Wilderness shall blossom as a rose. Isa. 35.1. That floods of
water shall be poured out on the dry ground, to enrich and make it fruitful,
Isa. 44.3. That the spirit shall be poured out on the Offspring of the Church,
therefore they should spring up as the willows by the watercourse: One should
say I am the Lords, another should subscribe, and as by writing bind himself to
the Lord, Isa. 44.4, 5. That the deaf should hear the word of the book, Isa.
29.18. And the dead should hear the voice of the Son of God, and live, John
5.25.

There are Promises made to Christ that he shall see his Seed; behold the
travel of his soul and be satisfied, and that by his knowledge he shall justify
many, Isa. 53.11. That he should call Nations, that knew not him, and they
should run to him, Isa. 55.5. And the Apostles that God should send to the
Gentiles, should succeed and prevail, and bring in the Gentiles (that are
called their Brethren) as living Sacrifices, as holy Offerings to God's
spiritual Temple, Isa. 66.18, 19, 20. Therefore the Labors of God's Messengers
cannot be in vain: As Ministers are Plowers, and Seeds-men, so they shall be
Harvest-men, Matt. 9. last. The Seed they sow should spring up to a Harvest,
Hearers should be Converted, gathered into the Barn of the Church, there be
threshed and winnowed for the Garner of Heaven, Matt. 3.12. What sweet and
encouraging words are these, I will put Laws into their inward parts, and write
them in their hearts, Jer. 31.33. Ministers are but as Pens, but the spirit
does handle these Pens to write an Epistle with them, whereby the Soul is
dedicated to God and Christ, 2 Cor. 3.3.

How reviving are these Words, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new Heart will I give to you,
a new Spirit will I put within you: I will take away the Heart of Stone, and
give a Heart of Flesh. My Spirit also will I put within you, and cause you to
walk in my Statutes, and keep my Commandments.

As Christ does speak in his Ministers, 2 Cor. 13.3. so he works by them, and
in them, Mark 16.20. how greatly would Ministers else be deterred from this
Tillage? Shall Horses run on the Rock? will one plow there with Oxen? Amos
6.12. Some Seed is said to fall on a Rock, Luke 8.6. To plow and sow on a Rock
is very uncomfortable; yet this Promise of God, I will take away the Heart of
Stone, may bear up Ministers against these Difficulties.

4. You must persist and go on in this Work of breaking up your fallow Ground.
As there are Fallows in the visible Church, many there do need Conversion; so
in the best of the Saints there is a carnal and unregenerate part, that well
may be called a fallow Ground; this Ground should still be plowed up. More
Ground in the Soul should be subdued, converted to Tillage, and manured; there
is still a barren part, there is still a Soil that nourishes Weeds, and is
overrun with Thorns, this is to be broken up: We are sowed but in part, bear
Fruit but in part; With our flesh we serve the Law of Sin, Romans 17. ult.
Nehemiah complained, That though their Captivity was turned, yet they were
Servants in their own Land; and it yielded much increase to the Kings that GOD
had set over them: because of their Sins, Neh. 9.36, 37. the Kings of Persia
were still their Lords, and out of their Labors they paid Tribute, either in
Money or Fruits, to them. But how much more is this to be bewailed and
lamented, that Sin and Satan have yet some Ground in us that bears Fruit unto
them? Should we not therefore more break up our fallow Ground? Should not the
Kingdom of Christ, and the Coasts of the New Creature be more enlarged in us?

Joshua divided to the Children of Israel even the Nations not yet conquered,
and did yet remain in Canaan, and encouraged the Israelites to fight against
them, with this Promise, The Lord your God shall expel them from before you,
Joshua 23.4, 5. So all that is possessed by the Flesh in us is divided to us,
is to be the Portion and Lot of the New Creature. We should still therefore
more crucify and subdue the Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts; the New
Creature should more cast forth its Roots, and spread its Branches; we should
gain more Ground from the Sea of Corruption, and turn more of our Souls to
Tillage.

5. We should presently set on this Work, and fall to break up our fallow
Ground. The Jews said, The time was not yet come, the time that the Lord's
House should be built, Hag. 1.2. So sloathful Souls are ready to say, The time
is not yet come to fall to plow, and break up their fallow Ground; they are yet
but in their Youth, in the Morning of their days, two or three hours of their
day will suffice to sow Seed enough, and to provide for an Eternal Harvest: but
this Tillage may well take up our whole Day of Life. It is to please an
Infinite God, it is to enjoy an Eternal Harvest, that we plow; God cannot sow
us to himself, Hosea 2. ult, and we cannot sow to our selves in Righteousness,
and reap in Mercy: We cannot bring our Sheaves with joy, and eat the fruits of
our doings with comfort for ever, Isa. 3.10. if we do not break up our fallow
Ground. We should make haste, and not delay to obey this Command of God, Psalm.
119.59, 60. Do not mind and pursue the World, as if that were your greatest
Business and chiefest Happiness: consider, to mind earthly things is a great
sin, Phil. 3.19. to have our Portion in this life is a sore Judgment, Psalm.
17.14. to have their Backs continually bowed down, to look after and pursue
carnal things, is a dreadful Curse, Romans 11.10. be persuaded, be convinced that
it is high time to break up your fallow Ground, and to seek the Lord: O desire
to be God's Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9. O, cry to him to enlighten your dark Minds,
to break your hard Hearts, to spiritualize your carnal Affections: Seek God
diligently, seek him with your whole Heart, seek him continually, that he would
write his Law in you, stamp his Image on you, and graft his Word in you, Jam.
1.21. and thereby graft you into Christ, and plant you in the likeness of his
Death and Resurrection, Romans 6.5. to root and ground you in the Faith, Col.
2.7. Do not delay, do not defer this necessary Work of Spiritual Tillage, lest
hereby you fall into the Snare of the Devil, he that now tells you it is yet
too soon to set on this Work, to break up your fallow Ground; After your long
idleness and negligence, the Devil may change his Temptation, and suggest to
you, that the time to break up your fallow ground is now past; that it is too
late to set on this Work, when your Hearts are hardened by the deceitfulness of
Sin, your Day of Grace is past, God's Treasury is locked, his Fountain of Life
is sealed, his Bowels of Mercy shut: Therefore you must pine away in Horror
and Despair, and perish for ever.


