A DEFENSE OF Mr. M. H's Brief ENQUIRY INTO THE NATURE OF SCHISM And the
Vindication of it.

WITH REFLECTIONS Upon a Pamphlet called The Review, etc.

And a Brief Historical Account of Nonconformity from the Reformation to this
Present Time.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, at
the Lower End of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, 1693.

THE PREFACE.
I Expect to hear from all Sides, that such Controversies as these, at this
time a day, are very inopportune and Ill advised; I confess we have as much
reason to value our present Ease and Quiet as any People in the World, and to
avoid every thing that may disturb or endanger it: And we have not so abandoned
the Principles of Self-preservation, as willingly to expose our selves to
repeated Severities.

And if I had not some Cause to believe that our silent disregard of the Abuses
put upon us, will be made (by Innuendo's) a Confession of Guilt, and will
harden and encourage our Adversaries against us, I would have took no notice of
the Citizen's Reply, but have left him and his Learned Cabal, to the sweet
Delights of a fancied Conquest.

I know we may safely appeal, from his sordid Calumnies, to the juster
Sentiments, of the soberest and wisest of the Episcopal Persuasion, who have
been full as severe in the Censure of his Pamphlets, as is necessary for us to
be; but I am also assured, there are too many in this emancipated Age, that are
passionately fond of any thing that throws dirt upon Dissenters, and true or
false, sense or nonsense, it is all one to them; whose insatiable Lusts have
left them neither Time nor Capacity to search into the true state and merits of
the Cause.

I wonder upon what Inducement, this Gentleman should take upon him to quarrel
with Mr. H's Enquiry, unless it were that he might make himself the Favorite
of such a Generation of Men; or that his Ghostly Fathers had obliged him to do
Penance in those Sheets; I know not what could have been writ, more fair and
inoffensive, than that Book; Schism was the Word, that had animated Men with a
strange, Blind Zeal, against all those upon whom their Leading Men had fixed
the mark; and it was given out with so much Industry, as if it had been the
Shibboleth of the Party, reserved for some special Service against a convenient
Season.

Mr. H. kindly endeavored to undeceive them, and by enquiring into the Quality
of those Actions, upon which this Sin is charged in Scripture to discover its
true formal Nature, that Men might not fight in the dark, and build vast and
endless Controversies upon a single Word, and that too not rightly understood.

He observes that the word Schism is not used in Scripture in any sense
applicable to the present Case, save only three times in St. Paul's first
Epistle to the Corinthians, those places he has particularly examined. He shows
that those Schismatical Corinthians met in the same place still, but contending
with one another, about some lesser matters to the breach of Christian Love,
and Mutual Alienation of their Affections, fell into the Sin there called
Schism; Enquiry, p. 9.
concluding from hence, that the formal Nature of this Sin consists not in
Separation of Communion, but in the Violation of that Love and Charity there
ought to be amongst Christians; Acknowledging nevertheless, that many Overt
Actions may be, and are Schismatical, as they proceed from this
Uncharitableness; and he mentions such as these, Judging and Condemning one
another about the Circumstantials of Religion; reproaching and reviling each
other; making, approving, and executing Penal Laws, about such things; and
Separation from Communion with those we have joined our selves to without
cause; that is, (as he explains it) without regard had to any thing amiss in
the Church we separate from, or any thing better in that we join our selves to,
which he calls Separation for Separation's sake; This is Schism, not barely
because Separation, but because animated by that Uncharitableness and
Disaffection, which in Scripture is known by the Name of Schism.

The Gentleman, could not digest a Notion so far different from what he had
imbibed; Reply, p. 2.
but tells us, Mr. H's Book had not much more of Schism than of the
Philosopher's Stone in it: He was loath so heavy a Charge should lie against
Uncharitableness, which being a main Ingredient in his own Constitution, must
be more softly and tenderly handled, he thinks it more Prudent to lay the Fault
so, as he may bear the least share of it himself; Arch-Rebel, p. 10.
and therefore boldly affirms, that Diversity of Communion is the Ratio
formalis of Schism; and more than that, says he, has proved it to be so.

The Author of the Vindication justly blamed him, for so rash and confident an
Assertion, as giving the Lie to the Word of God, which Charges the Corinthians
with the Guilt of Schism, when there was no such diversity of Communion; and
can there be a Schism where that is wanting, which he calls the true formal
Nature of Schism? Can a thing exist without its Essential Form? To this, the
Gentleman replies, Shall a Cut in the Arm be truly Schism, and not the
separating the Arm from the Body? If Paul condemned the Corinthians of Schism,
for preferring one Minister before another, Shall that far greater Crime of
separating from them, be excluded from Schism? This Gentleman is a topping
Accuser.

But we cannot Complement this Gentleman so far as to call him a Topping
Defendant; For the Question was not, Whether there may not be a Separation that
is really Schismatical, Mr. H. granted that; But whether Separation be the very
Essence and formal Nature of Schism? If so, then there can be no Schism without
such Separation; which is false, as in the Case of the Corinthians; nor any
Separation without Schism, which is equally false; for in many cases we may be
obliged in Duty to separate: His Comparison of Cutting the Arm from the Body is
like it self, Lame and Defective; for sometimes such a Scissure may be
necessary to keep the Body from perishing: In short, if Separation be needless,
it is sinful; if Uncharitable, it is Schismatical; if neither needless nor
Uncharitable, it is a Duty; And let it be observed by the way, that in this
Reply, the Gentleman acknowledges the Corinthians were guilty of Schism, though
they did not Separate; when before he told us, he had proved that the Ratio
formalis of Schism, consists in Separation, let him reconcile these things at
his leisure.

He thinks if such Uncharitableness be Schism, it must follow, a minori ad
majus, diversity of Communion is much more so; but the reasoning is not good,
for Uncharitableness can in no case be lawful, but Separation may: He himself
acknowledges, that if any of their terms of Communion be sinful, our Separation
is justifiable; and yet even in that case, Uncharitableness would be a Sin.

If this Gentleman must needs let the World see his Talent in Controversy, he
should have taken up the true Question, as it was laid before him, What is
that which the Scripture calls Schism? and should have proved in all those
Instances, where mention is made of it, that there was not only Alienation of
Affection, but diversity of Communion; and when he had done this, it had been
time enough to have boasted, that he had answered Mr. H's Enquiry, till then
his Labor is impertinent, and his Triumphs ridiculous.

But instead of observing this Proper and Necessary Method, which by all the
Laws of Argument he was bound to, he ranges from the Point, and Chimes upon
those decantate terms, Church, Unity, Communion, Obedience, Succession, etc.
and is wonderfully pleased with the melodious Sound of words he does not
understand; for though he should from these Topics, prove the Practice of
Dissenters to be sinful, yet he cannot prove it to be that Sin which in
Scripture is called Schism, unless he can discover in it, that
Uncharitableness, and want of Christian Affection, which is the very thing
called by that Name in sacred Writ.

This would be sufficient for the Defense of Mr. H's Enquiry, without ever
entering upon the Lawfulness or Fault of Nonconformity; but since the Valiant
Man has challenged us into that Field of Argument, we have gone along with him
into it, and endeavored to justify our Practice not only from the Crime of
Schism, but any other of which it has been accused, and how far we have
succeeded in this Affair, is with all possible respect referred to the Censure
of the Learned and Moderate of both Persuasions.

The grand Impertinencies exposed in the Gentleman's first Paper, he has
endeavored to defend in the latter; but through the Common Misfortune of a Man
that meddles with what he does not understand, he is more bewildred and
confounded than before; and indeed of all things that ever set up for a Defense
of so Learned a Party as the Episcopal, I never saw any thing comparable to
this, for Style and Argument, unless it were the famous Works of Mrs. Eleanor
James, to which this Gentleman's Reply bears such a mavelous resemblance,
that a man would almost conclude it to be the issue of some Friendly Conference
betwixt our Citizen, and that renowned Heroine.

I wonder why he should be so much disturbed, that the Vindicator has concealed
his Name, especially when he did not think fit to discover his own; for T. W.
Citizen of Chester, is a Cipher so general, as remits us to conjecture, and
common fame, and leaves him room to escape, if any such danger should happen,
as he portends concerning his adversary; but what great matter is it, who is
meant by T. W. or what that man's name is, that has adventured to encounter him;
it is not names, but things, that we have to examine; and yet by his little
contemptible menaces, it is very apparent, that he would gladly betake himself
to their former way of Confuting Dissenters, as that which was always found to
be the most easy and effectual.

He Triumphs in the Effects of his former Paper, one of which was, few believed
but that it was done by some Clergyman, who had prevailed with him to Print it
in his Name; That is to say, they thought it beyond the longth of T. W. to
write such a Book; a shrewd sign, that his Neighbors have no great Opinion of
his Abilities, if they thought such stuff was above him; but as his Name is
capable of giving little Reputation to another man's work, so I dare say no
Clergy man in Chester will grudge him the Honor of his own.

He would not be thought, to have acted beneath himself in his Reply, and
therefore he magnifies the Stature of his Adversary, and transforms the
Vindicator into a Ship, and by all means, it must be one of the first Rate,
that was chosen to Attack and Fire all its Guns, at his mighty Self, so happy a
thing it is to have Gazetts and News Letters always at hand, where a man can
never fail of being furnished, with Admirable Metaphors, but (if we must needs
speak in such Bombardick Language) though the Vindicator was size enough, for
the Service assigned him, yet there was no need of choosing a Man of War of the
first Rate, to engage a disabled Frigate, Venus arta Mari.
whose Mast and Tackling, had suffered miserably in some hot Sea Fights
heretofore.

But it is no part of my design, to vye with him in his Bantering Dialect, I
shall therefore apply my self in good earnest, to the matter in Hand, and in
the Remainder of this Preface, defend some lesser Passages in the Vindication,
which this Gentleman either does not understand, or will not seem to do so, and
afterward proceed to the more material parts of the Controversy.

In his first Paper he pretends to tell us, of the Origination and first
Existence of the Church, which he dates only from the time of Pentecost,
mentioned Acts 2. The Vindicator thought there was Reason to find fault with
that Account of the Matter, not only because it excludes the Angels, which but
a few Lines before, this Gentleman had told us, were members of the Church, but
especially, because it shuts out the Jewish Church, as it stood in Old
Testament Times; but he has a Salvo ready such as it is, and he that can
content himself with such a one will never be at want, for (...) ^oes. The
Church was never called Catholic before that (...) ^ost, the Wall of Partition
not being broken down; But if I mistake not, he promised to show us, when the
Church had its first Existence, not when it acquired a new Title; it is an odd
way of arguing, The Church was first called Catholic at Pentecost, therefore
it had its first Existence then, a miserable Consequence, and yet as good as
the Antecedent, for it is not true that the Church was called Catholic at that
time, nor do we find it once so called in all the Scripture that I know of (and
the Wall of Partition was broken down at Christ's Death, when the Vail of the
Temple was rent in sunder) and if in spite of all Reason the Existence of a
Church must needs commence with its acquest of a new Title, he must still fix
his Epoch much lower; and yet I know not, why the Name Catholic, may not (if
men please) be attributed to the Jewish Church, which was before its Apostasy
the whole, and the true Visible Church of God upon Earth.

The Vindicator told him, nothing could be proved from the bare Name of Bishops
in Scripture-times, to favor our English Prelacy, till the Power of those
Bishops, the Extent of their Dioceses, the Quality of their Underofficers, the
Modes of their Worship, and Terms of Communion, be proved to be the same with
ours, or liable to the same Exceptions; To this the Gentleman replies, I cannot
understand this last Sentence (or liable to the same Exceptions,) unless he
would make the Primitive Church liable to the same Exceptions; But I hope we
are not to be blamed, for the dullness of his understanding; The Expression is
Plain and Pertinent, He knows very well what Exceptions we make, against the
Power of our English Prelates, etc. Now if he can prove that the same
Objections lie against the Primitive Episcopacy, he shows thereby that they are
frivolous and unjust, and throws them out of doors, as militating against
Scripture Bishops as well as ours; one would have thought the meanest Citizen
in Chester, might have understood this, but it will never be better, when men
take upon them to be Authors, in spite of Nature and Education.

He condemns the Vindicator, as having no regard to Ecclesiastical Antiquity,
for speaking of Scripture Rules, before they were written, this lets us see,
What Mercy we may expect from him, when we stand in need of it: We will
endeavor therefore to be as little beholden to him as we can; and as to this
matter, a few Words will evince, that his Reflection is very unjust.

In his former Paper, Arch-Rebel, p. 2.
speaking of the Progress of the Gospel, and planting the seven Asian Churches,
in St. John's time, he adds, Though there was a Multiplication of Churches, yet
no Variation; here the Vindicator enquired; What does he mean in saying there
was no Variation? Was there no variety at all in any Circumstance of Worshop
that is gratis dictum? if he means there was no Variation from Scripture Rules,
(though we are afraid that will scarce hold yet) we wish it had been so still.
Now it seems the Vindicators Error was, he spoke of Scripture Rules in the
Apostolical Age, and they were not then written; No? That Is something strange,
were not the Gospels and Epistles writ by Evangelists and Apostles, during the
time of their Lives? No Legend that ever I heard of, tells us of their rising
from the dead, and writing to the Churches; And if they writ their Epistles,
containing Rules for Divine Worship, why may not those be called Scripture
Rules: What if they were not Collected as soon as they were writ, were they not
therefore both Scripture, and Authoritative? And yet very Learned Men think the
Canon of Scripture was collected in St. John's time, and that this awful
Sanction, If any shall add to these things, God will add unto him the Plagues
that are written in this Book, etc. Refers not only to the Apocalypse, but to
the whole Canon, and stands like the Cherub with a flaming Sword to Guard the
Tree of Life, and if this Gentleman be for Scripture Rules, that were not
written in the Time of the Apostles, I despair of ever coming to an agreement
with him.

And it is certain, there is a very material difference betwixt us, about the
Rule and Standard of Controversy, which must be first adjusted, before we can
well proceed any further, for if we take different Measures, we shall certainly
give a very different account.

Mr. H. desirous to find out the true Notion of Schism, takes for his Rule, all
those places in the New Testament, where that Word is found; This the Gentleman
is offended at, and tells him, If he had enquired into the ninth Article of the
Apostles Creed, then he had found out the true Standard of this Controversy;
And the Vindicator thought, there was more Reason to be offended with him, for
declining the sufficiency of the Scripture, as the standard of Faith and
Practice, this he censured as an affront to Scripture, and common Sense too,
for when the Authority of that Creed depends solely upon its agreement with
Scripture, how senceless a thing is it, to make that a truer Standard than
Scripture, whose Truth and meaning is to be derived purely from it? What
defense now will the Citizen make? As good as he can afford no doubt; He
charges the Vindicator with saying, that an Article of Faith, is an affront to
Scripture and Common Sense, which is as false as any thing in the World, we
appeal to the Readers Eyes, and desire no other favor, but that he Read true.

To bring himself off, he acknowledges, That the Scripture indeed is the truest
touchstone of Sin and Duty, but he adds, whoever he be that expounds the Holy
Scripture, in Contradiction to an Article of the Creed, must needs err; and we
are assured of the Error, by that Article it contradicts.

Should we grant this to be good Sense and Divinity, yet it will not serve his
turn; for then he should not have accused Mr. H. of taking a wrong Standard,
but have proved, that he made an Erroneous Application of the true One to his
Case, which are two different things; a man may take a true measure, and yet
mistake in measuring a thing by it, but to tell him in the former Paper, of not
finding out the true standard, and to think to come off in this, by blaming his
Exposition of it, is a very sorry shift, which his Ignorance, or Inadvertency
has forced him upon.

And yet we must not let him go, without further Examination about this matter,
for it is certain he is fallen into a most dangerous Error, making the
Compilers of the Apostolical and Nicene Creeds, the Infallible Interpreters of
Scripture; for so he tells us. Reply, p. 11.
We come to be infallibly assured, that the Socinian Interpretation of
Scripture against the Divinity of Christ is False, because it contradicts that
Article, I believe in Jesus the only begotten Son of God, and that in the
Nicene Creed, God of God, very God of very God, being of one Substance with the
Father.

This is an Opinion, which his own Spiritual Guides, are obliged to chastize
him for, being so contrary to the avowed Principles of all Protestant Churches,
and to what our Learned Doctors have worthily asserted in their late Writings
against the Papists, to which I refer him for his better Information, amongst
others, let him consult the Ingenious Dr. Sherlock, in his Preservative against
Popery, where having declared that the Protestants abide by that, Part 1st. P.
49.
which they see plainly proved out of Scripture, bids us put this Question, How
shall we know what is the true sense of Scriptures, and proposes three ways,
either by an Infallible Interpreter, or the unanimous Consent of the Fathers,
or by such humane means as are used, to find out the sense of other Books; He
rejects the Pretensions of an Infallible Interpreter, and disapproves of the
Rule of Expounding Scripture by the Consent of the Fathers, and concludes there
is no way left, but to expound it as we do other Writings, by considering the
Signification, and Propriety of Words, and Phrases, the Scope and Context of
the Place, the Reason of things, the Analogy between the Old and New Testament,
and the like.

Our Citizen has found out that Infallible Interpreter, which the Learned
Doctor was ignorant of; He is infallibly assured of the Divinity of Christ,
because the Compilers of the Apostolical and Nicene Creeds, have so Interpreted
Scripture; but what if one should ask him, How he is sure the Doctrines of the
Creed are true Expositions of Scripture? Either he must fall into the Circle,
or resolve his Faith into the Infallibility of the Church, and Compilers of
those Creeds; and therein he turns his back upon the Church of England, and all
the Reformed, in one of the Principal and most Important Points of
Controversy, the Resolution of Faith.

I will not suppose him so ignorant, as to think that the Apostles were the
Authors of that Creed, that goes under their Name; Bishop Pearson, and Dr.
Towerson, will tell him the contrary, and by the Confession of all Protestants,
These Creeds are but summary Collections of the most principal Doctrines of
Faith, put into that form by Fallible Men, and are to be received no further,
and on no other account, than as they are Consonant to the Word of God, and
therefore were never intended, as a Standard or Rule of Faith, or as an
infallible Interpreter of that which is so; I wonder how this Gentleman would
have been infallibly assured of the Divinity of Christ, if he had lived before
these Symbols were extant, I wonder, how he is infallibly assured of the true
sense of these Creeds? I doubt, he wants one Creed to give an Infallible
Interpretation of another, and so ad Infinitum; but if he say, the sense of
these Creeds is very plain and obvious to any ordinary Capacity, so is the
Scripture too in all Fundamental Points, and is sufficient Assurance of the
Truth of them, without the joint Security of Ancient Creeds and Churches.

Whether these odd Opinions, are to be imputed to his inconsiderateness, of
which every Page affords us instances enough, or rather to the Happy
Illuminations, of his great Rabbi, Mr. Dodwell, I will not determine; but the
latter is not improbable, if we compare it, with what that Amphibious Gentleman
writes, Separation of Churches, p. 542.
That the Power actually received by Ordained Ministers must not be measured by
the true Sense of Scriptures, but by that wherein the Ordainers understood
them, etc. Many other Effata of the like Nature, have proceeded from that great
Oracle, which would scarcely have been encouraged or so much as suffered in any
Reformed Church besides our own, but it was sufficient to make these things
passable, that they were levelled at the Dissenters, and sent them all headlong
into the Pit.

I think it may not be amiss to defend the Vindicator from the Imputation of
Malice, against the late Archbishop of Canterbury, which this Gentleman very
unfairly suggests; the Passage aimed at, is this, To say, that Bishops, Vindic.
p. 18.
which are stated Pastors in an Organical Church, are the Apostles Successors,
in their Apostolical Power, is destructive to their own Notion of Church
Government, and would give the Bishop of Rome as great Power in England, as the
Archbishop of Canterbury (when there is any.) All the Malice lies in this
little Parenthesis, when there is any, and here the Citizen clamours upon him,
for reviling Gods High Priest, Reply, p. 18.
and speaking evil of the Ruler of his People; What Apology will the Vindicator
now make? Truly, if it was my own Case, I would desire no better, than that of
St. Paul under the same Accusation, I wist not Brethren, that he was the High
Priest. The late Archbishop, had been deprived by Law, above half a Year
before that Vindication was writ, and the Metropolitan See was vacant, a
considerable time after this was Printed, and yet it was a malicious Reviling
of the Ruler of Gods People, to say there was none, I will not drive this too
far, I hope he can give a better Reason for calling the Deprived Prelate the
Ruler of Gods People than I can for him; If he was the Ruler still, What
becomes of the Authority of those that deprived him? It had been more becoming
this Gentleman, to have answered that Argument, wherein this Parenthesis had
its Place, than by falling foul upon so Innocent an Expression, to expose those
thoughts, which Prudence would have concealed.

I know not of any thing else in his Reply that needs to be taken notice of,
but what will fall under the General Heads of this following Treatise; wherein
I have attempted (at least) to prove, that our Congregations, are not
Schismatical, or Unlawful, though many of our Ministers, were not Ordained by
Diocesan Bishops, though the Places we meet in be distinct from the Parish
Churches, and the Mode of our Worship in some things different from theirs.

And because I find the most Learned of our Adversaries condemn our Present
Practice,

1. As Inconsistent with Catholic Unity and Communion.

2. As Guilty of Disobedience to Superiors, Civil and Spiritual.

3. And of Scandalous Indecencies, and a Breach of good Rules and Order, I
shall examine the matter as carefully as I can under all these Particulars,
heartily Praying that whatever Censures, I bring upon my self, the Interests of
Truth and Peace may be promoted.

ERRATA.
PAge, 6. l. 38. r. retained. p. 16. l. 13. r. consciousness. p. 20. margent,
r. August. p. 33. l. 38. r. Diaboli instinctu. p. 37. l. 15. and p. 38. l. 12.
for rite, r. right. p. 117. l. 17. for Ananias r. Anianus. Several lesser
faults will occur, which are referred to the Reader's Candor and Emendation.

A Defense of the Vindication, etc.
CHAP. 1.
The true Notion of Catholic Unity; distinguished into Political and Moral. A
Regular Ministry not Essential to this Unity. The Judgment of the Fathers and
others.

IT is the observation of an Ingenious Gentleman, that the World has never been
without some extraordinary word, to fill men's mouths, and furnish out
Pamphlets, and by which the Sentiments of men, have been for the most part more
absolutely governed, than by the true reason of things, for Reason concludes
nothing, without disquisition; but the other, like a kind of spell, captivates
and determines men's thoughts, many times beyond the Relief, of the most
rational and convincing Arguments.

Amongst all the Charms of this nature, which take place as the Interests and
Designs of Parties, or posture of Public Affairs, vary and direct, I know of
none, that has been more unmercifully tortured, and forced to speak things
never intended by it, than this of Unity: It has been the Motto, and Device, of
every Ascendant Party, in the Militant Church, to frighten the weak and
timorous, and chastise the more resolute opposers of Spiritual Usurpation and
Tyranny.

The Papists, for the good Service it has done them, have preferred it to be
the Seventh Note of their Church, according to the Order in which their great
Cardinal has marshalled them; and under the Umbrage thereof, have raised the
greatest Feuds and Divisions, that ever infested the Christian World. In their
most bloody Persecutions, barbarous and funest Tragedies, they have still
pretended to act by the Commission of Catholic Unity, to advance her
Interests, and to make her glorious in the World; when in the mean time,
Christianity it self has been rendered odious and contemptible, Ridente Turce,
nec dolente Judaeo.
Turks, Jews, and Pagans, have beheld her flames with pleasure, and warmed
themselves, and said, Aha, thus we would have it.

It must not be denied, but that Catholic Unity, where it is so happy as to be
understood, acquaints us with something very sacred and venerable, of which we
cannot be too fond or tender, it bears the Image of Divinity; and if it were
not in it self a most excellent thing, the name of it, could never be made so
specious a pretense.

It has been often, and confidently asserted, that all the Dissenters in
England, have departed from the Unity and Communion of the Catholic Church:
This lies as a mighty prejudice in the minds of many, both against our way,
Arch-Rebel, p. 28. Reply, p. 1.
and persons too; and their common Inference from hence is, That we are out of
a State of Salvation, have no right to any of the Promises of the Gospel, that
all our Hopes are unwarrantable and groundless Fancies, that we are contemners
of the Peace and Unity which Christ has bequeathed to his Church; and if they
will demonstrate, that our case is indeed such as they describe it, we will not
persist in it a day longer, for we cannot be so fond of the Inconveniences of
Nonconformity here, as merely for the sake thereof to purchase to our selves,
greater Miseries hereafter.

But that we may evince, how void of Reason and Humanity, the Sentence which
they have past upon us is, let us enquire, wherein the Catholic Unity and
Communion of the Church consists, and then try, whether none of our Dissenting
Congregations be within the Verge of it.

By this Catholic Unity, our Adversaries understand, not that which is
accidental, may be present or absent without the destruction of the Subject,
which some Churches may have, and other True Churches may be without, for then
it would not serve their purpose, which is to conclude all that want this
Unity, to be in a State of Damnation; and indeed it is the truest acceptance
of the word, to make it signify Essential Universal Unity, (Uniformity in
accidentals belonging more properly to the common place of order) in this
sense, therefore we shall speak of it, that we may come up as close to their
thoughts as we can.

Nothing then belongs to the Catholic Unity of the Church, but what belongs to
the being of the Church; that which makes it a Church makes it one; Ens and
Unum being convertible; and nothing can dissolve its Unity which does not
destroy its Essence; and certainly the being, and the state of the Church must
not be confounded: Many things are required to the due and orderly state and
form, in which the Church ought to be, and appear in the World, and which may
contribute to her stability, beauty and enlargement, which suppose her Essence,
but do not constitute it.

This Essential Catholic Unity whereof we speak, may be distinguished into
Political and Moral.

Political, whereby all the True Members of the Church are united unto Christ
the Head, and that is by true Faith: And

Moral, by which they are United one to another, and that is by Christian Love,
which in some degree always follows the former; those that have a mind to it,
may quarrel with the terms of this distinction; but if I may but express my
meaning by them, I shall not be at all concerned about it.

1. The Political Unity, is that which does primarily, necessarily, and
immediately constitute, that Sacred Society, the Church of God, which was
therefore by the Primitive Christians, as well as our first Reformers,
frequently known by this short definition, Catus fidelium, the Congregation of
the Faithful; sometimes, the Body of Christ, the Temple of God, Divin. Instit.
l. 4. c. 13.
and such like: So Lactantius, Ecclesia est verum Templum Dei quod non in
parietibus est, sed in cord, and fide hominum, qui credunt in eum, and
vocantur fideles; The Church is the True Temple of God, which does not consist
in the bare Walls, but in the Hearts, and Faith of Men that believe on him, and
are called Faithful; and before him Ignatius, in the same sense calls it,
(...), The Holy Congregation, Ep. ad Trall. vid. Isidor. Pelus. Epist. l. 2.
Ep. 247.
the Assembly of the Saints. To the same purpose speak all those Fathers who
affirm, that the Church was built upon the Faith of Peter, not upon his Person
or Authority, a great Cloud whereof, the Illustrious Chamier, has collected to
our hand, proving thereby, that our Union with the Church, De Oecumen. Pont. l.
11. c. 4.
is founded in our believing on Christ, the True Foundation, and Chief Corner
Stone; nothing therefore can dissolve this Union, but what is inconsistent with
True Faith in Christ.

And this agrees fully, with the tenor of Holy Scripture, which every where
lays the Salvation of Men upon their believing, Ephesians. 3.17.4.13.
1 Pet. 2.6. Behold I lay in Zion a Chief Corner Stone, elect, precious, and he
that believes on him shall not be confounded. By this Faith Men are United to
Christ, and therefore cannot be divided from his Body which is the Church. St.
Paul calls the Church of God, the House or Family of God, and how a Man comes
to be a Member of that Noble Family, we are told, Ephesians. 2.18. by the Spirit ( i.
e. working of Faith) we have access unto the Father, and are no more Strangers
and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens of the Saints, Gal. 6.10.
and of the Household of God; and therefore this Household of God is elsewhere
called the Household of Faith. In short, nothing is more evident than that the
Apostles received Men and Women into the Visible Church by Baptism, upon the
Profession of their Faith in Christ, and thereby invested them in all the
Sacred Privileges of the New Covenant, which belong only to the Church of God.

This Excellent Grace of Faith, from whence our Union with Christ, and his Body
the Church does flow, is a very comprehensive thing, it includes our solemn and
hearty Choice of the Eternal God, as our chiefest Happiness, and hereby all the
True Members of the Church, are United in the Love and Service of One God, and
so distinguished from the Pagan World, and in an humble affiance in One
Mediator, in whose hand alone, they are brought back unto God, and hereby are
distinguished from Mahometans, and those that call themselves Deists, they are
also United in the gracious Influences of One blessed Spirit; and hereby are
distinguished from all impenitent sensual persons, who have grieved and
quenched that Spirit: And they are hereby United in One Rule of Faith, Worship,
and Obedience; not that they all understand this Rule alike, or are fully
conformed unto it; but in this they agree, that they all take it for their
Rule, and endeavor an Universal Compliance with it, and are distinguished
hereby from all that reject this Law, and set up any other in opposition to it:
This Faith likewise Unites them in One Baptism, not that they all agree in the
External Was^^^^ and Modes of Administration, but in that which the Apostle
Peter makes to (...) Substance of it, not the putting away of the filth of the
flesh, but (...) of a good Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 2.21.
when a Man's Conscience returns a consenting Answer to the Gospel Proposals,
and by a solemn Self-dedication becomes Sacred to God, he has then the
Substance of that Ordinance.

This is the True Catholic Unity, described in the 4th of Ephesians. 5, 6. There
is one Body, and one Spirit, even as you are called in one Hope of your
Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and the Father of all, who
is above all, and through all, and in you all.

2. The Moral Unity, by which the Members are knit one to another, is that of
Love: This is the Unity of the Spirit, which is to be held in the bond of
Peace, and will always flow from the other, by a kind of Spiritual Sympathy and
Sensation; but it must be acknowledged, this admits of various degrees, and is
subject to sinful Declensions; Emulation, Passion, Interest, Misunderstanding
of Persons and Things, may very much weaken the Bond of Amity, but it must be
habitually in every True Christian; and he that has no brotherly kindness, for
those that appear to him True Believers can never know that he has passed from
Death to Life.

Mistakes and Weakness, may create Jealousy, and too great Distances even
amongst great and good Men. Paul and Barnabas from different apprehensions
about the management of their Work, proceed to a parting one from another: And
too many Brethren, that have all the same Father, and are all bound for the
same home, cannot forbear falling out by the way: The Corruption of Nature both
fullies men's Graces, that they do not shine forth so clearly as otherwise they
would, and also darkens their sight, that they cannot so well discern the
Virtues of each other, and where the Eye is dim, and the Object clouded too, no
wonder if misapprehensions and uncharitable surmises arise, and men mistake one
another for Enemies, and fall a quarrelling, when perhaps a true Light would
let them see they are all Friends.

But certainly, as far as Believers understand one another, they have Christian
Affection one for another; and if they knew more of the Truth of each others
Christianity, their Mutual Love would be greatly increased. And a shyness in
some tempers, and unwillingness to converse more freely, and often together,
keep up men's prejudices, and hinder their desired Union; and yet they have
still a fervent Love for the Church in general, though their Affections be
misplaced as to particular persons.

This Brotherly-kindness, where it is prevalent, will oblige the Members to
have the same care one for another, not envying, but rejoicing at each others
Heath, Beauty, and Improvement, it would make them sensible of each others use
ulness and service, they would not think any part superfluous, or tie it up
from performing its duty toward the good of the whole; the Eye would not say
to the Hand, I have no need of thee: This would not permit them to reproach and
despise each other, for their blemishes and deformities, but oblige them to
cover the same with the greatest candor and civility, and to bestow more
abundant honor upon those parts that may be thought less honorable.

This is that great Law of Love which the King of the Church has given to all
his Disciples, as the Bond of Peace amongst themselves, and the great
Characteristick by which they shall be distinguished from others: John 13.35.
By this shall all men know that they are Christ's Disciples, if they love one
another. Where the Soul is wholly destitute of this, all pretenses of Love to
God, or Faith in Christ, are false and vain; 1 John 4.20.
For he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom
he has not seen? And true Faith will work by Love.

I know this Account of Catholic Unity, as consisting in Faith and Love, will
not meet with general approbation: Many will reject it as to spiritual, who
have placed their hopes of Salvation in being of such a Party, and in a Zealous
Observation of the Rites and Ceremonies of that Communion in which they are,
these are too senseless to be argued with, That can suppose the Son of God would
be incarnate, and crucified, only to teach men a particular kind of dress, and
fashionable gestures, and a form of words, etc. whilst their Souls are under
the dominion of sin, and they have not learned to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in an Evil World.

Many will censure it as too narrow, excluding from the Church, all formal and
insincere pretenders to Christianity; but I suppose when we understand one
another, we shall not much differ about this; it is certain in Foro Dei, none
but true Disciples are true Church Members; but in Foro Ecclesiae, all that
seem to be so, must be so accounted. When we say, such a one is a Member of the
Visible Church, we mean, he is visibly a Member of the Church, that is, he
appears so to us, and we are obliged to think so of him, till he discovers the
contrary; but whether he be really so or no, God only knows.

And most will condemn this Notion, as too large and general, including even
those that have not a Regular Ministry amongst them, nor are joined to any
particular Congregation, duly organized: And here indeed the main difficulty we
have to encounter is about the Unity of the Ministry, and how far that is
essential to the Unity of the Catholic Church.

And I freely grant, every True Member of the Church of Christ, will give great
deference to the Ministerial Office; and whoever they be, that will presume to
ridicule the Function, and despise its just Powers, cannot in reason be thought
to have the Faith and Charity of the Gospel. But there must be a great
difference made, betwixt contemning the Ministry, and questioning the Rights of
this or that particular person to the Office, or scrupling the Term o^ Made of
his Administrations, or preferring another before him, whose Qualifications and
Conduct are more answerable to the great Ends of that Office.

But though I do verily believe, it is essential to Catholic Church Unity,
that every Member love and honor the Ministerial Function; yet, I dare by no
means affirm it to be equally necessary, that every Person be under the Conduct
of a Regular and duly called Ministry; this indeed, is requisite to the
flourishing State of the Church, and all are obliged to pray for it, and
endeavor it in their several Spheres of Activity; but it is not absolutely
Necessary to the Being of the Church, or the Salvation of her Members. My
Reasons are these:

1st. This would be to confound the Unity of the Church, with its Order, which
must be distinguished here, where we speak of Essential Unity; that which
belongs to the Order of the Church always supposes its Essence; a thing must
first be, before it be capable of Order: Thus the Excellent Monsieur Claude
argues, Histor. Def. of the Reform. Part 4. p. 57.
To admit that to be a true Church where the Ministry is, and deny that to be a
true Church, where the Ministry is not, is a vain, deceitful and illusory way
of reasoning; For the true Church naturally goes before the Ministry, and does
not depend upon the Ministry, but the Ministry on the contrary depends upon it;
as in the Civil Society, the Magistracy depends upon the Society, and not the
Society on the Magistracy. In the Civil Society, the first thing that must be
thought on, is, That Nature made Men; afterward we conceive that she Assembled
and United them together. And lastly, from that Union which could not subsist
without Order, Magistracy proceeded. It is the same thing in a Religious
Society: The first thing that Grace did, was to produce Faith in the hearts of
Men, after having made them believe she united them, and formed a mutual
Communion between them; and, because their Communion ought not to be without
Order, and good Government; from thence the Ministry arose. So that a Lawful
Ministry is after the true Church, and depending upon it. And a great deal more
to the same purpose.

2dly, This would make it utterly unlawful for the Laity to Reform the Church
from idolatry, or other Abuses, unless the Clergy would join with them in it;
and so would condemn those Princes and Churches in Germany, and elsewhere, that
Reformed without their Bishops; yea, against their Wills, and repeated
clamorous Prohibitions. Either the Popish Bishops and Clergy, were the regular
Ministry of those Churches before the Reformation, or no; if they were not,
then there was no Regular Ministry amongst them, and the Line of Succession
failed; and either they had no Churches, or else their Churches re^ain'd their
Beings without the Ministry: But if the Popish Clergy were the Regular
Ministry, Then either those that Reformed without them, were cut off from the
Unity of the Catholic Church, and Reformed themselves into Hell, as the
Papists speak, or else they were still in the Unity of the Church, though at
present without a Regular Ministry.

Those that will needs thrust the Unity of the Episcopacy into the Desinition
of the Catholic Church, would do well to consider, Every Nation was not so
happy as England, in having Bishops so willing to comply with their Rulers, in
a Secession from Rome; or in having Rulers so Potent and resolved as ours were:
And yet God forbid any Protestant should say, they ought to have delayed their
Reformation, till they had disgusted Princes, and complying Bishops to lead
them on. Surely, the lawfulness of our Departure from Rome, does not depend
upon such contingencies. How few Bishops there were that gave the least
countenance to Luther's Proceedings, none can be ignorant, that has read any
thing of the History of that Reformation; the Ministry they had was generally
chosen by themselves, out of the most learned of the Laics, some few of the
Priests and Monks falling in; the Nobles themselves sometimes devoted their
Gifts to the Service of the Church, as the Prince of Anhalt, Du Plessis,
Sadeel, and others; they never insisted upon an uninterrupted Line, but
maintained, That where the true Faith and Doctrine were, there was the true
Church; Claudes Hist. Def. Part 4. p. 58.
and that it is the Call of the Church, and the Approbation of the most
competent Judges therein, that makes a Lawful Call of Persons to that Office,
and that the Church has a full and entire Right to set up Ministers for its
Government, supposing it have the true Faith.

3dly, If there can be no true Church without a Regular Ministry, what becomes
of the Being of a Church, when its Ministers are dead and banished, and no
other yet chosen? By this Notion the Church must be dissolved and die with
them, and the Death of the Shepherd must be the Damnation of the Flock; for if
the Regular Ministry of each particular Church, be the great Ligament, by which
that part is fastened to the whole, it must needs follow, that upon the Failure
of the Ministry, it falls off from the Body, and consequently from Christ the
Head. If it be replied, that such Societies remain in the Unity of the Church,
whilst they desire a true Ministry, and endeavor to get one, though at present
they are without it, That Is as much as we demand; for then it is not essential
to Catholic Unity, that there be a Regular Ministry, but that there be a
desire of it; and no doubt all true Christians have such desires, and the great
difference amongst them is, which Ministry is most Regular; and, it is their
apprehension of the greater Regularity of theirs than of others, that makes
each side of them prefer their own before others.

In short, if we admit the absolute Necessity, of such a Ministry, under whose
Conduct every Church must be; what shall we say of those Scandalous Tumults and
Contests that have happened about the Election of Bishops? Vott. de D^sp. Cause.
Pap. l. 2. 2. Chapter 3. p. 143.
one Party choosing this, another that; sometimes falling to downright blows,
and the stronger Side winning the day, such things often happened in the
earlier Ages of the Church, and sometimes the Controversy was a long time
undecided, and yet far be it from us to think the Essence of those Churches was
lost, during those Contentions; it is true, some have invented a Metropolitan
or Patriarch, to whom those Churches remained United, in the vacancy of the
Episcopal Seer, to save the Body from perishing, and over these the Pope as the
principal visible Head of Unity; but I hope I need not prove that there may be
Catholic Unity without these.

I expect to be assaulted with that Text, Romans 10.14, and 15. How shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a
Preacher, and how shall they Preach unless they be sent by this sending, I know
many understand Regular Ordination to the Work of the Ministry; and they would
infer from hence, that none can believe, but by the Preaching, of a rightly
Ordained Ministry; which must therefore be necessary to the very being of the
Church.

But it is certain, the Word and Works of God never contradict one another, and
therefore this cannot be the sense of the place; for we read of great
Conversions made, by the Preaching of those, that were never so Ordained;
Ruffinus, l. 1. c. 10.
as those of the Abyssines by Frumentius and Edesius, and the Roman Merchants,
and the Iberians by a Captive Maid; as for this Text, it plainly speaks of that
Extraordinary Mission of the Apostles to the Gentile World, by them, as Men
infallibly inspired for that End, were the great Doctrines of the Gospel
delivered, and the perpetual Rule of Faith laid down, this they must by no
means have presumed to do, had they not been sent of God; and yet without such
a Gospel the World had never believed on Christ, and this Apostolical Doctrine
is still the great Instrument, by which God converts Souls sometimes by reading
of it themselves, sometimes by hearing it from others, whether duly ordained,
or no, sometimes by bringing it to their Remembrance when they are neither
reading nor hearing it; though the usual way is by the Preaching of a faithful
Ordained Ministry; but to say, that it is never done by other means, cannot be
proved by Scripture, and is evidently contradicted by Experience.

I cannot but have a great value for the Judgment of Monsieur Claude in this
particular, and shall therefore transcribe his words, in that learned Treatise
before mentioned, Histor. Def. Part 4. p. 54.
viz. It is the Church that produces the Ordinary Ministry, and not the
Ordinary Ministry that produces the Church; The Church was the fruit of the
Extraordinary Ministry of the Apostles and Evangelists; That Ministry of
theirs, produced it at first, and not only produced it, but it has always made
use of that means, or that source for its Subsistence; and we may truly say,
That it yet produces it, and that it will produce it unto the End of the World:
For it is the Faith that makes, and always will make the Church, and it is the
Ministry of the Apostles that makes and always will make the Faith: It is their
Voice that calls Christians together at this day; it is their word that
essembles them, and their teaching that unites them. It is certain that the
Ministry of the Apostles was singular; that is to say, only tied to their
Persons, without Succession, without Communication or Propagation; but it ought
not to be thought that it was also transitory, as that of other Men, for it is
perpetual in the Church; Death has not shut their Mouths as it has others, they
speak, they instruct, they incessantly spread abroad Faith and Holiness among
the Souls of Christians, and there is not another Fountain from whence those
Virtues can descend but from them. If any demand of us, what is the perpetual
Voice that we ascribe unto them? We answer, That it is the Doctrine of the New
Testament, where they have set down all the Efficacy of their Ministry, and the
whole virtue of that Word, which gave a Being to the Church; there is their
true Chair and Apostolic See; there is the Center of Christian Unity; there it
is that they incessantly call Men, and join them into a Society -- But as to
the ordinary Ministry, we cannot say the same thing of them, it is not their
Voice as distinct from that of the Apostles, that begets the Faith, that
assembles Christians into a Society, or that produces the Church: They are no
more but mere Dispensers of the words of the Apostles, or external Instruments,
to make us the better understand their Voice, to speak properly, it is not the
Voice of the ordinary Pastors, that produces Faith, where it was not before, it
is the word of the Apostles themselves; They are no more but those External
Guides, that God has established in the Church to lead Men to the Scripture,
and even such Guides as cannot hinder us from going thither of our selves, if
we will; -- Therefore there is a great difference betwixt these two sorts of
Ministers, the one preceded the Church, the other follows it; the one has an
independent and sovereign Authority, with Infallibility on its side; the other
is exposed to Vices, Disorders, Errors and humane Weaknesses, inferior to, and
depending on the Church.

And indeed to affirm that no Man can be truly converted but by a Regular
Ministry, would involve the Minds of Men in endless Perplexities: A Man must
know all those things that belong to the due mission of the Preacher, and must
be assured that all those met in the person, by whose Ministry he was helped to
believe, before he can know that he has true Faith; this would keep persons in
a dark and uncomfortable state all their days, especially if a Line of
uninterrupted Succession be necessary to a true Mission; for then a Man must be
able to prove, that the Bishop that ordained his Converter, was ordained by
another Bishop, and that by another, and so up to the Apostles; which, because
no man in the World can be morally assured of, it is impossible for any Man to
know that he has true Faith. This is an insuperable difficulty on the one hand.

And on the other, those Persons that know they have true Faith by the powerful
effects of it upon their Hearts and Lives, must conclude from hence that their
Preachers were duly ordained and called, otherwise they could nor have been
instrumental in their Conversion; and yet this would not be true, for doubtless
there are many honest Souls that fear God, and work Righteousness amongst those
Sects, that have no Regular Ministry amongst them: So that this Assertion would
rob many Souls of the comfort of a true Faith, because of the uncertainty of
their Ministers Mission; and it would confirm others in an irregular and
unauthorized Ministry, because of the cerainty of their Faith.

I hope by this time I may venture to conclude, That the essential Unity of the
Church, consists in Gospel-Faith and Love, hereby Men are made Saints, and
unired to Christ, and Members of the Catholic Church. Did I think the Chester
Gentleman would not yet take it, I would be so civil to him, as to and some
more Testimonies.

That of Clemens Alexandranus is apposite enough, The ancient Catholic Church
is but one only Church, Strom. l. 7.
and assembles in the Unity of one only Faith, by the Will of one only God, and
Ministration of one only Lord, all those who were before Predestanted to be
just, having known them before the Foundation of the World. In Cant. Hom. 1. In
Maten. 16. De Ar^. Patr. l. 1. c. 3 In Psalm. 35. De corona indilitis.
So likewise Origin, The Church is the Society of the Saints; and else where,
The Church which God builds consists in those who are upright, and full of
those Thoughts. Words and Actions which lead to Blessedness. St. Amtrose tells
us, The Assembly of the Righteous is God's Tabernacle, and that the Saints are
the Members of Jesus Christ. Terrullian says, Where there are Three, there is a
Church, though they be Laics, for every one lives by his own Faith.

S. In Job, c. 26.
Jerome speaks to the same purpose, saying, The Church which is the Assembly of
all Saints, is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, because she has in Jesus Christ
an Eternal firmness; In Cant. Hom. 1.
(and elsewhere) The Church is the Assembly of all the Saints. And again, The
City of the Lord is the Church of the Saints, the Congregation of the Just. St.
Austin speaking of the visible or mixed Church, De Bapt. Con. Donat. l. 7. c. 51.
distinguishes it into two Nations, Jerusalem and Babylon; the Faithful, and
the Wicked: the latter may be in the Visible Church, but are not really of the
Church; and says, The Rights of the Church belong only to the Faithful.

Amongst the Divines of the Reformed Churches, the Incomparable Jurieu speaks
as fully to the purpose as we can desire; Pastora^ Let. Vol. 1. p. 151.
He describes the Unity of the Church, by the Unity of the Spirit, the Unity of
Doctrine, and the Unity of the Sacraments; and exposes the Bishop of Meaux, for
making the Unity of the Ministry, necessary to Salvation; saying, They must
have lost their Senses that suffer themselves to be deluded with such
Imaginations, as if the Medicine must be given by such a hand, or else it would
not heal, but poison them; and adds, Ah my Brethren, open your Eyes upon this
Folly, and be ashamed thereof, be sure, every hand that gives you the true
Doctrine is good in that respect, the saving remedy of Truth heals, from
whomsoever it comes.

And the same Person, reckoning up the Innovations of the Third Age, mentions
amongst the rest Cyprian's corrupt Idea of the Church, thereby opening a Door
to the most cruel Doctrine that ever was advanced; of which he thus speaks: He
made a false Idea of the Unity of the Church, which be encloses in one external
Communion, and because the Unity of one visible Head was not yet invented, he
imagined I know not what Unity of Episcopacy, which all the Bishops did
individually possess; whereof nevertheless each administered but a part. This
inconsistent Imagination, gave place afterward for the substitution of one
single Head, to the end, that a visible Head might be given to the Unity of the
visible Communion, which might be the Center thereof. -- The Bishop of Meaux
brags much of four or five Passages in Sr. Cyprian, P. 149.
that ancient Doctor goes so far as to say, [There can be no Martyr but in the
Church, that when a Man is separated from its Unity, it is in vain that he sheds
his Blood for the Confession of Jesus Christ.] This Maxim in a large
signification may be suffered, for indeed there may be Heretics, who
confessing the Name of Jesus Christ, but on the other side ruining the
Foundations of the Christian Religion, may die for the Religion of Jesus Christ
to no advantage. But the Application which St. Cyprian makes thereof, is one of
those Faults, over which wise Men ought to draw a Curtain; he proceeds so far
as to apply it to the Nevatians. Now it must be known, that the Novatians were
good Christians, a thousand times better than the Papists, since they did not
ruin any of the Foundations, but retained and believed all the Christian
Verities, only they were something severe in Discipline, and would not receive
those that fell in times of Persecution to the Peace of the Church; was not
this a fine occasion to say as Cyprian did, That a Novatian was no Christian?
-- O what temper are the Doctors of the Roman Church, that make use of those
Excesses which ought to be hid out of honor to those Great Men that fell into
them? It was Cyprian's Zeal, for the Peace of the Church and the Harred he had
for Schism, that ran him into that Excess, as to think or say, P. 150, 151.
That out of I do not know what Exterior Unity of the Church a Man could not be
saved; and it was in this Age that Men begun to corrupt the Idea of the Church.

I have transcribed thus much, out of the Letters of this Illustrious Divine,
because some, noted Men amongst us, lay much stress upon the Authority of
Cyprian, in this Notion or One Communion, and One Episcopacy; though they can
make bold to censure him themselves, in the case of Rebaptizing, Ep. 68. Ed.
Goulart, p. 201.
and the Peoples Duty of withdrawing from the Communion of a Debauched Bishop,
in which he is very Positive; and I know not why they should deny us that
Liberty they take themselves.

But it may be, the Opinion of an Eminent Divine of the Church, would go
further with some People than either Scripture, or Fathers, or foreign Authors:
And is it not the common sense of that Church that has so often told the World,
there is none upon Earth so Learned and Wise as her self; that without the
Unity of Episcopacy, there can be no true Church, no Sacraments, no Salvation?
I confess, her Chieftains have been free enough of such kind of Language, when
it has been her Glory to tread upon the Necks of poor Dissenters; but when the
Tables were turned, and she had to do with an Adversary that could make as
great a Noise about Catholic Unity and Communion as her self, she learned more
Modesty and Discretion.

Though they all acquitted themselves well, in their late Rencounters with the
Papists; yet I know none that have come off more cleverly, than the Examiners
of Bellarmine's Notes of the Church; Upon the seventh Note, [the Union of the
Members amongst themselves] We have this Account of Church-Unity. P. 164, 165.


There is the Unity of submitting to One Head, the Lord Jesus; There is the
Unity of Professing the Common Faith that was once delivered to the Saints;
There is a Unity of Sacraments; a Unity of Obedience to all the Laws and
Institutions of Christ, the Union of Christian Affection and Brotherly
Kindness: The Unity of Discipline and Government, by retaining for substance
the same Form that was left in the Church by the Aposties, an Unity of
Communion in the Worship and Service of God. -- Now to speak clearly, there
ought to be all these Kinds and Instances of Unity in the Church, but we see
evidently they are not all thore; I mean in every part and Member of the
Church, and therefore they are not all necessary to the being of a Church, but
some of them are; and they are, The Acknowledgment of One Lord, the Profession
of One Faith, and Admission into the state of Christian Duties and Privileges
by One Baptism: And this is all that I can find absolutely necessary to the
Being of a Church.

And if they be the same Persons that Vindicate the Discourse of the Notes,
they speak yet plainer thus: Vindic. p. 20, -- 22.
In such a divided state of Christendom as this is, mere External Unity and
Communion cannot be the mark of a true Church -- All true Christian Churches
are United in the most Essential things; Ephesians. 4.5, 6.
They have one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and the Father
of all; and this makes them one Body, animated by the same Holy Spirit, which
dwells in the whole Christian Church; but still they are not One entire
Communion, but divide and separate from each other; this we will grant is a
very great Fault, but yet if they Communicate in such things as make one
Church, their Quarrels and Divisions may hurt themselves, but cannot destroy
the Unity of the Church, for the Church is one Body not merely by the Agreement
of Christians among themselves, but by the Institution of Christ, who has made
all those that profess the same Faith, and are united in the same Sacraments,
to belong to the same Body, to be his own Body: And therefore Christians are
never Exhorted to be One Body, for that they are, if they be Christians, as the
Apostle expressly asserts; but they are exhorted to live in Unity and Concord,
because they are One Body, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3.

And in the 25th Page, Those who profess the true Faith of Christ without any
corrupt Mixtures, are Sound and Orthodox Churches; other Churches are more or
less pure, according to the various Corruptions of their Faith; And thus it is
with respect to the Christian Sacraments and Worship too.

I hope this will be acknowledged very pertinent to our purpose, but if we
desire it, he will yet speak more plainly, for when his Adversary had said
[Succession of Doctrine, without Succession of Office, is a poor Plea,] He
answers, I must needs tell him, it is a much better Plea than Succession of
Doctrine; for I am sure, P. 53.
there is not a safe Communion where there is not a Succession of Apostolical
Doctrine; but whether the want of a Succession of Bishops will in all Cases
unchurch, admits of a greater Dispute: I am sure true Faith in Christ, with a
true Gospel Conversation, will save Men: and some Learned Romanists defend the
old Definition of the Church, Jo. Laun. Ep. Vol. 8. Ep. 13.
that it is Coetus Fidelium, the Company of the Faithful; and will not admit
Bishops or Pastors into the desinition of a Church.

I have even tired my self with these Quotations, not for the sake of our
Cause, but out of Civility to the Citizen of Chester, and Men of his Temper,
that by taking up a false Idea of Catholic Unity, to the Exclusion of all
those that have not Diocesan Episcopacy, are animated by it, to the greatest
Severities against them, concluding that those who shut themselves out of the
Catholic Church, are well enough served if they be cast out of Civil Saciety,
and denied the common Rights and Privileges of Mankind.

Let us now examine this Gentieman's Notions about the Unity of the Church,
which may give us a little diversion in our Journey; He charges the Vindicator,
with mis-reporting his Description of Unity, Reply, p. 16.
omitting that which was necessary to be added; and if he did so, he was very
much to blame: But let us turn to the places, and try whether it be so or no.

Those words out of which we must draw his Notion of Unity are these, Though
there be a Multiplication of Churches by the increase of Believers, yet no
variation; they are all one with that Church first mentioned in Jerusalem, and
all One with one another, being all United into one Spiritual Society or Body,
under One head Jesus Christ, Arch-Rebei, p. 2.
and are in all things the same with that first Church; United in One Baptism
and in One Faith, all partake at the same Table -- and so all United in the
visible external Worship and Service of God. This Account of the Unity of the
Church, the Vindic, thus Contract, All Churches are One, as United into One
Body, Vindic. p. 16.
whereof Christ is the Head, having the same Baptism, the same Faith, and the
same Eucharist. Now what has he omitted, that belonged to this description of
Unity? why he should have added, They are all One with that Church first
mentioned at Jerusalem, but that he left out; and he should have added, They
are all one with one another: and again, They are in all things the same with
that first Church, but he omitted both these: A very dangerous Omission! But
pray, what do all these three Sentences amount to, more than this single
Assertion, the Catholic Church is One? Not one of them answers the Question
wherein it is One, it is no explanation of the Unity of the Church, to say it
is all One with the Primitive Church, and all One with it self, and the same
with that first Church; still the Question is, wherein is the Church One?
wherein does the Unity of all true Churches consist? For to say they are One,
because they are One, and because they are the same, and all One with one
another, is a most vain and ridiculous Tautology, which the Vindicator was so
civil as to pass by, only fixing upon those words that tell us wherein they are
One, even as united into One Body, under One Head, having the same Baptism,
Faith and Eucharist, and so united in the Worship of God; the other Phrases
barely assert the Unity, these describe and explain it; But this Gentleman
knows not when he is well dealt with, but will force us to expose him whether
we will or no.

The Vindicator having thus Collected out of his words, a description of Unity,
as consisting in the same Lord, and in the same Baptism, Faith and Eucharist,
agrees to it with this Explanation. [that is the same for Substance] for it
does not appear that they all agreed in the Primitive Times in the same
Circumstances; and infers from hence that there may be Catholic Unity, without
Diocesan Episcopacy and Ceremonies; neither of which he put into his
Description.

The Gentleman's reply to this is very remarkable, for thus it goes; It is
plain, all that he drives at here is, that there may be a true Church-Unity
without Episcopacy, which Doctrine is a mere Innovation, etc. But why did he
not then insert the Unity of Episcopacy in his Description? If he left it out,
it was not to be expected the Vindication should foist it in for him, as he now
would do himself, but it is too late, and to add it now, is not a Defense of
his former Paper, but an Amendment rather, such as it is, but indeed rejected
by the most Judicious of the Episcopal Writers, as has been already evinced; to
which I will here add one citation more, that I may either recover him out of
his frenzy, or leave him inexcusable; it is the Learned Author of The Summary of
the late Controversies betwixt the Church of England and the Church of Rome. P.
123.


He very well distinguishes between External Ecclesiastical Communion and the
Unity of the Church; and says, The Unity of the Catholic Church consists in
One Faith, and Worship and Charity; that indeed such external Communion when
occasion offers, shows that we are all Disciples of the same common Lord and
Savior, and own each other for Brethren. But the Church may be the One Body of
Christ without being One Ecclesiastical Body, under One Governing Head, which
it is impossible the whole Christian Church should be; and therefore a Church
that divides it self from that Ecclesiastical Body, to which it did once
belong, if it have just and necessary Reasons for what it does, is wholly
blameless, nay commendable for it, if it have not, it sins according to the
Nature and Aggravation of the Crime; but still may be a Member of the Catholic
Church, and still enjoy all the Privileges of the Catholic Church, the
Communion of Saints, and Promises of Everlasting Life; which shows how the Holy
Catholic Church in the Creed may be One; Norwithstanding all those Divisions
of Christendom, which are caused by the Quarrels of Bishops, and Disputes about
Ecclesiastical Canons and Jurisdiction.

Thus have these Learned and Sober Gentlemen, made up those defects, which the
Lord Verulam complained of in his day, Advance. of Learning, l. 9. p. 472, 473.
he sets down amongst the Deficients, and recommends us a wholesome and
profitable work, a Treatise touching his degrees of Unity in the City of God:
and he tells us, It exceedingly imports the Peace of the Church, to define
what, and of what Latitude those points are, which discorporate Men from the
Body of the Church, and cast them out, and quite Casheir them from the
Communion and Fellowship of the Faithful. The bounds of Christian Community are
set down, one Faith, one Baptism, and not one Rite, one Opinion, the Coat of
our Savior was entire without Seam, but the Garment of the Church was of
diverse Colors: In the mean time, it is very likely he that makes mention of
Peace, shall receive that answer Jehu gave to the Messengers, Is it Peace Jehu?
What have thou to do with Peace? Turn and follow me: Peace is not the matter,
that many seek after, but parties and siding.

To conclude this point, Dr. Stilling-fleet, Irenic. p. 121. God will one day
convince men that the Union of the Church lies more in the Unity of Faith and
Affection, than in the Uniformity of doubtful Rites and Ceremonies.
since the Unity of the Church consists in the true Catholic Faith and
Christian Affection, whereby Men are knit to Christ the Head, and to one
another; None are out of the Unity of the Church, but those that are destitute
of these fundamental Graces, and to affirm this of Protestant Dissenters in
general, is a piece of Diabolism which the Gospel abhors, and Humanity it self
will be ashamed of. We must first prove that Men are without Faith, before we
can prove that they are without the Church, and not (with the Papists) condemn
them as void of Faith, because out of the external Communion of their Church.
It is a very foolish and misleading method, to prove our interest in the Faith,
by our interest in the Church, as if we must first know the true Church, and
that we are in it, before we can know the true Faith or that it is in us: this
way of arguing has been always condemned by Protestant Writers. The Scripture
Test for the trial of our Faith, is a serious endeavor to perfect Holiness in
the fear of God, to be careful to maintain good works, etc. And indeed nothing
but gross Heresy and known constant Immoralities, can warrant us, in saying,
that any who profess to be Christians are destitute of the Faith: and whether
Dissenters in England, do not generally show as much of the fear of God, both
in their Fumilies and common Conversation as their Neighbors, must be left to
the Consciences of all observing Men here, and the righteous judgment of God
hereafter.

And I hope they may modestly justify their pretensions to Christian Love and
Charity too; I am sure their quiet and peaceable behavior under so many years
severe Persecution, will plead more strongly for them, than for those by whom
they suffered such things; all the World will take notice, how unable those
Gentlemen were to bear a very small share of those Severities themselves, which
they had for a long time so liberally inflicted upon others.

I am far from the thoughts of charging these things upon the Episcopal Party
in general, or even the Clergy themselves; but all the Nation will bear
witness, it is too true concerning those Bishops and others that were formerly
most uneasy and troublesome to their Dissenting Brethren.

How odd a thing was it, for this Gentleman to begin his Book, with Panegyricks
upon Peace, when the avowed design is to justify all those Violations thereof,
that have been the scandal of the Protestant Religion. He tells us of a blessed
Legacy left us by our dying Redeemer, and why then should we not be suffered to
enjoy it? I am sure we should have been glad to have lived in the obscurest
places and circumstances, where we might have enjoyed that Sacred Bequest; but
there were a Generation of Men amongst us, who having spent their own Legacies,
would needs deprive us of ours, unless we would surrender the dearer Peace of
our own minds. I am afraid it is the conscienciousness of their former guilt,
that makes many of them, so very suspicious and jealous of Dissenters as they
are; they can hardly believe that we have any Charity for them, because they
know how little they have discovered toward us: And thus the remembrance of
what is past, pushes them on to farther abuses, instead of producing fruits
meet for Repentance; whereas I do verily believe the generality of Dissenters
can heartily forgive all that is past, and would be glad to see any ground of
hope that the same men would not greedily embrace the first opportunity of
acting over again their former excesses.

CHAP. II.
Of Obedience to our Governors, Spiritual and Civil. That the Jurisdiction of
our English Bishops is not Jure Divino; but Presbyters have as much Power by
the Law of God as they. An Answer to the Gentleman's Allegations out of
Antiquity The Judgment of the Fathers, and Councils, and Schoolmen, and our
first Reformers, and the Divines of the Transmarine Churches.

I Hope we have safely passed the Ordeal of Catholic Unity; we now proceed to
defend our selves, from the dreadful Accusation of Disobedience to Superiors;
for though our Nonconformity should not utterly exclude us from the Unity and
Communion of the Catholic Church, yet if it involve us in the guilt of
Sedition, contempt of our Lawful Governors, and disobedience to their just
Commands, our Cause would be bad enough, and we could by no means justify it
before God or the World.

The Indictment charges upon us a twofold Disobedience; First, Disobedience to
our Spiritual Governors the Bishops; And secondly, To the Civil Magistrate
likewise; but we do verily believe our selves to be innocent, and desire an
impartial hearing of our just Defense, which will proceed in this Method.

1. We plead that Bishops have no Power by the Law of God, but what Presbyters
have as well as they.

2. That the whole Jurisdiction of our English Bishops, and Power of their
Canons, is derived from the Civil Magistrate, and Laws of the Land.

3. That the Civil Powers have left us to our Liberty in the case of
Conformity, and therefore we are guilty of no Disobedience to them.

The first Position, concerning the Identity of Power in Bishops and
Presbyters, has been often and warmly debated, and we can scarce touch it so
gently, but it will be resented as an high affront; it is accounted a Plea to
their Jurisdiction, which in all Courts has an ungrateful sound, and must
expect to be overruled, if powerful Interest, and loud Menaces can do it; and
yet it seems so clear in it self, both from Scripture, Fathers, and Protestant
Divines, our own Reformers not excepted, that were it not for the sake of the
Silver Shrines, we cannot suppose it would have been a Controversy at this day
in any of the Reformed Churches.

For Scripture Proof, the Point being Negative, the Evidence that is but
Negative, must be allowed sufficient. The Word of God no where asserts, that
Bishops are a Superior Order to Presbyters, therefore they are not so by that
Law: Those that say they are, must produce that Rule which makes them so: If no
such Rule appears, the matter is fully concluded against them.

This being a Question concerning a very great Power, extending to a great
number of Persons, and producing great Effects, a matter of great distinction
and dependencies, ought to have clear and positive Warrant and Commission, from
the Word of God. Mere Names and Titles, Suppositions, and fine Probabilities,
will not all make a Foundation strong enough, to bear the weight of a
Structure, so high and towering, as our English Prelacy.

It is far short of Demonstration to say, the Bishops are the Apostles
Successors, and therefore a higher Order than Presbyters: For if they mean that
they have the same Power that the Apostles had, and in the same degree, it will
distort their own Scheme of Government, and will not only give them power over
Presbyters, but over Bishops too, for such power the Apostles had, and it will
give every Bishop an Universal Power over all the Churches in the World; If it
be said they are only the Apostles Successors in some part of their power, the
answer is obvious, so are Presbyters too: and we must enquire in what parts and
degrees of power do they succeed them? And why do not Presbyters succeed them
in the same powers? And where shall we find any chapter or verse in our Bibles,
that thus divide the power, and give some men the power of Doctrine, and others
that of Displine and Orders; where is the discrimination? We find it very plain
in Dr. Cosins's Table, ^ot so in those of the Apostles.

Nor is it any more to our satisfaction, to say that Timothy and Titus were
Bishops of Ephesus and Crete, for the Question is not whether there were
Bishops in Scripture times, but whether those Bishops had any power that the
Presbyters had not, and if they had, whether it belongs to them as Bishops, or
on some other account, St. Peter was a Presbyter, and had Authority over
Bishops, must we therefore argue that Presbyters had power over Bishops:
Timothy had Authority to command Bishops too, and joined with Paul in Writing a
Canonical Epistle to the Bishops and Deacons of Philippi? will it therefore
follow that one Bishop has Authority over another?

And what did Timothy and Titus, that Presbyters might not do, if they had the
same qualifications? They ordained Elders, and how does it appear that they did
not do it, as being Elders themselves? and that they had not the assistance of
others? And may not Presbyters do so too? Perhaps it will be said, no, for they
have not the Episcopal Power; but that is the very thing in question, and must
be proved, and not taken for granted; if God has laid no injunction upon them
to the contrary men cannot do it; It Is an odd way of reasoning, Titus was left
to ordain Elders in Crete, therefore he was a Bishop, for none but Bishops can
Ordain, how do you prove that? Why because Titus was a Bishop and he alone did
Ordain; if this be not a Circular, Precarious and Trifling way of arguing,
nothing in the World deserves that name.

But indeed the many removes which Timothy and Titus made, is argument enough
that they were not the fixed Pastors of particular Churches; no question
wherever they came, they were employed in the same work, which they did at
Ephesus: and why Titus by being sent into Dalmatia, did not become the Bishop
of the Churches there, as well as by being lest in Creet, the Bishop of the
Cretians, I see no reason; he was sent to the one, he was left in the other;
and doubtless in both, his work was to set in order the things that were
wanting, and this was his business every where, and would as well entitle him
the Bishop of any other place, as of Creet.

The argument from the Angels of the Churches, is as dark and inconclusive as
the former: those messages sent to the Churches were delivered by Vision, and
in the style and phrase of Vision, a singular term is often to be understood
collectively: as by the false Prophet, A. B. Usher understands the Roman
Clergy; and there are many words in those Epistles that favor this
Interpretation, (...), etc. and there is not one word in all that Book,
intimating that those Angels were single persons, much less such as had any
power above Presbyters. And those that grant them to be single persons will
tell us; the most that can be inferred, is a President or Moderator of a
Presbytery, which is allowed by those that are wholly dissatisfied with
Diocesan Prelacy.

The Gentleman pas;ses very lightly over all these difficulties, and in a
strain of carelessness and confidence natural to him, tells us. It is evident
that the Government of the Church by Episcopacy, was of Apostolical
Institution, for that Timothy was made Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus of Creet,
as is plain by St. Paul's Epistles to them both; that the seven Churches of Asia
which received the Christian Faith had each a Bishop is evident, by the Title
St. John gives them in his Letters to them. This is the Gentleman's proof of the
Divine right of our English Prelacy, this is that mighty evidence and
demonstration, he so often refers to in his Pamphlet, saying, I have proved, I
have showed, etc.

But if it was so plain from St. Paul's Epistles that Timothy and Titus were
Bishops, why did he not tell us what words those are which make it so very
plain? Indeed the Postscripts to those Epistles, expressly call them Bishops of
Ephesus and Creet, but does he need to be told, that the Postscripts are no
part of Canonical Scripture, nor joined with the Epistles for several hundred
years after Christ; Theodoret being the first that mentions them, only as part
of his own Commentary, and yet he has not the word Bishop in them; Nor any body
else till Oecumenius who wrote above a thousand years after Christ: nay the
very Postscripts themselves prove that they are of much later date than the
Epistles, for in one of them Phrygia is called Pacatiana, which was not the
name of it till above three hundred years after Christ, when it was conquered
by one Pacatius a Roman General, and after him called Pacatiana; and in the
Postscript to Titus, it is said the Epistle was writ from Nicopolis, which it
could not be, since in the Epistle it self, Paul speaks of Nicopolis a place
whither he designed to go and Winter, and would have Titus come to him there;
come to me to Nicopolis, for there (not here) I design to Winter; these
Postscripts therefore betray themselves by their own language.

And he should have told us, what there is in the word Angel that will
demonstrate a Diocesan Bishop, but instead thereof tells us a long story out of
Dr. Hammond, which is worse than impertinent, for it affirms that those Angels
were not Diocesan Bishops, but Metropolitanes, or Archbishops, that had
Bishops under them; Vid. Dr. Sherlock Vindic. of Prot. Princ. p. 71.
now our learned Church Men acknowledge that Metropolitanes, are not of Divine,
but of Ecclesiastical Institution, and have no proper Jurisdiction over
Bishops, and they generally desert Doctor Hammond in this Notion, but this
Gentleman had not considered so far, but found a large Paragraph, that would
prove the largeness of those Churches, and thought he had got a prize; in short
let them but acknowledge Presbyters to be Bishops, as Dr. Hammond says they all
were in Scripture Times, Dr. Morris of Diocesan Ep. scop. p. 27.
and let the Bishops be Metropolitans, holding only by Ecclesiastical
Institution, without any proper Authority over the Presbyters, and we shall not
much differ from them.

Let us now see what evidence may be brought to prove that Presbyters are of
the same Order with Bishops, and have the same power as they. And

1st. It is no contemptible argument that Presbyters are frequently called
Bishops in Scripture, that the names are used promiscuously the greatest
Patrons of the Prelacy acknowledge; the Elders of the Church of Ephesus are so
called Acts 20.28. The Ministers of the Church of Philippi are called Bishops;
and it is observable that the Syriack Version, which is very ancient, has but
one word for Presbyter and Bishop; now if there be so material a disserence
betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter, as some men would make, it is strange there
should not be a distinct word to express it by: if only such as are now owned
to be Bishops were called Presbyters, the argument would not be so strong, for
they might think to evade it by saying, the lesser is included in the greater,
and they are Presbyters before they are Bishops, but when even those who are
acknowledged to be mere Presbyters, are called Bishops, it is very
considerable, for the lesser cannot include the greater; it would sound very
strange in England for a Presbyter to write himself Bishop: and if the Apostles
had known any thing of this mighty distinction, upon which the Fate of so many
Churches, and Salvation of so many Souls is made to depend, we cannot suppose
they would have laid such a temptation before us, to draw us into an opinion of
the Identity of Order, by the indifferent and promiscuous use of the Titles.

Dr. Morris in his defense of Diocesan Episcopacy, makes very little account
of the Title of Bishops being given to Presbyters in the Church of Philippi,
Page 29, 30.
and is pleased to say, This debate about the Bishops of Philippi had soon been
at an end, if our Author had thought fit to explain himself, and told us what
he meant by Bishops, for were the Pastors of single Congregations respectively
in Covenant? Then there must have been several Congregations or Churches in the
same City, which Mr. Clarkson will not allow: Or were those Bishope only
Presbyters ruling the Church of Philippi with common and equal authority? Then
our Author must give up the question, and instead of making many Bishops, must
own that there was none at all there but only Presbyters, will he contend that
there were no other Bishops than Presbyters? That will be to abuse his Reader
with the Ambiguity of a Word, which he takes in one sense, and the Church in
another, that many Presbyters might belong to one Congregation none ever
denied, but that many Bishops in the Allowed and Ecclesiastical sense of the
Word, had the oversight of one City, seems strange and incredible to the
Ancient Christians. Chrysostom observing this expression of the Bishops of
Philippi, seems to be startled with it; What many Bishops in one City? By no
means, it cannot be, what then? They were not Bishops properly so called, but
Presbyters.

I have taken the more notice of this Paragraph, Works of the Learned Augustine,
p. 25.
because La Crose magnifies it as a terrible Dilemma, though he has lamentably
spoiled it in the Abridgment; but taking it as the Dr. has laid it before us, I
see not how it can much weaken our Cause or fortify his own: We do really
maintain that these Bishops were Presbyters, ruling the Church of Philippi with
common consent, and whether this be the Ecclesiastical sense of the word or no,
we are not much concerned to enquire; it is sufficient to our purpose that it
is the true Scriptural sense, and the only one too, Communi Presbyterorum
consilio Eccles^e gubernabuntur, Hieron 1. Tit.
for we never find the word in all the New Testament, signifying an
Ecclesiastical Order of Men Superior to Presbyters; we deny not, but that this
Name very early began to be appropriated to the Senior Presbyter in a Church or
City, who yet never pretended to be a distinct Order from the rest of his
Colleagues of the Presbytery for a long time afterward. But as the word thus
used, is taken in an Ecclesiastical, not Scriptural sense, so the Dignity
thereby expressed, is of mere Ecclesiastical, not Divine Institution.

And whereas Chrysostom says, They were not Bishops properly so called; he can
mean no more by it, but that they were not such Bishops as that word was made
to signify by common usage in his time; and we grant they were not, for the
Distinction of Office and Degree, not being known in Scripture, the word could
not be used in that distinguishing sense there. Thus a Learned Canonist gives
it as the Vogue of many Primitive Authors: Lancel Instit. Lag. Can. l. 1. Tit.
21. p. 32.
That Bishop and Presbyter were formerly the same, and that Presbyter was the
Name of the Persons Age, Bishop of his Office, but there being many of these in
every Church, they determined amongst themselves for the preventing of Schism,
that one should be Elected by themselves to be set over the rest, and the
Person so elected, retained the Name of Bishop for Distinction sake; the rest
were only called Presbyters, and in process of time, their Reverence for these
Bishops so increased, that they began to obey them as Children do a Father, etc.

2dly, Not only the same Title, but the same Powers are ascribed to Bishops and
Presbyters in Scripture; both that of Jurisdiction and that of Orders, as they
are usually distinguished. As to the former, we read of ruling Presbyters, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that Rule well be accounted worthy of double honor;
If this Rule be not the same with their Jurisdiction, where lies the
difference? and where will they find as plain Scripture for the pretended
Jurisdiction of Prelates, as here we have for the ruling Power of Presbyters?
and that Admonition of the Apostle Peter is worthy our observation, 1 Pet. 5.1,
2, The Presbyters which are amongst you I exhort, who am also a Presbyter, and
a witness of the Sufferings of Christ -- Feed the Flock of God which is amongst
you, taking the Oversight thereof, etc. The Spiritual Jurisdiction of
Presbyters, is here expressed by two words, [(...)] which the Defenders of the
Hierarchy contend, does not signify barely to Feed, but to provide Food as the
Governor of a Family, and is often used for Government, and sometimes that of
Princes; but however it certainly signifies the office of a Pastor, and is a
good Argument that the Pastoral Power is vested in Presbyters; The other word
is [(...)] taking the oversight, or the Episcopal Office, doing the work of a
Bishop; if this will not prove that the Episcopal Jurisdiction belongs to
Presbyters, I despair of ever understanding the meaning of words.

The Power of Orders is with the same clearness attributed to Presbyters;
Timothy himself, who they say was a Bishop, receives his Office or Gift by the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. To this the Gent. replies, Dr.
Hammond says that those Presbyters were Apostles; but that is only the Doctors
conjecture, and yet if the Apostles were concerned in it, it is plain they
acted as Presbyters, whether they were Apostles, or Bishops, or Evangelists,
they acted as a Presbytery. I doubt not but if it had been said, The Gift which
thou receivedst by the laying on of the hands of the Episcopacy; these
Gentlemen would have presently concluded that Ordination belongs to Bishops as
such, and would have given us very hard words, if we should have dared to
dispute it.

Barnabas and Paul themselves, who are called Apostles, received their
Ordination from Prophets and Teachers, Acts 13.1, 2, 3. and it is observable
before this, neither of them were called Apostles; but presently after they
were, Chap. 14. Verse. 14.

These things have so gravel'd the Learned Defenders of Diocesan Prelacy, that
they have not agreed amongst themselves how to find out a tolerable Evasion;
Dissert. 4. Cap 19, 20. Vind of Dissert. p. 26.
but their most famous Doctors have taken quite contrary Paths. Dr. Hammond saw
there was no way to come off, but by holding that all the Presbyters we read of
in Scripture, were Bishops; and that there was no inferior Order instituted by
the Apostles, but that presently after in Ignatius's time we meet with them.
Now this is as much as we desire, for it fully proves that by Divine Right
Bishops and Presbyters are the same, and that the distinction was not founded
upon any Scripture Rule, but only an ancient Constitution: I perceive many have
learnt out of Dr. Hammond to evade all these instances of the Powers given to
Presbyters in Scripture, by saying, Those were not mere Presbyters; and when we
ask them what they mean by mere Presbyters, they answer, such as were not also
Bishops, and we grant they were not mere Presbyters if that be the
signification of it, nor were there any such mere Presbyters in Scripture that
we know of.

Dr. Stillingfleet on the other hand says, Vnreason. of Separ. p. 269.
That the Apostles in their times managed the Government of the Churches
themselves, and therefore there was then no Bishop, but they were all one with
Presbyters; but that as the Apostles went off, Bishops came to be settled in
the several Churches. Now though it is most certain the Apostles did not manage
the Government of particular Churches themselves, but put it into the hands of
the Presbyters, they themselves still holding an Universal Superintendency; yet
we gladly accept the Concession of this learned Prelate; it is indeed a regione
adverse to Dr. Hammond, but will equally serve our purpose; the one says, there
were no Presbyters in Scripture times inferior to Bishops; the other, there
were no Bishops superior to Presbyters: Our conclusion flows alike naturally
and freely from both, that in Scripture times Bishops and Presbyters were of
the same Order.

3dly, We have no Rules laid down in Scripture for the Ordination of any
Bishops but what are the same with Presbyters; in 1 Timothy 3. we have the
Qualifications of Bishops and Deacons described, and no mention made of
Presbyters, because they were the same with the Bishops; and unless we
acknowledge that, we shall be utterly at a loss for a Reason of that Omission,
and there are few Commentators but understand it so: The learned Grotius upon
this place says, the Presbyters of the Churches are here called Bishops or
Inspectors, but that afterward that Name was given (...), to one of them that
was the (...), President.

Titus who was left in Creet to ordain Elders, has a Canon given him about the
Qualifications of those Elders, Chapter 1. v. 5,6. and as a reason it is added, For
a Bishop must be blameless; this would have been no reason, had not the Elder
and Bishop been the same. A late Author thought this so considerable, that he
puts a new sense upon the words (...), ordain Elders in every City, as if the
meaning were, advance Presbyters in every City to the Office of Bishops; but
this is a stretch upon the word which it cannot bear, [(...)] plainly signifies
to constitute and ordain, and when the Persons are mentioned, it is in the
capacity to which they are ordained not from which they were advanced, as
Aristot. in Polit, (...), the instauration of Princes, and Plutarch, (...), the
Accusative Case if alone always representing the State unto which the (...),
had raised them; nor do I believe any one instance can be given to the contrary
in either Sacred or Profane Writer.

Now if this distinction of Order had been known in Apostolical times, it is
very strange we should not have a distinct Rule for the Ordination of the one,
and the Consecration of the other; especially since by the acknowledgment of
all, it is not having many Congregations, or Presbyters under him that makes a
Bishop, but only a peculiar, and higher Ordination: And yet we find no
footsteps of it, but on the contrary, in the very Directory for Ordination of
Presbyters, they are called Bishops: Surely these things are as clear proof
that Bishops were not a Superior Order as a Negative is capable of, and there
being no one Text in Scripture that affirms the distinction Semper praesumitur
pro negante, we must have concluded in the Negative, though we had not had
these proofs.

But what is wanting in Scripture, they hope to make up out of the Fathers and
Councils, in behalf of Diocesan Prelacy; it is certain they think their
greatest strength lies there: And we deny not that many of the Fathers seem to
make a great difference betwixt Bishops and Presbyters; but this does not
overthrow our Hypothesis; for if they are the same in Scripture, the Sayings of
the Fathers cannot make them otherwise, and yet few or none of the Ancients say
that they are distinct Orders, much less that they are so by divine right; but
some of them acknowledge the contrary, as we shall presently show.

It is not therefore their using the Name of Bishop in a sense distinct from
that of Presbyter, or requiring Presbyters to be obedient to their Bishop, that
will prove a superiority of order jure divino; for we grant that it was the
early Practice of the Church to choose one of the Gravest and Wisest of the
Presbyters, and constitute him President over the rest; and that where there
were many Presbyters in a particular Church, commonly the Eldest or worthiest
was as Pastor, and the other his Assistants, but still we know the Parson and
the Curates are of the same order; and every Bishop in England is equal in
order to the Archbishop of Canterbury, though they take an Oath of Canonical
Obedience to him; the same we say of the distinction betwixt Bishop and
Presbyter in Primitive Times.

This would be a sufficient reply unto the Antiquities this Gentleman has
alleged, but lest he should think he has done a mighty feat in transcribing
these Passages, I shall animadvert more particularly upon them.

He begins with the Canons of the Apostles, but why they should take place of
Clemens Romanus and Ignatius, I cannot tell, unless he has a Mind to cheat us
with the Name, or was cheated by it himself. Dr. Cave reckons them among the
Supposititious Works of the First Age; and Dr. Beveridge, who has labored so
hard to defend them against Daille, only contends that they were written by
Clemens Alexandrinus, near the latter End of the Second Century. But what say
these Canons? why they say, Let not the Presbyters or Deacons do any thing
without the consent of the Bishop, for he has the People of the Lord entrusted
to him, and there shall one day be required of him an Account of their Souls.
Here (says the Gentleman) the Bishop has the Power of governing the Presbyters
and Deacons; Council. Carth. c. 23. Cypr. Edit. Goul. Ep. 6. p. 17. Ep. 24. p.
55.
it is well argued however; the Kings of England can make no Laws without the
consent of the Lords and Commons, have they therefore the power of governing
him? Cyprian did nothing without the concurrence of his Presbyters; nay, he
determined to do nothing without the consent of his People; by our Gentleman's
dialect the Presbyters and People had the Power of governing the Bishop.

And is there one word here to prove that the Bishop was of a Superior Order?
The Curates of a Church are to have the direction and consent of the Parson,
and yet the Order is the same; And it deserves to be considered whether it is
likely this Bishop the Canon speaks of, was any more than the Pastor of a
particular Church, since he must be supposed capable of giving the Necessary
Orders for management of all Affairs, and nothing must be done without his
consent; it would be a Rule hard to be observed, as our present Dioceses are
Modeled; and if Presbyters must do nothing without the Bishops consent, they
must do nothing at all, the whole time being too little for Travel and
Consultation, there would be none left for Action; unless by consent, we must
understand a general Permission to do what they please, without consulting him
at all in particular Matters, which would be a very odd Comment upon such a
Text, and not very well agreeing with the Reason that is added for this
consent, viz. That the Bishop has the People of the Lord committed to him, and
shall give an account of their Souls. Surtly this requires a more careful and
near inspection, than to commit the care of all by an Act of general consent to
others, without ever intending a personal Acquaintance with one of a Thousand,
Pres. Treat. of Repentance.
so solemnly committed to him. Dr. Tailor says he is sure we cannot give an
Account of those Souls of whom we have no notice.

The next passage is out of Clemens Romanus his Epistle to the Corinthians, a
Piece of Antiquity which all the World has a great Veneration for; that which
the Gentleman thinks is for his purpose, he gives us thus; The Apostles
foreseeing that there would be Contentions about the Name or Dignity of Bishop
or Episcopacy, they set down a List or Continuation of Successors, that when
any died, such a certain person should succeed him.

But this place in Clement is very falsely recited, and whoever furnished him
with it abused him, and imposed upon his Ignorance. This Translator whoever he
be, would have us to think that the Apostles set down a List of the Names of
those that were to Succeed in the Episcopal See; this we cannot admit, until he
tell us where this List is to be found? how far it went? It seems it was a
Continuation of Successors, but it is hard to imagine how they could have the
Names of Persons so ready, that were yet unborn, and unconverted; we know an
Infallible Spirit could reveal it to them, but surely then we should have had
it in the Canon of Scripture; such a thing would have been of singular Use, not
only for prevention of Disputes about the choice of Bishops, but for the
Uncontrollable Evidence of the Truth of Christianity, when they were able to
produce a Prophetical List, with the Names of Persons then unborn, and yet all
in due time appearing, and ascending the Chair according to that Sacred Roll:
for these Reasons we cannot but reject the Fiction of any such List of Names,
which when one died, declared that such a certain Person should succeed him.

And I am sure the words of Clement say no such thing; (...), etc. Edit.
Colomes. 103.
the true English of them is this: And our Apostles understood by our Lord
Jesus that contention would arise about the Name of Episcopacy, and for this
Cause being furnished with perfect foreknowledge, ordained those
beforementioned, and moreover gave [(...)] order, that whenever they should
die, other approved Men should succeed and perform their Functions.

I know there have been great Disputes about this odd word (...), Bishop Usher
renders it [Ordinem] those that translate it [a List] would have it (...), But
let them contend about words as long as they please, the true import of the
place, is plain enough to those that consider it with the foregoing Paragraph;
(...), etc. p. 100.
for there we find the Jewish Contests about the Priesthood, and those of the
Christians about the Episcopacy are compared together; the case may be thus
contracted, Moses knowing that the Tribes would contend about the glorious
Title of the Priesthood, ordered them to bring their Rods, each inscribed with
the Name of its Tribe, and he laid them up in the Tabernacle, telling them,
That the Tribe whose Rod should blossom God had approved and chosen for the
Priesthood; Even so the Apostles, etc. That is, as the Sacerdotal Tribe was
chosen and approved of God, so none must take upon them the office of
Episcopacy, but Men well approved; this seems to me the true sense of the
place, and the only one that it is capable of.

And what is here to prove that Bishops are a distinct Order from Presbyters,
not one word, but rather to the contrary; for here it is said the Apostles
constituted (...), P. 98.
the aforesaid, go a few lines backward and you have the word again, and there
you will find it refers to Bishops and Deacons, which the Apostles ordained for
those that should believe: Now, if they only appointed these two sorts of
Officers, what is become of subordinate Presbyters? the Apostles we see
appointed none such, the distinction betwixt Bishops and Presbyters according
to Clemens, is not by Divine or Apostolical institution; and it is observable,
that in this very Paragraph he makes them the same, (...), etc. It will be no
small Sin in us to reject those that have discharged the Duties of their
Episcopal Function in an holy and unblameable manner, happy are those
Presbyters who have finished their course -- They fear not being turned out of
their present Settlement.

It is strange these Gentlemen should threaten us with Clement, who as he writ
next to the Apostles, so he is next to them most friendly to our Cause, and
this was so evident to the learned Grotius, That he gives it as a reason why he
thinks this Epistle to be Genuine, Quod nusquam meminit exortis, Epist. 182. ad
Bignon.
etc. because he no where mentions that extravagant Authority of Bishops which
by the Custom of the Church began to be introduced at Alexandria, but plainly
shows as the Apostle does, that Churches were governed by the Common Council of
Presbyters who were also Bishops.

His next Author is Ignatius, and it must be confessed, he puts a distinction
betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, and bids them all be observant of the Bishop, and
do nothing without the consent of the Bishop; but still here is not a word to
prove a Superiority of Office by divine right; we grant that in his time the
Name of Bishop began to be appropriated to the Senior Presbyter, who was as
Pastor, and the rest his Curats or Assistants, but this will make little for
the Diocesan Prelate; That Ignatius's Bishop was no more than the Pastor of a
particular Church, his own words abundantly manifest; (...). Ep. ad Philad.
There is to every Church one Altar, and one Bishop, with the Presbytery and
the Deacons my Fellow Servants; here we have the principle of Individuation in
Churches, not that all the Members of the Church, must be no more than can
always meet together in one place, there be many things that may make that
difficult, but they must all have One Altar, that is, One Communion Table; Many
Tricks and Salvo's have been invented to evade this instance; some say by One
Table, is meant specifically One; but so, are all in the World. Others, One
Supreme Altar, to which the rest were Subordinate; but why then may we not say,
by One Bishop, is meant One Supreme Prelate, with other Bishops under him?
There is no reason assignable, why the (...), should be taken Numerically, and
the (...), otherwise. That by One Altar, is meant One Consistory, as Dr.
Morris would suggest, is very improbable, when in the same Sentence we read of
One Bishop with his Presbytery, which sure must signify the Consistory, if any
thing that Sentence does, and is much more likely to do so, than One Altar.

This is so apparent, that Mr. Mede confesses, Proof of Churches in the second
Cent. p. 29.
It should seem that in those first times before Diocesan were divided into
lesser and subordinate Churches, we now call Parishes, and Presbyters assigned
to them, they had not only one Altar in one Church or Dominicum, but one Altar
to a Church, taking a Church for the Company or Corporation of the faithful,
united under one Bishop, and that was in the City and place where the Bishop
had his Residence. Dr. Morris would disable this Evidence, because Mr. Mede
expresses it with Caution and Modesty, it should seem. But such modesty makes
it more valuable, being the humor and way of that learned man; he had made as
strict researches into these things, as he could, and upon the whole it seemed
thus to him, but if there was a more than ordinary Caution, observed in the
Words, some will be apt to think, it was not for want of evidence, that the
case was really so, but rather because he knew the Notion would not be very
agreeable to the Governors of that Church of which he was an Excellent Member.

The Author of a late Treatise, called a Defense of Pluralities, supposed to be
Mr. Wharton, notwithstanding the heights of his Zeal for the Hierarchy, which
appear sufficiently throughout the Book, yet ingenuously acknowledges, That at
the beginning, Page 59.
the Bishop and his Presbyters lived altogether in one common place, and were
maintained by the free Oblations of the People which were brought to the
Cathedral and deposited upon the Altar or Communion Table, when the number of
Christians increased they began to build more Churches than one in a City,
these new Churches were but as Chapels of Ease, annexed to and depending upon
the Cathedral Church, where the Holy Eucharist was Consecrated.

This may suffice to show what kind of Diocese, Ignatius's Bishop had, and what
he means by one Altar; Enquiry into the Constitut. Discip. Unity, etc. Of the
Primitive Churches. Chap. 2.
and a late Author has said a great deal to prove out of Ignatius himself, that
the several Bishoprics of Smyrna, Ephesus, Magnesia, Philadelphia and
Trallium, were but so many single Congregations, governed by a Bishop as Pastor
and his Presbyters as Assistants, and this he makes the true distinction
betwixt Bishop and Presbyter in those times: But whether that be so or no is
not so material, as that our Cause cannot stand without it; for as the first
variation from Apostolical Practice, was the setting up of one above the rest
of the Presbyters, in a particular Church, and calling him Bishop, so the next
was the keeping of new Congregations in dependancy upon that which was the
first Church; and though I will not say such dependances are in all Cases
unlawful, yet they are ordinarily dangerous, and can never be proved necessary;
God has no where tied up a new formed Congregation, from endeavoring to have a
Bishop and Altar of their own; and if this cannot be had with the good Will and
Consent of that Elder Church and Bishop, who had been instrumental in the
Conversion of this new Colony, they may, no doubt, do it without them, if
general Edification require it.

Thus I have briefly examined our Gentleman's Antiquities, what Advantage he or
his Cause has received by them, he has now leisure to consider; Let us see
whether the Primitive Fathers are no more favorable to us than they have been
to him. And I would lay down this, as a just remark upon these proofs out of
Antiquity, That, one Passage which expressly tells us, what kind of Superiority,
Bishops had in Primitive times over Presbyters, and how they came by it, is of
more value in this Controversy, than a score, that barely mention that
Superiority; the one speaks directly to the Question, the other not; we
acknowledge those whom the Fathers call Bishops, had some kind of Superiority,
over those called Presbyters, and it is a vain thing for Persons to sweat and
toil, in proving that which we never deny, but will grant them at the first
demand, but the Controversy turning upon this very hinge, whether it was a
Superiority of Order by Divine Institution, those Ancients that speak purposely
to this Point, are the most proper Evidences in this cause.

St. Hierom speaks as directly to the Question, as it is possible for one to do;
he positively asserts, and largely proves, that Bishops and Presbyters are the
same, Ad Evagrium.
Manifestissime comprobatur eundem esse Episcopum and Presbyterum; and cites
for that purpose, Acts 20.28. Phil. 1.1. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7. And diverse other Texts
of Scripture, and in his Commentary on Is It of Titus affirms, Idem ergo
Presbyter qui Episcopus, etc. and tells us, that at first the Churches were
governed by the common consent of the Presbyters, and that the Distinction
betwixt Presbyter and Bishop was, Magis consuetudine quam dispositionis
Dominicae veritate, rather by Custom than Divine Appointment -- in another
place he ascribes to Presbyters the Power of the Keys; Ep. ad Heliodorum. p.
283.
and is so full and express, that some of the Papists accuse him of Error
herein; others labor hard, but in vain, to invalidate his evidence by
pretending, that this Praelation of Bishops, above Presbyters, was a thing done
by Apostolical Appointment, because Jerome says, it was found out as a remedy
against Schism, when men began to say I am of Paul and I of Apollo, which was
in the Apostles times; but to this it has been often replied, St. Jerome does
not speak of that particular Schism of the Corinthians, but of others which
arose about Contests of the like Nature; and that he does not intend that
individual Case of the Church of Corinth, is most certain. For,

1. The Schisms he speaks of, were occasioned by their differences about those
Presbyters, that had governed them by common Consent; but that of the
Corinthians was about the Apostles, it cannot be supposed, that by the common
Council of Presbyters; Jerome should mean, Paul, Apollo, and Cephas governing in
Common the Church of Corinth.

2. This Schism Jerome speaks of, was too much promoted, by the Presbyters
themselves, Postquam vero unusquisque eos quos baptizaverat suos esse putabat,
non Christi, etc. He does not date this Distinction of Order, from the time
that the People only contended about their Ministers, but when the Ministers
also, influenced those Contentions, and made themselves the Heads of Parties,
accounting those their own who had been baptized by them; now this was not the
Corinthian case, for there the Apostle was so far from encouraging those
sidings, that he expressly condemns them.

3. The Schism he speaks of, was remedied by choosing one of those Presbyters
they contended about; and setting him over the rest, and committing the whole
care of the Church to him, but I hope none will say, that Paul was set above
Cephas, or he above Paul, or Apollo above them both, to heal the Corinthians
Schism; and therefore the rise of Prelacy is not to be dated from that very
Schism; but from others, that afterward happened in the Churches.

And it has been observed by a very learned Doctor, That the Arguments which
St. Jerome brings for this Parity, Dr. Stilling. Irenic. p. 279.
are grounded upon those parts of Scripture, which were writ after this
Corinthian Schism, and says he, can we think Jerome had so little sense, as to
say that Episcopacy was instituted upon that Schism, and yet bring all his
Arguments for Parity after the time that he sets for the Institution of
Episcopacy?

St. Ambrose or rather Hilary, Non per omnia conviniunt scripta Apostoli
ordinat. in Ephesians. 4. Prospiciente Concilio ut non ordo, sed meritum crearet
Episcopum multerum sacerd. judicio constiti. Ibid.
affirms that the Ordination that was in the Church in his day, did not exactly
agree with the writings of the Apostles, and afterward shows, how the
difference betwixt a Bishop and Presbyter arose, by a mere Act of the Church
choosing One that was most worthy, and setting him over the Rest, but that in
the beginning there were no particular Rectors of Churches constituted, and
therefore all things were managed, by the Convention of Presbyters, Comment in
1 Cor. 11. These Commentaries are cited by St. Augustine and greatly commended.

Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromat. l. 7. tells us, that the Discipline of the
Church, is Penes Presbyteros, in the Power of the Presbyters.

St. Augustine gives us a plain account of the difference betwixt Bishops and
Presbyters, Secundum honorum Vocabula, quae jam Ecclesiae usus obtinuit,
Episcopatus Presbyterio major est; he does not pretend that it was by Divine
right, but by the Custom of the Church, nor in any real act of Power, but only
in an honourary Title that Episcopacy is Superior to Presbytery. Medinas de
sacr. Hom. Orig. l. 1. c. 5. Consult. Art. 14. p. 952. Chrysostom. Hom. 11.


And this matter is so evident, that the most learned Papists acknowledge it
was the opinion of most of the Fathers, Cassander is positive in it, Convenit
inter omnes olim Apostolorum aetate nullum discrimen, etc.

To this, some Object, that both Jerome and Chrysostom, notwithstanding all
they say for the Identity of these Offices, do still except Ordination, as that
which is peculiar to the Bishop, but the illustrious Chamier has sufficiently
taken off this Objection, Agere de sui temporis politia non de ea quae fuit ab
Ecclesiae initiis, and more particularly to that of Jerome, Chamier de Occum.
Pontif. cap. 6. p. 180.
manifestum est de suo loqui tempore, etc. It is manifest, when St. Jerome says,
a Presbyter does every thing that a Bishop does, except in Ordination, he
speaks of the time in which he lived, and from that very thing he draws an
Argument to prove, that formerly Bishop and Presbyter were the same, because,
says he even now, though the Names have been for a long time used for
Distinction of Degrees, yet excepting in Ordination, there is nothing that a
Bishop does but a Presbyter may do it also; and therefore if after so long a
Discrimination of Title and Degree, Bishops have only gained this one Point of
Power, it is certain at first there was no difference at all; this is the
reasoning of that Father, wherein he agrees very well with himself, and is
guilty of no such inconsistency as some careless or prejudiced Readers would
charge upon him.

But that which seems most directly to confront these Witnesses is, That Aerius
is reckoned amongst the Heretics by Epiphanius, for this Opinion, and is
represented as a Prodigy, and his Opinion madness, which Dr. Morris does not
forget to Proclaim, as that which gives a mortal wound to our Cause.

But a learned Prelate of their own, will give them a sufficient answer to
this, Irenic. p. 277.
for if Aerius was a Heretic for holding the Identity of Order, it is strange
that Epiphanius, should be the first man, that should charge him with it, and
that neither Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret nor Evagrius before whose time he
lived, should censure him for it; and why should not Jerome have equally
Animadverted upon, who is as express in this as any man in the World. But some
tell us, He was an Arian, others say, he was put amongst the Heretics for
making an unnecessary Separation from the Church of Sebastia, and Eustathius
the Bishop thereof; not that this was indeed Heresy, but it was the custom of
angry Bishops in those Ages to call all men Heretics that stood in their way,
as appears by the famous Catalogues of Heretics and Heresies, that Philastrius
a Bishop and Saint has bequeathed unto the World.

It is too evident to be concealed, that Epiphanius, though otherwise a Worthy
and Good Man, was of a hot and eager Temper, rash in his Censures, and
sometimes transported into great irregularities of Practice, as appears by the
disturbance he made at Constantinople, Socrates, c. 11, 12.
and the rude Language he gave to Chrysostom, because he did not at his
command, banish Dioscorus and condemn the Books of Origin.

The Learned Author of the Summary of the Controversies between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome, gives us an instance of the rash and
injudicious Zeal of Epiphanius, in condemning Aerius for Heresy in another
point, which will very much depreciate the Authority of that Father in judging
of Heresies; Summary of the Controv. p. 62.63, 64.
take it in the Words of our Author. At the Celebration of the Eucharist, the
Bishop or Priest made mention of the Names of Martyrs, and Confessors, and
those who had deserved well of the Church, and particular Christians in their
Private Devotions, remembered their own Relations and Friends, and thus it
became a Custom without enquiring into the Reasons of it, till by this Custom,
People began to conclude, that such Prayers were profitable for the dead, and
that those who had not lived so well as they should do, might obtain the pardon
of their Sins by the Intercessions of the Living; which I confess, was a very
natural Thought, and shows us the easy progress of Superstition, that Customs
taken up without any good Reason, will find some reason, though a very bad one
when they grow Popular; upon this Aerius condemns the Practice, and he is
reckoned amongst Heretics for so doing; He desired to know for what Reason,
the Names of dead men are recited in the Celebration of the Eucharist, and
Prayers made for them, whether by this means those who died in Sin might obtain
Pardon, which he thought if it were true would make it unnecessary to live
virtuously, if they had Pious Friends who would pray for them, when they were
dead; Epiphanius undertakes to confute Aerius, but gives such Reasons, as are
no answer at all to his Questions. He says it signifies our Belief, that those
who are dead to this World do still live in another state, are alive to God;
That it signifies our good Hopes of the Happy State of those who are gone
hence; That it is done to make a Distinction between Christ, and all other good
Men, for we pray for all but him, who intercedes for us all. Very worthy
Reasons of praying for the Dead, etc.

Thus you see what a Monstrous Heretic Aerius was, and what an admirable
Confuter Epiphanius; The Truth is, these two Heresies of Aerius concerning the
Parity of Bishops and Presbyters, and the unlawfulness of praying for the dead,
are much of the same Nature; and Epiphanius's Confutation of them both, equally
Learned and Satisfactory; for it is very observable that in the same place
where he condemns that monstrous prodigious Heresy of the Identity of Order,
he fairly confesses, That by the two Orders of Presbyters and Deacons, Epiph.
conr. Acrium haeres. 75. p. 905.
all Ecclesiastical Offices might be performed, (...), (...).

After the Fathers, we have suffrage of the Canonists, Gratian, cap. 24.
Legimus, did. 39. cap. 5. Olim, did. 95. cap. 4. Nullus, did. 60. cap. 16.
Ecce, did. 95. Lancel. l. 1. Tit. 21. p. 32. Auth. Glossae in cap. did.
Council. Basil, Duaren de sacr. Eccl. Min. l. 1. c. 7.
And it being thus enrolled in the Canon Law, was publicly taught by the
Schoolmen and others, as Lombard, lib. 4. Sentent. did. 24. litera I. But at
length the Roman Church saw it necessary for the better settling of the Papacy
to advance the Order of Episcopacy above Presbytery, and in the Council of
Trent they have Decreed, Sess. 23. cap. 4. Can. 6, 7. this Superiority, and in
their New Edition of the Canon Law have inserted this Note. Annot. Marg. ad
Cap. legimus, did. 43.
That Bishops have differed from Presbyters always, as they do now in
Government, Prelacy, Offices and Sacraments, but not in the Name and Title of
Bishop, which was formerly common to both. And those Learned Examiners of the
Tridentine Council, Chemnitius and Gentilletus, Exam. part 2. Lib. 4.
the one a Divine, the other a Lawyer, condemn this Decree, the one by
Scripture and Fathers, the other by the Canon Law.

The Judgment of the Reformed Churches, is so well known by the Harmony of
Confessions, that I shall not particularly enlarge upon it, we have it there
laid down, as the common Sentiments of the Churches of Helvetia, Savoy, France,
Scotland, Germany, Hungary and the Low Countries, that Bishops, and Presbyters,
are by Divine Institution the same; and though some of those Churches, admit a
kind of Episcopacy, yet they never pretend a Jus Divinum for it, but
acknowledge it to be only a Prudential Constitution; but I know the Humor of
some Men, has led them to despise the Reformed Churches and to condemn and
unchurch them too, I shall therefore more distinctly show, what has been the
Judgment of our Learned Country Men concerning this Question.

Caelius Sedulius Scotus, who flourished about the year of our Lord, 390, falls
in with the opinion, and the very words of Jerome, Expos. Tit. cap. 1. and
citing Acts 20.17. bids us observe, how the Apostle calling the Elders of but
one City Ephesus, Fuisse Presbyt. quos Episc.
does afterward style them Bishops, which thing says he, I have alleged to
show that among the Ancients, Presbyters were the same with Bishops.

Venerable Bede speaking of these things, Alcuine de div. Offic. cap. 35.
says, Conjunctus est gradus and in Multis pene Similis, in Acta Apost. cap.
20. Tom. 5. Col. 657. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury above 600 years ago, a
man so Learned that for his Confutation of the Greeks in the Council of Bari in
Apuleia, he was dignified to sit at the Popes right Foot, is wholly with us in
this Point, Constat ergo Apostolica institutione omnes Presbyteros esse
Episcopos, Enarr. in Ep. ad Philip.
and speaks in the Words of Jerome, Sciant Episcopi se magis consuetudine, etc.

And before him the Canons of Aelfrick, Anno 990. speaking of Bishops and
Presbyters say, Spelman Council. Tom. 1. p. 570.
Unum tenent eundemque Ordinem.

Rich. Armachanus a Learned Prelate, de Questionibus Armenorum, cap. 2. affirms
that the Degrees of Patriarch, Archbishop and Bishop were invented by the
Devotion of Men, not instituted by Christ, and that no Prelate how great soever
has any greater Degree of the Power of Order than a simple Presbyter, and in
the 4th. Chap. he proves by Acts 7.14. 1 Timothy 4. That the Power of Confirmation
and Imposition of Hands belongs to the Jurisdiction of the Presbyter; and
declares that Presbyters succeed the Apostles, and makes all the distinction
betwixt Bishop and Presbyter to be this, he that has a Cure is a Bishop, he
that has not is a Presbyter, which agrees with Dr. Of the Church, l. 15. c. 27.
Fields Notion of Episcopal Jurisdiction, and also with that of the Impartial
Enquirer into the Government of the Primitive Church, before mentioned.

Come we now to our Reformers, John Wickliffe, called by Mr. Fox the English
Apostle, speaks thus, Some multiply the Characters in Orders, but one thing I
confidently averr, that in the Primitive Church in Paul's time, two Orders
sufficed, the Presbyter and the Deacon, then was not invented the distinction
of Pope and Cardinals, Patriarchs and Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons,
Officials and Deans, with other Officers of which there is neither Number nor
Order, that every one of these is an Order, and that in the receiving thereof
there is a Character imprinted, as ours Babble, it seems good to me to be
silent, because they prove not what they affirm, it is sufficient to me if
there be Presbyters and Deacons, keeping the State and Office that Christ has
imposed upon them; Quia certum videtur quod superbia Cesarea hos gradus and
ordines adinvenit; because it seems certain to me that Imperious Pride has
invented these other Orders and Degrees.

In the Year, 1537. The Archbishop of Canterbury and York, and the rest of the
Bishops and Clergy in Convocation, whose Names are all subscribed to their Book
entitled, The Institution of a Christian Man, Dedicated to the King and
ratified by the Statute of 32. Hen, 8. thus determine; The Truth is that in the
New Testament, there is no mention made of any degrees or distinctions in
Orders, but only of Deacons or Ministers, and of Priests or Bishops, and of
these two Orders, that is to say, Priests and Deacons, Scripture makes express
mention, etc.

The Judgment of Archbishop Cranmer as Dr. Stillingfleet reports it ex ipso
Autographo, was, that Bishops and Priests were at one time, and were not two
things, but both one Office, in the beginning of Christ's Religion, Irenic. p.
392.

That Godly Martyr Mr. Bradford, in his Conference with Dr. Harpsfield, averrs,
Acts and Monuments, Vol. 3. p. 293.
that the Scripture knows no difference betwixt Bishops and Ministers, that is,
Priests, and when Harpsfield asked him, Were not the Apostle, Bishops, answered
no, unless you will give a new Definition of a Bishop, that is, give him no
certain place.

Thomas Beacon a Prebendary of Canterbury, and Refugee for Religion in Queen
Mary's Reign, in his Catechism Printed at London, and Dedicated to both
Archbishops, puts the Question, What difference is there between a Bishop and
a Presbyter? And Answers, None at all, their Office is the same, their
Authority and Power is One, therefore St. Paul calls Ministers sometimes
Bishops, sometimes Presbyters, sometimes Pastors, sometimes Doctors.

Dr. Bridges Dean of Salisbury, afterward Bishop of Oxford, P. 359, 360.
in his Book called The Supremacy of Christian Princes, endeavors to clear
Aerius from the charge of Heresy in this matter, and thus replies upon
Stapleton. Jerome who lived in the same Age with Epiphanius, will tell you, or
if you have not read him your own Canons will tell you, Idem est ergo Presbyter
qui Episcopus, and antequam Diaboli Studia, etc. This was the Judgment of the
Ancient Fathers, and yet they were no Arians nor Aerians therefore, and then
cites Lombard and Durandus, and thus sums up the whole: That in Substance,
Order, or Character as they call it, there is no difference between a Priest
and a Bishop; That the difference is but of accidents and circumstances, That
in the Primitive times this difference was not known, etc.

Dr. Jewel, Defense of the Apology, Part. 2. C. 9. Divis. I.
That most excellent Bishop of Salisbury, brings in Mr. Harding, alleging that
they which denied the distinction of a Bishop and Priest were condemned of
Heresy, as we find in Sr. Austixe, and Epiphanius, and the Council of
Constance; to which he answers in the Margent: Untruth, for hereby both St.
Paul, and St. Jerome, and other good men are condemned of Heresy; and
afterward says farther, Is it so horrible an Heresy as he makes it, to say
that by the Scriptures, a Bishop and Priest are all one? Or knows he how far,
or to whom, he reaches the name of a Heretic? Verily Chrysostom says,
between a Bishop and a Priest in a manner there is no difference, St. Jerome
says somewhat in rougher sort, I hear say there is one become so peevish, that
he sets Deacons before Priests, that is before Bishops, whereas the Apostle
plainly teaches us that the Priests and Bishops be all one. St. Austin says,
what is the Bishop but the first Priest? So says St. Ambrose there is but one
Consecration of a Priest and Bishop, for both of them are Priests, but the
Bishop is the first. Thus he.

The next I shall mention is Dr. Whitaker Regius Professor of Divinity in the
University of Cambridge: Contr. Duraeum l. 6. 19. de Eccl. Regim. qu. 1. Cap.
1. de notis Eccles. quaest. 5.
He repeats Sr. Jeromes words at large on 1 Titus, and to Evagrius, that
Bishops and Presbyters were the same, that the Primitive Churches were governed
by the common consent of the Presbyters, that this custom was not changed by
the Apostles, but afterward by the Church, and thus argues. If the Apostles
had changed the order as Sanders pretends, what had it advantaged him to have
so diligently collected Testimonies, out of the Apostles to prove that they
were sometimes the same? He might easily have remembered, that the Order was
changed by the Apostles themselves, after the Church was distracted with
contentions, if any such thing had been done, (and he enquires) Wherefore then
says Jerome, Before it was said, I am of Paul, etc. He answers, This might
deceive Sanders, but it is certain Jerome only alludeth to that place of the
Apostle to show that Schisms were the Cause of changing the Order, but this
Remedy was almost worse than the Disease, for as at first one Presbyter was set
above the rest, and made a Bishop, afterward one Bishop was preferred before
the Rest, and this custom at length produced the Pope with his Monarchy; Resp.
ad decion. rationem Campiani. p. 51.
and elsewhere he thus speaks of Aerius his Heresy; And truly if to condemn
Prayers for the Dead, and to make Bishop and Presbyter equal be Heretical,
Nihil Catholicum esse potest, nothing can be Orthodox and Catholic.

That passage in Mr. Tract of Schism, p. 13.
Hales of Eaton is as memorable as its Author. They do but abuse themselves and
others, that would persuade us, that Bishops by Christ's institution, have any
superiority over men further than Reverence, or that any is superior to another
further than positive order agreed upon among Christians has prescribed;
Nature and Religion agree in this, that neither of them has any hand in the
Heraldry of Secundum, sub and supra, all this comes from composition and
agreement of Men among themselves, wherefore this abuse of Christianity to make
it Lacquey to Ambition, is a Vice for which I have no extraordinary name of
Ignominy, and an ordinary one I will not give it, lest you should take so
transcendent a Vice to be but trivial.

The most Excellent Archbishop Usher both in his Writing and Discourse,
acknowledged these Orders to be the same, that the difference was only in
degree, that Bishops ordained as Presbyters, but regulated the Ordination as
Bishops, and would not endure to hear the Ordination of the Reformed Churches
condemned; In his Reduction of Episcopacy Printed by Dr. Bernard, he proves
both by the words of Paul, of Tertullian, P. 2, 3.
and the Order of the Church of England, that Spiritual Jurisdiction belongs to
the Common Council of Presbyters, in which the Bishop is no more than
President, and page 6. has these words. True it is that in our Church this kind
of Presbyterial Government has been long disused, yet seeing it still
professes that every Pastor has a right to rule the Church, from whence the
name of Rector was also first given to him, and to administer the Discipline of
Christ as well as to dispense the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the restraint of
the exercise of that Right, proceeds only from the Custom now received in the
Realm, no man can doubt but by another Law of the Land this hindrance may be
well removed.

And to say the Truth this was the general opinion of the Church of England for
many years after the Reformation, and very few even of the Bishops themselves
opposed it, Till the Treaties about Marriage with Spain and France, became the
great occasion of corrupting the Court and Church, and letting in a sort of
Men, who in pursuance of secret Articles were to effect an accommodation with
Rome, Vid. Dr. Heylin's Cyprianus Angl. Mr. Baxter against a Revolt to a
Foreign Jurisd. p. 25. and alibi. See also the late Bishop of Hereford's Naked
Truth.
and therefore must settle the Jus Divinum of the Prelacy, as the Council of
Trent had done before them, by taking the power of opposition and dissent, out
of the hands of the inferior Clergy, who generally abhorred the design; from
that time this new Doctrine has much grown upon the Nation, and with a great
deal of noise and confidence has been asserted by the main bulk of the
Ecclesiastics, and yet some few of the most learned of them have declared
against it, I shall only mention two, both of eminent note and figure in the
Church at this day, I mean the Bishops of Worcester and Salisbury.

For the Bishop of Worcester, I have cited his Irenicum so often already, that
it would be in vain, to add any thing more, the main design of that learned
Tract especially the latter part of it is to prove that God has not by his Law
settled any form of Church Government: and he has for ever ruined the
pretensions of Episcopacy to a Jus Divinum; they say indeed he has retracted
that Book, but as long as he has not destroyed the reason of it, we are well
enough, for it is upon the reason of the thing, not the authority of his person
(how great soever) that we depend; and till that Book be undone as well as
unsaid, it will remain in full force and virtue, for reason is always the same,
though Men and their Interests may vary.

The Bishop of Salisbury inferior to none in all the accomplishments of
Gentleman, Vindication of the Church of Scotland p. 306.
Statesman and Divine, spoke his thoughts freely, at a time when Prelacy was
in its Zenith, thus At first every Bishop had but one Parish, but afterward
when the numbers increased that they could not conveniently meet in one place,
and when through the violence of persecution, they durst not assemble in great
multitudes, the Bishops divided their charges into lesser Parishes, and gave
assignments to the Presbyters of particular Flocks, which was done first in
Rome in the beginning of the second Century, etc.

And P. 310. I do not allege a Bishop to be a distinct office from a
Presbyter, but a different degree of the same office, etc. P. 331. I
acknowledge Bishop and Presbyter to be one and the same office, and so plead
for no new Office-bearer in the Church, the first branch of their power, is
their authority to publish the Gospel, to manage the worship and dispense the
Sacraments, and this is all that is of Divine Right in the Ministry, in which
Bishops and Presbyters are equally sharers, but besides this the Church
claims a power of jurisdiction, of making Rules for Discipline, and applying
and executing the same, all which indeed is suitable to the common Laws of
Socleties and the General Rules of Scripture, but has no positive warrant from
any Scripture Precept -- Therefore as to the management of this Jurisdiction,
it is in the Churches power to cast it into what mould she will, etc.

I believe I shall rather be censured for having said too much, than not enough
upon this Subject, yet I will venture so much farther upon the Readers
Patience, (who cannot be wearier of reading than I am of transcribing) as to
conclude this Chapter with the suffrages, of three Famous Divines of the
Gallican Churches that have all writ in our Day.

Let the learned le Blanc, These. Sedan. de Grad. and distinc. Minist. p. 501.
be first heard, thus, Quod spectat vero Discrimen Presbyteri and Episcopi,
etc. But as to the difference betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, for as much as the
Church of England is Governed by Bishops, it is the more general opinion of the
English, that Episcopacy and Presbytery are distinct offices, instituted by
Christ with distinct powers; but the rest of the Reformed, as also they of the
Augustane Confession, do unanimously believe that there is no such distinction
by Divine Right, but that as the names in Scripture are synonymous, and put for
each other indifferently, so the thing is wholly the same; and that the
superiority of Bishops above Presbyters, which has now for many Ages obtained
in the Church, is only of Positive and Ecclesiastical Right, and has been
introduced thereinto by degrees. That even in the Apostles days, a certain
precedence of honor and place, was given unto him who did excel his
Colleagues, either in Age or in the time of his Ordination, so that he was as
President or Moderator of the Presbytery, and yet looked upon as altogether of
the same office, and had no power or jurisdiction over his Colleagues, and this
Person did always perform those things, which the Presidents or Moderators of
our Synods now perform.

But in the following Age it so fell out, that this Primacy was not conferred
according to the Persons Age or time of entrance, but a custom was introduced,
that one of the Presbyters should be chosen by the Votes of the whole College,
who should continually preside after the same manner over the Presbytery, and
these after a while assumed to themselves the name of Bishops, and by degrees
gained more and more Prerogatives, and brought their Colleagues into subjection
to them, till at length the matter grew up to that Tyranny, which now obtains
in the Church of Rome.

Moreover though all reformed Divines, (excepting those of the Church of
England) condemn that supreme power, which among the Papists, Bishops usurp
over Presbyters as Tyrannical, and think that by the Law of God there is no
distinction betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, yet is there some dispute amongst
them, whether it be not expedient by Positive and Ecclesiastic ri^^^ to
appoint some degrees amongst the Ministers of the Gospel, by which some may be
set above others, provided such moderation be observed as that it may not
degenerate into Tyranny, the French and Dutch Churches, and not a few in
England it self, think it dangerous, and not sufficiently agreeable to the Laws
of Christ, to admit any such thing, but the Judgment and Practice of the
Churches in Germany and Poland is otherwise, they have certain Bishops which
they call Superintendents, that preside in such certain districts, over the
rest of the Pastors, with some Authority and Power, but much short of that
which the Popish Bishops claim.

The second I shall mention is Monsieur Jurieu, Pastoral Letters, let. 14.
who having spoken concerning the Monastic Life, and Oecumenick Councils, as
two great Novelties which had very unhappy effects, he adds, Behold a third of
them, it is the Original of the Hierarchy, which has given birth to the
Antichristian Tyranny, hereby is understood that subordination of Pastors which
has been seen in the Church for 1000 or 1200 years, in this subordination are
seen the lowest Orders in the lowest seats, above these are seen the Priests,
above the Priests are the grand Vicars, above the Grand Vicars are the Bishops,
above the Bishops are the Archbishops or Metropolitans, above the Archbishops
are the Primates, above the Primates are the Exarchs, above the Exarchs are the
Patriarchs, above all these appears a head which was insensibly framed and
placed there, this is that which is called the Pope; All this is a new
invention with respect to the Apostles who left in all the Churches Presbyters
or Bishops to Preach the Word and Administer the Sacraments: But the Bishop and
Presbyter were not distinguished, those which St. Paul calls Bishops he calls
Presbyters in the the same place, this is matter of fact which our Adversaries
cannot deny: Then he proceeds to tell us how this distinction was made, and the
account thereof, agreeing very much of that of Le Blanc, I shall not transcribe
it.

The last I shall take notice of, is the Renowned Monsieur Claude, whose Name
will be great in all the Churches, as long as Piety and Learning have any
esteem among Men; his words are these,

As for those who are ordained by mere Presbyters, can the Author of the
Prejudices be ignorant, Historical Defense of the Reform. Part. 4. p. 95.
that the distinction of Bishop and Priest as if they were two different
offices, is not only a thing they cannot prove out of Scripture, but that which
even contradicts the express words of Scripture, where Bishop and Presbyter,
are names of one and the same office, from whence it follows that Presbyters
having by their first Institution a a rite to confer Ordination, that Rite
cannot be taken away from them by mere humane Rules; can the author of the
Prejudices be ignorant, that St. Jerome, Hilary, and after them Hincmar, wrote
formerly concerning the Unity, or, as they speak, the Identity, of a Priest and
Bishop in the beginning of the Church, and about the first rise of that
distinction which was afterward made of them into different offices, can he be
ignorant that St. Austin himself writing to Jerome refers that distinction not
to the first institution of the Ministry, P. 97.
but merely to an Ecclesiastical use? And elsewhere, And to speak my thoughts
freely, it seems to me, that this confident opinion, of the absolute necessity
of Episcopacy, that goes so high as to own no Church, or Call, or Ministry, or
Sacraments, or Salvation in the World, where there are no Episcopal
Ordinations, although there should be the true Doctrine, the true Faith and
Piety there, and which would make all Religion depend upon a formality, and on
such a formality as we have shown to be of no other than Humane Institution,
that opinion I say, cannot be looked on otherwise than as the very worst
character, and mark of the highest hypocrisy, a piece of Pharisaisme all over,
that strains at a Gnat when it swallows a Camel, and I cannot avoid having at
least a contempt of those kind of thoughts, and a compassion for those who fill
their Heads with them.

CHAP. III.
An inference concerning Ordination, The Point of Succession more largely
debated; Our English Bishops have no Jurisdiction, nor their Canons any power,
but what is derived from the Civil Magistrates; who has now left us to our
Liberty in the case of Conformity, reflections upon Mr. Norris his charge of
Schism continued.

I Will now venture to leave this point as sufficiently proved, that Bishops
have no Power or Jurisdiction given them by the Law of God, but what Presbyters
have as well as they, I have been the larger upon it, because it goes a great
way in deciding the whole controversy, and would save me all farther Labor,
about the cases of Ordination and Succession.

As to Ordination, if Presbyters be the same with Scripture Bishops, the Orders
conferred by them must needs be valid, for as Monsieur Claude says, it is a
right that cannot be taken away from them by Humane Rules; it is true indeed
there may be such a prudent Order agreed upon, for the due management of this
work, as may make it irregular to ordain without a President, but such
agreements cannot make the action null; for my part I never knew any Ordination
amongst Diffenters, but there was a Moderator chosen, who was chiefly concerned
in the conduct of it, and such a Moderator wants nothing of the Primitive
Bishop: And if there be some Ancient Canons, that say the Presbyters shall not
ordain without the Bishop, Council Carth. 3, 4. C. 22.
so there are others that say the Bishop shall not ordain without the
Presbyters, and by requiring Presbyters to join in this office, it is certain
they have the power, otherwise their laying on of hands would be a mere
nullity. The truth is, neither a single Bishop, nor a single Presbyter can
regularly Ordain, it ought to be done by a Classis, and in that case there must
be some President to avoid confusion, and that is the general practice amongst
us, and therefore our Ordinations are not only valid, but regular too.

Bishop Carleton in his Treatise of Jurisdiction, says, P. 7.
The Power of Order by all Writers that ever I could see, even of the Church of
Rome, is understood to be immediately from Christ, given to all Bishops and
Priests alike by their Consecration; And it is very considerable, what Dr.
Bernard mentions, concerning Archbishop Usher's Opinion in this case, The
Judgment of the late A. B. of Armagh, p. 134, 135.
wherein we have this Historical passage, That in 1609, when the Scotch Bishops
were to be consecrated by the Bishops of London, Ely, and Bath, a question was
moved by Dr. Andrews Bishop of Ely, whether they must not first be ordained
Presbyters, as having received no ordination from a Bishop, the Archbishop of
Canterbury Dr. Bancroft, who was present, maintained, That there was no
necessity for it, seeing where Bishops could not be had, Ordination by
Presbyters must be esteemed lawful, otherwise it might be doubted whether there
were any lawful vocation in most of the Reformed Churches: this was applauded
by the other Bishops, and Ely acquiesced in it, etc.

It was too great a hardship therefore that our Bishops put upon the poor
banished Ministers of the French Churches, in requiring them to be re-ordained,
which in the sense of the imposers, was a renouncing the validity of their
former Ordination, and it is very remarkable that some of those that were most
zealous in that severe usage of those poor Refugees, and would admit none to be
Ministers that did not submit to them in it, are since divested of their
Episcopal power themselves, and have now time to consider, whether to allow the
Ordinations of the Roman Churches, and reject those of the Reformed, was not
(to use Monsieur Claudes words) a piece of Pharisaisme all over, that strains
at a Gnat and swallows a Camel.

And for the pretended Succession, if our Presbyters which have Ministerial
Ordination (and I know no other) be really Bishops by the Laws and Language of
Scripture, We are in the Line still (as the Vindicator speaks) if such a Line
there be: though we look upon it as a most wretched piece of confidence and
madness, to make the Essence of the Ministry and Church depend upon a thing so
lubricous and uncertain.

But that we may if it be possible lead this Man out of his foolish conceit,
about the necessity of an un-interrupted Line of Succession from the Apostles,
let us but state the case according to his own assertions, and perhaps when it
is rightly put it will not require much arguing; His opinion in this matter,
take in these three points.

1. Arch-Rebel, p. 2, 3.
He affirms that the Bishops receive their Spiritual Jurisdiction from the
Apostles, by the Line of Succession, this Succession he makes the foundation of
their Title and Power.

2. From hence he infers, that he is no true Bishop, who is not ordained by
another Bishop, and so upwards in a continued line of Episcopal Ordination to
the Apostles themselves; Arch-Rebel, p. 3.
so that if a Man could show a Spiritual Pedigree in a Line of Episcopacy for a
thousand years, yet if so long ago there was failure, he is but a Lay Impostor.
And

3. That those Churches (or what you will please to call them) that are not under
the Government of such Bishops, Reply, p. 18.
as are possess't of their Authority, by such a Line, are out of the Communion
of the Catholic Church, have no Ministry, no Sacraments, no Salvation.

The first of these, that Bishops have their power from the Apostles as being
their Successors, P. 20.
will certainly infer, that they could never be possessed of it till the
Apostles were dead, unless we can suppose that they were degraded, or
voluntarily resigned; this the Vindicator has deservedly exposed, To be the
Apostles Successors in Apostolical power, the Apostles still living and in
Plenitude of Power, is a very great Mystery, and something like the honest
Vicar of N's Prayer for King Charles the II. that he might outlive all his
Successors; What has the Gentleman to reply to this? He puts on a mavelous
grave aspect, and charges the Vindicator with Scoffing at Timothy and Titus;
but this is a poor shift of his own, when he has rendered himself ridiculous, to
turn it off to Timothy and Titus, I do not believe there is any such Affinity
or Line of Succession betwixt those blessed Evangelists and this Gentleman, but
a man may venture to expose the folly of the latter, and still preserve a due
Veneration for the former.

He confesses it was a piece of Ignorance to pray that the King might outlive
all his Successors, and why then is not he as ignorant in saying that Timothy,
and Titus, and Linus, were made the Successors of the Apostles in their
Apostolical Power, whilst the Apostles were still living, for in this case, the
Apostles might have outlived their Successors, and if we believe some
Historians they did so; and if this be ignorance in the Vicar, it can be no
extraordinary piece of Wisdom and Illumination in the Citizen; he confesses
this is a mystery, and so he says is all the Gospel, but he must not take upon
him to obtrude such stuff of his own upon the World, because the Gospel is a
mystery, thanks be to God, a man may easily discern, betwixt the mysteries of
the Gospel, and those of T. W's making.

But if this Notion will not pass under the pretense of Mystery, he will invent a
reason for it, which we have in these Words, They could not have been said to
be Successors of Apostolical Power, if the Apostles whilst living had not
conferred it upon them, could the Apostles have ordained then after they were
dead? No truly, no more than give Scripture Rules after they were dead; but
were all that the Apostles ordained their Successors in Apostolical Power, then
the Presbyters which they ordained must be so too; He says, The Apostle by
ordaining them in his Lifetime, secured the Succession to them, and the
Government too in the Apostles absence: But I wish he had told us how they
could secure the Succession to them, unless they could have secured them from
dying before them; and for securing the Government to them in the Apostles
absence, that was no more than what they did for the Presbyters, but if they
were invested in Apostolical Power, they had enjoyed the Government as much in
the Apostles Presence, as in their Absence, for the Apostles had all the same
Power, and had it alike whether together or asunder; In short, if it be really
true, that the Bishops must either be the Apostles Successors in Apostolical
Power, whilst the Apostles lived, or they could never be so, we must conclude,
they could never be so, for whilst the Apostles lived, they could not have
Successors in their Office, especially such as claimed their Power by such
Succession.

The second Point is equally censurable, viz. That he is no true Bishop, that
was not ordained by another Bishop, and so upwards to the Apostles; This the
Vindicator told him was altogether unproved, and that the Papists, whose
Interest it is to make men believe so, confess there are insuperable
difficulties about the Succession of Popes in the Roman See: The Gentleman
replies, I never discoursed with any of that Church, who did not zealously
affirm the Succession, that all established Catholic Churches do assert it,
and that in every Diocese, it is as sacredly recorded, as the Succession of
Kings and Emperors to their Thrones, and challenges his Adversary to prove the
contrary. Well I Will be so civil to him as to tell him, that, which it seems he
knew not before, touching the uncertainty of this Line of Succession.

Eusebius himself, notwithstanding the Conjectures that he makes concerning the
Successors of the Apostles, Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 4.
after all ingenuously confesses, (...), etc. But how many or who were the true
Successors of the Apostles, and thought sufficient to govern the Churches
founded by them, is hard to say, excepting those which perhaps some one may
gather, out of the writings of St. Paul upon which a Learned Prelate says, What
becomes then of our unquestionable Line of Succession of the Bishops of several
Churches, and the large Diagramms made of the Apostolical Churches, with every
ones Name set down in his Order, as if the Writer had been Clarencieux to the
Apostles themselves? Is it come to this at last, that we have nothing certain
but what we have in the Scriptures? Are all the outcries of Apostolical
Tradition, of Personal Succession, of Unquestionable Records, resolved at last
into Scripture it self, by him, from whom all these Pedigrees are fetched? Then
let Succession know its place, and vail Bonnet to the Scriptures, and withal
let men take heed of overreaching themselves when they would bring down so
large a Catalogue of single Bishops from the first and purest times of the
Church, for it will be hard for others to believe them, when Eusebius
professes it is so hard to find them.

There are two things to be done, before a man can prove this uninterrupted
Line; first, He must have a true Catalogue of the Names of all such Bishops as
have filled the Sea, and then he must be able to demonstrate that none of them,
came in after a Surreptitious manner without Episcopal Ordination; the former
is difficult, but the latter much harder, and yet without it, the former will
amount to no more than a Wild-goose row of hard Words and Names.

1. It is extremely Difficult to get a satisfactory Catalogue, even in that See
whose Bishops have made the greatest noise and figure in the World, and if this
Gentleman has any Friend that will consult Baronius for him, I suppose he will
forbear making challenges for the future.

Licet plerique sive vitio Scriptoris acciderit sive alia ex causa, etc. the
learned Annalist shows, Tom. 1. ad Ann. 69. Number. 41.
that Optatus Milevitanus rehearsing the Catalogue of Roman Bishops down to his
own times, begins thus. In the principal Chair sat, first Peter, then Linus
succeeded, to him Clemens, to him Anacletus, (passing by Cletus as thinking him
the same with Anacletus) but on the other hand Epiphanius, omitting Anacletus,
mentions Cletus, speaking thus, The Succession of the Bishops of Rome is in
this Order, Peter and Paul, Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Evaristus; St. Austin
following Optatus omits Cletus, thinking him the same with Anacletus; St. Jerome
speaking of Clemens says, he was the fourth Bishop of Rome from Peter, that
Linus was the Second and Cletus the Third, although many of the Latins think
that Clemens was the second; of these Jarring accounts, Baronius says, Number. 48.
Si in ordine and tempore primorum Romanorum Pontificum quempiam errare
contigerit, in multos errores ferri omnino cogetur.

The Author of the Roman Ceremonial, endeavors to reconcile these things by a
fine Conjecture, Lib. 1. cap. 2.
Ipse Jesus primum denominatione Successorem constituit and ea ratione, etc.
Jesus Christ appointed his Successor by Name, and after the same manner Peter
also named Clemens, but on this Condition, that the Senate of the Roman Church
would admit of him, but they knowing that this way of naming ones Successor,
would in time be very Prejudicial to the Church, would not accept of Clemens,
but chose Linus to hold the Pontificate after Peter, but that afterward, when
both Linus and Cletus were dead Clemens was chosen by the Senate it self.

Of these Primitive times the great Scaliger thus speaks. Prolog. in Eusebius.
Chron.
Intervallum illud ab ultimo, etc. That interval of time from the last Chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles, to the Middle of the Reign of Trajan, in which
Quadratus and Ignatius flourished, might be called (...) an obscure confused
time, in which nothing is delivered to us certainly concerning the Affairs of
the Christians, besides a few things that the Enemies of the Church touch upon
by the way, as Suetonius, Tacitus, Pliny, etc. Now to fill up this Chasme,
Eusebius has carelessly fetched things (...) out of the Hypotyposes of I know
not what Clement (for it is not, Alexandrinus (...)) and out of the
Commentaries of Hegisippus, a writer of no better Credit than the former.

These Perplexities the Learned Bishop of Worcester thus relates, Irenic. p.
322.
Come we therefore to Rome and here the Succession is as muddy as the Tyber it
self, for Tertullian, Ruffinus and others, place Clemens next to Peter,
Irenaeus and Eusebius set Anacletus before him, Epiphanius and Optatus both
Anacletus and Cletus, Augustine and Damasus, make Anacletus, Cletus and Linus
all to precede him; certainly if the Line of Succession fails us here, where we
most need it we have little cause to pin our Faith upon it, as to the certainty
of any particular form of Church Government, which can be drawn from the help
of the records of the Primitive Church.

And we do not ^^^ly meet with these Difficulties, near the Head of the Line,
but many Ages lower; The Series of Popes in the Roman See, after the eighth
Century, is very much ruffled and confused, as Onuphrius tells us, Horum
temporum Pontifices, neque Praefat. act partem secund. de Romano Pontif.
perpetuum quendam habent Scriptorem, etc. The Bishops of those times have not
any constant certain Writer, and a great part of their Affairs are omitted,
whence it comes to pass, that these times are so uncertain and obscure, that we
cannot tell in what Order the Names of diverse Popes ought to be put, and some
new Popes have crept in, which by Computation of the time can have no place in
the Roll, as Basilius, one Agapetus, and Dommus the second, which are either
the same with others under a different name, or else were Schismatics or
perhaps were never in being, but which of these to affirm is uncertain and
doubtful; and he tells us, that as to John the 11th. Leo the 16th. Stephen the
8th. Leo the 7th. and Stephen the 9th. He has not followed the common Opinion
of Writers, but of Luitprandus Ticinensis, and says there is a foul mistake in
the account of the Martins, for there never were any such men as Martin the 2d
and 3d. and in the John's; quanta, bone Deus, confusio exorta est ex veterum
Historiarum ignorantia!

It seems our Learned Citizen, never dreamed that Popish Writers should be so
ingenuous as to confess these insuperable difficulties in the Succession, for
his part he never discoursed with any of them that did not zealously assert it,
and it may be so, but certainly then he never discoursed with the wisest or
honestest of them, but had the good hap always to meet with men as bold and
ignorant as himself. But

2. Were these Catalogues of Names, as clear and certain as they are otherwise,
yet unless it were equally certain that all of these were truly Bishops, and
had valid Consecration, the Line of Succession is still unproved; and how
impossible is it to have this demonstrated with that clearness, requisite unto
a point upon which the Truth of our Churches and Salvation of our Souls is made
to depend.

For it has been often observed, that our Church Historians being left so much
in the dark for the earliest Ages, are forced to supply the defects of History
with bold conjectures of their own; and wherever they met with the Apostles
or Evangelists in any place, presently they made them the Bishops of that
place, Irenic. p. 302.
so Philip is made Bishop of Trallis, Ananias Bishop of Damascus, Nicolaus
Bishop of Samaria, Barnabas Bishop of Millan, Silas Bishop of Corinth, Sylvanus
Bishop of Thessalonica, Crescens of Chalcedon, Andreas of Byzantium, and upon
the same grounds Peter Bishop of Rome.

And through the loss of the Dyptychs of the Church, which would have
acquainted us with the time of the Primitive Martyrs Suffering, called their
Natalitia, some have mistaken Martyrs for Bishops, and the time of their
Apotheosis, for that of their Consecration, and the Learned Junius reckons
among these Anacletus, Cletus and Clemens at Rome.

And how shall we prove that all the persons mentioned in the Lists, had such
Ordination as is made essential to Episcopacy; it is not sufficient to say
there were ancient Canons, decreeing that no Bishop should be Consecrated but
by three at the least, this is arguing a jure ad factum, which is no better
than to argue a facto ad jus, it is certain there were abundance of excellent
Canons made, and it is as certain they were very little regarded, in that state
of Apostasy and Antichristianism into which the Churches fell, and lay for so
long a time; we know there are many examples of men's getting into the highest
Church Preferments by Murder, Simony, Sorcery, which by the Ancient Canons
nullify their Authority and Administrations; It is certain there are many
excellent Precepts in Scripture against judging, hating and persecuting one
another about Ceremonies, but if any shall argue from hence there were never
any such Practices, every age will afford instances enough for their
Confutation; and if there has been so notorious a contempt of the Laws of
Christ; Why should we think it strange, if the Canons of the Church have been
despised too, when they have stood in the way of men's Interest? Every body
knows Ecclesiastical Canons are mere Spiders Webs only to catch Flies, whilst
the greater sort of Vermin rush through.

The Council of Lateran decreed, Electio facta per civilem Magistratum in
sacris beneficiis vim nullam habeat; and the Jus Orientale, Lib. 3. Inter. 59.
(...), Conc. Carth. 4.
and the seventh General Council (as it is called) determine, Omnem Electionem
quae fit a Magistratibus, Episcopi vel Presbyteri vel Diaconi irritam esse; and
yet that de facto the Magistrates sometimes did elect will not be denied. The
second Council of Nice decreed that the Orders of all Symoniacal Bishops shall
be null and void, (...), Bernard con. ad Eugen. l. 4.
etc. And yet Eugenius and others were notoriously guilty of it; and therefore
the late Examiner of the Notes of the Church says, Notes of the Church, p. 152.
It is probable the Roman Church wants a Head, and that there is now no true
Pope, nor has been for many Ages for that Church to be united to, for by their
own Confession a Pope Symoniacally chosen, a Pope intruded by Violence, a
Heretic and therefore sure an Atheist, or an Infidel is no true Pope, This,
etc. Is to be supplied with Archbishops Bishops and all other Orders.
Advertisement on the Hist. of K. Charles, p. 193.
and many such there have been of one sort or other, whose acts therefore in
creating Cardinals, etc. Being invalid, it is exceeding probable that the whole
Succession has upon this account failed long ago, etc.

I may add hereunto, that it is the opinion of Dr. Heylin, where there is no
Dean and Chapter to elect and no Archbishop to Consecrate, there can be no
regular Succession of Bishops; now where there are so many junctures in which
this Line may fail, it would be very strange if in all that Series of Ordainers
and Ordinations, none of those things should happen which break in upon the
Succession.

Nay farther, when a Bishop has advanced by lawful paces to the Chair, yet it
is not impossible, but he may lose this power again; I know the Papists have
invented the Chimaera of an indelible Character to support the other Chimaera
of an uninterrupted Succession: But Bishop Jewel affirms, Apology, c. 3. divis.
7.
That if the Bishop of Rome (and I suppose it will hold of any other) do not
his Duty as he ought, except he Administer the Sacraments, except he instruct
the People, except he warn them and teach them, he ought not to be called a
Bishop, or so much as an Elder; for a Bishop, as says St. Augustine, is a name
of Labor, and not of Honor; and that man that seeks to have the
Pre-eminence, and not to profit the People, must know he is no Bishop: Defense
of Ap^^. part 2. p. 135.
And he vindicates this Saying against Harding from other of the Fathers,
Chrysostom Hom. 13. Multi Sacerdotes and pauci Sacerdotes, multi nomine and
pauci opere; And St. Ambrose, Nisi bonum opus amplectaris, Episcopus esse non
potes, Lib. 4. Ep. 32.
de dignit. Sacerdot. c. 4. And Gregory speaking in the name of wicked
Prelates, Sacer dotes nominamur, non sumus; And the Council of Valentia under
Damasus, c. 4.
Quicunque sub ordinatione vel Diaconatus vel Presbyterii vel Episcopatus
mortali crimine dixerint se esse pollutos a supra dictis ordinationibus
submoveantur; Whosoever he be, whether of the Order of Deacon, Presbyter or
Bishop, that is convicted of deadly Sin, let him be removed from the said
Orders. Now can any man imagine that in a Line of above 1600 Years length,
running through Babylon it self, there should be none of these, who by their
intolerable wickedness had nullified their Title? Woe unto Mankind, if their
Salvation depend upon such a Supposition.

Thirdly, The third Part of this Gentleman's Position is, That those Churches,
Reply, p. 18.
or (if they must not be so called) those Societies that are not under the
Government of such Bishops, are out of the Communion of the Catholic Church,
have no Ministry, nor Sacraments, nor Salvation.

This cuts off at a blow the Church of Alexandria, and damns all her Members
for the First two Hundred Years: Of the Government of that Church, we have this
remarkable Account from Entychius Patriarch there.

That the Evangelist Mark in the Ninth year of Claudius Caesar, Eutychii Annal.
Pococks Edit. p. 328.
came unto the City of Alexandria, and called the People to the Faith of
Christ, and as he was walking in the Street broke the Latchet of his Shoe, and
presently applied himself to one Ananias, a Cobbler, to get it mended; in the
doing of it, Ananias pricked his Finger with the Aul, after that dangerous
manner, as caused a great effusion of Blood and much Pain, insomuch, as that he
murmured against Mark; who said unto him, If thou will believe on Jesus Christ
thy Finger shall be healed, and added, In his Name let it be made whole; and
accordingly in the same moment it ceased bleeding and was well; from this time
Ananias believed, and was baptized by Mark, and made Patriarch of Alexandria,
and with him were appointed twelve Presbyters, Hitrom Ep. ad Evagr. 85.
that when the Patriarchate was vacant, one of them should be chosen, on whom
the other Eleven should lay their hands, and bless him and create him
Patriarch, and then should choose some worthy Person and constitute him a
Presbyter in his room who was made Patriarch: And this Custom continued till
Alexander the Sixteenth Patriarch without interruption, which was about 235
Years. This Story St. Jerome likewise tells us, and by it proves the Identity
of Bishops and Presbyters, and that Presbyters have not only Power to ordain
those of the same degree with themselves, but to consecrate Patriarchs too.

And this Assertion undoes all the Reformed Churches abroad that are governed
by Presbyters; To this the Gentleman replies, That many very Learned and Pious
Persons amongst them, have declared their longing Desires for the Episcopacy,
but living in Popish Dominions, cannot have any but those of the Popish
Communion, or in Republics that will not admit of Episcopacy.

But are desires then of Episcopacy sufficient to bring a Man within Catholic
Communion? What then becomes of the Absolute necessity of Apostolical
Succession, if affectionate Desires after this Communion will free a Man from
Schism? Then surely Schism lies in the want of such Desires, which comes nearer
to Mr. H's Notion than this Gentleman I suppose was aware of; but after all
(though it is pity to put him out of a good humor, since he happens so seldom
into it) if there be no Catholic Communion without Episcopacy, and without
such Communion, our hopes for Salvation are but Fancies, as this Gentleman
tells us; Desires after Episcopacy will not relieve Men, it will only prove
that they desire such Communion, and to be in the way of Salvation, but that at
present they are not so.

And I wonder how it does appear that the Reformed Churches desire this
Diocesan Episcopacy; by what Public Acts do they declare any such Desires?
What their Thoughts are concerning it we have already seen: It may be indeed
(as the Honorable Mr. Feb. 9.40.
Fines once replied in Parliament to this very thing) there are some amongst
them that desire Episcopacy, that is, the Dignities and Revenues of Bishops,
but that any desire Episcopacy as the fittest and best Government of the
Church, I do not believe; for if they would have Bishops, I know not what
hinders but they may; they have Presbyteries, and Synods, and National
Assemblies, and Moderators therein, and how easily might these be made Bishops?
Germany and Poland are Popish Countries, and yet they have Superintendents or
Bishops; And why will not Republics admit Episcopacy? Is it because they have
found it injurious to the Commonwealth? Methinks that is no great Commendation
of the Order, or will they say it does not so well comport with that Form of
Government? That is a sign it is not of Divine Institution; for, as God will
have Gospel-Churches in all Countries, so he has put nothing into their
Constitution, but what will consist with any form of Civil Polity, and has not
obliged Republican States to become Monarchies, in order to their reception of
the Gospel. I know nothing the Church has to do with Civil Constitutions, nor
will I ever be of that Ecclesiastical Communion which cannot subsist in
Commonwealths as well as in Monarchies, but must overturn Public Constitutions
to make room for its own Settlement.

And as this Doctrine overturns the Primitive, and the Reformed Churches; so
this Gentleman knows not how great a shock he has given his own by it: For
Historians tell us, that those Famous Bishops who were instrumental in
Converting so many in the Northern Parts of our Island to Christianity, were
ordained by the Abbot of Hye, who was only a Presbyter; and who knows how far
the Line of those Bishops reaches. To this, the Gentleman has made some reply,
telling us, Reply, p. 22.
That Archbishop Bramhall has cleared the Northumbrian Bishops from receiving
their Consecration of the Abbot of Hye; and shows that they had it from the
Bishop of Derry, under whose Visitation this Abbot lived, and that this was to
be found in the Records at Derry before the Irish Rebellion.

But it is a strange piece of Considence in these Men to set up a Story
reported by themselves out of I know not what invisible Records, Beda Eccles.
Hist. l. 3. c. 4. Haberesolet ipsa Insula rectorem semper Abbatum Presbyterum,
etc.
so to confront the direct words of our most ancient and credible Historians.
Bid expressly says that Island was wont to have an Abbot for its Governor, who
was always a Presbyter, to whose Jurisdiction all the Province, and even the
Bishops themselves, were subject after the example of their first Teacher
Columbanus, who was not a Bishop, but a Presbyter and Monk; and that King
Oswald when he came to the Throne, Usher de Eccles. Brit. Primordiis. p. 701.
sent to the Elders of Scotland amongst whom in his Exile he had been baptized,
to desire that a Bishop might be sent unto him, by whose Doctrine and Ministry
his Realm might learn and receive the Christian Faith; From this Island of Hye,
and from the College of Monks there, Aidan was sent, having received the Degree
of Episcopacy, at that time when Segenius a Presbyter was the Abbot, and that
Aidan being dead, Finan succeeded him, being likewise sent by the same
Monastery.

The Gentleman tells us we have the story in the Bishop of St. Asaph to the
same purpose with Bramhal, but he does not tell us that Sir George Mackenzie
has answered him; besides it is not the same story, for St. Asaph will have it
to be the Bishop of Dunkeld that joined in this Consecration not Derry or
Derrymagh; if there was any such story in those Records it is a wonder these
Gentlemen should not agree better in the telling of it.

The ingenious Dr. Vindic. of some Protest. Princ. p. 102.
Sherlock, wisely declines disputing the matter of fact concerning this Abbots
Ordination of Bishops, and fairly grants that the Church of Rome allows the
Ordinations of Abbots Sovereign, which are but Presbyters, to be both valid and
regular, but says such Ordinations were an incroachment upon the Episcopal
Authority, and void in themselves, which I shall not now question, it being
sufficient and indeed only proper to my present purpose to show that Abbots did
Ordain, and were allowed to do it by the Church of Rome, and if such orders be
void then the Episcopal Line is broken.

And who can forbear declaiming against the wretched folly of Men of such
principles, that will thus unsettle the foundations of their own Churches, that
they may overturn others, and like the Executioners of the three Children will
venture a burning themselves, that they may be sure to throw others far enough
into the fiery Furnace.

Let us hear how this Gentleman will demonstrate this uninterrupted Line of
Succession, for He ought to make it as clear as any Article of his Creed, there
being none more essential to Salvation according to his own account of it. And
he tells us, The very necessity of such a Line is a sufficient reason to prove
it, no man can be Minister of the Gospel that is not sent, no man has power to
send, who has not received it by Succession from the Apostles; That is to say,
it is so, because it must be so; and it must be so, because it is absolutely
necessary it should be so; and if this be not proof sufficient, we must go to
those that can give us better. But,

1st. Why does he not prove that thore can be no true mission without such a
Line? we cannot give him credit in a matter of such value, and though he repeat
it a thousand times, we will not regard it, till we see it proved; We do verily
believe with the rest of the Reformed Churches, that wherever the Coetus
Fidelium is, there lies an inherent fundamental right of choosing, and calling
persons to the Ministry, though this is most regularly exercised by those that
are already Pastors, and ought not to be done by others where such may
conveniently be had; but all the World besides the Papists and a few odd
Bigoted persons in our own Nation, distinguish betwixt an irregularity and a
nullity, and we believe that both Sacred and Civil Societies agree in this,
which is founded upon the essence, and common principles of all Societies as
such, that they have a latent power to elect and invest their Officers, though
by Custom, or the Laws of the Community, the exercise thereof may be consigned
to a particular Order of Men amongst them.

The Author of the Prejudices challenges Monsieur Claude to produce any Texts
of Scripture, that give Laymen a right to ordain Ministers in any case; to
which he replies, This demand is but a vain wrangling, Defense of the Reform.
P. IV. p. 94, 95.
for when Scripture recommends to the Faithful, the taking diligent heed to the
preservation and confirmation of their Faith, and to propagate it to their
Children, it gives them by that very thing a sufficient right to make use of
all proper means in order to that end; and every body knows the Ministry is one
of those means, and therefore the obligation the faithful are under to preserve
and propagate the Faith, includes that of Creating to themselves Pastors when
they cannot have them otherwise; in short when the Scripture teaches that the
faithful have a right to choose their Pastors, it teaches thereby that they have
a right to instal them into their Office in case of necessity, for that call
consisting much more essentially in Election than in installation, which is but
a formality, there is no reason to believe that God would have given the People
a Right to choose their Pastors, and to have them installed by others, and that
he has not given them at the same time a power of installing them themselves,
when it cannot be done otherwise, since naturally that which we have a right to
do by another, we have a right to do by our selves.

Nay, what if not only Monsieur Claude, but Monsieur Dodwell too, that
speaking head of our high-flown Clergy, acknowledges such a right in particular
Societies of choosing and investing their Officers? No matter whether it be
reconcilable with the other parts of his Scheme or no: Dodwel Separat. of
Churches p. 102. P. 52.
In his Separation of Churches he speaks to this purpose. The Church with whom
God has made the Covenant, is a Body Politic, though not a Civil one, and God
has designed all persons to enter into this Society; -- It is sufficient for my
purpose that the Ecclesiastical Power be no otherwise from God, than that is of
every supreme Civil Magistrate; it is not usual for Kings to be invested into
their Offices by other Kings, but by their Subjects, yet when they are invested
that does not in the least prejudice the absoluteness of their Monarchy, where
the Fundamental Constitutions of the respective places allow it to them, much
less does it give any power over them to the persons by whom they are invested;
If the power of Episcopacy be Divine, all that men can do in the case, is only
to determine the person, not to confine his power -- no act can be presumed to
be the act of the whole Body, P. 509.
but what has passed them in their public Assemblies (in which Body is the
Right of Government.) -- As nothing but the Society it self can make a valid
conveyance of its right, so it is not conceivable, how the Society can do it by
any thing but its own Act -- And when ever a person is invested into the
Supreme Power, P. 522.
and the Society over which he is placed, is independent on other Societies,
such a person can never be placed in his power, if not by them who must after
be his subjects, unless by his Predecessor, which no Society can depend upon
for a constant Rule of Succession. -- I am apt to think this must have been the
way of making Bishops at first, how absolute soever I conceive them to be when
they are once made -- This seems best to agree with the absoluteness of
particular Churches, P. 523.
before they had by compact united themselves under Metropolitans and Exarchs,
into Provincial, and Diocesan Churches; And this seems to have been fitted for
the frequent persecutions of those earlier Ages, when every Church was able to
secure its own succession, without depending on the uncertain opportunities of
the meeting of the Bishops of the whole Province; And the alteration of this
practice, the giving the Bishops of the Province an interest in the choice of
every particular Colleague, seems not to have been so much for want of power in
the particular Churches to do it, as for the security of compacts that they
might be certain of such a Colleague as would observe them -- It is probable
that it was in imitation of the Philosophers Successions, that these
Ecclesiastical Successions were framed, and when the Philosophers failed to
nominate their own Successors, the Election was in the Schools. These are his
words, and they are too plain to need a Comment: If every particular Church had
Originally a power within it self to choose and invest its Bishop, and the
concurrence of other Bishops herein was not for want of Power in that
particular Church, but only for securing the agreement of Bishops amongst
themselves, We have done with the necessity of a continued Line of Episcopal
Ordinations, and there may be true mission without it, quod erat probandum. But,

2dly, Should we grant that there is a necessity of an uninterrupted Line, and
that this, as he learnedly speaks, is a sufficient proof that there is such a
Line, yet it must be considered, this necessity will only prove that there
must be some Bishops and Churches that are in the Line, but it will not prove
that they are all so, nor that it is the case of those amongst us; for though
we may suppose that God has had a true Ministry in all Ages, and will have,
that will not demonstrate that he has such in England, and therefore to prove
the Ministry of the English Churches true, he must have some better Evidence
than the necessity of such a Line which will only prove it is somewhere, not
that it is amongst us; and it is but small satisfaction to us, to know that
there is a true Ministry some where in the World, but no man in the World can
tell where it is; By this Gentleman's way of reasoning the Papists pretend to
prove the Infallibility of their Church, first they suppose the necessity of an
Infallible Judge, and then take it for granted that this Judge is to be found
amongst them, and truly Arcades ambo.

The Vindicator put a question to him, and we should be glad of a better answer
than he has yet thought fit to give us; He desired T. W. to tell him whether
this Line of Succession might be continued in a Schismatical Church, for if by
Schism Men and Societies are cut off from the Catholic Church as this Man
affirms, such Schismatical Churches are indeed no Churches, no parts of the
Universal Church, and so cannot be the Subjects of the Apostolical Power; and
if this Power cannot be derived through a Schismatical Church, then must he
grant, either that the Church of England has not this Power, or that the Papal
Churches through which it runs are not Schismatical; and if they be not, his
own Church must be so in separating from them, for he holds separation to be
utterly unlawful, unless it be from a Schismatical Church.

His answer to this, such as it is, you have in the 23 page of his reply, in
these words. I cannot understand his Logic in this, if by Schism Men and
Societies are cut off from the Universal Church, then such Schismatical
Churches are no Churches.

But is not the consequence as plain as can be, if Schism cut Men and Societies
off from the Universal Church, then such Schismatical Societies are no
Churches? Can they be Churches, and yet cut off from the Universal Church? Can
they be cut off by Schism, and still united to it? He that does not understand
the Logic of this, does not understand the Logic of Common Sense; but has he
nothing farther to reply? Yes he says, Churches they are, though Schismatical,
while they retain the Apostolical Succession. But the Question is, whether
Schismatical Churches can retain the Apostolical Succession? Since by Schism he
says they are cut off from the Catholic Church, and so Unchurched; these
things will require a second reading, and a more direct reply, and that I may
provoke him to do it, I shall lay the case before him, in these three points.

1. If any Schismatical Societies may still remain Churches, then Schism as
such, does not cut Men and Societies off from the Unity of the Catholic
Church, and then the whole thread of his discourse is spoiled, which every
where makes Schism to be Separation from the Communion of the Catholic Church,
out of which he says truly there is no true Ministry, nor Sacrament.

2. If all Schismatical Societies are Unchurched, then either they lose the
Apostolical Succession and Power, or else there may be Apostolical Power where
there is no Church; And it would be very strange to find a Power to Ordain and
to Administer Sacraments in Societies, where there can be no Ministry nor
Sacraments; Church Power without a Church, a Right to Gevern the Church by
Apostolical Succession, and yet no Right to the Church or any of its
Privileges; The power which is an adjunct, without the Church which is its
Subject; These are mysteries which I am no more worthy to understand, than that
of Transubstantiation.

3. If the Papal Churches through which this Power is conveyed be not
Schismatical, then he makes the Founders of his own Church so, for he says,
There Is no way of holding Communion with the Universal Church, Arch-Rebel, p. 6.
but by holding Communion with the Particular Churches we live amongst, if they
be not Schismatical.

Instead of speaking plainly to these things, he asks us whether Reordination
of those that come over from the Church of Rome to the Reformed, was ever
required? We answer No, and can give a good reason for it upon our Principles,
but it will be hard to do so upon his: We do not think the validity of the
Ministry depends upon such Line, nor do we believe that either Schism or
Heresy, as such, do utterly destroy their Church state, indeed a renunciation
of any of the fundamental Articles of our Faith would do it; but every heresy
will not: We believe the Church of Rome to be both Schismatical and Heretical,
but do not therefore say their Church state is utterly lost, though greatly
corrupted, for then it would be hard to allow their Ordinations, especially if
we thought Ordination so necessary, and that the Validity thereof depended upon
the Administrators, as this Gentleman affirms.

Therefore where he says the Vindicator attempts to unchurch the Church of
England, because our Bishops derive their consecration from Rome, he utterly
mistakes himself, the Vindicator spoke ad hominem, and only showed him what
would be the consequence of his own arguing.

He tells us It is the Judgment of all Reformed Divines, that formal Schism
can never invalidate the power of formal and regular Ordination. But if those
Reformed Divines thought as be, that formal Schism utterly excludes out of the
Catholic Church, they must needs acknowledge that where there is formal
Schism, there can be no such things as regular Ordination; and it is strange
this Gentleman, that makes Schism such an unchurching thing, shall talk of a
regular Ordination in a formal Schism; one would think the regularity would
have been spoiled, if the Essence thereof should happily escape, Dr. Sherlock
Vindic. of Prot. Princ. p. 107, 108.
(And yet some of our Doctor, make this the very reason why the Dissenters
Ordinations are Null, because they ordain in a Schism, granting that in case of
necessity they may do it.) But as to the Reformed Divines, if they allow the
Ordination of Schismatics to be valid, it is either because they think the
validity of the Orders, does not depend upon the quallfications of the person
conferring there, or that Schism does not necessarily exclude a Person or
People out of the Communion of the Catholic Church; and here lies this
Gentleman's Error, he would tack the candid conclusion of the Reformed formed
Churches, to the unmerciful Premises of his own, but they will by no means
comport.

This Notion of the Necessity of an uninterrupted Line of Succession for the
conveyance of Power, like Water by Pipes and Conduits, the Vindicator made bold
to call a Whimsie, which has exceedingly raised the Gentleman's Spleen; A
Whimsie (says he,) that is some Fantastic device, or the Creature of an unst
able unsettled Brain, which being applied to Prelates that bear the Authority
of Christ can be no less than Blasphemy.

But the Vindicator never charged this Whimsie upon the Prelates, the greatest
part of whom I dare say will not thank this man for hanging their Authority
upon so slender a thread; it is his own Whimsie, and so silly a one that we will
never charge it on any that do not expressly own it; and yet if a Man should
venture to say of some Prelates, that they are unstable and their Brains
unsettled (as namely the late Bishops of Oxford and Ely, etc.) I know not how
it can be proved Blasphemy, nor will any man call it so that has not made an
Idol of the Mitre, or the Head that wears it, unless these clamours proceed
from the same Principle with those of the Ephesians, who were as tender of
their Diana, as these men are of the Hierarchy and this Image of Succession
that dropped down from Jupiter.

After all we have said against the Necessity of such a Line, yet if this
Gentleman or any for him will clear it, we will have as much Benefit by it as
himself, having largely proved that Presbyters are the same with Bishops by the
Law of God, and therefore our Ordinations are as valid as theirs, but we will
never so far betray, the Honor of the Church, nor the Peace of men's
Consciences, as to make all depend upon that which is impossible to be proved;
and certainly if it be a thing of that consequence this Gentleman makes it, the
proof should be as strong and clear as that of the most essential Doctrines of
our Religion; and to say as Mr. Dodwel is forced at last that a Presumptive
Title may serve, is to unsay all, and to confess that it is not the reality of
such a Line on which the Power depends, but the strong Conceit and Presumption
of men, which is the worst Basis that Episcopacy has ever yet been fixed upon.

2. The second thing in our Plea, is, That the whole Jurisdiction of our
English Bishops, and the Power of their Canons is derived from the Civil
Magistrate and Laws of the Land.

And this I think will follow from the former, if this Prelatical Power be not
from the Laws of God, it must be from the Laws of the Land. Here I expect some
will reply, Datur tertium, there is the Jus Ecclesiasticum, resulting from the
Customs and Canons of the Church, by which Bishops formerly laid claim to this
Power, even when there was no Christian Magistrate; but this will be soon
answered. For,

1. This Jus Ecclesiasticum, has not the proper nature of a Law, nor does it
oblige by virtue of strict Authority; we are not bound in Conscience, by the
Canons of Ancient Foreign Churches, any farther than the matter of them brings
the stamp of Scripture along with it; Grot. de Impsum. Potestat. p. 168.
The Learned Grotius, has fully proved, that there never was a Council truly
called General, excepting that of the Apostles at Jerusalem; that Councils have
no governing Power, Non ideo convocari Synodum quod in co pars sit imperii. Yea
that the Church has no Legislative Power by Divine Right, That what was written
in Synods for Order and Ornament are not called Laws, but Canons, and have
either the force of advice only, Burnets Abridement, p. 139.
or they oblige by way of agreement, etc. And our Reforming Bishops, Cranmer,
Tonstal and others, being required to give their opinions concerning the
Authority of General Councils, declared that this Authority did not flow from
the number of the Bishops but from the matter of their decisions, and this
indeed is the only true notion of Ministerial Power, it depends purely upon the
matter of their Canons, not the Authority of the Person, so that they can never
by their Authority make a thing indifferent to become a Duty; Praeeant ipsi
judicio directivo, says Grotius, they are Councils, not Parliaments, and only
to show men what is Sin and Duty, not to make any thing Duty, which was not so
before. Dr. Sherlock fairly acquits himself of the Suspicion of ascribing unto
a Council of Bishops, Vind. of Prot. Princ. p. 30. Vind. of the Def. of Dr. St.
p. 162.
any Power in matter of Faith, or Manners, or Catholic Unity; and because in a
former Treatise he had let fall an Expression that might seem to give them such
a Power, he by much struggling gets from under it, and says he meant no more
than a Power of Deposing Heretical Bishops, but withal adds, It does not follow
that any Bishops, or any Number of Bishops, however assembled, have such an
Authority to declare Heresy, as shall oblige all men to believe that to be
Heresy which they decree to be so; and therefore the effects of those Censures
must of Necessity depond upon that Opinion which People have of them; those who
believe the Censure just, will withdraw from the Communion of such a Bishop,
those who do not, will still communicate with him; and whether they do right or
wrong, their own Consciences must judge in this World, and God will Judge in
the next. And elsewhere he thus speaks, As for Ecclesiastical Causes, nothing
is a pure Ecclesiastical Cause, but what concerns the Communion of the Church,
who shall be received into Communion, or c^st out or put under some less
Censures, etc. Here we see it is not in the Power of Councils or Synods to take
away any of that Power from Presbyters that God has given them, this is none of
the Ecclesiastical Causes belonging to them.

This is more directly asserted by the Author of the Summary of the
Controversies betwixt the Church of England, P. 119.
and the Church of Rome, what he says of the Episcopal Office will hold true of
the Ministerial in General, That a General Council has no Authority to give
away those Rights and Powers, which are inherent in every Church, and
inseparable from the Ministerial Office, for it is not in Ecclesiastical as it
is in Civil Rights, Men may irrevocably grant away their own Civil Rights and
Liberties, but all the Authority in the Church cannot give away it self, nor
grant the whole entire Episcopacy with all the Rights and Powers of it to any
one Bishop. If Bishops or Presbyters will not exercise that Power, which God
has given them they are accountable to their Lord for it, but they cannot give
it away, neither from themselves nor from their Successors, for it is theirs
only to use, not to part with, and therefore every Bishop or Presbyter may
reassume such Rights, though a General Council should give them away, because
the Grant is void in it self.

By ancient Ecclesiastical custom, Archbishops were set over Bishops, Vind.
Prot. Prin. p. 72.
and yet Dr. Sherlock confesses they have not direct Authority and Jurisdiction
over them; and if Bishops have no Superiority over Presbyters, but what is
grounded upon this Ecclesiastical Right, it will not amount to formal
Authority. But,

2. No Power can be claimed by Ecclesiastical Right, but what has been acquired
according to the Rules of those Councils and Customs by which they claim; if it
be a jus Ecclesiasticum, they must come by it, more Ecclesiastico, in that
method which Ecclesiastical Canons have prescribed; and nothing is more evident
than that the Rules of the Primitive Churches, gave all the Presbyters, and the
People too, a voice in the Election of their Bishops; the African Bishops in a
Council where Cyprian Presided, Cypr. Ep. 68. Council. Nic. Arab. Can. Sozom. l.
1. c. 23.
determined that Plebs maxim habeat potestatem vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes,
vel indignos recusandi. St. Ambrose Ep. 82. Electio and vocatio quae sit a tota
Ecclesia vere and carto est divina vocatio ad munus Episcopi. That this was the
Primitive Custom none will deny, though some Question whether this be
absolutely necessary or no, and I will not say it is necessary, where the
Office stands upon a Divine Institution, but certainly, where it only stands
upon the Plea of Ecclesiastical Right, the Ecclesiastical Method is absolutely
necessary to give that Right, for our Bishops cannot pretend to stand upon the
Foundation of those Canons which they do not observe in their entrance upon
that Office, since those Canons must needs bind them as much in their
Acquisition of Power, as the People in their Subjection to them.

The best Title therefore our Bishops have to show for their Prelatical
Jurisdiction is the Law of the Land.

Our learned Historians and Lawyers tell us, that before William the Conquerors
time, there were no such Courts in England, as we now call Courts
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, only by the Laws of Ethelstane, the Bishops were
allowed to be present with the Sheriffs in their Turn Courts, Brompton de
Leg. Ethels.
where all Ecclefiastical matters were heard and determined; Sir Edward Cook
says, William the Conqueror was the first that by his Charter to the Dean and
Chapter of Lincoln prohibited Sheriffs to intermeddle any more with
Ecclesiastical Causes, but leave them wholly to the Bishop; 4. l. Institut. c.
53. p. 259.
and yet there appears no enrolment of any such Charter till the 2d. of Rich.
2d. And Cook himself mentions the Red Book of Henry the first, de general.
placit. Comitat. extant in the Office of the Kings Rememb. in the Exchequer,
wherein it is said of the Sheriffs Turn Courts; Ibi agantur primo debita
Christianitatis jura, secundo Regis placita, postremo causae singulorum, and he
adds, certain it is the Bishops Consistories were erected, and Causes
Ecclesiastical removed from the Turn to the Consistory, after the making of
the said Red Book.

Nothing will set this matter in a better Light than our Acts of Parliament,
especially that of the 37. Hen 8. Entitled, An Act that Doctors of Civil Law
being married may exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; In most humble wise
show and declare unto your Highness, your most faithful, humble and obedient
Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of this Present
Parliament Assembled, That whereas your Highness is, etc. -- The Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, who have no manner of
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but by, under and from your Royal Majesty -- to
whom by Scripture all Authority and Power is wholly given, to hear and
determine all Causes Ecclesiastical, and to all such Persons as your Majesty
shall appoint thereunto.

And long before this time our Kings were so tender of their Royal Rights in
Ecclesiastical Matters, that when the Clergy in Parliament 51. Edw. 3d.
Petitioned, that of every Consultation Conditional, the Ordinary may of himself
take upon him the true Understanding thereof, and therein proceed accordingly
(that is, without Appeal to the King, who by his Delegates by Commission under
the great Seal might determine the same) the Kings Answer was That the King
cannot depart with his Right, Instit. 4th. part cap. 74. p. 339.
but to yield to Subjects according to Law, upon which Sir Edw. Cook gives an
Item, Nota hoc and stude been.

By the Statute, 1. Edw. 6.2. The Bishops could hold no Court, but in the Kings
Name, and it was no less than Praemunire to issue out Process in their own
Names, and under their own Seals, and though that Statute was Repealed in 1.
Mary 2. Yet it lets us see the true Fountain of Prelatical Jurisdiction; and
some are of opinion that it was revived in general terms in the 1. Eliz. 1.
Which annexes and unites all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the
Imperial Crown of England, and shows that the Prelatical Power of our Bishops
is wholly founded, directed and limited by the Laws of the Land.

And this is readily granted by our ablest Civilians, particularly Godolphin in
his Abridgment of the Ecclesiastical Laws, Introduct. p. 2^.
whose words are, No sooner had Princes in ancient times assigned and limited
certain matters and causes Controversial to the Cognizance of Bishops, and to
that end dignified the Episcopal Order with an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but
the multiplicity and emergency of such Affairs require, for the dispatch and
management thereof, the Assistance of subordinate Ordinaries, etc.

Dr. Cases of Consc. l. 3. chapter 3. fol. 544.
Jeremy Tailor, acknowledges that the Supreme Civil Power is also Supreme
Governor over all Persons, and in all Causes Ecclesiastical, and he says, This
is a rule of such great necessity for the conduct of Conscience, as that it is
the measure of determining all Persons concerning the the Sanction of Obedience
to all Ecclesiastical Laws, etc. And in another place, It was never known in
the Primitive Church, that ever any Ecclesiastical Law did oblige the Church
unless the secular Prince did establish it. The Nicene Canons became Laws by
the Rescript of the Emperor Constantine, says Sozomen. When the Council of
Constantinople was finished, the Fathers wrote to the Emperor Theodosius,
Ibidem cap. 4. fol. 600.
Petitioning ut Edicto Pietatis tua confirmetur Synodi sententia; The Decrees
of the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon had the same Confirmation; as to the
last, Marcion the Emperor wrote to Palladius his Prefect: Quod ea quae de
Christiana fide a Sacerdotibus qui Chalcedone convenerunt per nostra praecepta
statuta sunt.

And indeed what is it that the Civil Magistrate may not do in the making of a
Prelate in the Church of England?

He may elect the Person, and does so in reality, for he nominates
Authoritatively, and whatever some pretend, Godolph. Repert. Canon. p. 42.
the Dean and Chapter have no power to refuse the Conge d'eslire; and Mr. Gwin
in the preface to his Readings tells us, that the King of England had of
ancient time the free appointment of all Ecclesiastical Dignities investing
them first per Annulum and Baculum, and afterward by his Letters Patents, and
that in process of time, he made the Election over to others under certain
Forms and Conditions, and affirms with good authorities out of the Books of
the Common Law, that King John was the first that granted this Liberty of
Election to the Dean and Chapter, but that all Bishoprics were at first
Donative.

The Civil Magistrate may multiply Bishops ad libitum, and if he pleases may
appoint one in every Parish; by the Statute of 26 Hen. VIII. c. 14. Six and
twenty Suffragan Bishops are added to the Diocesans, as (says the Act) has
been accustomed to be in this Realm, the Archbishop or Bishop was to name two,
whereof the King to choose one, and to give him the Name Title and Dignity of
Bishop, and to that Name, Title and Dignity, the Arch Bishop with two Bishops
or Suffragans more, is to consecrate him, only he is to act by the Commission
of the Diocesan, and to have none of the profits of the Bishopric; this
restraint in the exercise might have been taken off, if the Legislative Power
had so pleased; And if this Law had not given them the Episcopal Power, they
could not have exercised that Power, by any Commission from the Diocesan
whatsoever.

He may also delegate the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to whom he pleases,
either to Laymen or to Presbyters; It Is commonly assigned to Lay-Chancellors,
they do judicially Excommunicate and Absolve, and they have their Commission to
do it, from the King, not from the Bishop; and in some places the Episcopal
Jurisdiction is reserved to a Presbyter, as in the Peculiars, we have in diverse
parts of England, at Bridgnorth six Parishes are Governed by a Court held by a
Presbyter; and Godolphin tells us, there are certain peculiar Jurisdictions,
belonging to some certain Parishes, the Inhabitants whereof are exempted from
the Archdeacons, and sometimes from the Bishops Jurisdiction, of which there
are fifty seven in the Province of Canterbury; A certain proof that the Bishops
Jurisdiction is only by humane Right or Custom, because the Law can exempt some
Parishes from it; but by the Citizen of Chesters Divinity, all these peculiars
have the peculiar privilege of being unchurched, and their exemption would be
tantamount to Excommunication, because they are not under the Government of the
Bishop, without which there can be no Church Unity; If any say, they are under
the Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction, I answer, they are no otherwise under it than
the Bishops are, and the Prelatical party themselves acknowledge that
Archbishops are but of Humane Institution.

Lastly, The Civil Magistrate may also depose and deprive Bishops when they see
just cause; and this power has been so lately exerted, that it needs no farther
proof; I would fain know whether the deprived Bishops be not divested of all
Episcopal Jurisdiction; Perhaps this will be thought an invidious question, and
an insulting over the misfortunes of those learned Gentlemen, but I profess
seriously, it is not spoken in any such Humor; Men of Tender Consciences
though under a mistake, will conciliate veneration from others; The worst I
wish them is, that God would show them the evil of their former impositions
upon the Consciences of their poor despised Brethren; But that which induces me
to mention it is, I find the Defenders of the Hierarchy confidently assert,
that there can be but one Bishop in one Church at the same time, therefore if
the former be not divested of their power, I see not how the present Incumbents
can have any by their own Rule, and so their Ordinations would be Null, if the
others be still valid; The present Bishop of Worcester in his debate with Mr.
Clarkson says it was the Inviolable Rule of the Church, to have but one Bishop
in a City and Church at once, and Dr. Morris labors hard to conquer Mr.
Clarksons objection against it, which was, Def. of the Ans. to Dr. St. p. 19.
That Alexander was made Bishop of Jerusalem whilst Narcissus lived: He says
Narcissus took Alexander into the participation of the charge, but foreseeing
that Mr. C. would reply, then here were two Bishops jointly governing one
Church, contrary to Dr. St's. inviolable Rule, he adds Alexander was the
Bishop, Narcissus retained but the Name and Title only, that is, was but a
Titular, not a real Bishop, and it seems that was his part of the Charge, to
have only the Title and no Charge at all. Now whether T.W. thinks the late
Bishops are the Titular and the present the Real, or on the contrary, we will
not oblige him to declare, only we guess at his Sentiments, by his calling the
Late Archbishop the Ruler of Gods People, above half a year after he was
deprived.

Perhaps this Gentleman will satisfy himself with saying, the late Prelates
have the power still, but are restrained from the exercise of it. But that
would be to confront the Act of Parliament, which says expressly they are
deprived of their Office, and distinguishes betwixt being suspended from the
exercise of their Office, and being deprived of the Office it self, if they did
not take the Oaths before the first of August, 1689. Primo Guliel and Mariae.
they were suspended from the Execution of their Office for six Months, and if
then they still refused, They shall be ipso facto deprived, and are hereby
judged to be deprived of their Offices, Benefices, Dignities and Promotions
Ecclesiastical.

What is it then that the Civil Magistrate may not do in the making of an
English Prelate? I know it will be said he cannot consecrate him, and it is the
Consecration that gives the Episcopal power, but to this I have two things to
return.

1. According to their own Practice, Episcopal Jurisdiction is exercised by
persons never so consecrated, as by Presbyters and Lay-Chancellors in the cases
before mentioned, and they have Authority given them to exercise that
Jurisdiction, and that not by Deputation from the Bishop, but by Legal
Constitution; and what is the Office of a Bishop, but Authority to do the work
of a Bishop?

2. Since the whole Being of Episcopal power, is founded upon their
Consecration, it is very reasonable to demand from them a plain Rule in
Scripture for this Consecration of Bishops, as distinct from the Ordination of
Presbyters; If they choose this Foot to fix their Divine Right upon, it is
necessary a clear Scripture Canon should be produced for it, but it is most
certain they may turn over all the Leaves of their Bible, all the Days of their
Life, before they can find any such thing.

And as the Scripture is altogether silent as to the difference betwixt the
Ordination of a Presbyter and Consecration of a Bishop, 1 Tit.
(nay in the Rule for Ordination makes them the same) so this Ceremony of
Consecration has not been at all times and all cases thought necessary,
Repertor. Canon p. 49.
or practiced in the making of Bishops; Godolphin tells us that anciently
according to the Canon Law, and where the Popes Spiritual Power and Authority
was in force, Bishops were not so much by Election as Postulation, Sum. Rosel.
postulat. and tit. si ques. Pan. 2. p. 106.
and in that case the Elected was a Bishop presently, without Confirmation or
Consecration, only by the assent of the Superior; And I have recited already
the judgment of Mr. Dodwell, that every particular Church had a Power to invest
its Bishop, and that the calling in the assistance of other Bishops, was not
for want of a right in themselves to do it; I hope these Gentlemen will be more
cautious how they lay the whole weight of Episcopal Authority upon
Consecration, which it seems might sometimes be omitted, lest thereby they
break their Line, and the neck of their cause together.

Upon the whole matter I think it is clear enough that the English Prelaty is a
mere Creature of the Civil Magistrate, who may make every Parson of a Parish a
Bishop if he pleases, their whole power (as distinct from Presbyters) being
founded upon the Laws of the Land, by the Statute 25 Hen. VIII. 19. it is
declared That none of the Clergy shall from thenceforth presume to attempt,
allege, claim, or put in ure, any Constitutions or Ordinances, Provincial, or
any other Canons, Nor shall Enact, Promulge, or Execute any such Canons,
Constitutions or Ordinances Provincial, by whatsoever name or names they shall
be called in their Convocations in time coming (which shall always be assembled
by the Authority of the Kings Writ) unless the same Clergy may have the Kings
most Royal Assent so to do, upon pain of being Fined and Imprisoned at the
King's will. I need not say how severely the Canons of 40 were damned by the
House of Commons, where it was resolved, That the Clergy in a Synod or
Convocation, Supplement o^ Bakers Chron. p. 476.
has no power to make Canons, Constitutions or Laws Ecclesiastical, to bind
either Laity or Clergy, without a Parliament, and that the Canons are against
the Fundamental Laws of this Realm, against the King's Prerogative, Property of
the Subjects Rights of Parliament, and tend to Faction and Sedition. And the
Act of Uniformity has not left the Bishops power to add or change one Ceremony
without the Consent of Parliament.

4. Lastly; We plead that the Civil Power has now left us to our Liberty in the
case of Conformity, and therefore we are not guilty of Disobedience to
Authority in what we do.

I know it will presently be replied, That the Act of Liberty only frees
Dissenters from the Penalty of the Law, not from the Precept of it; and there
is a sharp thing written (it seems) by Mr. Norris, to prove that the only
Change made by the Toleration (as he calls it) is, that the Penal part of the
Law is for the present laid aside, Charge of Schism continued.
as for the Preceptive part, that stands where it did, and obliges under sin,
though not under Civil Penalty, and that Dissenters are not hereby excused from
Disobedience to the State, though they be not accountable to the Law for their
Nonconformity: This (as far as I can learn by his Book) he grounds upon these
two Suppositions.

1. That our present Liberty extends no farther, than to the removing the
Sanction of the Law.

2. That the taking away of the Sanction, does not take away the whole
Obligation of the Law: And having very civilly arraigned the Government, as
doing that which it ought not to do, P. 24, 32.
in granting this Liberty, and predicted, I know not what ill Consequences to
the Nation and general Interest of Religion, which time will show: He concludes
with a very great Complement upon himself, that he believes the Argument has
suffered no damage by the Management of it, and that he has so broken the Neck
of his Adversaries Objection, P. 78.
that he had need to be a skilful Artist that shall set it again.

I must confess this is enough to discourage a man from meddling, that is
conscious to himself, how little skill he has in setting broken Necks; but
however, we will venture to examine the matter, and if there should chance to
be no such mortal blow given, the less skill will serve to set all right again.

I could wish the Gentleman had bestowed a little more pains to make the first
Point good; for the Question is not, what Toleration signifies in the strict,
or forensick sense of the word, nor what Suarez says, nor how he criticizes, or
distinguishes of it; for the words of the Statute are to be our Rule in
discovering the Extent and Effects of it, and not the critical meaning of the
word Toleration, which we have nothing to do with, being a word not to be found
in the Act of Liberty from the beginning to the end of it; and to lay the
stress of his Argument upon a bare word, which is not in the Statute, is so
grand an impertinency as one would not have expected from Mr. Norris; and
whatever his Admirers may say of this kind of Arguing, I am sure the Lawyers
will think it receives some damage in the management.

He tells us, Where there is an Established National Church, all that Toleration
can do, is only to remove the Penalty, P. 15.
and it cannot there be a Liberty of Allowance, but only of Impunity: But what
if the very Act it self expressly says it is an Allowance? why then, either
there may be an Allowance to dissent from an Established Church, or else this
Act of Allowance destroys the Establishment; let him take whether of these
Consequences he pleases, it is all one to me. The words of the Act are,
Provided always that no Congregation or Assembly for Religious Worship shall be
permitted or allowed by this Act until the place of such Meeting shall be
certified, etc. Here the Law says, such Assemblies so certified are allowed by
this Act. Mr. Norris says, they are not allowed, I hope he will not be
displeased, if we believe those favorable words of the Law, rather than his
unkind contradiction.

But he says, It cannot be an Allowance, and yet if it be so, it can be so; and
let him argue the Notional impossibility as long as he pleases, whilst we have
the plain words of the Statute, and matter of fact to the contrary; but, says
he, if it be an Allowance, the National Church is not Established, why then it
is not Established, for an Allowance it is, if we may believe the words of the
Law; and if this Act of Allowance have destroyed the former Establishment, who
can help it? And yet I see no reason why the Church of England may not be
Established, and Nonconformity allowed too, unless by Establishment something
more be meant, than that word can necessarily import: Indeed if by
Establishment he mean a direct positive Command, to Worship God according to
the Mode of the Episcopal Party; I grant it cannot well consist with an
Allowance to Worship him otherwise; but certainly the Law is not to be set at
variance with it self, it has but one Voice, and speaks distinctly and
consistently, and therefore if former Laws have said, We command you all to
Worship God after this manner, and a latter Law says, We allow you to Worship
God after another manner, it is plain the last is the present Voice of the Law,
signifying that it is not its design to tie us up to that particular Mode, and
that former Command which he accounts the Establishment, cannot disannul the
Allowance which comes after; but if they cannot consist together, the former
must be vacated by the latter.

The Church of England has still a Legal Establishment, that is to say, she has
great Privileges, large Revenues, the Public Places of Worship, and those she
has by Law; but, as Mr. Norris tells us, All that Toleration can do where there
is an Establishment, is to remove the Penalty: So we may reply, All that
Establishment can do or signify, where there is an Act of Allowance, is only
to confer such outward Privileges; and as the removal of the Penal Sanction
does not always abolish the Command, so the continuance of the Praemial
Sanction does not continue the Obligation of the Command, where an Act of
express Allowance has taken it away.

2. His other Maxim, That the taking away of the Sanction does not take away
the whole Obligation of the Law, wants a little explanation too; for though I
readily grant, it will not in all cases have that effect, yet I suppose in some
it may. There are certain Laws that are as well satisfied with the bearing of
the Penalty, as with obeying the Precept; and Mr. Norris confesses as much
concerning those Laws that are purely Penal, that is (as he says) that do not
oblige absolutely to the Fact, but only conditionally either to the Fact, or to
the Penalty; that there are such Laws I grant, only in this I differ from him:
P. 50.
Whereas he says, these purely Penal Laws bind to the Penalty, I think we are
not bound to the Penalty by the Authority of the Law, but only by the honor
and respect due to the Lawgiver; that is, a man is not bound in Conscience to
suffer the Penalty if he can avoid it, without putting an affront upon the
Office of the Magistracy; for by our Laws as well as the Law of Nature, no man
is bound to accuse himself of any thing that has a Penalty annexed to it,
especially since the repealing of the Oath ex Officio.

We are thus far agreed, that there are Laws that do not absolutely bind to the
Fact: Now the Question is, Whether the Act of Uniformity and the rest, as far
as they relate to Protestant Dissenters, be not some of those Laws that he
calls purely Penal?

Mr. Norris well observes, That Human Laws are not therefore purely Penal
because Human; and no question but he is so far right; Human Laws may be so
just and warrantable, and advantageous to the Public Interest, that they may
formally oblige to Obedience; how then shall we find out what Laws are purely
penal, and what are not so?

Truly here the Gentleman leaves us in the dark; He tells us it is by accident
that any Laws are purely Penal, and not from the Specific Nature of the Laws
themselves; but these Logical terms of Accident and Specific Nature are not so
proper in matters of Law, nor are we ever the wiser in this case for them; for
who can tell what Accidents those are that make this difference, since he has
not been pleased to inform us? And though he adds, It is not from the different
Authority of the Law, but from the different Intention of the Lawgiver that
any Laws are purely Penal, that is, do not oblige absolutely to the fact, yet
we are never the nearer satisfaction; for if the Obliging power of these Laws
depend upon the Intention and Will of the Lawgiver, one would think where that
Will and Intention are different, the Authority of the Law must be different,
for the Authority of the Law, and its Obliging power, are the same thing; but
not to contend about the Phrase, let us examine the Notion it self, which is,
That it is the different Will and Intention of the Lawgiver that makes any Law
purely Penal; there are two inconveniences I think attend it.

1. The Will and Intention of the Lawgiver any farther than it is expressed by
the words of the Law, is very doubtful and uncertain; and more especially where
the Legislative Power is in the hands of so many as it is with us; for it is
possible the King may intend one thing, the Lords another, the Commons a third;
yea, there may be an infinite variety of Intentions amongst both Lords and
Commons; and if we say the Intention of the Majority must carry it, yet by what
Scrutiny shall that be found out? And if the Will and Intention of the
Lawgiver must be understood only by the express words of the Law, I suppose it
will be hard to find any Statutes, that in express terms declare, they do not
intend to bind absolutely to Obedience; and yet such Laws there are, by the
Gentleman's own acknowledgment: But

2. To say, it is the different Will and Intention of the Lawgiver, that makes
any Law purely Penal, will resolve the Obliging power of Human Laws into the
Will of Man, which is liable to considerable prejudices. And I find this same
ingenious Gentleman in another Treatise, Miscellan. consid. of the Nature of
sin, Sect. 11, p. 370, 371.
has chosen to resolve the Obliging power of all Laws (Divine as well as Human)
not into the bare will and pleasure of the Lawgiver, but in the fitness of the
Laws themselves to promote the common good; and this aptness, fitness or
tendency to promote the common good, he tells us, is the Supreme, Eternal and
Irreversible Law which prescribes measures to all the rest, and is the last
reason of good and evil; and he thus analyzes the immorality of an Action into
its last Principles; It is to be avoided because it is sin, it is sin because
forbidden, it is forbidden because it was in it self fit to be forbidden; it
was fit to be forbidden because naturally apt to prejudice the common Interest,
which is above all things to be regarded and prosecuted as the best and
greatest End: And though he acknowledges, Authority is to be obeyed, let the
instance wherein Obedience is required, be never so indifferent, yet still, the
reason of this Obligation, is not derived from the Authority of the Lawgiver,
but from the common good, P. 372.
which requires that the Supreme Authority be obeyed; and yet by the way, I
cannot see how his foregoing Chain of Causes, will admit of any mere positive
Laws; for, did he not say, a thing is therefore forbidden, because it is in it
self fit to be forbidden, as naturally apt to prejudice the common good: Now if
this be so, an indifferent Action which is not naturally and in it self apt to
prejudice the common good, cannot be either forbidden or commanded; for
according to his Scheme, the fitness to promote the common good is not only the
Reason of our obeying Laws, but the Rule of God's making them also, being (as
before) the Supreme, Eternal and Irreversible Law which prescribes to all the
rest.

Now, if the Will of God must not be made the Ultimate Reason of our Obligation
to obey his Laws, but their fitness to promote the common good, certainly the
Will of Man must not be the Reason of the Obligation of Human Laws; it would be
very odd and dangerous to ascribe more to the Will of Man, than to the Will of
God; therefore we must enquire for some better Reason, why some Laws oblige
absolutely to Obedience, and other not, than merely the different Will and
Intention of the Lawgiver.

And I suppose the true (...) of this kind of Laws, is to be found in the
matter of them, and those Laws are purely Penal, which require things so very
trivial and indifferent, as naturally and in themselves have no fitness at all
to promote the common good, nor any tendency that way; and though I dare by no
means say, that this tendency to common good is a Law so supreme, as that God
himself must always observe it in his Commands and Prohibitions, and that the
Obliging power of his Laws is to be resolved into it; for I doubt not, God may
command things that have no such tendency in themselves, merely to try whether
men will obey the Authority of God for its own sake; yet I am verily persuaded
men should make the common good their Rule in every Law of theirs, and that
amongst men; Salus Populi est suprema Lex, and that God has not given them
Authority to command any thing, Demosthenes Natal. Commit. Mythol. l 2. c. 7.
Aquinas, q. 95. Camero praelec. tom. 1. p. 367. There was one (says the Bp. of
Winch. on John 16.) that would have his will stand for a reason, 1 Samuel chapter 2.
Thus it must be, for Hophni will have it so, his reason is, because he will.
God grant (sayshe) there be none such found amongst Christians; and I say, Amen.
but what has a tendency thereunto: And therefore Cicero and others were wont
to put the bonum publicum into the Definition of Human Laws, and to affirm that
those Edicts which command things no way tending to the public good (quidvis
potius quam Leges censendae sunt) may be called any thing rather than Laws. It
is certain God has obliged Governors to steer by the Compass of Right Reason,
and to make the Point of public good in all their Political actions; if this
be the Supreme Law to all men, it must be so to them; they ought never to do an
act Personal, or Political, but what has such a tendency, if they do, they act
against the Authority of God in this Supreme Law, and therefore cannot in the
same thing act with his Authority: And if in making such Laws as have no
tendency to the public good, they act without Authority, it is certain those
Laws cannot bind men to Obedience, though the public good, and a respect to
the Persons and Office of their Governors, may oblige them to submit to the
Penalty.

The Authority of God is absolute, is originally in himself and from himself,
and therefore is not under the direction of the public good of his Creatures;
but the Authority of Man is derivative, and dependant, given unto him not for
his own sake and pleasure, but for the common Interest of Mankind, and is
wholly directed and limited thereby; and therefore he cannot as God make Laws
purely positive, no way tending to good, but merely to try men's Obedience to
his Authority; for he has no Authority to command such things, and a compliance
with such Commands, may be submission, but cannot be proper Obedience. And it
is observable, that there are many Statutes in England not repealed, and yet
not regarded, because the matter of them is found to be so very trivial, that
no body thinks Conscience any way concerned in them, as the Act for the tire of
Wheels; that about the Age of all Calves which the Butchers kill; another
requiring Butts for shooting in every Town; another, That no Bull shall be
killed without Baiting; That none shall pay above a Penny for a Quart of Ale,
and such like, which are buried and forgotten in their own unusefulness.

The matter therefore is come to this Issue, if those things wherein we dissent
from the Episcopal party, be naturally and in themselves apt to promote the
common good, a mere suspension of the Sanction will not excuse us from
obedience, because the Laws requiring those things, are not mere Penal Laws;
But if they have no such tendency at all, then, though our Liberty were no more
but a suspension of the Sanction, yet the Law being purely Penal, we are under
no manner of obligation to Obedience by it.

We have therefore these two things to say for our selves under this head.

1. That the Act for Liberty amounts to more than a bare suspension of the
Penalty, for it allows of our Congregations, it secures us from disturbance,
laying a penalty upon all those that shall presume to do it, it exempts our
Ministers from serving in any Secular Offices, which is conferring a kind of
reward upon them.

I cannot but take notice, how weak and ineffectual these Gentlemen would now
make this Suspension of the Penal Laws to be, and how little influence they
will allow it to have upon the Preceptive part; and yet when it was their
Interest in the Late King's Reign to decry the Suspension of them by the Kings
Declaration only; They pretend and plead, that if that Declaration have any
Legal effect, it would discharge Ministers and People from attending upon the
Public Service of God, thus Sir Robert Sawyer Pleaded in the Bishops Trial;
Page 100, 103.
When a Law is suspended the obligation thereof is taken away; Now (my Lord)
with submission, I have always taken it, that a Power to abrogate Laws is as
much a part of the Legislature as a Power to make Laws; A Power to lay Laws
a-sleep and to suspend them, is equal to a Power of abrogating them, for they
are no longer in Being as Laws, while they are so laid a sleep or suspended,
etc.

2. Though it should amount to no more but a bare suspension of the Penalty,
yet it is sufficient to excuse us from Disobedience, because the Laws hereby
suspended are mere Penal Laws, that is, such as require things that are no way
apt to promote the common good, those that say they are, must prove it, however
here we remove the Cause out of that Court, and must stand or fall by the
intrinsic worth and nature of the things commanded.

CHAP. IV.
The Nature and Rule of Decency; Dissenters vindicated from the charge of
Indecency in Expression, Gesture and Habit; no positive Decency in the
Ceremonies; Of Parochial Order; A short account of the Reasons of our Non
conformity. Arguments for the imposition of Ceremonies answered.

IF we come off clear in these great points of Catholic Unity, and Obedience
to Superiors, we shall more easily defend our selves against the lesser
imputations of Indecency and Irregularity.

We begin with that of Indecency, and therein shall enquire, first into the
Nature and Rule of Decency, secondly into the Practice of the Non-conformists,
and how far it is agreeable to those Rules.

We fully assent and consent, to that great Law of Decency laid down in
Scripture, and believe the transgression of that as of all other Divine Laws to
be absolutely sinful; We do not think it an indifferent thing whether we
worship God decently or indecently; But the question is, what may be the
Standard or Rule by which Decency is to be measured, our thoughts about it
(such as they are) we shall lay down in a few words.

1. It must be something Antecedent to the Command of Superiors; even the
Apostle himself when he commands that all things be done decently, supposes
that there was a Decent way and method of acting, which they could not be
ignorant of; he does not by his command make the Decency, but supposes it, and
obliges them to the observation of it; We therefore conclude Decency is not a
thing of mere positive institution, nor depends upon the Will and Command of
Men, but is of higher Original, even the Light of Nature, and is no other but
the Natural decorum of an action: To say the Ceremonies of the Church of
England are therefore Decent because commanded, is as much as to say, were
there no such command, there would be no Decency in them, and therefore that
the omission of them is guilty of no other indecency than that of disobeying
Superiors, and where Superiors are pleased to suspend such commands, the
Worship of God may be performed as decently without them, which indeed is to
set aside the Argument of decency and to betake our selves wholly to that of
Obedience which has been already discussed.

2. It Is therefore Nature (or Custom which is a second Nature) that is the rule
and measure of Decency; Vind. of Prot. Prin. p. 100.
And Dr. Sherlock argues rationally upon this point, when his Adversary would
suggest that there is as much necessity of an Ecumenical determination of
Decency and Order, as of a National one, he answers No, for Decency of Worship
is nothing else but to perform the External Acts of Worship in such a manner,
as may express our Reverence and Devotion to God, therefore since there are no
Catholic signs of Decency, there can be no Catholic Uniformity in these
matters, The Decency of Garments, Postures, Gestures, differ in several
Countries, and so do the expressions of Honor and Reverence, and therefore
such external Rites being only for external Decency, and having no sacredness
by institution, may vary with the different customs and usages of Countries:
But as to National Churches, since the usages and customs of the same Nation,
and Rules of Decency are the same, the Bishops may agree upon an Uniformity of
Rites for a National Church; The sum is, it is not the Command of Superiors,
but the Customs of a Country that make a thing Decent, and therefore the same
Rites may be commanded throughout a Nation, because the Customs upon which
Decency stands are the same.

3. When we make Custom the Rule of Decency we do not mean, This or that way of
Worshipping of God is Decent, because we are accustomed to Worship him so, but
on the contrary, We use to Worship so, because it is Decent, that is agreeable
to our custom of expressing Honor and Reverence in other cases; Otherwise we
should make the same thing the Rule of it self, and say, this Worship is Decent
because it is customary, and it has been our custom to Worship God thus,
because it is Decent: which would be running the ring; besides, then might all
the fopperies of the Roman Church set up for Decency, because they are now
become customary; No actions or gestures in the Worship of God, how long soever
they have been used, can plead Decency, but those which are used in other
cases, as well as in Divine Service, and therefore used in the service of God,
because agreeable to the general customs of Decency in other matters.

4. Nothing is required of us by the Law of Decency, but to preserve the
Worship of God from all Indecencies; It is impossible to prove that we are
obliged by that Law to use this or that Ceremony in the Worship of God, if it
may be managed decently without them; If the Omission of such Ceremonies do not
render the service of God Indecent, the Law of Decency is not broken; As no man
can be charged with a breach of the Law of Justice, but he that has done some
unjust thing, or of the Laws of Charity, but he that is uncharitable, so none
can be charged with breaking the Laws of Decency, but he that Behaves himself
Indecently in Divine Worship; As there is no medium between Justice and
Unjustice, so there is none betwixt Decency and Undecency, and when of two
actions one is said to be more just, the other must needs have something of
injustice in it, so when one thing is more decent, the other must have
something of indecency, for these things being privately opposed, admit of no
medium in a capable subject.

There are some indeed tell us of certain transcendental heights of Justice,
Charity and Devotion, which might be omitted without sin, Miscell. p. 275.
thus Mr. Norris in his discourse of Heroic Piety; How they can reconcile it
with the 14th. Article of the Church of England, I cannot tell; it is like such
men will pretend to the same Eminencies of Decency too, but so long as they
acknowledge, we may fall short of such acme's without Sin we are well enough,
the Nonconformists pretend not to such high Seize, they would be heartily
glad, could they come up to the Rule in any thing, but are so far from
pretending, that they do not desire to exceed it, nor do they grudge these
Gentlemen that unweildy Glory, of being wiser and better than God has commanded.

Now let us Examine the Practice of Dissenters, in their worshipping of God,
and its agreeableness with the Rules of Decency; The Chester Gentleman falls
upon the Vindicator for saying; We desire the Rules of the Gospel may be
carefully looked into, and such a Model of Government and Worship taken from
thence, as may be likely to answer the great ends thereof, that nothing may be
imposed, but either what is expressly commanded, or has a natural and proper
tendency to promote that which is so, then would the Worship of God appear like
it self, Rational, Grave and Majestical, becoming reasonable Creatures to
offer, and a Being of perfect Simplicity, and Spirituality to accept; Nor would
we as we are accused under pretense of Spirituality, reject the natural Decorum
of an Action in Divine Worship, but only lay aside these Formalities that are
over and above natural Decency, which in Civil Converse are counted Foppish,
and daily grow out of repute betwixt man and man, and are no where so improper
as in the Service of God.

Now what harm is there in all this, the Gentleman it seems has nothing to
object against it, but all the Question is, Whether the Worship of God in our
Conventicles be as agreeable to this Rule, as their is in the Churches; and no
doubt he thinks the Case is half determined, by the very Names Churches and
Conventicles; for is it imaginable that men should worship God as decently in a
Conventicle, as in the Church? All the Club will say, and swear too it is
impossible; but what if our Assemblies are as much Churches as theirs, and
theirs as much Conventicles as ours; it is true enough for any thing he has yet
produced to the contrary; Of Schism.
Mr. Hales tells us, that all pious Assemblies in times of Persecution and
Corruption are the only lawful Congregations, and the public Assemblies though
according to form of Law, are indeed nothing but Riots and Conventicles, if
they be stained with Corruption and Superstition.

He charges the Dissenters with Indecency, 1. In their Expressions. 2. In their
Gestures. 3. In their Habits.

1. In Expression, because our Ministers use not a stated form of Prayer, and
therefore he accuses them of Rushing into the presence of God with the rash and
sudden thoughts of one single Person, with a Prayer newly Coined, but whether
Sterling or no, is uncertain, being never tried, for the People know it not
till it be out.

But must it needs follow, that because we have not a form laid before us, that
our thoughts are therefore rash and sudden, is he sure that we never use
Premeditation both as to the general Method and Matter of Prayer? And for the
words if they be usually Scripture Phrase, I hope they will pass for current in
a more equal Balance than his; Will this Gentleman say, that all conceived
Prayer is rash and irreverent? Then I am sure he will condemn the most learned
and pious Divines, yea and Bishops too of the Church of England, who in the
Pulpit commonly use such Prayers, and sometimes of a considerable length too,
which we may be sure they would not do, if they thought it impossible for the
People to join with them in it; and if the Duty of Prayer may be performed
rationally and gravely without a prescribed form, this Objection vanishes into
putrid Air.

If this Gentleman would only say that He and his Companions, cannot express
themselves rationally and reverently in the presence of God, without a
prescribed form of Words, we would not contradict them, they best know what
they can do, but to say, that without such a form, it is impossible to perform
this Duty aright, is (as the Vindicator speaks) little less than Lampoon upon
the common sense of English men; and I am sure it is contrary to the whole
scope of that excellent Book of Bishop Wilkins called the Gift of Prayer; for
my part I thank God, for the acquaintance I have had, with some plain poor
People, that in their Prayers to God would express themselves in much more
proper and pertinent Language, than this Gentleman has yet attained to, though
he be the Author of at least two famous Books.

2. In our Gestures; that in Prayer they are confused, and irreverent, I know
not what he intends by these Words, We judge it our Duty either to kneel or
stand, in the time of Prayer, either of which are postures of Adoration, and to
sit or loll we utterly disallow, unless in case of bodily weakness and
inability, where they are excused, by that Rule, God will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice; I wonder, how this Gentleman should come to know our postures,
better than we do our selves. I suppose he has seldom appeared in our
Assemblies, unless it was in former days, when he came attended by his Setters
to break them up, and then perhaps the Terror of such a One might put the
People into postures odd and confused enough, but if he pleases to come now,
when his Thunderbolts are spent, he may satisfy himself that our Gestures are
almost as grave, though not so genteel as his own.

But it seems the Dissenters sit and loll, and are covered, at the reading of
the Psalms; as for sitting, I know not why it should be more irreverent at the
reading of the Psalms, than other parts of Scripture, or than at the singing of
the Psalms, and at such times, I am sure in Churches they generally sit.

And that we are usually covered, either at the Reading or Preaching of the
Word is not true, and yet I know of no great Crime in it, S. B. Esquire The
Providence of God observed, p. 28.
especially in Infirm and Aged Persons; but I shall refer him to what a Learned
Gentleman of the Church of England, says in this Case, his Words are, Though
the Act for enjoining the Common Prayer, forbids both Affirmatively and
Negatively any other Method or Form of Service Rites, and Ceremonies than is
there directed; some Churchmen are great Nonconformists in disobeying that
Rule, by several Additions in approach to Popery, as in their second Service,
etc. As also in being superabundant to Popery, in endeavoring to make a
Superstitious Fashion, to sit bare during Sermon, which is but a new thing in
England, and not known in any other Christian Church, for though the Papists
are bare in their Churches out of Service-time, whom we endeavor to imitate in
that Circumstance, yet they are covered during Sermon, wherein we outdo them;
and he tells us, That the Minister of Finchly not long since caused one to be
committed for being covered, whilst he was in his Sermon, who bringing his
Action against the Justice for false Imprisonment recovered good Damages of
him; which though sufficient to prove the Churches Usurpation in this matter,
they do notwithstanding go on in it, as a part of that new Popery formerly
intended by Laud in his time.

But the Gentleman is chiefly scandalized at our Gesture in receiving the
Sacrament, Reply, p. 46.
wherein (he says) we sit like Clowns and Bumkins; but who told him that we sit
so Clownishly? A man may sit very decently and handsomely, and how does he
know, but we do so? I hope merely sitting is not the thing that makes a Bumkin,
for then this Gentleman is forced to be a Bumkin almost all the day long; nor
sitting in the Service of God, for that he does too; and why it should have
such a peculiar Rustical quality at the Lords Supper, rather than in other
Ordinances I cannot imagine; especially when for any thing that appears, our
Savior used it in the very Institution of the Ordinance, and the Apostles even
when they received it from his immediate hand, and though I am not of their
minds, that think this makes sitting necessary, yet I am sure it will at least
defend it from the scandal of an irreverent Posture.

3. The Habit of our Ministers is not pleasing, For (says he) He who
administers in their Divine Service, as they call it, has no other habit than
what is due to, and becomes a Tradesman or any other Laick in the Congregation.

And here again, we have Reason to complain that the matter of Fact is not
truly represented, for our Ministers are generally distinguished from others,
Tertul. de pallio. p. 490.
by the use of that very ancient Garment the Goak, of which Tertullian has writ
a Treatise, and prefers it before the Gown, as a more modest humble Attire,
insomuch as that, a Toga ad Pallium, became a Proverb to express a Person
growing humble, from which Beatus Rhenanus argues against the costly Wardrobe
of the Prelates, as not being a toga ad pallium, but a pallio ad togam, ad
purpuram, ad mundi p^mpam. And what if Laics wear Cloaks too, so do Lawyers
wear Gowns, and the singing Men and Boys have their Surplices, and yet I
suppose they are not thereby advanced above the Condition of L^icks; why then
is not our habit as grave, though not as Majestical as theirs?

The Gentleman seems to be exceedingly enamoured of the Surplice, and
passionately cries out, should the Church condescend to gratify your humor to
stripped the Priest of his Habit, the Emblem of Innocence, and Color of the
Robes in St. John's Vision? I must Confess, it is Pity the Priest should not be
Innocent, and Heavenly at least in Emblem; and yet we find the learned men of
his Church, Vnreason. of Separat. Pres. p. 83. Iren. p. 64.
make but a very small account of this Visional Holy Garment; The Bishop of
Worcester says, As for the Surplice in Parochial Churches, it is not of that
consequence, as to bear a dispute one way or another; and elsewhere, I am sure
it is contrary to the Primitive Practice, to suspend and deprive Men of their
Ministerial Functions, De rebus Eccles. cap. 24.
for not Conforming in Habits, Gestures, and the like; and Wulfridus Strabo
expressly tells us, there was no distinction of Habits used in the Primitive
times; Can. 14.
and the Council. Gangrense condemned Eustathius Sebastenus for making a
necessity, of the Diversity of Habits; and we find Justin Martyr (...),
Preaching the Gospel in his Philosophers Habit; and if after all this we must
be condemned for irreverent Clowns and Bumkins, it will be some comfort to us,
that we shall suffer in very good Company.

In short, The most Learned Conformists, that have largely writ in Vindication
of these Ceremonies, Protest. Rec^n. p. 41.
acknowledge there is nothing of real goodness in them, nothing of Positive
Order, Decency or Reverence, for which they ought to be commanded: The Church
her self declares them to be indifferent, which they cannot be, if the worship
of God might not be decently performed without them.

Bishop Sanderson, whose Learning and Spirit were both high and great enough,
expressly says, If any man shall wear a Surplice, or Kneel, Sermon in Mat. 15.9.
p. 20, 21.
or Cross, with an Opinion of necessity for Conscience sake toward God, as if
those parts of Gods Service could not be rightly performed without them, yea
though our Church had not appointed them, doubtless the use of such Ceremonies
by Reason of such his Opinion, would be Superstitious to him; this is full to
our purpose, we have the suffrage of this great Prelate, that we may Worship
God every whit as well without these Ceremonies, and if T. W. thinks otherwise,
one of his own Fathers has condemned him for Superstition.

Dr. Patrick in his Friendly Debate speaks to the same effect; P. 115.
Then do we make the Ceremonies parts of Divine Worship, when we suppose them
to be so necessary, that the doing them would be a thing pleasing to God, and
the omitting of them would be a thing displeasing to him, although there were
no Humane Law, that required the doing of them.

Now we may thus argue, If it were indecent to omit these Ceremonies, it would
be displeasing to God, who has commanded that all things be done decently; but
we see the Defenders of Ceremonies, when they are put to it have no way to
defend themselves from the guilt of Superstition, and of instituting new parts
of Divine Worship, but by declaring, that these things are in their own Nature
purely trivial, and the using of them would not be at all pleasing to God, nor
the Omission displeasing, were they not commanded and enjoined by humane Laws,
that is to say, the Worship of God is not at all the more decent for them, nor
the less decent without them.

4. We come to the point of Order, and here indeed we are most blamed by the
sober Conformists, as acting irregularly, setting up distinct Assemblies in
Parishes, and drawing away the People from the Parish Minister, gathering
Churches out of Churches, which the Presbyterians formerly condemned in others.

To this we Answer, That we really approve of all Prudent Rules for the more
orderly and effectual Management of the Ministerial Function, and in ordinary
Cases, we judge it convenient that the Charge of a Minister should be confined
within such bounds, as our Parishes, but we do not think this to be a matter of
that Consequence, Vind. P. 87.
as strictly to oblige us in all circumstances of Affairs, and the Vindicator
mentioned several Cases, wherein this Order may be transgrest without Sin, to
which the Gentleman has not made the least reply.

The Learned Writers of their own party, Defense of Plural. p. 59.
tell us, that the Division of Churches by Parishes is of a later date, and we
know it is not so nicely observed by themselves, but that many Chapels of Ease
have been set up, and filled with People of diverse adjacent Parishes, the
Ministers sometimes celebrating both the Sacrament, and no Exceptions taken,
and why may not our Assemblies be looked upon as such? If it be said these
Chapels are all under the Parish Minister, yet it cannot be denied but they
may be freed from that dependence by Law, and made distinct Churches, and
exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Parson or Bishop as several places
already are; unless we will with Pythagoras curse the Number two, because it
was the first that did depart from Unity.

But we acknowledge it were more desirable to have the Parochial way observed,
interest, as well as a due regard to Order, would invite us to it, if we could
comply with those terms that are required of us in Order thereunto; Our Case is
plainly this, The Laws of the Land allow us to Assemble in other places, upon
such Qualifications as we heartily approve of, but admit us not into the
Public Churches, without such a further compliance as we cannot in Conscience
come up unto.

I must confess, this is that part of the Controversy, which I have the least
Mind to meddle with, not because it is the most difficult, but because it may
seem to reflect upon the Wisdom or Integrity of many Worthy Learned
Conformists, of whom I would not speak or think without due respect; but the
importunate clamours of this Gentleman, and men of his temper extort it from
us, he is often challenging us at this Weapon, as in his Reply, p. 4. If these
men have any thing imposed upon them by our Governors that is sinful, let them
show it, and their Plea must be allowed, but they are forced to confess, the
terms of Obedience imposed are but indifferent things, mere trifles, now for a
man to disobey his Governors and have no other Plea but this, is too mean an
excuse from the Transgression of a known Law; This he seems to express with a
great Elevation of Mind, as if it were a killing Sentence, when indeed it is as
foolish and inconsiderate, as his Adversaries can desire. For,

1. It is not true, that we confess the terms of Conformity to be things
Indifferent, when the Vindicator says they are such by acknowledgment, he
plainly speaks of the Acknowledgment of the Imposers, not of the Dissenters,
and no Body can understand it otherwise, but those that have a mind to be
mistaken.

2. Our Governors do not now impose such things upon us, as terms of
Obedience, and therefore all the noise he makes about Childrens disobeying
their Parents, because they suspect the Lawfulness of their commands, is out of
doors, and yet by the way, he would be a very severe Father, that should force
his Son upon the highest Penalties to do a thing, Crudelis Pater magis quam
Puer improbus ille --
which he himself confesses is altogether needless, and good for nothing,
especially when the Son really suspects it to be unlawful, and thinks he cannot
de it without displeasing God; all the World would condemn the Barbarity of
such a Father; Blessed be God, the illustrious Parents of our Country, are too
just and merciful to command such things; our Nonconformity is indeed a loss to
our selves, but no disobedience to our Superiors, as has been already argued
at large.

The Authors of the Enquiry and Vindication, waved this Point of the Sinfulness
of Conformity, out of mere Respect and Civility to their Brethren that are
otherwise minded, and chose rather to infist upon those general precepts of
Love and Charity toward weak and scrupulous Consciences, which the Scripture
abounds with, being willing to admit that we are mistaken in these matters,
rather than to expose the mistakes of others, but this Gentleman had not the
Civility to make a suitable return, but encourages himself, by that Modesty of
theirs to insult, and hector, and cry aloud, for proof of the sinfulness of
Conformity, declaring that they will admit of no other Plea.

But what if terms of Conformity be not sinful, it is sufficient for us, that
we are under no Obligation to comply with them; our Governors have left us at
our Liberty, and though the Bishops may still command them, yet our own Pastors
are as truly Bishops as they; The Unity of the Church does not depend upon
them, but may be much better preserved without them, and the Act of Liberty in
the Preamble, declares, that it is the Sense of the King, Lords and Commons,
that not Conformity, but ease to scrupulous Consciences may be an effectual
means to unite Protestants in Interest and Affection, and the Worship of God
may be as decently performed without them; how are we then obliged to comply
with such things? Will he say it is our Duty to use all those Ceremonies and
Customs in the Worship of God that are not sinful? What if a Papist should ask
him; Why do you not Conform to all the Ceremonies of our Church? Why do you not
use Salt and Cream, and Spittle, in Baptism? Why do you not Cross your Breasts,
and Shave your Heads? Can you prove these things to be sinful? I suppose this
Gentleman would reply, we care not whether they be sinful or no, we are not
obliged to use them; and if the Papist should allege the Command of the
Catholic Church, he would reply, No Foreign Prelate or Potentate has
Authority to enjoin such things upon us, and our own Governors have not done
it; if the other should urge, that we must comply for Unity sake, he would
answer, The Unity of the Church lies not in Uniformity of such Rites and
Ceremonies; if the Papists should press it further, These are decent
Ceremonies, and serve to excite in men devour thoughts of God and Christ, and
have rare mystical Signification, surely He would rejoyn, The Worship of God is
managed by us very decently without such things.

Thus we say in answer to his demand, if we be not obliged to Conformity,
though it should not be unlawful, our Nonconformity is very justifiable;
therefore this Plea of the Sinfulness of the thing, is not now so necessary as
he imagines; but lest we should seem to acknowledge that we had nothing to
justify our practice heretofore, when Conformity was required by the Law. And
that we are still for an unaccountable Singularity, and are resolved to differ
from others merely for distinction sake, and have no regard to Parochial Order,
which we have formerly seemed to approve of; I shall venture to say something
upon this point, though I am sensible beforehand some will blame me for saying
so much, and others for saying no more.

The World is not to seek for the Reasons of our Nonconformity, a large Account
has been given thereof in a Multitude of Treatises, some of which have received
no answer at all, as Dr. Rule's Rational Defense, and Mr. Baxter's English
Nonconformity Stated and Argued; wherein the Case is so copiously and yet so
closely debated, in the several particulars both of Ministerial and
Lay-Conformity, that it seems wholly superfluous to add any thing, till we see
what answer will be made unto it; I have seen indeed a little impertinent
Scribble of two or three Sheets of Paper, wherein the Author pretends not to
engage in the Controversy, but only tells us with Confidence enough, that Mr.
Baxter's Book is an unnecessary, unseasonable and unaccountable Undertaking,
and has been already answered, which is a very quick and cheap way of confuting
Dissenters, and the common reply of every baffled Party, to all that is writ
against them, and is only taken up as a little shist to serve an easy and
credulous sort of Men amongst themselves, but can never be designed to give
Satisfaction to others; and if such Trifles must pass for an Answer to a Book
so Large, Distinct and Argumentative, as Mr. Baxter's is, truly it is to no
purpose either to write or read Controversy.

There are three Steps a man must take before he can arrive at the height of
English Conformity: 1. He must submit to the Use and Practice of the
Impositions. 2. He must declare his Approbation and good liking of them. 3. He
must Swear never to endeavor any Alteration, some of us stumble at the First,
many stick at the Second, but the Last is most inaccessible.

1. Many of us can by no means be satisfied with the constant Use and Practice
of these controverted Matters, and that for these Reasons amongst others.

1. We observe, That the great Corruption of Churches has in all Ages risen
from this Source, introducing unnecessary Ceremonies in the worship of God,
teaching for Doctrines the Traditions of Men; this had reduced the Jewish
Church to that Leprous condition wherein it lay in our Savior's time: And the
grand Apostasy of Rome begun by advancing the Power of Ecclesiastics beyond
its measure, and exerting it in the Invention and Imposition of such Mystical
Rites and Ceremonies, and by adding still thereunto, it grew up to such a
Mystery of Iniquity, and Monster of Usurpation and Tyranny, as it appears at
this day in the World; and we know not of any Specifical Difference betwixt the
Ceremonies in England and those of Rome, and we could never prevail with our
Antagonists to give us a Rule to distinguish them by.

It is usually said ours are but few, but theirs are many, and therefore
burthensom; but this does not satisfy; for many or few alters not the kind,
and if it be lawful to use Three, why not Six, Twenty or a Hundred? besides, if
ours be therefore better because they are fewer, I hope they will give us leave
to infer, the fewer Ceremonies and the better, and therefore best of all where
there are none; if the Matter must be resolved into their Positive decency, we
have already showed by their own Confession there is no such decency in them,
but the worship of God may be managed as well without them: But if the Matter
be fixed upon the Churches Authority, then let the Church command never so many
we must comply, and so are as much enslaved to the humors of the
Ecclesiastics as the Papists themselves; and the case standing thus, we think
none can justly blame us if we are afraid of contributing to the return of
Superstition and Arbitrary Church Power, by entertaining and embracing those
things, that have given it rise and strength in other Parts and Ages of the
World. Our Objection against them is not that weak and silly thing some
represent it, as if we reject them merely because the Papists use them; but we
do it because the Imposition and use of them has given Life and Growth to the
Papacy.

2. Especially since they are altogether useless, and have no tendency to
promote that which is good, this much strengthens the prejudice, they have done
a great deal of harm, and they can do no good by the Confession of the
Imposers, and we cannot imagine why they should be retained, since they are
neither good in themselves, nor have a natural fitness to promote the Common
Good; were there any usefulness in them, we would not reject them, merely
because they have been abused, but since by their own acknowledgment the
Worship of God is not at all the better performed for them, we cannot but judge
it irrational to retain them; a Wise Man will do nothing deliberately in his
common Conversation but what he can give some account cui bono, to what end he
does it; And really it is somewhat a hard case that we are in if we use these
Ceremonies, and know before hand, our Duties are never the better for them,
Conscience and Reason tell us we are guilty of trifling in a Matter of the
greatest Solemnity, if we use them with an opinion that the Worship of God is
better performed with them, than otherwise, their own Bishops and Doctors tell
us we are guilty of Superstition and Will Worship.

3. We observe that the Dealers in Ceremonies are apt to grow upon us, and if
we yield to a few, they still urge us with more; and indeed the Principle upon
which they are defended, leaves room to bring in as many as they please,
provided they be not expressly prohibited in the Word of God, which in things of
this Nature is not to be expected; for it had been an endless task, and would
have swelled our Bibles, to a Prodigious Bulk, to have precluded them all by
Name, which may be as various and indefinite as the fancies of Men; Thus our
Canons enjoin several things which are not required by Law, as bowing at the
Altar at the Name of Jesus, reading some part of the Service at the Communion
Table, etc. and the Practice of some Zealous Men outgoes the very Canons
themselves. We are very loath to launch out into so vast an Ocean, and commit
our selves to be tossed up and down by the Caprices and Humors of Men, which are
as uncertain as the Winds and Waves, and we know not upon what dangerous Rocks,
or remote Shores, they may at length drive us.

4. Those things which we scruple, are disapproved by the best Reformed
Churches; we know it to be so from their own words; when the Ministers of the
Helvetian and French Churches were desired to give their Opinion about these
things, they did generally express their dislike of them; See a Book Entitled,
The Judgment of the Reformed Churches, Printed at Geneva, October. 24. 1547.
Subscribed by Beza, and many famous Divines of those Churches.

And we cannot forget the Exhortation of the poor Remains of the Bohemian
Churches, directed to the Reformed, especially to that of England, by the
Learned and Pious Comenius, writ in Latin, and Dedicated to King Charles II.
at his return into England, I will transcribe a few Lines because the Book is
not in every Bodies hand.

Contend then, P. 8.
Oh great Churches! among your selves, if you please, about the Pre-eminence;
Strive about the Notion of Faith, or for Ceremonies, or the Hierarchy as
fiercely as you can; behold God presents you with a little Child, an Infant
stripped of all Pomp and Dressing, considerable for nothing but for Simplicity,
knows not any thing of preferring it self before others, or quarrelling with
any, or coveting Wealth and Honors, only understands how to keep at home, to
do its own Business, not to intermeddle in other Men's Matters, but to Serve God
in Spirit and in Truth, etc.

And in another Place thus: P. 47.
As for the Pomp of Church Ceremonies, God indeed in the old way of Worship
ordained such a thing, therein by Shaddows to set forth the Spiritual Mysteries
of Salvation, which Christ at his coming was to disclose; but seeing that since
the coming of Christ, they have been demolished and levelled, by so many
Apostolical Strains, as Claps of Thunder and Flashes of Lightning directed
against them, why should we bring them up again still to make use of them?
Under the Papacy perhaps where the Light of the Gospel is obscured, in their
Barbarous Generations, they might seem to be of some use, at least with some
colorable pretense; but in a Reformed Church, I beseech you, what use can be
made of them? Those that have been hitherto retained in England under the
Reformed Bishops, have not the very Pentificians themselves laughed them to
Scorn and Derision? It is plain to be seen in Weston's Theater of Life Civil
and Sacred, Printed at Antwerp 1626. P. 564, etc. Where having said that the
Religion of the Protestants is without all Religion, because they have no
Sacrifice, Priesthood nor Sacred Ceremonies, he adds, Some Protestants indeed,
that they may not appear absolutely Impious and Irreligious, use our Missal and
Breviary, selecting what they please thereof for the Rubric of their Liturgy,
and to make the Form of their Worship appear the more goodly, they have their
Canonical Persons forsooth, after the Modes and Customs of the Church of Rome,
their Caps, and Hoods and Holy Days, and suchlike Stuff, which they say they
found in the Synagogue of Antichrist; by which very thing it is apparent that
the Religion of these Protestants stands guilty of Stealth and Robbery, by
which it first came into the World, or if they will not be taken for Thieves,
let them go for our Apes: These with their whole Service are derided and
scorned not only by ours, but also by their own; the English seem to have
driven the Pope out of England in such haste that they have forced him to leave
his Clothes behind him, which they as Fools in a Play, put on with a kind of
Pompous Ceremony of Triumph, and so lead the Quire, a goodly Reformation it is
that they dare not carry it through, etc.

It will therefore be a glorious thing for the Reformed Churches to come back
to the Practice of Christ and his Apostles, leaving off the Baubles of earthly
Riches, Honors and Pomp, and to look after and busy themselves about things
of a higher Nature, etc. This and a great deal more to the same purpose is
there to be seen, by which it appears, not only that those renowned Martyrs and
Confessors called the Taborites, disliked our Ceremonies, but that the Papists
themselves, for whose sake they are retained, despise and ridicule us for them.

2. There are those amongst us that could bear with the use of these things,
but cannot declare their Approbation of them, and their Assent and Consent to
all of them; this would be to espouse and commend those things which at best
they look upon but as Tolerabiles Ineptiae, and this Approbation must extend to
all things required; and they cannot so far dissemble with God and the World.

There are many things in the Book of Homilies which they like very well, but
they cannot say so of all; there are some very odd Passages, which they cannot
Assent to; P. 160.
take one instance of many, 2 Hom. of Alms. The same Lesson does the Holy Ghost
teach us in sundry places of Scripture, saying, Mercifulness and Almsgiving
purges from all Sin, delivers from Death and suffers not the Soul to come
into darkness; alleging for it, Tobit 4. v. 10. and the saying of the Son of
Syrach, That Alms makes an Atenement for Sin.

There are many good Petitions in the Liturgy, and good Directions in the
Rubric, which we could (some of us) freely use; but we cannot prevail with our
selves to Assent to that Notorious Mistake in the Rule for finding Easter, nor
can well digest that Complemental Prayer, Those things which for our
Unworthiness we dare not, and for our blindness we cannot Ask, vouchsafe to
give us for the worthiness of thy Son.

There are excellent Lessons taken out of Scripture and appointed to be Read,
which our Ministers would gladly do, but we cannot approve of those fulsom
Apocryphal Tales, (...) chapter 3. chapter 5. and 6.
about Sarah the Daughter of Reguel, and her infernal Spark Asmodeus, that
killed all her Husbands before they lay with her, till at length, the Angel
Raphael put them into a way to get rid of the Amorous Fiend, by burning the
Intrals of a Fish, which it seems had such a Super-sulphureous stench, that the
Devil himself could not endure it, but quits the Room and his Mistress to the
enjoyment of his Rival Tobias; I might take notice of the strange and
self-contradicting Stories that this pretended Angel told them; Of the many odd
and gross things we have in Judith and in Ecclesiasticus, as where we are
dissuaded from receiving Strangers to our Houses; Ecclus. chapter 11. v. 34. To be
read October. 25.
for, says the Book, He will disturb thee, and turn thee out of thy own; and we
are bid give Alms only to the Godly, but help not a Sinner, give not to the
ungodly, hold back thy Bread, and give it not to him, for the most High hates
Sinners; Chap. 12.1, 2, 3.
let all Mankind judge how contrary this is to our Savior's Command, Love your
Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them that despitefully use you -- that you may be like your Father which is in
Heaven; for he makes his Sun to rise upon the Evil and the Good, and sends
rain on the just and on the unjust. And yet this Apocryphal Doctrine is
appointed to be Read in Churches as a Lesson, To be read, October. 30. Council.
Laod. Can. ult. (...).
which I fear too many have learned; and this is part of the Book to which we
must subscribe, as containing nothing contrary to the Word of God, and the
Preface to the Common Prayer Book says nothing is ordained to be Read but the
very pure Words of God, or that which is agreeable to them, to which we must
likewise Assent. Many more such Passages might be, and have been mentioned,
which contain things false, or odd and ridiculous, and wholly unfit to take up
a place in so Sacred a Thing as the Worship of God.

There are many amongst us, that would willingly submit to a Moderate
Episcopacy, according to Archbishop Usher's Reduction; but we cannot declare
our Approbation of delegating the Power of the Keys to Lay Men, nor dare our
Ministers promise to Publish all such Excommunications as they send out, which
may sometimes be levelled at the most Sober religious Persons in the Parish,
nor dare they consent to Publish the Absolution of Notorious Debauchees who
have given no other Proof of Repentance, besides Paying the Fees of the Court;
we dare not trifle with such things as these, nor expose the Censures of the
Church to that Scandal and Contempt they lie under by reason of such Practices.

When this Case was proposed to the Ministers of the Helvetian Churches
beforementioned, That the Keys of binding and loosing, are not used by the
judgment of the Presbyters, according to the Word of God, but by certain
Lawyers, and made a Money Business; and their advice was desired, how far these
things ought to be complied with. They seem to be amazed at the thing, Judgment
of Foreign Divines, p. 16.
as altogether incredible, and answer, That though things which are ill done by
one Party, may be born with by another, while they cannot change or reform
them; yet if they shall be forced not only to bear, but to approve such things,
and to Assent to so manifest an Abuse, we then exhort them that they will
rather suffer any kind of Trouble, than act herein against their Consciences.

3dly, We must not only use and approve these things, but must Swear, That we
will not endeavor any Alteration in the Government of the Church; this the
Oxford Act requires of us, and that in terms as Universal as can be, and leaves
us no liberty to explain our selves, or to say that we will not endeavor by
any unlawful means to do it: And we remember very well how the Marquess of
Argyle was dealt with, for putting such a sense upon the like words. It is not
long since a Great Prelate of our Church openly declared, That the Spiritual
Courts are the great Grievance of the Nation; and it is very hard we must be
obliged to Swear, that we will not at any time endeavor the redress of such a
Common Nuisance, that we must not Study, Write, or Petition for it; this was a
clenching blow indeed to fasten and entail all the faults of the Constitution
upon our Selves and our Heirs for ever. This is a brief Account of those things
that have made us Nonconformists, and now keep our Ministers out of the Parish
Churches; those that would see them more largely and strongly and particularly
argued, are remitted to the Books before mentioned.

Let us now see what the Gentleman has said to Vindicate these Impositions, and
then I Will bid him farewell till we meet again.

1. He endeavors to justify them, by the like Practice amongst the
Presbyterians, mentioning Three significant Ceremonies imposed by them at the
taking of the Covenant, viz. The Person must be uncovered, must stand up, and
the right hand must be lifted up bare; and these, he says, were terms of
Communion amongst them.

Now really for my part I am much confirmed in my dislike of these controverted
Impositions, because I find the Defenders of them are forced instead of
justifying, to recriminate, and all they have to say, is the Presbyterians were
as bad as they, when they had the Power in their hands; and if there be any
Strength in such a Reply, it concludes against themselves for doing that which
they condemn in others, and all that it proves is, that all Parties have been
at one time or other transported into unreasonable Severities against each
other, and surely then it is time for all to amend, unless they resolve to
perpetuate these Quarrels, and to act them alternately in an Endless round.

There are not many Dissenters now alive that remember any thing of those days,
and fewer that were any way concerned in them; And many of those that were at
that time most zealous in urging the Covenant, and Engagement and Abjuration,
were the first that turned with the Times, and became as Troublesome and
Vexations on the other Side; and yet the instance which this Gentleman brings
ought to be a little examined, for it is neither Pertinent nor True as to Matter
of Fact.

It is not pertinent, because not appertaining to the ordinary Worship of God;
that which he calls the Rebellious Covenant, was a Solemn Oath whereby Men
bound themselves to endeavor in their Places a Reformation both in Church and
State, according to the Word of God, and particularly to preserve the King's
Person; pursuant to which Clause, Thousands of Scotch and and English hazarded
all that was dear to them on the behalf of the Royal Family, Royal Declar. at
Dumferling, Aug. 16. 1650.
it was deliberately and voluntarily taken by King Charles the Second, who
professed himself deeply humbled for his Father's Opposition to it, and that
upon full persuasion of the Justice and Equity of all the Articles thereof, he
had Sworn and Subscribed it, and was resolved to adhere thereunto to the utmost
of his Power, and to prosecute the Ends of it all the days of his life: And it
is certain, the Restoration of that Prince is very much owing to the Sense
which a great many had of the binding Power of that Covenant; as Mr. Crofton
shows in his Defense of it against Dr. Gauden.

Now this being a Solemn Oath, must needs as all other Oaths, require some
signal Expression of Consent, according to the Custom of all Civilized Nations;
in some this Consent is signified Viva voce; in some by kissing the Book, in
Scotland by lifting up the Hand, and as we had the Covenant from thence, so
their Signification of Consent was used also, being more suitable for the
expressing the Joint Consent of a Multitude, than any other; but this is
nothing to Mystical Ceremonies in the stated Worship of God; if no more had
been required of us in the late Troublesome Times than to kiss the Book when we
were called to take an Oath, there would not have been many Dissenters,
excepting those that scruple Swearing upon any Account.

Besides, it is not true, that this Covenant with the manner of taking of it,
was ever imposed as a term of Communion. The House of Commons indeed, and the
Assembly of Divines took it, and most of those that held any Office of Profit
or Trust, but it was never imposed upon any on Pain of Excommunication or
Suspension from the Lord's Supper; Rushworth's Coll. Part. 3. p. 475.
it was to be tendered to all in general, and an Exhortation drawn up for the
satisfying of those that might scruple the taking of it, but it was forced upon
none by any Penalties Corporal or Spiritual; if the Ceremonies and
Subscriptions had been no otherwise imposed, it had been happy for us. The
Presbyterians neither imposed nor used any Mystical Ceremonies of their own
devising in the Worship of God, they never tied Men up to the Words of their
Directory, nor required any to Subscribe to it, or declare their Assent and
Consent to all things therein contained; they never obliged Persons to Swear
against endeavoring an Alteration, but bound themselves to promote a
Reformation of whatever should be found to be contrary to the Word of God; and
therefore they gave no Presidents for what has been done against them in the
late Reigns.

2. The Gentleman tells us, the Apostles made mere Ceremonies Terms of
Communion in their days; which is not true, and yet if it were, would not
justify others in doing so, who have not the Commission and Power which the
Apostles had.

The Gentleman instances in having all things Common in their Love Feasts, and
in the holy Kiss, and affirms, that these were mere Ceremonies imposed by the
Apostles as terms of Communion; but he is miserably out all along.

As to the Custom of having all things common, nothing more evident than that
it was a thing purely voluntary, and imposed upon none. St. Peter tells
Ananias, Whilst it remained it was his own, Acts 5.4.
and after it was Sold it was in his Power, he might have done with it what he
pleased; but the Sin was Lying against the Holy Ghost, in pretending they had
dedicated the whole to God when part was kept back; surely this was more than
the omission of a mere Ceremony.

And he is not more happy in the second instance of the Love Feasts, for as
they were no Parts of Religious Worship, but either going before or immediately
following the Eucharist, so it no where appears that they were ever instituted
by the Apostles at all, much less imposed as terms of Communion; and though
some Learned Men think the Apostles recommended them to the Churches, yet I see
nothing in Scripture to ground such an Opinion upon, but rather on the
contrary; for 1 Cor. 11.20, 21. the Apostle does not only reprove them for
their Disorders in those Feasts, but seems to disapprove of the very thing it
self, and advises them rather to Eat their Meat at their own Houses, than to
make those Solemn Assemblies, Places and Times of such Feasting: And the
Learned Dr. Lightfoot seems to have a great deal of reason for what he says
upon this place, viz. That the Jewish part of the Church retained something of
the Old Leaven, and could not forbear Judaizing in this Ordinance of the Lord's
Supper, and therefore it must be attended with a Feast, as the Passover was:
And he observes, that the Apostle does not only find fault with their abuse
herein, but with these very Feasts themselves, in that they dishonored the
Church by bringing their Meat into it, which they should rather have eaten at
their own Homes.

And as ridiculous it is to say that the holy Kiss was imposed by the Apostles
as a term of Communion, it was indeed the manner of Friendly Salutation, a mere
Civil Rite used amongst Jews and Gentiles as well as Christians, and the
Apostles Command relates only to the sincere, chaste and honest use of it, as
became Persons devoted to God, and that they should not suffer that Token of
Respect to degenerate into an Hypocritical or Lascivious Complement.

It is so far from being plain that these things were imposed as terms of
Communion by the Apostles, That it is certain from their own words, They
determined to lay no burden upon Christians but necessary things, that is,
things that had some good tendency; for that is the softest sense that the word
Necessary will bear, and our English Ceremonies, by the Acknowledgment of all
can never come under that Denomination.

And indeed if the Apostles had made these things terms of Communion in the
Catholic Church, they must have remained so to this day, unless by some latter
Apostolical Edict repealed, for who will dare to alter the Apostolical terms of
Communion; and it may be, this Gentleman's design is to revive these old
Ceremonies of Feasting, and Kissing and having all things common, not only for
the sake of their Apostolical Institution; but, as being all of them Ceremonies
of very comfortable importance to a Man of his Temper and Circumstances.

But after all, if it were plain that the Apostles made mere Ceremonies terms
of Communion, it will scarcely follow, that our Bishops may do so too, no more
than that they may write Canonical Epistles, and make Laws to bind the whole
World as the inspired Apostles did; To make terms of Communion is a very great
Power, especially if out of Communion there be no Salvation, for then to make
terms of Communion, is to make the terms of Salvation, and to put such a Power
into the hands of weak and fallible Men, is a thing of such dismal Consequences
to the Souls of Men, that we may be sure our Blessed Redeemer would never do
it: He has in his own Person, and by his Apostles whom he inspired, fixed that
Law by which he will justify and condemn Men, and has not left it in the Power
of any Mortal to add thereunto, and to pretend to such Power, is not only to
impose upon Men, but upon God too; as if he must ask them leave, whether he
shall have a Church upon Earth, or no.

REFLECTIONS Upon a PAMPHLET ENTITLED, A REVIEW OF Mr. M. H 's. new Notion of
Schism, and the Vindication of it.
THE Title of this Paper imports, that there has been some kind of Answer
already made to the Enquiry and Vindication, but such as the Zealous Club judge
Lame and Impotent, and therefore have thought fit to order a Review; great
things surely may be expected from this, which comes to supply the defects of
the former.

Methinks the Author of the Reply, is more concerned in this thing called a
Review, than either the Enquiror or Vindicator, Reply p. 2.
for it is a scurvey intimation that his own Confederates do not believe him,
when he boasts that he has run down his Adversary, and proved, and showed, and
demonstrated every thing, for if they had entertained as good an opinion of the
success of his last expedition, as he himself has, it had been the most
superfluous thing in the World to have come with a Review, before the other had
received an Answer, these things would almost persuade a Man to think, P. 35.
that T. W's Reputation is not so great amongst the party as he pretends.

But whether this latter comes out on purpose to Affront the Citizen, or
whether it be with his consent upon conviction of the miserable weaknesses of
his Reply, I neither know nor care; my business is to enquire whether the
valiant Second has done any greater seats, than he that first engaged in the
quarrel.

This Gentleman must not expect an Answer, to his famous and innumerable Oxford
Jests; I consider the humor of his party, and how dull and insipid every thing
is to them how rational soever, that has not a great mixture of Farce and
Comedy in it, for my part I shall take no more notice of them, than I would do
of those little ludicrous wanton Creatures, that can make themselves excellent
sport, with their own Tails and Shadows.

As to the Enquiry, there are two very material things he encounters in it, the
Design and the Management. He will not allow the Design of it to be Honest and
Peaceable, to allay heats, and create a better understanding amongst us, as the
Vindicator pretends, that design it seems is too high, and the Vindicator
ascribes too much to Mr. H. in saying, he endeavored to create a better
understanding betwixt parties that had been so long and learnedly contending,
this is to place him in the Chair, and make him an Oracle, and I do not know
what so uneasy a thing it is to Proud Men to hear any body commended but
themselves; it seems the Reviewer had no design to accommodate differences, or
to contribute any thing to a better understanding betwixt Churchmen and
Dissenters, he, modest man, will not pretend to take so high an aim, for my
part, I believe this was not his design, but then I am sure it must be
something worse, that is, to inflame the differences, and perplex the
controversy, and no doubt he has managed such a design as well as he could.

He tells us Mr. H's design was no greater than to satisfy the scruples of
some persons, and to make two Female Proselites, which is a great piece of news
to Mr. H. for he declares he knows nothing of it, and desires the Gentleman to
name the Persons that were to be drawn in, and to tell us at what Gossipping he
picked up this Story, or else we must lay the Brat at his own Door; I leave it
to the Reader to judge what expectations Mr. H. could have from this Book, when
he found so notorious a Fiction in the very first Page.

And truly he goes on as he begun, telling us that Mr. H's Notion of Schism
will turn all Church Discipline out of Doors, Review. p. 3.
for if breach of Communion be no Schism as these Gentlemen allege, a Man may
appeal from the Stool of Repentance to the Quakers Meeting House, etc. It is
not without good reason that some Men have so great a spite at the Stool of
Repentance, there are a sort of Men that hate it, as a Thief hates the Gallows,
the Citizen could not forbear it in his Book; But to let that pass, I wonder
where this Gentleman finds any such a Sentence in either of the books he
pretends to review, as that breach of Communion is no Schism, let him produce
it, or confess himself worse than a trifler; Both those Books acknowledge
Separation of Communion to be Schism, if it be uncharitable, and to be sinful
if it be without good reason, and how this can be prejudicial to Church
Discipline I know not, unless by Church Discipline be meant that uncharitable,
unchristian, and tyrannical thing, that has been sometimes acted under that
Title, and if that should be turned out of Doors by this account of Schism, all
wise men will love it better upon that score.

He proceeds, We have reason to question the peaceableness of his design,
Review. p. 4.
for the Notion it self being contrived to encourage and justify Separation, I
am afraid the last result and consequence of it will not be peace; this has as
little honesty in it as the former, there is not the least tendency in Mr. H's
Notion to encourage or justify any sinful Separation, nay it lays the
strictest tie upon persons to see to it not only that the cause of their
Separation be just, but the manner of it peaceable and charitable too; if the
Cause be not just it is sinful, and if it be not managed peaceably and
charitably it is Schismatical: Nay it obliges persons in the same Communion to
avoid uncharitable contentions about the lesser matters of Religion, upon pain
of being convicted of Schism by the Word of God, and how the effects of such an
opinion should be any other than peace, I cannot unless it be by an
Antiperistasis, and the powerful opposition of contrary principles that some
Mon have sucked in; I confess when these Gentlemen are so often telling us of
the loss of peace, if Dissenters will not all come to Church, it appears to me
like a menacing the Government, as if they were resolved to throw all into
confusion again, unless they may be restored to the liberty of trampling us
under foot, and if our present Indulgence be attended with such dangerous
symptoms, I believe they do wholly arise from the discontents of some four and
haughty Spirits, that cannot be satisfied with all their Grandeur, whilst
Mordecai sits in the Gate and will not bow.

But (says he) suppose a Man should introduce the same doctrine into the State,
and tell people that it is lawful to act in separate Bodies, that they need not
own the Present Government; but where has Mr. H. said any thing like this in
the whole Enquiry? Does he any where say Men need not to own the Government
that God has established in his Church, but may act by a Polity of their own? I
wish this Gentleman can clear himself as well of such a Doctrine, as Mr. H.
may; If he means that it is as unlawful to have several distinct Bishops and
Churches in the same Diocese, as several Kings in the same Kingdom, he deserves
the rebukes of the Government much more than Mr. H. or the Vindicator either;
It is plainly the drift of these Men, to make themselves as absolute Governors
over the Laity, as Princes over their Subjects, and if they can persuade Men,
that it is as great a Crime to leave the Ministration of their Parish Priest,
what ever he be, and go to hear another, that is as truly a Minister of the
Gospel, as to rebel against their Prince, and set up another in his room, they
have taken a great step toward it.

His harangue about the Present Government, about the Title of K. James, the
Nature and Rights of Sovereignty, he may if he pleases reserve for the
Illumination of his Brethren, that are for distinguishing between Kings de
facto and de jure, without which Vehicle they could not so easily have
swallowed the Oath of Allegiance, or for his dear Friends in the Jacobite
Conventicles, whom (it may be) he would willingly excuse from Schism,
notwithstanding their Separation, because they still adhere to Episcopacy and
Ceremonies, those fundamental Principles of Unity; that which follows in the
same Paragraph, is equally false and impertinent, Mr. H. never sets people at
liberty to break into parties or to make any such divisions as he speaks of,
but endeavors to prevent all such things, by fixing a brand upon that division
in affection, which commonly gives the rise to all other sinful divisions
amongst men.

As to the differences betwixt the Presbyterian and the Independent Party in
former times, with which he upbraids us, I shall only say, if the Presbyterian
Churches were framed according to the Word of God, and laid no other Burden
upon their Members than necessary things, according to the Apostles Canon,
which all Churches are for ever bound to observe, that Separation was Sinful,
and if it proceeded from uncharitableness it was Schismatical, according to Mr.
H's. Notion; And if this Concession will do him any service, let him take it
and make his best advantage of it: And if it be sinful to break off from
Particular Church Communion without just cause, it is much more so for men to
deny and renounce Communion with all Christians and Churches that will not
comply with needless inventions of their own.

We are now come to Mr. H's Description of Schism, viz. That it is an
Uncharitable Distance, Division or Alienation of affection, amongst those who
are called Christians, and agree in the Fundamentals of Religion, occasioned by
their different apprehensions about little things.

The Gentleman first charges this Description of Schism with Novelty and
Wildness, and then proceeds to draw out the consequences; But as to Novelty and
Wildness, if it be the Scripture notion of Schism, it will sufficiently clear
it self of such imputations; The question Mr. H. proposed, was not what the
Fathers called Schism, but what the Spirit of God calls so in his Word, it was
this which he undertook to answer, and if he has acquitted himself well in
that, he is not concerned what this or that Father calls Schism: and this
description is founded on the case of the Corinthians.

They were called Christians, and it was fit to put that into the definition
for we are not enquiring into the Schisms of Jews, Turks, or Pagans.

They agreed in the Fundamentals of Religion, that is, in all that was
absolutely necessary to Salvation, otherwise the Apostle would scarcely have
given them the Title of Brethren and Saints, acknowledging the Grace of God in
them.

That there were contentions amongst them to the prejudice of Christian Love
and Charity, will not be denied, since the Apostle plainly reprimands them for
it; And that these contentions were occasioned by different apprehensions, is
equally certain, otherwise there would have been no room nor pretense for such
contests.

And that all this was about little things, that is, comparatively little, on
which Salvation does not necessarily depend, is sufficiently plain, from the
good account that is given of these persons as to the main, notwithstanding
these unhappy differences; These contentions thus circumstantiated the Apostle
calls Schisms, and Mr. H. though a man might without danger or offense
conclude, That an Uncharitable distance or alienation of affections amongst
those that are called Christians, occasioned by their different apprehensions
about little things is Schism, according to the Scripture notion and account of
it.

But nothing will please those that have a mind to be quarrelsome, this must be
bantered, for a wild, novel, and bungling description, the latest that ever was
Coined; And yet if this Gentleman had perused the Homilies of the Church of
England, before he subscribed to them, as in all Reason and Conscience he ought
to have done, he would have found such an Agreement betwixt Mr. H's description
of Schism, and the sense of his own Church as would have obliged him, for his
own sake to have treated it with better language.

Let him consult the Homily against contention, F. 9. and there he will find
that the Church of England places the Unity of the Church in Concord and
Charity, and the Rents or Schisms of the Church in discord, contention bitter
Emulation, etc.

Oh how the Church is divided! Oh how it is cut and mangled! Oh how that Coat
of Christ which was without Seam is all rent and torn! Oh body Mystical of
Christ, where is that holy Unity, out of which, whosoever is, he is not in
Christ! If one Member be pulled from another, where is the Body? We cannot be
joined to Christ our Head, except we be glued with Concord and Charity one to
another, for he that is not of this Unity is not of the Church of Christ, which
is a Congregation or Unity together, not a Division, St. Paul says, that as
long as Emulation, or Envying, Contention and Factions, or Sects be amongst us,
we be carnal and walk according to the Fleshly Man; And St. James says, if ye
have bitter emulation, or envying, or contention in your hearts, glory not of
it, for where contention is, there is unstedfastness, and all evil deeds, etc.

Nothing is more evident than that the thing declaimed against in this Homily
is Schism, what else signify the words cut and mangled, divided, rent and
torn? And as plain it is, that this rending and tearing, and cutting and
mangling the Body of Christ, is done by contention, by the violation of concord
and charity, without which we cannot be joined to the Head, nor one to another,
it is true it mentions Factions and Sects, He speaks of contentious Sects.
but there may be Factions amongst those of the same external Communion, and
there are many Sects too in the Church of Rome, where the external Communion is
the same, and so there were formerly amongst the Jews, and at this day in the
Church of England, some are Arminians, others Calvinists in points of Doctrine;
But both the Title of the Homily, and the express words and general scope of
it, make the Rents and Schism in the Coat of Christ to consist principally in
the want of Concord and Charity, in Emulation, envying, and heart contentions;
Which I hope will justify Mr H. from the censure of having advanced a wild,
and novel doctrine.

Now let us examine the Consequences, which this Gentleman has drawn out of
this Definition.

First of all, From hence it will follow, that he that was never truly admitted
into the Christian Church may be guilty of Schism, if he be called a Christian.
But before we can tell whether there be any absurdity in this, we must desire
him to explain himself and tell us, what he means by a true admission into the
Christian Church; If by admission he means Baptism, and by true admission,
Baptism after the form and mode prescribed by his Church, I doubt not there are
many may be justly called Christians that were never so admitted, and if he
will take upon him to assert that none can be guilty of Schism, but who have
been admitted according to their Canons, he will fairly acquit a great number
of Dissenters from that crime, who though they have been Baptized, yet not
altogether according to their Rubric; As for Mr. H's Words, they are plain
enough, Schism in the Scriptural Sense, is only the fault of professed
Christians, and all professed Christians are visible Members of the Catholic
Church.

2. That Heretics in fundamentals are no Schismatics, for Mr. H. sapposes
that where there is a Schism, both parties must agree in the Fundamentals of
Religion. Yes, he does suppose so, and very justly, for those that deny
fundamental Truths are without the Christian Faith, without the Unity of the
Church; and where there is no such Union, there can be no Schism which always
supposes a previous Union; As Treason always supposes that a Man be a Subject
of the King, and Member of the Common wealth.

If a Man never received the Fundamentals of Christianity, he never was a
Member of Christ's Body, and therefore never a capable subject of that
Christian Love, and Brotherly kindness, the violation whereof is the thing in
Scripture called Schism, if he has formerly professed the Faith, and afterward
renounced it, he has by so doing, dissolved that principal Fundamental Union
with the Christian Church upon which Brotherly Love is built, and therefore
after such Apostasy cannot be formally guilty of the breach of Christian
Charity, because he is indeed no Christian and so no capable Subject of such
Charity, and can no more properly be called a Schismatic, than a Stone or Tree
can be called blind, or any other thing in which there is no capacity of Sight.

And if the Gentleman do not like this Notion, he may if he pleases write a
Book to convince the Grand Signior, and the Great Mogul, and Cham of Tartary,
See the Review. p. 8.
that they are all Schismatics, as were their Fathers Jannes and Jambres the
Egyptian Sorcerers before them.

But he adds This is as much as to say the greater the fault, the lesser the
crime. By no means, for what if Heretics be not Shismaticks, are they
therefore innocent Creatures? What if Traitors, Murderers, Adulterers be not
Schismatics, are they therefore Saints? Heresy in Fundamentals is a greater
crime than bare Schism, and the less is merged in the greater; And it seems
very strange that the same Gentleman; who but a line or two before thinks it
absurd to call those Schismatics, who were never truly admitted into the
Church, should think it also absurd, not to call those Schismatics that either
never embraced the Christian Faith, or have since renounced it.

3. The third inference is, According to this Definition, Alienation of
Affection is Schism, but Division or Alienation of Communion is not: Here he
ought to have told us, what he means by Division or Alienation of Communion;
Communion with the same God, and the same Mediator, and in the same Essentials
of Faith and Worship is necessary to the Being of Christianity, and an
Alienation here is something worse than Schism, if he mean personal Communion
in the Worship of God in the same place, and after the same Mode, it is
impossible this should be undivided; if by Alienation of Communion be means
withdrawing from that particular Church of which we have been members, and
joining with another, it is no more but what is allowed to all, upon the removal
of their Habitations, and may be lawful on many other accounts, but if it be
done without some good reason it is sinful, if it be done out of
Uncharitableness toward the Church we leave, it is Schism; now if he would be
as plain with us as we desire to be with him, there might be hopes of bringing
the matter to some issue.

But the last Inference is most remarkable both for Phrase and Sense, and I
would desire the Author to review it. No one can charge another with Schism,
except he be able to look into his Heart, it is impossible to know according to
this Description, that People are Schismatics, if they profess themselves to
be in Charity, except we should enquire into the Secrets of their Hearts, and
on the contrary People may be the greatest Schismatics under the outward
Profession of Charity, and yet no Body can accuse them with it.

But pray, why is this last Sentence said to be on the contrary to the former,
it is impossible to know that People are Schismatics, if they profess
themselves to be in Charity, and on the contrary People may be the greatest
Schismatics under the outward Profession of Charity, and no Body can accuse
them. Here Is a mavelous contrariety betwixt these two Sentences, montibus
illis erant, and crant in montibus illis, I suppose by on the contrary he meant
on the Tautology, at least he must give us leave to take it so.

But is there no way then to know men's Uncharitableness, but by looking into
the Secrets of their Hearts? Did he never hear of a rule, by their Fruits ye
shall know them? How often does this Gentleman accuse the Enquirer and
Vindicator with Malice and Uncharitableness? If he had no evidence for this by
overt acts, we know what to call him, but if he had sufficient ground for it,
then his Inference is spoiled and proves like the former.

Only thus far we will allow him to argue, if Schism consist in such
Uncharitableness, and Alienation of Affection, men ought to be very cautious
how they call one another Schismatics, lest they should be guilty of that Sin
themselves, whilst they are charging it upon others; and I suppose this is not
the least of our Authors Prejudices against Mr. H's Notion; that it will not
suffer men to be continually bawling, Schismatics, Schismatics, against all
that are not of their own Persuasion; but I am sure all but Schismatics will
like it the better, upon this account, that it would lay a restraint upon men,
that they should not without very good grounds, fix such a brand upon their
Neighbors, nor as heretofore hunt them out of Churches, Corporations, and out
of the World too as far as in them lay, by the noisie clamours they have raised
about this Word.

Our Surveyor proceeds to blame this Notion for want of clearness, and puts
wonderful hard Questions. 1st. Whether this uncharitable distance must be
really amongst those that are Christians; But this is the same thing over
again, and has received its Answer, they must really be such as profess
Christianity, but who are real Christians God knows, and if these men will
forbear calling Dissenters Schismatics till that matter be fully cleared, the
World would be much quieter.

2. Qu. What does he mean by Fundamentals of Religion? But what strange
perverseness is this in those who so often tell us, we have all the
Fundamentals of Religion in the Apostles Creed? He asks, Whether Fundamentals
of Salvation, or Fundamentals of Truth, and I answer they are Fundamental
Truths necessary to Salvation; he urges further, are they so to every man in
his Private Capacity, or are they the Fundamentals of Church Communion? These
are mighty pretty Distinctions, pray why should those things be Fundamentals of
Church Communion, which are not necessary to the Salvation of particular
Persons?

3. Qu. What does he mean by little things? Whether all Manner of little
things, or Ecclesiastical little things? Had this Gentleman looked into the
case of the Corinthians, he might have answered himself, they are such things
as relate to the Affairs of the Church, which are comparatively small, that is,
small in Comparison of the great things wherein they agreed, and of the great
heats these things caused.

From these little quibbles, which do no Body harm but himself, he returns to
his former Practice of falsifying Mr. H's Words, for (says he) Mr. H. tells us,
Review. p. 7.
there is but one Scripture in the Old Testament relating to this Affair, viz.
Number. 11.21. But what if Mr. H. say no such thing? Why then, all his fine
Observations upon it fall to the ground, and he must give us leave to observe
that he is a very unfair and unjust Writer; all that Mr. H. says, is, The Old
Testament will not help us so much in this Enquiry as the new, only mentioning
that one Text, and that not as giving us a proper Notion of Schism, but only
helping to rectify some mistakes concerning it.

Now I Will be so Civil to this Gentleman, as to help him to take this matter
aright, He ought to consider, what that Enquiry was which Mr. H. says the Old
Testament will not be so helpful in as the New, it was not how many times the
Church has been troubled with Schisms? it was not his design to write a History
of all the Schisms that ever were in the Church, either since Christ, or
before; then indeed, if he had said the Old Testament will not be so helpful to
us, the Gentleman might have inferred that the Jewish Church was not infested
with this Sin; but the Enquiry was, What is that thing which the Scripture
calls Schism? And those Texts were to be principally discussed, that have the
Word Schism found in them; and by considering the circumstances of those Cases
and Actions, which are charged with Schism, he comes to determine the formal
Nature of that Sin; and there may be a hundred Texts relating to the thing,
which would not be in the least helpful to Mr. H. in this Enquiry, till he had
first cleared that to be really the thing called Schism, which must be proved
by comparing it, with that which in express terms is so called: This was Mr.
H's Method, and I think a very proper and rational One; and therefore the Cases
which this Gentleman mentions of Aaron and Miriam, of Jannes and Jambres, of
Korah, Dathan and Abiram, were very justly omitted by Mr. H. for how bad soever
those Practices were, they cannot be proved Schismatical till it be made to
appear that they are of the same kind and quality with those which Scripture
calls Schisms.

He is pleased to divert himself, with the instance of Eldad and Medad;
Prophesying in the Camp, which he says is foreign to the business. 1. Because
they were to bear the weight of the Government with Moses under God. But was it
not in Subordination to Moses? Was not he the chief Governor still? And are
not the Presbyters allowed some share of Government with the Bishops? and does
that make them incapable of being Schismatics? 2. Their Prophesying was for a
sign. Well, be it so, and would have less answered that end, if these two, had
been with the rest of them in the Tabernacle. 3. They were acted by a
constraining impulse, which surely is not the Case of our Nonconformists; No
surely, nor of the Conformists neither, though they openly declare at their
Ordination, that they are moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon them the Office
of the Ministry; But what if Eldad and Medad prophesied by impulse, did not Mr.
H. obviate that Objection by putting us in Mind, that the Spirit of the
Prophets is Subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.22. And though this Gentleman
says, that Scripture is impertinently alleged, yet wiser men, as Grotius and
others, give that sense of it, which makes it as pertinent as any thing can be,
viz. The Spirits of the Prophets are so subject to the Prophets themselves,
that they are not acted with that urging Violence as will not allow a
Compliance with the Rules of Order; that is, they might if they had pleased
notwithstanding the Spirits resting upon them, have come into the Tabernacle as
the rest did.

Lastly, he adds, all this was secular, and distinct from that which did more
peculiarly belong to the Ecclesiastical Body. But prophesying was a sacred
thing, and the Tabernacle a sacred place, and that People a sacred People; and
if the business of Jannes and Jambres, was not too much secular to come within
the Verge of Schism, I wonder this should be thought so foreign; but indeed
after all, he wholly mistakes Mr. H's design in this instance, which was not to
show what was Schism, but what was not so, viz. That all Separation or
Irregularity in sacred Actions is not Schism; this is that mistake, which by
this Text he endeavored to rectify, and whether it be not apposite enough for
that purpose is left to the Judgment of the Considerate Reader.

This Gentleman is so very desirous to cast upon Mr. H. the reproach of
ignorance, that rather than fail, he will betray his own, and something else
which is worse; Mr. H. said, the Jews were obliged to worship at one place, and
immediately explains it concerning Sacrificing, which being the most famous and
noted part of their worship, may well be called so by way of eminency, Joh.
4.20.
as it is several times used in the discourse betwixt our Savior and the
Samaritane Woman, and he adds, This Obligation is vacated by that Gospel that
wills us to pray every where; from hence our Surveyor would infer, That Mr. H.
thought the Jews were to pray no where but at Jerusalem, when his own eyes
would have told him, that in the same Paragraph Mr. H. acknowledges the Jews
had their Synagogues, which are rather the patterns of our Christian Assemblies
than the Temple; The only doubt is, whether that Rule, 1 Timothy 2.8. since it
only mentions Prayer, was pertinently alleged as vacating that Obligation
which confined the Jews to one Altar; It is certain, it has been so understood
by as Learned men as ever writ upon Scripture; I hope Grotius will be instar
omnium with this Gentleman, his words upon the place are, Preces Deo hodie non
minus grata sunt in quavis Ecclesia quam in Templo Hierosol. and he bids us
compare this with, John 4.21. And Danaeus, and Vorstius, and Beza are with him
in it, all these and many more were so ignorant as to think that only one part
of worship is here mentioned, yet it is a rule which relates to the whole, and
takes away all pretenses of the Holiness of Places.

This Gentleman seems to deny, that the Jews were obliged, only to offer at one
Altar, and tells us of an Altar at Mount Ebal, of Samuels Sacrificing at
Mizpah, Zuph, etc. And Elisha at Mount Carmel, and says, the Jews had their
Synagogues, and inferior Altars, which were still in Communion with the
Supreme One; and yet afterward, he tells us out of Sigonius that there were no
Synagogues till the time of the Captivity, Review, p. 13.
that they who wanted the Temple to pray and teach in might have some place
like the Temple in which they might assemble to perform that sort of Duty, and
confesses that the Jews were confined to that one Altar at Jerusalem, P. 11.
till that Obligation was taken away by our Savior; now what can a man do, but
wait with patience till this Cameleon has assumed some certain color, and when
he has told us which of those inconsistent opinions he will abide by, he may
expect a reply.

It is certain there was an express Law confining the Jewish Sacrifices to the
Sanctuary which God should choose, Deuteronomy. 12.13, 14. Take heed to thy self that
thou offer not thy burnt Offering in every place thou see, but in the place
which the Lord thy God shall choose in one of thy Tribes there shall thou offer
thy Burnt-offerings. Yea all that was Sacred to God, as their Tithes and
Free-Will-Offerings, must not ordinarily be eaten in any other place, but that
which God should choose, and though God gave them leave in Case of great
distance from the Sanctuary, to eat those things in their own Gates, yet all
Devoted things that were to be Sacrificed (though the distance was never so
great) must be brought to the appointed place.

What then shall we say to the Cases mentioned, where Sacrifices were offered
at other Altars? The Answer is plain, 1. All those Anomalous Offerings
excepting the last, were made before the chosen place was fixed, and Temple
built, and it should seem by the beginning of the 12. chap. of Deuteronomy. That this
Law was not designed to oblige so strictly, till the place was fixed, and
prepared for that purpose; But, 2. These were all extraordinary Cases, and are
not to be urged in Bar of a standing Rule; we are not certain that those
Sacrifices were offered by the Priests the Sons of Aaron, and yet the Law
appropriated that work to them. God may dispense with his own Law, but it is a
Law still, and binds men, though not God, and is to be strictly observed in all
Cases, saving those wherein God himself by his Prerogative sets it aside.

That there were any constant Inferior Altars, upon which the Jews were
allowed to Sacrifice, is a Notion more Novel and Wild than any thing in the
Enquiry; the mere Suspicion of such a design in the two Tribes and a half on
the other side Jordan, filled the People with amazement; and they appeal to
God, that they had not built that Altar, Josh. 22.22, 23.
to offer thereon Burnt-Offering or Meat Offering or Peace Offerings, and till
they had made this Protestation, the rest of the Tribes could not be satisfied;
and that these Inferior Altars were in Communion with the Supreme, has as much
of Sense in it as the other has of Truth; I despair of ever knowing what the
meaning of this Word Communion is; if it may be predicated of things inanimate
we shall never comprehend its boundless significancy.

The Gentleman we see is something confounded in his account of the matter of
Fact, let us enquire whether he be any thing more clear in his Mystical
Reasonings from it.

He is taught by Mr. Dodwel to say, That the only way of Uniting the segullah
to God was by the Sacraments; But this is notoriously false, for the Sacraments
were only the Symbols of that Union, Review, p. 1^.
which fundamentally consists, in their hearty Dedication of themselves to God;
and whoever had so done were the peculiar People of God, whether ever they
enjoyed Sacraments or no.

That none could be in Union with God, unless United to the High Priest, is
false too, for the Seed of Abraham were Gods People, before they had any
High Priest, or Common-Altar amongst them; the Sacraments were not only
transacted by the Highpriests, Parents Circumcised their Children themselves
for a long time at least, and the Passover might be celebrated without a
Priest; and all true Believers are United to God, whether they have a Bishop,
or Baptism amongst them or no; and the Sacrament supposes men's Union to God,
but does not effect it.

His Observations, from John 4.21. must be examined before we pass them. 1.
There is something under the Gospel, that does correspond to that solemn
Worship at Jerusalem: How do you mean correspond Sir? Their's was Worshipping
the true God according to his Word, and ours is, or should be so; if that be
corresponding we grant it, but what it is to the purpose I cannot Divine; he
adds. The Worship at Jerusalem and the Spiritual Worship were the Type and
(...) one of another, I am loath to quarrel with him about Words, but I think it
is a very improper Expression; that their Priesthood and Sacrifices and Altar
were Types of Christ, I find the Apostle to the Hebrews largely illustrating,
but that they were Types of Gospel Worship, is neither agreeable to the
Language of Scripture, nor the Reformed Churches. He farther says, As all the
Jews did Communicate at one Altar, in like manner must all Christians partake
in the same Spiritual Sacrifices If by Sacrifices, he means that which Christ
offered up to the Father, we assent to it as a great Truth, or if he means the
same Sacraments and Prayers, we grant these must be specifically the same
amongst all Christians.

2. We are informed, That the design of the Jewish Anniversaries was to keep
them in the same Communion, and the spiritual Worship is for the same End. If
by the same Communion, he means the same Truth and Divine Worship, it is
granted, or if he means their Union to one High Priest, it is true so far as
the High Priest was a Type of Christ, the only remaining High Priest of the
Church; the same may be said of his three other Observations, which are all
safe, whilst by the High Priest and Altar we understand Jesus Christ.

But if he means (as he must if he will serve himself of them) that this High
Priest and Altar typifie the Government of the Church by Bishops, it is a very
foolish and dangerous Notion; and if it proves any thing, it will prove, that
there ought to be one Prime Bishop, the Principle of Unity with whom all
Inferior Priests and Churches must be in Communion, as he speaks, otherwise
the Type and Antitype do not correspond in the principal Point, which is a
Center of Unity; if he says, every Bishop is such a Center, then the Donatists
formerly and the Papists now are excused from Schism, for they have their
Bishops as well as the Church of England, but I have largely proved from the
acknowledgment of the most Learned Doctors of our own Nation, that Episcopacy
is not Essential to the Unity of the Church, and I would send this Gentleman to
them, who will teach him better Divinity, than the Mythology of Mr. Dodwel.

It Is a gross mistake, to say, That Salvation belonged only to those that
worshipped at Jerusalem, there were Proselytes, who only submitted to the Seven
Precepts of Noah, and were not circumcised, nor admitted to the Privileges of
the Jewish Church, Vid. Schind. in Verb. (...).
and yet to these the Jews granted a part in the World to come, such were
Naaman, Cornelius and many more; this he might have sound in Seldom, Lightfoot,
Mede, etc. and our Saviors words, Salvation is of the Jews, were never
intended to exclude all others, for the same Jesus by his Apostle Peter tells
us, God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that fears God,
and works Righteousness, is accepted of him; But the Jews enjoyed the
ordinary means of Salvation, and Christ the Savior of the World was of them,
according to the Flesh.

The Mystical reasonings of this Gentleman from the One High Priest and Altar
amongst the Jews, are pure impertinencies as to the Question in Hand; For the
Jews were obliged to have only One High Priest, and One Altar, and no more, or
if they had (according to his fiction) it must be in dependence upon the
Supreme One, but under the Gospel it is quite otherwise, for it is in the power
of Christian Kingdoms, to multiply particular Churches, and distribute a
greater Diocese or Parish into as many lesser as they see good, each having
their proper Bishop, without any dependence one upon another, in point of
Government, the Bishop of Eugubium is as absolute in his Church as the
Patriarch of Constantinople; The Diocese of Chester might, if the King and
Parliament pleased, be divided into twenty or a hundred Bishoprics, without
any Jurisdiction of one over the rest, but such a thing could not be done
amongst the Jews, without confounding and destroying their Constitution.

He blames. Mr. H. for laying so much stress upon the word Schism, P. 14.
and tells him the Nature of Schism may be expressed by other words, as (...),
(...), and (...). Mr. H. never denies but it may, and so may the Nature of
Treason be expressed by other terms, but yet he that would prove any thing to
be Treason by Statute Law, must see whether he finds it so called in the
Statute, 25 Edward III. or any other that ascertain Treason; And so he that
would prove (...), etc. to be Schism, must enquire, how far the practices by
these words signified, are of the same nature with those which are expressly
called Schism in the Statutes of Christ.

He pretends to give us a more exact interpretation of the words, (...) and
(...), and what is it? Why they signify a Separation of the parts, a rending
or cleaving of one thing into two; no great Criticism! All the World knows
where there is a Separation there must be parts Separated, but says he, in the
Ecclesiastical sense, it must signify a dividing of Christ's Body, which is
most visibly done by Separation and Breach of Communion; No doubt Schism
signifies division, and a breach of the Unity of the Church; But that Unity
does not consist in the Unity of one Governing Head under Christ, nor in the
Unity of one Personal Communion, which is impossible, but in the Unity of Faith
and Love; If by Separation of Communion he means multiplying particular
Churches, this is very lawful in many cases, an overgrown Church may be divided
into ten or twenty, and if it be done upon good reason, and with Christian Love
and Charity, there is nothing at all either Sinful or Schismatical in it; if
there be any Schism in forming new particular Churches which are sound in the
Faith, it must be in doing it contentiously and out of opposition to one
another, which resolves it into Mr. H's Notion of Uncharitableness.

Mr. H. observes that the word (...) is used figuratively, for a division, and
that twofold. 1. A Division in Apprehension, for which he cites John 7.43. To
this the Gentleman Replies, There was not only a diversity of Opinion, but
dividing into Parties; be it so, still this was occasioned by their different
apprehensions to which the Word plainly refers, some said, This is the Christ,
others said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee, so there was a division among
the People about him, the connection leaves no room to doubt, but that this
division relates principally to their apprehensions; He says they were divided
into Parties, so all men are in their differences of apprehension, some think
so, others thus, but I hope he will not call that a separation of Communion,
for then it will be hard to know where to find one Communion; We know the
Clergy of the Church of England, are of several parties amongst themselves, (in
this sense of the word) about another great Person in the World; but (he adds)
They censured and reviled one another, they did so, and this was the effect of
that division in their thoughts of Christ, like to many at this day, that show
very little either of Charity or Common Civility, toward those whose
apprehensions are different from their own.

As to the other Text, John 9.16. the very reading of the words will satisfy
any Man what is meant by that division, Some of the Pharisees said, This man is
not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath day; others said, How can a Man
that is a Sinner do such Miracles? And there was a Division among them. That
great quarrels did ensue Mr. H. never denied; the same may be said concerning
the other texts.

Mr. H. says, This diversity of opinion, judgment or apprehension cannot be
looked upon as in it self Criminal; The Surveyor most disingenuously perverts
these words, as if Mr. H. meant, It was no matter what opinion Men bad of
Christ or his Apostles, no matter whether they took him for the Messiah or a
Madman; Whereas in the very next words he says, where the matter is weighty
and reaches the fundamentals there an Error is Criminal; This was plain enough
to convince our Author, or any Man in the World, that Mr. H. was far from
intending to Libel Christ, or to make an Apology for the Jews and Sadduces in
their reviling of him; If this Gentleman had not told us, I could never have
guessed how it could enter into his head to fix such an odious sense upon Mr.
H's words, but it seems, that which led him to it was, Mr. H. said, This
diversity of apprehension, and why did he prefix the relative this, if not
referring to the Antecedent Texts? I Will tell him, and it is a shame he should
need to be told, Mr. H. but a few lines before distinguished of division in
apprehension, and division in affection; and showed that sometimes (...), is
used for division in apprehension, and then adds this diversity of opinion,
judgment, etc. that is, this first species or kind of division, according to
the distinction newly laid down; There you have the antecedent to which the
relative this refers, This division, in apprehension is not always criminal,
but the other division, viz. in affection, is always so; That this is the true
Thread and Sense of his Discourse, I appeal to any Man of Common Sense and
Honesty; It is not therefore Mr. H. that knows not what he says, but it is the
Surveyor that cares not what he says, so he may but render Mr. H. contemptible
to the unthinking Debauchees, the noble Patrons of his present adventures.

The Enquiror justly declaims against that mischievous practice of making our
own opinions (like Procrustes's Bed,) the Standard by which to measure all
others; To which the Gentleman replies, But if Authority think fit to call Mr.
H. to the Standard, he is undoubtedly a Subject, and I know not why he should
not go as well as I. This is really a very fair confession, that though he will
not yield to a private person, in differences about Religion, yet he can be of
any length, of any opinion which Authority shall set up for a Standard and call
him to, A Man of a malleable, ductile, complaisant Conscience, that can stretch
or contract himself to the Standard that Authority sets up in matters of
Religion, for he is a Subject, and must go to it; herein the Dissenters differ
from him, and cannot lay aside their present apprehensions in matters of
Religion, either upon the call of private persons or of Authority it self,
until the louder voice of Reason oblige them to it; And yet through the Mercy
of God, Authority has taken down the Standard now, not delighting either to
cramp, or rack the Consciences of Men in matters of Religion.

It seems the Enquiror and Vindicator have frightened this Gentleman into his
Devotions, and set him a Praying (I suppose without the Book, for vexatio dat
intellectum) that he may never stand in need of their Charity, and I believe
they have as much Reason to pray that they may never stand in need of this Man's
Justice, for when the Vindicator was making his Apology to any that might think
he had treated T.W. somewhat more roughly than such a Man could well bear, this
Gentleman tells us several times, the Vindicator boasted of his rude and
malicious usage of the Citizen, let this Man learn to be Just before he pretend
to be Charitable; As for the Vindicators usage of T.W. let it be referred to
all the Sober Churchmen in Chester, where the Man is known, as well as the
manner of his Writing, I am sure some of his own Communion openly said, he was
treated in that answer, with but too much respect.

But why should this Author be so terrified with the Thoughts of ever standing
in need of the Dissenters Charity; Is he afraid of the Lex talionis? There can
be no danger of that, unless Authority should ever be on their side, and set up
its Standard for them, and if i^ should do so, this Gentleman has declared he
is a Subject, and must go to it, for how ill so ever he may like the Principles
of Nonconformity, while they are but the Sentiments of private Persons, yet if
Authority should set them up for a Standard, they are become quite another
thing, he can go to it, as well as we, and be on the right side still; If this
be not fairly collected out of his own words, I know no tolerable meaning they
are capable of.

In the 19th Page he delivers himself of a Notion which I believe is really his
own, i. e. That it is as possible for all men to agree about the lesser matters
of Religion as about its great and fundamental Articles; An assertion contrary
to all reason, and the experience of Mankind; All Protestants acknowledge, that
the Essentials of our Religion, are clearly revealed in Scripture, and in these
they generally agree, but no one ever pretended the same of all
circumstantials, which are usually proved or disproved by inferences from
Scripture, and sometimes remote ones too, wherein it is common for Disputants
to disagree, and easy to be mistaken; whereas the Fundamentals being more
directly and positively asserted in the Word of God, admit of clearer
demonstration.

It Is true indeed those that think it their duty in all the lesser matters of
Religion to follow their Leaders, and that make their Commands in these things
the Standard of Sin and Duty, have found out an easy Rule of Controversy, and
this seems to be his opinion, for he says, if Mr. H. were better acquainted
with Church History he would find, that whole Churches and Nations had their
peculiar Customs and Ceremonies, and yet their Members agreed well enough in
their opinions about them; And I will venture to add if this Gentleman be as
well acquainted with Church History as he pretends, he knows in his Conscience,
that he imposes upon his Reader, and would obtrude a great fallacy upon the
World.

The first Attempt for the introducing such Customs and Ceremonies into the
Worship of God, occasioned a great deal of Contention and Discord in the
Apostles times; and the Imposers were severely checked by them for their
Arrogance, Gal. 5.1.
and all Christians commanded to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ had
made them free, and not suffer themselves to be entangled with the yoke of
Bondage, and so great a Disturbance was raised by urgeing such Ceremonies, v.
12.
that the Apostle wishes they were cut off that troubled the Church with them.

And after the Apostles were dead, when Ceremonies began to increase, (though
they were not for some time enjoined, but the People took them up partly of
their own accord, partly upon the example of those they had a great Veneration
for) yet they occasioned great Animosities and Discord in the Churches, of
which Socrates gives us many instances, Lib. 5. c. 21, 22. Sozom. l. 7.19.

And when Victor would needs impose his Observation of Easter, such Feuds and
Heats were raised thereby, as made them the scorn of the Pagans, and were
greatly lamented by all sober Bishops and Christians, and both Cyprian and
Irenaeus greatly blame him [(...)] as stretching the Rigor of his Government,
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.
not only beyond his line, but also to Causes of indifferency, which would not
admit of such severe Censures. And as Ceremonies and Impositions increased,
Contentions grew up with them, till at last a great part of the Christian World
was laid in a dead sleep, with that Poison poured into the Church, and for a
long time became like Issachar, a strong Ass, submitting to every Burden; then
indeed there was almost a Universal Agreement about Ceremonies, and a general
Prostitution of Conscience to the dictates of the pretended Catholic Church,
but that was the darkest and worst state, wherein Christianity ever was in the
World.

I come now to examine this Gentleman's Account of the Corinthian Schism, and
indeed [hic pes figendus] this is the Core of the Controversy and the hinge
upon which it turns, if he be right in this he has broken Mr. H's Measures, and
put him upon a new Enquiry.

Mr. H. supposes that these Corinthians who are reproved for their Schismatical
Contentions, were agreed in the fundamental Articles of Faith, and great Truths
of the Gospel, but engaged in foolish and uncharitable Contests about the
Apostles, some commending Paul, and preferring him before the rest; others
crying up Cephas, and a third sort Apollos; thus having the Faith of Christ
with respect of Persons.

This Gentleman has learned from Dr. Hammend to say, [That the Persons reproved
for these Contentions, were the Gnostick Heretics, Review p. 20, 21.
that denied the Resurrection of the Dead, and lived in Incest, and dissuaded
the People from Marriage, and sacrificed to Idols that they might escape
Persecution, some of them pretend they had their heretical Doctrines from St.
Paul, P. 22.
others fathered theirs upon Apollos, others upon Cephas, and another sort
pretended they had seen Christ himself, and received those Doctrines from his
Mouth; And (he affirms) they were Heretical Gnostics only, and not the
Orthodox, P. 24.
who are reprehended by the Apostle for saying, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos;
and concludes, that the Schism of the Corinthians lay in opposing the sound
Orthodox Doctors, and maintaining their own wild Heresies under the Umbrage of
these great Names.

Were it not for these Gnostick Heretics, I know not what some Men could do to
misunderstand plain Scripture; if we meet with any smart Reproofs in the
Apostolical Epistles, still they must be levelled at the Gnostick Heretics; if
any were guilty of Fornication, it was the Gnostics, if any of Temporizing, or
of Schism, they were Gnostics; as if all besides them had been Pure and
Innocent. This is too great partiality, and savours much of the Pharisaical
Humor of some Modern Men that are for casting the Odium of every ill thing
upon those they are pleased to call Schismatics; that under this Blind, all
the Sons of the Church may come off clear, and be thought in every thing
blameless and inoffensive.

Now although I make no question but there were such Heretics in those days,
and that they were as bad as he describes them, that some of them lived amongst
the Corinthians, and that the Apostle sometimes speaks concerning them, (though
I seldom find that he speaks directly to them) yet that these were the persons
here reproved for Schism (much less the only persons) I can never believe; For
these reasons.

1. 1 Cor. 1.
The Character which the Apostle gives of these contentious Corinthians, in the
context will by no means fit the Gnostick Heretics, for we find he calls them
the Church of God, Saints, and in the 9th verse, Persons that were called into
the Fellowship of Christ Jesus our Lord, and in the very same verses wherein he
admonishes them of their Schismatical Contentions, he calls them Brethren, v.
10. Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions amongst you, -- For it
has been declared unto me, of you my Brethren, that there are contentions
among you; Now this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, etc. Can
any Man imagine these such gross and damned Heretics, as the Gnostics have
been always described? Can we believe the same Apostle that was so sharp upon
those that urged the Jewish Ceremonies, as to call them Dogs, and Evil Workers,
and bid the Christians beware of them, would be so tender and kind, so
affectionate and endearing to the vilest corrupters of the Christian Faith, as
to call them Saints and Brethren, and all the good names imaginable; I am sure
the Church of England seldom speaks to Protestant Dissenters in such obliging
language, and yet I hope we are not altogether so bad as the Gnostick Heretics.

2. If the fault here reproved had been Herefie, and such as this Gentleman
speaks of, there is no question but the Apostle would plainly and expressly have
mentioned it; We never find him guilty of sparing such Sins and Sinners as
these; And if he had now to do with those that taught damnable Heresies under
that horrid aggravation of fathering them upon himself, and upon Christ too,
which would have added Blasphemy to his Heresy, it would have been a great
deal too soft and tender, only to have said, it has been declared unto me of
you my Brethren, that there are contentions amongst you, such kind of reproof
would have born no proportion to the crime, but would have been next door to a
justifying of them, and so far from convincing them of the desperate guilt they
were under, that it would rather have betrayed them into a good opinion of
themselves and their Doctrines; It is generally observed that Eli greatly
sinned in reproving such flagitious offenses of his Sons in that mild language,
Why do you such things? For I hear of your evil dealings by all this People, 1 Samuel 2.3.
nay, my Sons, for it is no good report that I hear of you, for you make the
Lords People to Transgress, etc. and yet this is much more plain and home than
the Words of Paul, if he was reproving a crime of that Nature.

And as we have all the reason in the World to think he would have been severer
in the case, so he would doubtless have spoken directly to the matter, he would
have exposed and disowned their Errors, and acquitted himself before all the
World, he would have called them Heretics, and set a black mark upon their
Heresies, and instead of saying, was Paul Crucified for you, or were ye
Baptized in the Name of Paul, would have challenged them, did Paul ever tell
you, that there was no Resurrection, did Paul ever give you leave to live in
Incest, or to Sacrifice to Idols? And he would have taken that occasion, since
a fairer could never offer it self, immediately to disapprove and damn those
Errors, which they had broached under his Name and Authority, but there being
not one word to this purpose, but a deep silence in all the Context; He must be
able to swallow a Camel, that can digest such a Notion.

3. Had this been the case, the Apostle would certainly have made a manifest
distinction betwixt the Orthodox and the Heretics, and have plainly advised
the Orthodox, how to proceed against those Blasphemous wretches; But here is no
such distinction made, but the fault of contention charged upon them all, Now
this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, which according to this
Gentleman's Comment must be, Now this I say, that every one of you is turned
Heretic, and Father your Heresies upon me, and upon Christ too; I will not be
so nice upon the word (...), as to say there were none free, but doubtless it
must argue a very common faultiness, and they were so generally engaged in
these foolish contests, that he could not have an Account thereof from the
Church in Common, for Men do not love to inform of themselves, but the House of
Cloe sent him the bad news; now can we think the Apostle would in such general
terms have assaulted the Heresies of some particular Persons? Would he have
laid such a Temptation before all succeeding Ages, to condemn the whole Church
of Corinth for Gnostics; Certainly his Love to that People, and indeed Justice
it self would have obliged him, in such a case, to have distinguished betwixt
the Innocent and the Guilty.

And it is as reasonable to conclude, that the Apostle would have commanded the
Orthodox to admonish and reject such abominable Wretches from their Communion,
we see in the case of the incestuous person he did so, and certainly he would
not have been more favorable to these, who according to this Gentleman's
account, were no better, but rather worse than he, and indeed as bad as can be
imagined.

4. The Advice that the Apostle gives to these contending Corinthians, shows
that he did not speak to Gnostick Heretics, he counsels them to be of one
mind, and to speak the same thing, and to be persectly joined together in one
mind, and in one Judgment, and that there be no divisions among them; Our
Gentleman thinks this will prove that they were Heretics, and I think it is
demonstration on the other side; For let it be observed the same persons that
he reproves for saying, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, etc. in the 12. v. and
of whose contentions (he says) he had heard in the 11. v. he advises in the 10.
v. to be of one mind, and to be perfectly joined together; Now if all these he
here speaks to were Heretics, would the Apostle have commanded them to be all
of one Mind, and to be perfectly joined together, was the Apostles design to
reconcile one Heretic to another, the Heretic that was of Paul to the
Heretic that was of Apollos; was he troubled that the Heretics did no better
understand one another? And is this the meaning of that kind and obliging
Admonition? Dear Heretics, agree amongst your selves, and let there be no
Divisions amongst you? Would not this have been an encouraging and strengthening
them in their Confederacy against Christ, his Gospel and Church? It would be a
very suspicious thing, for one that pretends to be a Loyal Subject, to go to a
herd of Rebols that are quarrelling one with another, and persuade them to keep
together, and to avoid Division, and to be of the same Mind, it would be a
better Office to sow the Seeds of Contention amongst them, to break their
Confederacy, that they might be more easily subdued.

And it is not to be omitted, how cunningly this Gentleman alters the Phrase,
and being perfectly joined together, he expounds, be well joynted and compacted
in the Church; but here is no color for such a Paraphrase, and to bid Heretics
be joined one to another, is rather forbidding them being joined to the Church;
no doubt he would have commanded them to abandon their Devilish Errors, and
return to the Truth, and would have charged the Orthodox to oppose them, For
the Contention on their side would have been commendable.
and to Contend earnestly for the Faith delivered to them, and not to
incorporate with them till they had renounced their Errors; but to bid these
Heretics be of one Mind, and of one Judgment, when there lay an indispensible
Necessity on them all to change their Minds, is such odd, insipid, and
infatuated Counsel, as cannot without a degree of blasphemy be ascribed to an
inspired Apostle.

5. The Repetition of this matter in the third Chapter, affords us further
Evidence, that this Gentleman's Notion is false, it is true the Apostle upbraids
them there with the weakness of their Faith and Judgment, that they were but as
Babes in Christ, and yet that would be a strange Character of the Gnostics,
far different from that which this Author gives us; but the Apostle proceeds to
reprove them for Envying and Strife, and Division, in saying, I am of Paul, and
I of Apollos, etc. And adds, Who is Paul, and who is Apollos, but Ministers by
whom ye believed, I have planted, Apollos has watered, and God gave the
increase? What sense can any man put upon this, but that the fault here
censured, lay in their glorying too much in Instruments, some in one, some in
another, and therefore he adds, Let no man glory in man, for all things are
yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, all are yours, and ye are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods. Would all this have been true of the Gnostick Heretics, or
would this have been a proper way of dealing with them for their recovery?

6. Clemens Romanus, in the passage this Gentleman cited would have undeceived
him, P. 110.
if it had been considered, (...), etc. Take into your hands the Epistle of the
blessed Apostle Paul which he wrote unto you in the beginning of his Gospel,
for he being divinely inspired, admonished you, that there were sidings and
factions amongst you, concerning Himself, and Cephas, and Apollos; But there
was less Sin in that siding than in your present Contentions, for there you
sided with the Apostles, etc.

Now I would fain know, were these Corinthians Gnostics too, to whom Clemens
here writes? If the other were, these must be so to, for he says the Apostle
admonished you, that there were sidings among you.

Clemens here tells us, that the Contending Corinthians, whom St. Paul
reproved, sided with the Apostles, which he mentions as a thing which did
extenuate their Crime; did the Gnostick Heretics do so? Can we think that by
siding with the Apostles, he means fathering their damnable Heresies upon the
Apostles, surely that would rather have aggravated than lessened the fault;
this Gentleman tells us, the Gnostick Heretics here reproved opposed their
Orthodox Governors, which agrees but very sorrily, with what Clemens says of
the Corinthian Schismatics siding with the Apostles.

That Schism which Clemens reprehends, he says was worse than that censured by
the Apostle Paul, (...), in the former Schism they sinned less than in the
latter; but what could be worse than the Gnostick Heresy, and fathering it
upon God himself? If those to whom Clemens writes were worse than the
Gnostics, it is strange we should not hear him taxing them, with monstrous
Errors, and horrid Crimes, (...), etc. p. 108. (...), etc. p. 106.
but that on the contrary he should tell them, they had one God, and one
Christ, and one Spirit poured out upon them, and one calling in Christ, and he
aggravates their Sin in casting off their Faithful Elders, because it was done
by the Godly, and says, It was without President, that the just should be
rejected by Godly Men; and nothing is more evident by the whole Series of that
Epistle, than that the Schism there reproved, was not any Heresy or Apostasy
from the Faith, but that for the sake of a few factious Persons, they had
slighted and cast off their faithful Presbyters, by whom, not by any one single
Person, that Church was governed, and the great fault is laid upon the want of
Charity, (...), his great Encomiums upon Charity, P. 114.
and his earnest pressing of them to it, shows that he looked upon
Uncharitableness to be the very Soul of their Schism, whereby it was informed
and acted, which agrees so well with Mr. H's account, that this Gentleman
should have called it any thing rather than new; but if this was the latter
Corinthian Schism, and if the former was not so criminal as this, surely it
could not be, that damnable Blasphemous Gnostick Heresy which this Gentleman
speaks of.

7. If I thought, what has been said were not sufficient, I could add that the
account, which Jerome and many after him give of this Corinthian Schism will by
no means quadrate with the Gnostick Heresy, the Passage is very Trite and
Common. Antequam Diaboli instinctu studia in Religione fierent, Comment. in
Tlt. 1.
and diceretur in Populis, Ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego autem Cephae, communi
Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur, postquam vero unusquisque eos
quos baptizaverat suos putabat esse, non Christi, toto orb decretum est ut
unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur caeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae
cura pertineret, and Schismatum semina tollerentur. Now though I can by no
means grant that upon this very Schism Episcopacy was instituted for the
Reasons already given, yet it is sufficient for the present purpose, that it
was upon a Schism of the same kind, and therefore the Nature of Schism may be
understood hereby, it consisted in contending about their Ministers that
governed them in Common, and instead of paying a due and equal respect to them
all, some cried up this, another that, probably every one would magnify him,
by whom he had been Converted and Baptized, and at length it seems it infected
the Ministers themselves, and they begun to challenge a special Propriety, in
those they had Baptized, as if by Baptism men had been united to them, not to
Christ, for the Prevention whereof one was chosen from amongst the rest, and
the Government of the whole principally committed to him, and by this means,
they endeavored to prevent such contests about the Pre-eminence for the future.

Let the Gentleman apply this to the Gnostick Heresy, and he will find it to
be the most unapt and discordant thing in the World, were those Heretics under
the Common Government of the Presbyters of Corinth? No, he says they opposed
their Orthodox Governors, and puts the grossest abuse upon the Apostles,
making them Haeresiarcha's; and what would it have signified to such men as
those to have one of their despised Presbyters made a Bishop? How would this
have put an end to the Heresy? What tendency could it have to make them change
their Minds, and renounce those Opinions for which they pretended Apostolical
Authority? Would they think that as soon as the Presbyter was advanced to the
Quality of a Bishop, he presently commenced infallible, and therefore they must
necessarily speak and think as he dictated to them? The World has not found
Episcopacy to be such a Sovereign Cure of Heresy, the Arians had their
Bishops, and so have the Papists, and prodigious great ones too, but they are
generally the greatest promoters of Heresy of all others.

I would now willingly consider any thing that has the least color of reason
to prove, that the Corinthian Schism was the Gnostick Heresy, and I have
searched as diligently as I could those three or four pages which the Gentleman
has writ upon this Point, but I must needs say his whole discourse upon it is
the most confused Jargon, that ever I read from a man pretending so high as he
does.

The thing which he insists most upon, to overthrow Mr. H's Notion, that the
Corinthian Schism lay in Uncharitable Contentions about their Ministers, is
that Expression, And I of Christ, upon which he thus Harangues, Our Savior was
ascended up into Heaven long before this, and it would have been a strange wild
Fancy, not to be contented with any other Minister excepting him -- besides it
would be hard to assign any Reason, why any Body should prefer Paul or Apollos
before Christ. I always thought our Savior might have had the Pre-eminence.

But these Questions have been often put, and variously answered; some think
the Apostle speaks this of himself, Chrysostom. in loc.
as if he should say, Let others choose who they will for Heads of their
Parties, I only choose Christ for mine; others say that some few of the
Corinthians being wiser than the rest, contented themselves with the Name of
Christians, Partus in loc.
without any other dividing Denomination.

But that which seems most probable is, that these unhappy Contentions about
Paul and Apollos had this effect upon some, that they too much slighted them
all, and pretended to be of Christ, in contempt of his Ministers, and it is
observable, that our Old Bibles Printed with large Notes in Queen Elizabeth's
days, and by her Authority, give this last as the sense of the place, which
shows that it was agreeable to the Sentiments of the Bishops in those days,
otherwise they would not have permitted those Notes to have been gone along
with it, and we have also there this account of Schism, that it is when men who
otherwise agree in Doctrine, separate themselves from one another; Now let this
Gentleman take any of these Solutions, and it will be abundantly less absurd
than this account of the matter which he has given us.

He tells us, That because these Corinthians had not the writings of the New
Testament, but must be instructed by their Prophets and Evangelists, it would
be a difficult thing for them to judge betwixt the Orthodox and the Heretical;
but I cannot apprehend any such mighty difficulty in the Case; the Apostles
when ever they planted Churches, preached unto them the fundamental Articles of
the Gospel, which are few and plain, and therefore easily received and
remembered; those that believed upon their Preaching could not so quickly forget
them, nor could they be easily persuaded to think that the Apostles would
preach one Doctrine to them, and the contrary to others, and we may be assured,
any that should come with such wicked pretensions would meet with a sharp
repulse; and it was so far from being a difficult thing to discover such
impostures, that nothing but folly or fascination could hinder them from so
doing, and therefore when the Galatians were corrupted with the Principles of
Judaical Pretenders, the Apostle admires at their weakness, Oh foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, etc.

He further informs us, That when there were contrary Doctrines preached, the
proof of each must depend upon the Credit and Authority of those Persons from
whom they were derived; if from Christ it was the greatest, if from the
Apostles it was next, if from one of the first Converts, as Apollos, it was the
last great Authority. I must confess, this is quite above my reach, I know not,
why this Gentleman should fancy such degrees of Credit and Authority as these.
The Apostles and Evangelists who were at that day infallibly inspired, spoke
with the highest Authority even that of Christ himself, who spoke by them and
in them by his Spirit, and to distinguish betwixt the Credit and Authority of
what Christ spoke and of what the Apostles Preached and writ, is not only a
vain but a dangerous thing, and makes such a difference in the several parts of
Scripture as ought not to be made, as if there was less Credit and Authority in
some than others.

I suppose, the proof of any Doctrine would depend upon this Point rather,
whether it was really the Doctrine of Christ, and his inspired Apostles and
Evangelists or no, if it could be evinced that any of them had delivered it,
there was proof sufficient of its Truth and Authority in the highest degree;
The Authority of the Apostles was not questioned, nor any such degrees of
Credibility imagined betwixt the Doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles and
inspired Evangelists, as to leave room for such pretended Comparisons, all the
doubt was, whether such a Doctrine was theirs or no, and there could not want
Witnesses in every Church to confront any one that should bring another Gospel
under any Name whatsoever.

The Gentleman has discovered a wonderful Argument for his Opinion in the form
of Salutation the Apostle uses in this Chapter, 1 Cor. 1.2.
To all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours, from whence (says he) it is plain, the Apostle makes two
Parties amongst them, the Orthodox and the Heretics, theirs and ours.

This then must be the meaning of that Preface, The Church of God which is at
Corinth, Sanctified in Christ Jesus, and whose members are called to be Saints,
consists of two Parties. 1. Theirs, that is to say, notorious damned Gnostick
Heretics, that deny the Resurrection, and hold it lawful to live in Incest,
and to Sacrifice to Idols, and that blasphemously ascribe these Doctrines of
Devils to Christ and his Apostles; these are the first sort of the Holy,
Sanctified Members of the Church of God at Corinth. 2. Ours, That is, the
Orthodox that hold fast the Truth, and the form of sound words; Grace and Peace
be to them both; certainly this would be the most scandalous Paraphrase, that
ever was invented, and yet the Gentleman sees this plainly in the Text.

But alas it affords no pretense for such a Comment, for theirs and ours,
plainly refer to the Lord Jesus, who (says the Apostle) is both their Lord and
ours, Theirs, that believe on him as well as Ours, that preach him to the
World, or theirs, that are Gentiles, as well as Ours, that are Jews, the Common
Lord of all the faithful, all the World over, thus it is understood, by the
whole band of Interpeters, Dr. Hammond himself not Dissenting, but when a man's
fancy is deeply tinged with a Notion, every thing must be thought to support
it, or else, this would never have been mentioned to such a purpose.

I now attend his Review of the second instance of Schism, 1 Cor. 11.20. I hear
that there be Divisions among you, etc. Mr. H. observes this could not be meant
of breach of Communion, because they all come together into one place and into
the Church too; The Gentleman replies, there was a notorious breach of
Communion even at the Communion Table, and very great and scandalous
Miscarriages; and who ever doubted of that? But does he call these things a
breach of Communion? Then I am afraid it is often broken among themselves; when
Mr. H. denies, that there was any breach of Communion, he takes it in their own
Sense, there were no separate Meetings, otherwise wherever there is a
Violation of Love and Charity amongst Christians there is a breach of
Communion, and his whole Book tends to prove it.

Will this Gentleman say, that by these divisions are meant, the rude and
disorderly behavior of some amongst them, or rather the contests that those
miscarriages caused; If he speaks sense he must say the latter; Forit is not
usual, to call the miscarriages of one sort divisions; Besides these
miscarriages, though very great, were chiefly about the Love Feasts which
accompanied the Sacrament, as the Gentleman himself acknowledges, and therefore
were not altogether so destructive of Communion, as if they had been about the
Sacrament it self; But if that will not do, he will try the old Salvo, and
these divisions must be into Sects and Parties that were Heretical; But how can
it then be said, that these Divisions arose when they came together to these
Feasts, what! did some of them turn Heretics presently upon the Congress? And
become Orthodox again when they parted, and so turn Heretics anew when they
came together the next time? And certainly if they were Heretics the Apostle
would have charged the rest to have cast them out, and not suffered them to
Communicate with them at all, and that had been a proper and likely way to have
put an End to such Disorders; But this he grounds upon the verse following, For
there must also be Heresies among you, and blames Mr. H. for omitting it, and
would fain know what we have to say to it; Why I Will tell him in a few words;
This does not show that the Divisions he reproves were Heresies, but gives us
the reason why he believed the report which he heard of their Divisions. I hear
there are Divisions or Schisms amongst you, and I partly believe it, for there
must be also Heresies amongst you, I need not wonder if there be Schisms
amongst you, for I know there will be Heresies also, which are a great deal
worse; Thus it has been understood by very Learned Expositors, and it seems the
Natural import of the words, and their connection with the former, and the
Particle [also] makes it plain enough.

But after all, if this Gentleman will in one place make Schism to be Heresy,
and in another a disorderly behavior at the Communion Table, or at the Feasts
attending it, he will advance an Idea of it, much more Novel than Mr. H's, and
it will fairly acquit Dissenters from being Schismatics, for he can neither
charge us with Heresy, nor any such disorders at the Lords Supper.

The last place agitated is, 1 Cor. 12.15. That there be no Schism in the Body;
Mr. H. acknowledges that Schism is that which breaks or slackens the Bond by
which the Members are knit one to another; Here the Gentleman presently claps
hold, and says, that is done notoriously by Separation and breach of Communion,
yes, no doubt Communion is broken by breach of Communion, we will not dispute
that, but all Separation does not break Communion, if we only separate in those
things wherein Christian Communion does not consist, the Bond is firm still,
therefore Mr. H. well added, but this i^ Bond not an Act of Uniformity in the
same Ceremonies, but of true Love and Charity, the Gentleman replies, nor is
the obligation of that Bond taken away by an Act of Indulgence; We grant it
Sir, it is sufficient for us that the Act of Indulgence takes away the
Obligation of the Act of Uniformity, we do not desire it should take away Men's
Obligations to preserve the Unity of the Church, which we question not is as
Sacredly observed in our Assemblies as in yours.

He falsely charges Mr. H. with saying that true Love and Charity is the only
Bond by which Christians are knit together, he does not say it is the only
Bond, but certainly it is the Bond, though not the only one, for they are
United by Faith also, but it is only the breach of this Bond of Love, which is
properly called Schism; He tells us the Apostle insists upon several other ties
and obligations whereby Christians are knit together, and let us hear what they
are; They are incorporated into one Society or Body, but is that a tie by which
they are knit together, or does it not rather show us what they are when united
together? Their being animated by one Spirit, and so having one Hope, and being
within the One Covenant of Grace, are not so properly the Bond by which we are
United, but the effects of our Union to Christ by Faith, and it is that is
properly the Bond or Uniting Grace on our part, that joins us to the Head God
in Christ, and from this the other Grace of Christian Love results, by which
the Members are Morally united one to another; How far the Unity of the
Ministry is absolutely necessary to the Unity of Christ's Body, has been already
discussed in the former part of this Treatise.

He concludes his Reflections upon the Enquiry, with the same ingenuity which
has all along appeared in him; He acknowledges that Charity is a comprehensive
Virtue, and every Sin is a violation of it, as Theft, Murder, Treason, but as
it would not be good Logic to make Uncharitableness serve for a definition of
them all, so neither in the case of Schism; And we acknowledge it would not,
and where does he find that Mr. H. makes uncharitableness the Definition of
Schism, he makes it but part of the Definition, the Genus only, and this
Gentleman, by his own pretty Colloquy makes it to be the Generical nature of
all Sin, but the Enquirer adds the Differentia, taken from the subject, those
who agree in fundamentals, and its object the smaller things of Religion, and
this with its Genus makes up the complete Definition of that which Scripture
calls Schism.

But the account which this Gentleman has given of it, is so uncertain and
various, so far from a Definition, that it falls short even of a bungling
Description.

In one place he affirms, where there is Schism there is a breach of Communion,
p. 9. in another, there was a Schism amongst the Corinthians, and yet they were
in the same Communion, p. 22. In one place it is Heresy, p. 21. In another
place Fornication, p. 20. In another rude and disorderly tricks at their Love
Feasts, p. 29. In one place it is opposing their Orthodox Governors, p. 26. In
another place, it is siding with them, p. 25. and yet this is the Man that
cannot endure any body should be thought a Conjurer in Logic and Divinity
besides himself.

I hope the Enquiror is got safe out of this Gentleman's Hands. I now proceed to
do the Vindicator the same Justice, in which I shall be brief, because the
merits of the Cause are discussed already, and his little scurrilous
Reflections are not worth our notice.

The Citizen of Chester presented his Adversary, with a List of the Names of
those that had done Wonders in proving the Dissenters Schismatics, and the
Vindicator repaid him with another of those that have defended them from that
Charge: And adds whether these have not done as much to prove the Imposers
Schismatics, as the former to prove the Dissenters such, is referred not to
the judgment of an interessed Party, but of all the unbiased part of Mankind;
Our famous Surveyor asks, Where shall we have a Council of such; For those that
have a Liturgy and Ceremonies and Bishops are certainly for us, and those that
are for none of these, are all biased against us. But Sir, the Question to be
referred is not whether a Liturgy and Ceremonies and Bishops are lawful, but
whether such as ours be so, and whether it be lawful to take those Oaths, and
make those Declarations that have been required of us, and as there is no
Church upon Earth requires the same things, as this of our Nation, so we have
judges enough of this matter that are disinteressed, without going to Pagans or
Atheists for them, and what their thoughts are has been already in part
discovered.

He would help T.W. to prove that a Man who is not divested of all Christian
Temper, Humility and Consideration, Review. p. 34.
may yet be in a desperate condition, because it seems He may not have Grains
enough of these Virtues to save him; What! must we have a statical Divinity
too? If a Man has Christian Faith, though it be but as a Grain of Mustard Seed
it will be effectual to Salvation, and I know not why the same may not be said
of all other Graces, he that has them not in the prevailing degree, has them
not at all, that Man in whom Pride is Habitually prevalent, has not the least
Grain of Christian Humility; The Gentleman therefore must find out some other
Salvo against the next time.

The Vindicator took notice of a blunder in the Citizen in calling the same
Person, Skeptical, a Slighter of our Religion, Obstinate and Perverse, etc. And
thought Skeptical and Obstinate, did not jump well together; This Gentleman
endeavors to help him here too, and says T.W. intended these as so many
several Characters, and did not intend to unite them all in one Person; But it
is certain he did, he speaks in the singular number, if thou be Skeptical -- I
shall altogether glory in thy Scoffs, etc. These are all joined together no
disjunctive particle betwixt them, all lodged in one single Person, in a
distinct Paragraph, as a third Man distinct both from the Churchman and
Dissenter, and this is so plain, that Alderman himself, (as this Author calls
him) was too honest to deny it.

The Question concerning the ninth Article of the Creed; and in what sense T.
W. sets it up as a Standard of Controversy, is fully manifested in the Preface
to this Paper; And it is a very groundless suggestion, that we have any design
to lay it aside, that we may impose whatever Notions we please upon the World,
we very well approve of the Creeds, and have subscribed to them, and to the
Doctrine of the Church, as laid down in the Articles, and it were to be wished
your own Ministers kept as close to those Articles in their Preaching as ours
do. The Vindicator has been already defended in the exceptions he took at T.
W's date of the Origination of the Catholic Church; This Gentlaman says he
spoke of it under the denomination of Christian, which is very false, as those
that read the passage will see, however the Alderman is beholden to his brisk
Champion, for he will say any thing in the World to help him at a dead lift.

He puts the question, Whether when our Savior said, upon this Rock I will
build my Church, he did not speak of it as yet unbuilt? I answer, if by
unbuilt, he means unfinished, it is true, for the Church Universal is a
building in fieri, and will not be completed till the End of the World; But if
by unbuilt, he means unbegun, I say there is no reason so to understand the
words of our Savior, for he has been building his Church upon the same Rock
there spoken of, from the Fall of Man, but I am loath to spend time upon such
quibbles, if the Gentleman had mentioned the Christian Church, or if he had not
said a few Lines before, that the Angels were the most glorious Members of the
Church, I dare say the Vindicator would not have taken notice of it, Review. p.
35.
nor have blamed him no more than Tertullian, and Jerome, for speaking of the
Christian Church in its infancy; And though the Vindicator acknowledges the
Apostles and Disciples were the Church, he did not say the whole Church, much
less that the Church then had its first existence, I hope when these Gentlemen
call the Church of England, the Church, they do not mean the Church Universal.

I desire this Gentleman to give us some better proof than his bare Word, that
ever the Apostles imposed upon the Disciples things indifferent, P. 36.
especially because they tell us, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to them
not to do so; And he must also prove that the Bishops are their Successors in
the same plenitude of power, till then he beats the Air, but gains no Victory.

The Vindicator bewails the slow Progress the Gospel has made in the World, and
imputes it in part to the needless Ceremonies, with which Men have encumbred
it, and want of Personal worth in the managers; To this he replies, The Divines
of the Church of England are no way concerned in it; No? What! not when there
is so much notorious Debauchery amongst us, that insolently out-faces all the
Letters and Orders whereby our Pious King and Queen have stirred up Magistrates
and Ministers to do what they can for the suppression of it? And yet these
Gentlemen see no want of success of the Gospel in England, but are for
recommending to the Dissenters a Journey to China or Tartary; Alas Man! The
design of the Gospel is not only to give Nations another Title, but to make
the Inhabitants other Men, and if you be not sensible that has made but a slow
Progress in England in that which is its main design, you will make but an ill
Watchman upon the Walls of your Church.

And if our Ministers should take such a journey as you are pleased to assign
them, it is not the first time that they have been forced to leave the dear and
pleasant land of their Nativity, and expose themselves to the fatigues of a
tedious Voyage, and all the dangers and hardships of a Pagan Wilderness, that
there at least they might enjoy that liberty of serving God according to his
Word, Vid. The Life of Mr. Elliot.
amongst the Barbarous Indians to whom they brought the Glorious Gospel, and
what toils they under-went, and what success God was pleased to give them, the
whole World has seen and admired.

The Citizen acknowledged that in the Primitive times there was a
multiplication of Churches, by reason of the increase of Believers, The
Vindicator was well enough pleased to hear him say, that the increase of
Believers will make it necessary to multiply Churches, for according to the
Episcopal Model there may be thousands of Congregations, and Millions of Souls,
and all but one Church under one Bishop still, the Gentleman now must mend it a
little, and he puts in distance of place, as that which must be added to
multiplication of Believers, but still, if a Bishop may be Pastor of a Thousand
Parishes, some of them a hundred Miles distant, and may do his work by
Delegates, I see no Reason (as the Vindicator speaks) why we may not have one
Bishop in a Nation, or one over all the World; He that can delegate one part of
his Work, may delegate the whole, and then it is but multiplying those
Delegates, and he may have a Diocese as Universal, as that of the old Gentleman
at Rome.

He requires a Scripture instance to prove that when believers grow too
numerous for one assembly, a Colony must be sent out under Independent
Officers; But he should rather prove, that such a Colony must be still in
dependence upon the former, for if such a Colony desire to have a Bishop and
Presbyters of its own, those that refuse to suffer it, must be able to give
some good reason for it; And to keep all new assemblies in dependence upon the
first Church, would make Jerusalem the Mistress of the Catholic Church, as
Rome pretends; This Gentleman tells us, there may be a multiplication of
Independent Churches, for such are the Episcopal, and he says, he is not for
Acring a Diocese, or contending about the Extent, and therefore I suppose if it
should be no bigger than a Parish, there is no harm done to the Essentials of
Episcopacy; What need therefore of proving by Scripture that a new Colony must
be an Independent Church, when the Author himself acknowledges it may be so,
and if it desire to be so, I know no body has power to hinder it, unless it be
the Civil Magistrate; And how far it is within his Jurisiliction I shall not
dispute.

The Magnitude of the Church of Jerusalem has been often debated, and before
any thing can be concluded from thence, on the behalf of Prelacy, they must
tell us, how many of those Converts, we read of, were constant Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and stated Members of that Church; For if the greatest part of them
might be of those that came thither at the Feast of Pentecost it will spoil the
Demonstration; And they must also prove that they were under the Government of
one Bishop; And asking questions is not proving that it was so. At that time we
read of such numerous Converts, they had the Apostles amongst them, who taught
them from House to House, and we have no account of their being under the
Government of one Bishop, but what comes from Hegisippus, and an obscure
Clement Writers of no Authority.

And it ought to be considered, that if the Church of Jerusalem were so very
numerous, it is strange they could all be received in so small a place as
Pella; Defense of the Answer 3. Treat. c. 6.
Let this Gentleman hear one of the Grandfathers of his own Church, Archbishop
Whitgift, thus, How few Christians were there at Jerusalem not long before it
was destroyed, being about forty years after Christ? Does not Eusebius
testify, that they were all received into a little Town called Pella, Epiph.
Here Is. 30. and de Ponder and Men's. c. 15. (...).
yet the Apostles spent much Time and Labor in Preaching there. And
Epiphanius, confirms the same truth, saying, That all the Believers, and
elsewhere, all the Disciples inhabited in Pella; Let him remove these
difficulties out of the way, and then he may more plausibly serve himself of
this instance.

What he says in his 39th Page is mere Banter, we neither condemn Bishops, nor
set up Altar against them, nor are in any Covenant against them, nor refuse to
Communicate with them in Sacraments and Prayers; A bare denial is answer enough
at any time to a bare assertion, We hold Communion with them in all that is
essential to Episcopacy or the Worship of God, See the Petition for Peace. 1661.
and if they will not let us Worship God with them in the same Congregations,
but turn us out by their Impositions, let them look to it, what ever is
culpable will lie at their Door, we are willing at any time to Communicate with
them on Christ's Terms, but if they refuse it, we must not lose the Ordinances
of the Gospel, for a point of Humane Order, such as Parochial Communion; Here,
I think Mr. Chillingworths answer to the Jesuit, is very pertinent. P. 15.
Notwithstanding your Errors, we do not renounce your Communion totally, and
absolutely, but only leave communicating with you in the practice and
profession of your Errors; The Trial whereof will be, to propose some form of
Worshipping God, taken wholly out of Scripture, and herein if we refuse to join
with you, and not till then, you may justly say we have utterly, and absolutely
abandoned your Communion.

He is pleased to say, Though we pretend to be United to the Head, yet not to
the Body, it being hard to find several Members united into one Body, and yet
still remaining all Independent; If he means Independent in Point of Government
one over another, Vind. of Prot. Princ. p. 71.
the Episcopal Churches are all Independent in that sense; (as Dr. Sherlock
very well proves) and therefore by this Gentleman's talk, cannot be United into
one Body; If he means Independent in Point of Communion, I know no Churches
that pretend to it.

He affirms that Bishops succeed the Apostles, in their Authority over the
Presbyters and People, For, (says he) it is not reasonable to suppose that any
branch of Authority given by our Savior to his Apostles died with them. But
this would prove too much, for then we must have some Supreme Officers in the
Church, that have Power over Bishops, Vid. Review, p. 39.
as well as over Presbyters and People, for so had the Apostles; and we may
retort his following words upon himself, If their Authority over the Bishops
expired with their Persons, why should that over Presbyters continue after
them, unless he will suppose that the Inferior Clergy are the only Persons
that need the Regulation of Superiors, all Multitudes must have Governors,
and the Bishops are certainly too numerous a Populace to be all Independent:
Now let the Gentleman give us an Answer to this, and it will serve very well
for an Answer to himself; It does not concern us to show that the Apostles
Commission was only a Patent for Life; but if any Persons nowadays shall
pretend to have a Patent for the Apostleship, it behooves them to produce it
well attested.

The Vindicator observed, that the Authority of the Apostles was Universal, and
the same over all Churches; and this Surveyor says, The Bishops succeed them in
the same Authority, only the exercise thereof is limited by humane Agreements,
and asks the Vindicator, whether a Bishop be not as truly a Bishop, and a
Presbyter as truly a Presbyter, in any other Man's Diocese or Parish as in his
own?

But here he puts things together, that should be kept distinct; a Bishop in
the received and ordinary sense of the word is a Relative term, and always
connotes a Bishopric, either in Possession or Title, as his Charge and Cure;
and therefore though he be Bishop in another Man's Diocese, he is not Bishop of
that Diocese; indeed, as a Minister of the Gospel, he may Preach, and
Administer the Sacraments any where that Providence casts him, and gives him an
opportunity of so doing: and if this be all the Episcopal Power they pretend
to, we will allow it to be as Universal as they please; but the Power of
Jurisdiction over Ministers and People, which they call the Apostolical Power,
they have not any where but in their own Dioceses, and yet even that Power the
Apostles had all the World over, and could not be limited in it by any Humane
Agreements whatsoever.

By this Notion our Gentleman has advanced, the Bishop of Chester has no more
Authority in Cheshire, than the Bishop of Rome, Review p. 40.
but what is founded on Humane Agreements, and what thanks his Diocesan will
give him for such a Doctrine, I cannot tell; for he afterward acknowledges,
that the Bishop of Rome has no Authority at all in England, which makes the
whole Power of our Bishops to depend upon Humane Agreements, without which, he
that has none at all, would have as much as they.

Or perhaps it is liable to a worse Consequence than that; for if every Bishop
has Universal Power in all Dioceses, by the Grant of Christ, and is only
restrained in the Exercise thereof by Humane Agreements: then may the Bishop of
Rome with Apostolical Authority make Canons for all England, and Excommunicate
us all if we receive them not, for Christ gave him Universal Power, only it was
limited by Humane Agreements which he never agreed to, and if he had, that
could not render his Act unauthoritative, but only irregular; Only, the best
on it is, any Bishop in England may make Canons for Rome too, and Damn them all,
(Pope and Cardinals, and all) if they will not obey.

I would gladly understand this Doctrine a little better, and therefore I beg
the favor of this Gentleman, to tell me, what Agreements these are of which he
speaks; where and when made, and by whom? Are they only made by the Bishops
amongst themselves? or had the People a hand therein? or does he mean the Laws
of the Land? If Bishops can by mutual Agreement so restrain the Exercise of
their Power, why may they not by the like Agreements, constitute one to be Head
over them all.

I wish this Gentleman would go to School to a learned Doctor of his own
Church, though he was not in Communion with him in these Notions; yet I hope no
Schismatic for all that; Treat. of Supremacy, p. 120, 121.
it is the worthy Dr. Isaac Barrow, whose words are, The Offices of an Apostle
and Bishop are not in their own Nature well consistent; for the Apostleship is
an extraordinary Office, charged with the Instruction and Government of the
whole World, and calling for an answerable Care (the Apostles being Rulers, as
St. Chrysostom says, ordained by God, Rulers not taking several Nations and
Cities, but all of them in common entrusted with the whole World) but
Episcopacy is an ordinary standing charge affixed to One place, and requiring a
special Attendance there, who (as St. Chrysostom says) do sit and are employed
in one place: Now he that has such a General Care can hardly discharge such a
particular Office; and he that is fixed to so particular an Attendance, can
hardly look well after so General a Charge.

I need not repeat what has been said about the Powers of Timothy and Titus;
what the Gentleman here alleges is anticipated and answered; He must prove
that Presbyters may not do what Timothy and Titus did; that they may not
ordain, that they may not reprove one another for their Faults, as they have
occasion: He says, These are the Powers that Bishops have exercised all along;
and so have Presbyters too: and if exercise proves the Title, they must
therefore be Bishops also.

He adds, The Congregational Invention allows of no such Officers, the most
ordinary Pastors being all Independent, without ever a Timothy or Titus to
Govern them, and therefore by Scripture stands condemned; and if it be so, I am
sure Episcopacy is involved in the same Condemnation; for the Bishops are by
their own Party accounted the only Pastors, and the Inferior Clergy are but
their Curates, and yet these Pastors have none to supervise them, but are as
Independent as can be, there is no Paul to govern these Timothies and Titus's,
and therefore their Churches are (to use his own words) plainly contrary to the
Apostolical Pattern.

And Dr. Morris has told us, That it is not essential to a Bishop to have many
Congregations under him, Bishops may be Pastors of single Congregations, yea,
they may not have one Presbyter under them, Review, p. 60.
and yet be Bishops still; for Milles the Martyr was a Bishop, and yet had no
Christian in his Diocese; and yet I think there are few Pastors of our
Congregational Churches, but what have Presbyters under them, so that
Episcopacy and Independency may very well comport together; for Episcopacy is
Independent, and may be Congregational, and if the one be condemned by
Scripture, the other must fall with it.

He says, It is an idle fancy to suppose that the Office of Timothy and Titus
was itinerant; for then, says he, they were out of their Office when they were
at home, the one in Ephesus, and the other in Crete. If by calling those places
their Homes, he would insinuate that they were their proper Diocesan Sees,
where they were to reside, it is a begging of the Question, and every Body knows
that is the way of Idle Persons; it is as certain as our Bibles can make it,
that Timothy was only to abide at Ephesus for a Season, till Paul's return out
of Macedonia, 1 Timothy 3.14. after which he accompanied Paul into Asia, Chap.
4.13. from thence to Italy, Heb. 13.23. thence Paul declares, he would send him
to Philippi, Chap. 2.19. and we find him at Rome again, Col. 1.1.

And Titus was so far from being resident at Crete, Gal. 2.1, and 3. 2 Cor.
2.12. and 7. and 13. and 12.8. 2 Timothy 4.10.
that he was commanded away to Nicopolis before Winter, Chap. 3.12. he was sent
to Corinth and Dalmatia, and went up to Jerusalem with Paul, and came to him
during his Imprisonment at Rome; These Removes our Gent. would have us to think
were their Episcopal Visitations; but that would make the Dioceses of Ephesus
and Creet to take in one another, and the whole Christian World too.

The Vindicator told T. W. that it would not agree with the Nature of a proper
Succession, that two Bishops should succeed one Apostle in his Apostolical
Power. This Gent. undertakes to prove it may, but by such kind of instances as
signify nothing but his own inadvertency, viz. When two Persons are Heirs to
one in the same Estate, the Law calls them Successores partiarii: But this will
not do, an Estate may be divided into a Thousand Parts, and each of them have
the Nature of an Estate still; but the Apostolical Power is Universal, the same
in all places, and division here will make it another thing, according to the
Account that Mr. Bradford, Dr. Barrow, and the best Protestant Writers give of
the difference betwixt the Offices of Apostle and Bishop: Paul as an Apostle
had the same Power at Ephesus as at Crete, and if Timothy had succeeded in the
Apostolical Power, he must have had so too.

His Argument from the Division of the Empire, is as defective as the former.
Empires, how great soever, are limited within certain Bounds, and may be
divided; it is not of the Nature of Imperial Power to be over all the World, as
it was of the Apostolical; it is a vain thing to talk of any Provinces to which
the Apostolical Power was limited, they had equal Power in all Provinces and
Parts of the World; and so must those have too that succeed them in the
Apostleship.

The Vindicator also desired to know how Timothy and Titus could succeed Paul
in his Apostleship, whilst he was alive and in Plenitude of Power? This Gent.
dares not undertake to unfold the Riddle; but so it was, choose what the
Consequences may be; for (says he) it is evident, the Apostle gave them a
Plenitude of Power within their respective Charges, choose how much or how
little he reserved to himself; But pray, Sir, think better of it, a Plenitude
of Power confined to a particular Charge and Province, is not the Plenitude of
Apostolical Power; and if he reserved any Power to himself within those
respective Charges, they had not the Plenitude of Power there, but were under
his Apostolical Jurisdiction still, and therefore did not succeed him in it;
and if the Apostle reserved to himself no Power over the Churches of Ephesus
and Crete, he divested himself of his Apostleship; for he that had not
Apostolical Power every where, had it no where.

But the generous Surveyor is willing to compremise the matter betwixt them, T.
W. must call the Bishops Coadjutors only, whilst the Apostles were living, and
the Vindicator must give them the Title of Successors after their Death. And if
by Successors, he means those that after them were employed in the great Work
of the Ministry of the Gospel, we grant all true Bishops are their Successors,
but then we must put him in Mind that the Bishops we read of in Scripture, were
as much Bishops before the Apostles Death as after, and therefore their
Episcopal Power did not come to them by Succession, nor did there at the
Apostles Death any new Accession of Power devolve upon them.

It was therefore the most needless thing in the World to give the Primitive
Fathers any trouble in this Matter; Review, p. 42.
what if they call Bishops and Presbyters the Apostles Successors, so do we
too, but do they say that they succeeded them in the Apostolical Power, or that
the Apostleship was devolved upon them by the Right of Succession, and yet it
is that, T. W. after his weak manner struggles to prove, and indeed no less
will serve his turn.

This Gentleman is not so thoughtful as he should be when he says, We make it
such a mighty Mystery for a Bishop to Constitute his Successor; if by
Constituting, he means Naming or Appointing who shall be his Successor, it is
not impossible, supposing that God preserve his Life, and the Church Consent to
that Appointment, though it be very inconvenient, and therefore forbidden by
ancient Councils, but it is impossible for one Bishop to devolve his whole
Episcopal Power upon another, and yet to keep it himself in as great amplitude
as ever. Decret. par. 2. cause. 7. Quaest. 1. c. 5. Vivente Episcopo, Can. 41.
in una Ecclefia, etc.
The Decretal and Canon Law will tell him a Successor comes not in place till
the Predecessor be gone, that as long as the Bishop lives no man can succeed
him, that there cannot be two Bishops in one Place, this is most certainly true
in the sense, wherein we now speak of Bishops, and sufficient to our present
purpose.

That which follows, about the certainty of Linus his succeeding Peter, of an
uninterrupted Succession, of the Concession of Papists, Vid. Review p. 44.
Irenaeus l. 2. c. 39. Sub finem. Aetatem seniorem quadragessimi aut
quinquagessimi anni habens Dom. noster, etc.
has already been largely discussed in these Papers. It is possible Irenaeus
might Name all the Roman Bishops, and yet be Mistaken in their Order of
Succession; and it is certain all is not to be taken for Gospel that Irenaeus
reports, even in matters of Fact, for he tells us, our Savior lived to the Age
of above forty or fifty Years, and said, he had this from all the Elders of
Asia, who received it from St. John himself: How well is it that we have a more
sure Word of Prophecy and History too, than the Testimony of Irenaeus: As to
the time of this Fathers Birth and Death, accounts are so various, and the
probabilities on each hand so fair, that no modest man will be Positive in it,
but Mr. Dodwel has taken upon him to fix it, and his Disciples make no
Question, but he has done it infallibly.

The Vindicator had some Reason to put that Question concerning the Apostolical
Succession in the Patriarchal Churches (which this Gentleman quarrels with)
because he observed T. W. made Linus succeed Peter in the Sea of Rome, Simeon
James, in the Chair of Jerusalem, Ananias (I suppose it should be Ananias the
Cobbler, of whom before) St. Mark in the Church of Alexandria; and the account
runs upon this Supposition that the Apostles, divided the World into several
Provinces, and each of them was Bishop of his proper district, and those are
called the Apostles Successors, that came into their several Sees after their
Death, and these being but such a number, it would follow that the Succession,
must be only propagated in these Patriarchats; this the Vindicator mentioned as
what would be the consequence of T. W. his Scheme of Succession, which he only
erected in those Churches, where he had an Apostle at the Head of the Roll; he
never affirmed that it was the Opinion of T. W. or any other, that none but the
Patriarchs were the Apostles Successors, but intimated, that such a Succession
as T. W. described, would only be found in those Churches.

We now come to the proof of an uninterrupted Succession, and let us see
whether this Gentleman can demonstrate it, better than his Alderman; it must be
remembered that according to these men, the Truth of their Church, the Authority
of their Ministry, the Validity of their Sacraments, and the Salvation of their
Souls, depend upon this Line, and therefore it requires a proof suitable to the
vast weight that is laid upon it; and whether he has given us such evidence let
the Reader judge.

He tells us, As far as we have an account we find the Succession regular, and
we have no Reason to doubt of the like care in former Ages, we rely upon the
Providence of God, and the Care and Integrity of our Ancestors, and no man
shall bereave us of our Confidence. Confidence indeed! in the highest degree,
but what if God has never promised such an unbroken line, how can we think his
Providence should be engaged to preserves it, or where has he said it should be
preserved in England? and what if our Ancestors who were Idolatrous Papists
had no integrity, nor took no care of any thing but to flatter the Pope, and
enrich themselves, and enslave the World; a miserable Faith and Hope, that
depends upon the Care and Integrity of Apostate, Antichristian Bishops and
Churches.

What he says about the Vindicators descending from Adam, as if it were as
impossible for a Priest to come into a Bishopric without Episcopal
Consecration, as for a Man to come into the World, without ordinary Generation,
is so perfectly ludicrous, that as I suppose it was only designed to make the
Club merry, so I shall leave it wholly to them.

But that which goes before must not be so soon dismissed, he pretends that we
have as good Evidence of an uninterrupted Succession of Ministers Episcopally
ordained as of pure and genuine Scriptures, Vid. Review, p. 44.
and (says he) although we have not the Original Manuscripts to compare the
One, nor entire Fasti in the other Case, yet unless any will produce matter of
Fact to show that we are deceived, no man shall bereave us of our Confidence.

But this will satisfy no Body, but those that are resolved to be Confident
right or wrong; for,

That we have true Scripture is a thing much more capable of Demonstration,
than that none of our Bishops have ever wanted Episcopal Ordination; it is much
more easy to impose an unordained Person upon a particular Church, Nor could
men lie under the same temptations to the one, as to the other.
than a false Bible upon the whole World, in the latter all the World would be
equally concerned to discover and reject the imposture, in the other a
particular Diocese is only interested; in the one, they had a great number of
Copies spread abroad, by which they might compare and try any that was offered
to them, in the other they might have nothing but the Credentials, or
Certificates of Persons dead or living remote, which might easily be forged,
and they not able to find it out.

And for the Authority of the Scriptures, we do not depend upon the single
Credit and care of the Antichristian Churches, but of many others, that have
not been made so drunk with the Wine of her Fornication. We have the Greek,
Armenian, and African Churches, to assure us of this great point, but as to the
continued Episcopal Ordination of our Bishops, we solely depend upon the credit
of a blind and deceitful Generation, that have outdone all Mankind in deceiving
the Nation and putting a thousand cheats upon the World.

In the matter and style of the Scriptures themselves, we have most excellent
(...), and Indications of their divine Original, but no such inherent Mark or
Character of Divinity is found upon the whole Line and Order of Episcopacy.

It was always accounted the most horrid Sin in the World to forge or
adulterate the Scriptures, but I have already proved in this Treatise that in
Popish Ages, the Power of Ordination was sometimes given to those that were no
Bishops; and though this was one of the encroachments which the Popes made upon
the rights of Episcopacy, as Dr. Sherlock tells us, yet if they assumed such a
power, it is greatly to be suspected they did not fail to execute it.

Besides, none ever pretended that the Salvation of men's Souls does absolutely
depend upon having a complete and entire Canon of Scripture, but according to
these men it does wholly lie upon an entire Line of Succession.

In these and many other Circumstances, these two Cases vastly differ; and he
that has no more to say for the Authority of Scripture than this man has said
for his Line, would greatly betray the Honor of his Profession, and he that
would persuade the World, that we have no better Evidences of the Truth of our
Bibles, than of such a Line, does the worst Office imaginable to the Interests
of Christianity, and (to use his own Words) it is one of the slyest Libels upon
Scripture that I have lately met with.

Here again the business of the Abbot of Hye falls in our way, but having
sisted it already, I shall not make Repetitions; This Gentleman would Salve and
Patch up the Business by Suppositions. Suppose the Succession of Bishops from
that Abbot were extinct, and true Bishops called in to Consecrate, then the
Line would be pieced again: And yet all the Churches and Christians, that lived
under the Successors of that Abbot were damned by their Doctrine; but what if
they were not all extinct? which is unreasonable to suppose, and impossible to
prove, suppose that Line should reach to our times, then all within it are Lay
Impostors; I think the Bishops ought, to oblige these men that talk at this
rate, to demonstrate that the Line is Right, or else Chastise them severely,
for making their Authority depend upon a Supposition impossible to be proved.

The Gentleman denies, that the Church of Rome allows an Abbot Presbyter to
Consecrate a Bishop, and makes challenges, and oppresses his Margin with
Citations out of the Schoolmen; and indeed to give him his due, he has
endeavored all along by the redundancy of the Margin to make amends for the
emptiness of the Page, which looks like a shallow muddy stream, hemmed in with
a flowery Bank on each side; but who knows not that there is a manifest
difference betwixt what the Court of Rome Practices, and what the Schoolmen
determine.

Bellarmine himself, upon the Note of Succession, confesses that the Pope may
by particular Delegation, empower Mytred Abbots, though mere Presbyters, to
supply the place of two of the Bishops, in the business of Consecration; The
Presbyters of Alexandria Consecrated their Patriarch for several Generations,
Cassianus tells us of a young man called Daniel, Sum. Angelic. Ord. Sect. 13.
Filuc. Jesu. de Casibus Cons. par. 1. Tract. 9. c. 5. Alens. sum. Theol. par.
4. q. 9. m. 5.
who lived amongst the Monks of Egypt, about the Year, 420. first made Deacon
and afterward Priest, by his Abbot Paphnutius, who was but a Presbyter, and all
the Schoolmen are not on the Gentleman's side, for some of them say, that
Presbyters by the Popes Dispensation may without the concurrence of a Bishop
ordain Deacons.

He Points at some Canons, that forbid Presbyters to Ordain, and say, every
Bishop must be Ordained by three Bishops at least; but he that argues from
their Canons to their Practice is a mere Sophister, as appears by the
Concession of Bellarmine just now mentioned; and he may as well say, no Bishop
ever obtained the Promotion, Con. Carth. 4. c. 23.
by Simony, or never Ordiained without his Presbyters, for there are Canons
against these things as well as the former, and he may proceed and say, that no
Bishops were ever Ignorant, Drunken, Tit. 1.7, 8.
Unclean, or Quarrelsome, because by very Authentic Canons, such are declared
incapable of the Office.

His forty seventh, and three following Pages, are all built upon a mistake,
which this Gentleman, as well as T. W. fell into I know not how, as if the
Vindicator ever denied the Validity of the Ordination of Schismatics, whereas
he only argues, from his Adversaries Assertion, that by Schism Men, and
Societies, are utterly cut off from the Catholic Church, and have no place,
nor Interest therein, and then I am sure it will follow that they cannot be the
Subjects of Apostolical Power, which can never be found out of the Visible
Church; I hope it has been sufficiently proved in this Treatise, that this is
the just Conclusion from such premises, and to talk of a remaining Character,
that includes the Power of Ordination in those that are utterly cut off from
the Church is perfect gibberish, and if this Gentleman thinks fit to answer
what has been already said to it, we shall willingly discourse him further
about it.

In the fiftieth Page he speaks like himself, We believe with St. Jerome that
the Power of Ordination belongs only to the Bishop, and your Ordinations made
by Presbyters are void and null, and we take you for no more but Lay Intruders.

We are not much concerned, what this Gentleman believes of us, nor what he
takes us for, but he should have been just to St. Jerome, though he may think
it is no matter, whether he be so to us or no; it would be very strange, if St.
Jerome should say any such thing as he pretends, and we should have been glad,
to have seen the Passage cited, if he refers to that, Quid enim facit
Episcopus, excepta Ordinatione, quod non facit Presbyter? that has been
sufficiently explained in these Papers already, to intend, not any distinct
Power that Bishops had by the Law of God, but what the Custom and Practice of
the Churches at that time had reserved unto them.

He tells us, Review. p. 50, 51.
of some nice Enquiries, that have been made into our Mission, and that they
suspect many of our first Apostles, from whom we derive our Orders, were never
Ordained, and supposes the Vindicator had not met with this Observation. And it
may be he has not, and therefore it is ten to One, but it is false, for if it
were true, the Dissenters were much more like to know it, than such as he, with
all his nice Enquiries and Suspicions.

He wonders the Vindicator should lose so many pages against this Line of
Succession, which if it would do no good, would certainly do no harm. Ay, but
it would do the greatest harm in the World to the Interest of the Church and
Christianity; to make the Salvation of men depend upon such a Line, and that is
the Notion the Vindicator spends some pages upon, and he cannot do a better
Office to the Church or Protestant Religion than to expose it, and if that be
not done effectually already, by my Consent, either he or some Body else, shall
spend as many pages more upon it.

We come now to the Vindicators account of Ordination, viz. That it is a
public Approbation of Ministerial Abilities by competent Judges; This (says
the Gentleman) is such a way of making Clergy men as never was heard of before,
will a public Aprobation of a man's Abilities invest him in his Office, will a
Testimonial from the Inns of Court make a man a Judge without a Commission from
the King?

Now here he confounds Commission and Investiture together, as if they were the
same thing which it is certain they are not; The Commission always goes before
the Investiture, and it is that which gives the Power, and the Investiture, is
only necessary to the regular Exercise of that Power, which is given by the
Commission. If this Gentleman would have the World believe, that it is the
Bishops that give a Minister his Commission and Ministerial Power, as the King
gives the Judge his Authority, he sets up Episcopacy in the Throne of Christ,
and is condemned by the Reformed Churches; it is Christ alone who grants the
Commission, in the great Charter of the Gospel, wherein he has declared that he
will have a standing Ministry, and tells us, what the Ministerial
Qualifications are, and has promised to work them by his Spirit in Men, in
Order thereunto; all the Ordainers do, is designare personam, to Point out the
Person that has those Qualifications, and this public Designation, with the
man's own Dedication of himself to the Work is the Investiture, and sets the man
apart to the regular Exercise of that Power, which Christ by his Charter
without, and those Qualifications within has given unto him.

The Case is something like to that of making a Person Mayor of a Corporation,
the People or Burgesses have the Power of choosing and the Recorder or Steward
the Power of Swearing him, and yet none of these confer the Authority, but only
design the Person, who receives his Power from the Prince alone, by the Charter
of the place, as his Instrument.

It is the great command of God to his Church, that the Gospel be Preached,
Religion Propagated, Churches Gathered, and Governed, and Sacraments
Administered; He has not named the Persons that are to do this, but he has
described them by their Qualifications, and Persons so qualified if they find
also a promptitude to undertake the Work (which I suppose is that which the
Church of England means, when she enquires of the Candidates, whether they be
moved by the Holy Ghost to undertake that Office are to seek for a regular
Investiture, and the Ordainers are commanded to invest them by a solemn
Approbation, that is, declaring that they find in them those Qualifications, by
which the Gospel describes a true Minister of Christ.

We grant that this Investiture is most regularly performed by the Ministers,
and should not ordinarily be without them; which seems to be grounded on this
Reason, (for all Gods commands are highly rational) the Ministers are
ordinarily to be thought, the most competent Judges; but as the Investiture it
self is not of the Essence of the Power, but only requisite to the due exercise
of it; So it is not of the Essence of the Investiture that it be performed by
Ministers, but other competent Judges may do it where they cannot be had, or
will not do it upon lawful Terms.

This Case of Ordination has been very weil argued by the excellent Mr. Baxter
(of whom England was not worthy) in his Disputations of Church Government, and
because I do not know that any one has directly assaulted him in it, I would
refer this Gentleman to it, where he will find it illustrated thus.

If the Sovereign Power make a Law, that there shall be Physicians Licensed by
a College of Physicians to Practice in this Common Wealth, and describe the
Persons that shall be so Licensed; This plainly first concludes that such
Persons shall be Physicians, but secondly, de ordine, that they shall be thus
Licensed. So that if the College should License a Company of utterly
insufficient men, and murderers that seek men's death, or should refuse to
License the Persons qualified according to Law, they may themselves be
punished, and the qualified Persons may act as authorized by that which binds
quoad materiam, and is by the College, not by them frustrate quoad Ordinem; So
it is in this Case in hand.

This is a rational account of the matter, and such as may give all Christians
full satisfaction in the Truth of their Churches Ministry and Ordinances,
without flying up into the Clouds, and inventing the Mysteries of an
uninterrupted Succession, indelible Characters, and such like stuff.

What has this Gentleman to Object against it, why? He tells us, no man can
preach unless he be sent, and no man can send him, but he that is Authorized
for that purpose; If he means by this, that no man ought to Preach, but those
that are Ordained (and this he must mean, if he speaks to the purpose) the
Constant Practice of his own Church Confutes him, which allows men to preach
several times before Ordination, that their Qualifications may appear, and they
may acquire a Title; but if no man can lawfully Preach till he be Ordained,
they ought not to allow this upon any account whatsoever, not so much as to
make experiment of their Abilities.

I would ask this Gentleman, when your Candidates Preach before Ordination, is
there no Possibility, that their Preaching may do good to the hearers, and
should they not in Preaching principally intend their Edification? If not it is
taking the Name of God in vain; but if they may do good, and should make that
their chief aim in those Sermons, then the Gentleman must find out some other
sense for that Text he mentions, which has been already explained in the first
Chapter of this Treatise.

He thinks, Ordainers are obliged to follow the Example of Christ, who when he
sent out his Apostles, Mat. 28.18.
recites his own Commission, All Vower is given to me in Heaven and in Earth:
Go therefore -- as my Father sent me, so I send you. But it is the highest
piece of Arrogance in the World, to pretend to the same Power that Christ had
in this matter; He had Power to institute the Office, and give the Authority of
the Ministry; Men have only the Power of Investiture, as the Bishops in
Crowning our Kings; and as Christ never made these Words of his the set form of
Ordination, so 'tis-too bold for any Bishop how great soever, to apply them to
himself in that Office.

That which follows, Review, p. 52
about appointing Ambassadors for Almighty God without his Order, is already in
substance answered, if by appointing Ambassadors, he means giving the
Commission and Power, neither Laymen nor Clergymen must presume to do it; if
he means investing them that God has chosen, with the Ceremonies of Ordination,
it is fit that the Ministers should do it, if they may be had, or will do it on
lawful Terms, but if not, better it were omitted, than that the Embassy of
Reconciliation should not be delivered to the World; I suppose their unordained
Candidates bring such an Embassy to their hearers (I am sure they should do so)
and if they do, then we have Ambassadors, without an appointment in his Sense
of the Word.

The Cases of Necessity which the Vindicator mentioned, are such as may happen,
and to neglect the public Worship of God, in expectation of a Gift of
Miracles, which I suppose he means, by the reviving of the Charismata would be
a profane Omission. He thinks to ridicule us out of it, by putting the Case
concerning a company of Women cast upon an Island, etc. Well, what if a man
should say, that the best qualified Sister among them might be chosen by the
rest, as the Abbesss, to be most constantly employed in Prayer and Exhortation,
till better help could be had; were not the Iberians Converted by a Captive
Maid; Russin. l. 1. c. 10.
and was it not the constant Custom of the Church of England till the Hampton
Court Conference, to permit Women to Baptize Children in Case of Necessity, and
how zealously did the Bishops endeavor to defend the lawfulness of it at that
time. The Bishop of London affirmed, the words of the Common Prayer Book
intended, a Permission of Private Persons to baptize in such Cases, and said it
was agreeable to the Practice of the Primitive Church, alleging the great
numbers that were Baptized, Acts 2. Which it was improbable the Apostles alone
could do, and added that some Fathers were of the same Opinion, Fuller Cent.
17. l. 10. p. 9.
and when the King opposed it, the Bishop of Winchester replied, that to deny
Private Persons to Baptize in Case of necessity, were to Cross all Antiquity
and the Common Practice of the Church, it being a Rule agreed on by Divines,
that the Minister is not of the Essence of the Sacrament.

Their great Ecclesiastical Politician Mr. Hooker sets himself to prove that
Baptism by any man in Case of Necessity is valid, Eccles. Pol. p. 320.
and says it was the Voice of the whole World heretofore, and (elsewhere) That
God has committed the Ministry of Baptism unto special men, it is for Orders
sake in the Church, not that their Authority might add any force to the
Sacrament.

Now is it not the most unaccountable perverseness in the World to make
Episcopal Ordination so indispensibly necessary? when the most solemn acts of
the Ministry (the Application of the Seals) are allowed by themselves to those
that have no Ordination at all, yea to a Sister, whether welll qualified or no,
in which they have quite outdone us, no such thing being ever practiced in the
Presbyterian Churches.

He endeavors to prove the necessity of such Ordination, from the Case of the
Abyssines, who were contented to be without those Ordinances which are to be
dispensed by Priests, till the return of Frumentius from Alexandria; but pray,
what Ordinances are those that are to be dispensed by Priests only, I thought
this Gentleman had made Preaching, the Gospel of Reconciliation one of them, I
am sure for that end, he pressed that Text, How can they preach except they be
sent? Does he mean the Sacraments? why the Fathers of his own Church tell him
all Antiquity allows the Baptism of Private Persons in Case of necessity, and
why not the other Sacrament too? the Words of Tertullian are well known, offers
and tingis, he argues from that Text, He has made us Kings and Priests unto
God, and to his Father, It is the Authority of the Church that has put a
difference between the Clergy and the Laity, Tert. de Corona Militis, and de
Baptism. p. 602.603. Laices etiam jus est -- Sufficiat in necessitatibus.
and which has established this sacred honor for the Body of the Clergy, this
is so true, that where there is no Clergyman to be had, thou do Celebrate,
thou do Baptize and thou art to thy self a Priest, now where there are three,
there is a Church though they be Laics, for every one lives by his own Faith
and God is no respecter of Persons: If therefore these Abyssines deprived
themselves so long of the Sacraments they were needlessly scrupulous.

Ruffinus tells us, that when Frumentius by the Providence of God was advanced
to some Power in the Realm during the Kings Minority, he carefully sought out
such as were Christians among the Roman Merchants, and exhorted them to meet
together and pray, which they did and when the Indians came amongst them, they
instructed them in the Christian Faith, and all this was done before he took
his Journey to Alexandria, and though Valesius will needs be so nice as to
distiuguish betwixt Oratories and Churches, and betwixt Preaching and
instructing I yet here was the great End of Churches and Bishops and Sermons
happily attained, viz. The Conversion and Instruction of Poor Souls, a greater
Seal of Mission than that of working Miracles, wherewith ('it is said) Frumentius
returned.

The Gentleman's other instances, prove no more but that in the sense of those
times, it was very desirable to have Ministerial Ordination and that they
rather chose to be at a great deal of pains than to want it, but it is not the
desireableness, but the necessity of it, that the Vindicator denied, and the
Church of England you see, will stand by him in it; Nor was it his design to
ridicule the Ceremony of laying on of Hands; But that foolish conceit, that by
such contact, there is a transition of power from one to another, in a
continued Line; The Presbyterians themselves always use that Apostolical rite
in their Ordinations, though they do not think it necessary to the conveyance of
Authority.

He charges the Vindicator with want of Sense or Integrity, in reporting the
Notion of a Patriarchal Right to Sovereignty; But if he can explain that Notion
any better 'twould have been a very obliging thing to have done it; I must
confess I am as dull as the Vindicator in understanding it, and cannot imagine
how that Patriarchal Right should exist any where but in the Line of the Eldest
Family in the World; For if at any time you set up a Younger Brother, it must
be upon some other Title, not the Patriarchal, but either the express
Nomination of God, or Election, or Conquest, or the like; But to claim the
Regal Power by Patriarchal Right, without pretending at least to the Line of
Primogeniture, is a thing I despair of ever understanding; That this
Patriarchal Right was ascribed to our Kings in the Late Reigns, is too well
known, and will not be so easily forgotten by the Nation, as it is denied by
those that then filled Men's Ears with it, E. of W.
a Noble Peer pretty well known to T. W. once publicly Animadverted upon this
Doctrine, and the Authors of it, and observed that such a right could be but in
one Person in the World at once, and no Person in the World could tell who that
was.

What he mentions p. 56. concerning the Decency of Ceremonies, has been
obviated in the former part, and there he may learn from the Bishops and
Doctors of the Church of England, that the Worship of God is never the better
performed for them, and therefore never the more decently, and Bishop Sanderson
condemns him for a Superstitious Fop that thinks otherwise, this case is
therefore adjudged already; See the Review, p. 57.
If the Motion he makes of allowing the Bishops to be judges of Decency, is to
be so understood, as that whatever the Clergy in Convocation Judge Fit and
Decent, must presently be submitted to, and that the Pastors of Particular
Churches or People (how mean or half-witted soever) must not make use of their
discerning faculty, this I confess is one way to end controversies, by tying us
all up to the Inspirations of the Canonical Tribe, and this is that some of
them have been long aiming at, but surely it is too far of the day, to impose at
this rate upon English Men.

The Survey or endeavors to justify their Excommunications, by the old
pretense of contempt and malice, but these Men ought to be very certain that it
is Malice and not real Scruple of Conscience, against which they so severely
proceed; And they have no power to impose those things upon Men, which they
know thousands are dissatisfied in, and they themselves acknowledge, render
their Duties not a whit more pleasing and acceptable to God; That scandalous
and disorderly Persons are to be disciplined according to the demerit of their
Actions and Behavior. No Church or sober Christian that I know of, will deny
but that persons of Orthodox Judgment, and Sober Conversation, should be
Excommunicated, Fined, Imprisoned, Banished and Ruined, because they dare not
comply with such things, as have been imposed in England, is a practice not to
be justified by any Rule in our Bibles, or President in the Reformed Churches,
but is indeed contrary to Humanity it self.

To what he says about the Greek Churches, p. 59. it is sufficient to reply, If
the procession of the Spirit from the Father and the Son be not an Article of
Faith, we desire to have a rule to distinguish what is de fide and what not in
those Creeds; But if it and the Greek Churches object against it, then T. W.
has excluded them, unless, he will say that ours is not the true Athanasian
Creed, and if it be not, why must it be put into the Liturgy, and Subscribed
and Assented to, under that denomination? He endeavors to help his Alderman
out, about the same Table, and tells us, he meant something else by it, than
the same Table in Specie, but since he has not told us what that more is, we
may suppose he wanted a handsome Salvo, for he durst not say it must be the
same numerically, and it would be hard to find any thing betwixt those two
kinds of Identity; He tells us To have the same Prayers, is to join with the
Church where we live in its Holy Devotions, and so do Dissenters join with the
Churches where they live, which are as true Churches, and their Devotions as
Holy, as if they were more large and splendid, for any thing that yet appears
to the contrary.

In the 60th Page, he acknowledges that to have the Government of many
Congregations is not essential to a Bishop, nor to have Presbyters under him,
for Milles the Martyr had no Christian in his Diocese; But it is Ordination
that makes a Bishop; If therefore our Ministers have all the Ordination that is
necessary to a Bishop by the Word of God, they are Bishops, though they be but
Pastors of single Congregations, and now if this Gentleman cannot prove by
plain Scripture that a Bishop must have a distinct Ordination from that of a
Presbyter, Ambrose in 1 Timothy, 3. Episcopi and Presbyteri una Ordinatio est,
uterque enim est sacerdos.
to advance him into a Superior Office, he has lost the Cause, and here we hold
it and expect plain and direct evidence to this very point when ever the
Reviewing humor returns upon him. And if the Pastors of single Congregations
have all that is essential to Bishops, then our Diocesans are a new Species of
Bishops, which St. Cyprian disowned in his Prefatory speech to the Council of
Carthage; And indeed it is liable to very just prejudices, for when Bishops
have taken away from the Pastors of Particular Churches, these Rights and
Powers, which God has given them, and engrossed all to themselves, and their
Diocese is become too large for their Personal Inspection and Administration,
they are forced to set up Officers of humane institution to exercise those
powers under them, which they have ravished from Gospel Ministers, that by
numerous Dependencies and large Revenues, they may gain that pre-eminence,
which some Men began betimes to contend for; See Mr. Baxters treatise of
Episcopacy never yet answered.

There is nothing more plainly shows these Men's contempt of Antiquity when it
speaks not on their side, than denying the Peoples power of Election, Rational
Defense, p. 3. Sect. 6. p. 197.
which is confirmed unto them by the Canons of diverse Councils and Ample
Testimony of the Fathers, as Dr. Rule has proved; And though we will not say
such consent is essential to the Ministerial Power, yet it is certainly
necessary to the Pastoral Relation, for the Bishops and Ministers could have no
certain cure (in such places where the Civil Magistrate does not interpose) but
by the Peoples consent; This Gentleman tells us the consent of the Ministers
and People of the Diocese is not necessary, -- but it is left wholly to the
discretion of the Church, and I wonder what that Church is, to whose discretion
this is referred when the Ministers and People are left out; will he say it is
in the Power of the Bishops of other Diocesses, to impose a Bishop upon any,
without the consent of Minister and People; And must we by the Church
understand the Bishops alone without Ministers and People as if they had
nothing to do in those matters that are left to the Churches Discretion; This
lets us see what these Men drive at, and how gladly they would enslave the
whole World to the humors of a few, and those not always the wisest or best of
Men.

That the Nomination of our English Bishops is vested in the King, is very
pleasing to Dissenters, especially under the Government of one so Wise and Good
as ours is; But then we must say the Power they receive from the King and Laws,
is not properly Spiritual Power; And we are willing to own them as having
Humane Authority over us, circa Sacra, by the appointment of our Governors, as
far as by Law we are under their Jurisdiction; And certainly many of them are
too wise to pretend to any more, since our Laws expressly condemn such
pretensions, as has been already proved, by the very Letter of the Law in that
case.

The Gentleman tells us The Vindicator showed his Abilities, in mentioning
Ignatius, who advises the Bishop to hold frequent assemblies, and to enquire
after all by their names, not despising the Men Servants or Maid Servants, and
he would fain show his Abilities, in enervating so plain evidence, and would
impose upon us a great many Negatives and Peradventures, which we must help him
to prove, We must prove, That those Assemblies, met only in one place, that
they were no more than ordinary Congregations, that the Bishop had no body to
assist him in the remoter parts of his charge, that no man else acquainted him
with the frailties and misdemeanors of particular; These and a great many more
such Negatives we must prove, which we are no way obliged to do, we insist upon
the plain words of Ignatius, and he must prove his peradventures himself, or we
shall take no notice of them; The Author of the Enquiry into the Constitution,
etc. of the Primitive Churches, offers to prove that these Diocesses were no
larger in the number of Church Members, than our present Parishes; But whether
that be so or no, I will not be positive; For it is manifest enough, the first
step toward Prelacy, was committing the Government of the Church to one, which
before was managed by several in common, the next was to make that Church as
large and great as could be; By keeping new formed Congregations under their
Jurisdiction; and we have early instances of such Encroachments.

These Men take the Liberty of making words signify any thing that serves
their present purpose. If Ireneus say, the Presbyters are the Successors of the
Apostles, there Presbyter must signify Bishop, for fear of spoiling the Plea
of Succession, Review, p. 65, 66.
If Tertullian say, they never receive the Eucharist from any but the
Presidents, there President must not signify the Bishop, but the Presbyter,
for it seems in a Bench of Presbyters they are all Presidents, though there be
a Bishop in Cathedra amongst them; Such Men will never be at a loss for
something to say.

Though the Vindicator trusting perhaps to his memory, mentioned the Sacrament
of the Eucharist instead of Baptism, yet it amounts to the same thing, for if
the Bishop was to take the Confessions of all that were to be Baptized, his
Diocese could not be of the same Model with ours, which such a thing would be
altogether impracticable; This Gentleman wonders the Vindicator should be so
nice in the Notion of Succession, p. 19. And afterward so loose as to make it
no more but conformity to the Apostles Model in Government and Worship, but the
wonder will cease, when he considers that in the former place, he took
Succession in the Sense T. W. used it, as that which gives the Bishops their
Title to Apostolical Power, and here he takes it in the true Sense wherein the
Fathers use it, whose words will never prove, that the Apostles left them their
Apostolical Power, but only that ordinary Pastoral Power which was emminently
included in the former.

The Vindicator grants that for persons wilfully to withdraw themselves from
such Particular Churches, as are framed according to Gospel Rules, and impose
no new or needless terms of Communion, is to act Schismatically, because it
cannot be without breach of Charity; The Gentleman replies Yes it may through
the Prejudices of Education, or want of Understanding, that is to say, they may
wilfully withdraw for want of Understanding; If their ignorance be not wilful,
it does not come up to the Case as the Vindicator stated it, but if it be
wilful ignorance, sure there is something of Uncharitableness in it.

His two last Pages are a very fit Epilogue for such an Opera, he rakes
together all the instances of wickedness that can be, and the Reader must take
it for granted, that the Dissenters are the Criminals pointed at, though he
does not think fit to say so; Such dealing and no other we have had from him
all along; We desire him the next time to speak above board, let him name the
particular Cases and Persons, and not by sly insinuations, prejudice the Minds
of his Credulous Party, against those who abhor such things as much as himself.

Who are those that look upon all besides themselves, as Enemies of God, and
Opposers of his pure Worship, Arch Rebel, p. 25. Reply, p. 47.
as Reprobates and Damned Wretches? Such censures indeed T.W. passes upon all
Dissenters (and the Reviewer has seconded him in it) they are Men out of the
Catholic Church, and Communion of Saints, have no right to the Promises, are
in a desperate Condition, their hopes of Salvation are unwarrantable and
groundless Fancies, etc. They neither Pray with, nor receive the Sacraments,
nor live under the Government of any Church, Review, p. 58. New Whigg Atheists,
p. 34.
and therefore cannot be within the Communion of Saints; These are their own
words; And as this Gentleman observes, it is no wonder if Men of such thoughts,
Consistory of Clowns, p. 61.
make no scruple of the most Violent and Uncharitable practices.

Who are those that are guilty of Plundering and Robbing their Neighbors and
taking away Men's Lives? Sure he does not mean those that for above twenty years
together made a Trade of breaking into the Houses of Protestant Dissenters,
taking away their Effects, and casting them into Prisons, and suffering them to
lie and perish there; See the 4th part of the Conformists Plea.
what lamentable havoc they made, is in part laid before the World by an
Eminent Conformable Minister, and will be ere long further discovered.

Who are those that refuse to have any dealing in Trade with Men of another
Persuasion? it would be madness in the Dissenters, for being the lesser number,
they must needs be great losers by such a Project, but this indeed was the
advice of L'Estrange when he was the Darling of the Party, Lay not out a penny
with the Whigs; I confess I am not able to name the place, but I find it in a
Paper concerning the Election of the Present Lord Mayor, and it is very probable
these Gentlemen can turn to it when they please.

Who are those pack't Juries that he speaks of, and where the unjust Courts of
Judicature? I hope he does not mean those that condemned the Renowned Lord
Russel, Colonel Sidney, Alderman Cornish, whom our Parliament has declared to
be Murdered; Or those that gave such damages against Sir Samuel Bernardiston,
Mr. Dutton Colt, Mr. Culliford: or the Judge and Jury that dealt so genteelly
with Mr. Papillon, etc.

By those cruel proceedings against a zealous Clergy Man that appears in
Defense of the Church; I would fain know whether he refers to the Barbarous
Usage of Dr. Oats, for discovering the Popish Plot, or of the Ingenious and
brave Mr. Johnson, for his Seasonable Advice to the Standing Army in behalf of
the Protestant Religion and Liberties of England: And whether by destroying of
Princes he means, the importunate invitation of some Spiritual Persons of
Eminent Note, to the then Prince of Orange, to come and free them from the
Tyranny of the Late King James; And that Infamous aftergame, that a certain
Elder Brother, with other of his Family, See the L. Pressed. Trial p. 53.
were a playing, to bring in the Abdicated Prince again, and destroy their
Generous and Noble Deliverer. If I have not been so happy as to hit upon the
Gentleman's true Meaning, he must e'ne blame himself for sculking so in Generals.

If he can convict any of the Dissenters of such scandalous practices, let him
do it, and if the Churches to which they belong, neglect to do their duty in
censuring and rejecting of them, they will be condemned by their own
Principles; But I hope he would not have them to proceed upon such unproved
Accusations and Libels as these, which it seems he advanced in such loose and
general terms, See his Review. p. 69.
because he knew not by what Rules to fix these crimes upon particular Persons;
And certainly he had better to have suspended the Charge, till he knew how to
make it out, than to arraign us so confidently upon it, and be forced after
all, to Petition, that we would help him to prove it.

Appendix.
IT is certain in such controversies as these, nothing is more necessary than
to understand the matters of Fact, without which we shall never make a true
judgment as to matter of Right; I shall therefore add a Brief Historical
Account, of such passages as are pertinent to our present case, laying down
this Law to my self, that I will report nothing but what in my Conscience I
believe to be true, and for which I can produce good Authorities.

That the Reformation of this Land was encouraged by King Hen. VIII, rather
upon private pique against the Bishop of Rome, than out of any hearty Love to
the thing it self, is too plain to be denied, and that doubtless was the reason
of the short and uneven paces by which it then moved, nothing must be done but
with a saving to the Politic Maxims and Interests of the Court; Fox Acts and
Mon. p. 1239. Fuller Cent. 16. p. 242.
The six Articles were put in Execution to the very last year of his Reign, and
that Pious and Ingenious Lady Mrs. Ann Askew, suffered Martyrdom thereby, not
many Months before that Prince himself gave up his Mighty Ghost.

His Son and Successor the Glorious King Edward, engaged himself in the Cause
upon a better Principle, and would in all probability have improved it to a
good degree of perfection, had not the stiffness of some leading Churchmen, and
the shortness of that invaluable life, prevented him. In the beginning of his
Reign, Miles Coverdale, John Hooper and others, who had fled beyond Sea upon
the six Articles, returned into England; And finding how very defective the
Reformation was, and how many Popish Ceremonies, Gestures and Vestments, were
still retained, could not conceal their dissatisfaction; See Fuller, lb.
But Cranmer, and Ridley, and others, who by Politic compliances, had
weathered out the Storm, very stiffly defended them under the pretenses of
Antiquity and Decency.

The Unhappy differences betwixt Ridley and Hooper, about these things are
sufficiently known, and so is that happy agreement to which they came when they
were Prisoners for the Truth in the Marian days; And by Ridleys Letter to
Hooper it appears that his sufferings had changed his Thoughts concerning those
by-matters as he calls them, for which in Prosperity he had so warmly
contended, he confesses it was Hoopers Wisdom to reject them, and his
Simplicity to urge them. Your Wisdom and my Simplicity I grant has a little
jarred.

A learned and worthy Person, that has lately descanted upon that Letter, B. of
S.
seems to think that this was only spoken out of Ridleys abundant humility and
condescension, and that it should be taken for granted, that Ridley was in the
right, and Hooper in the wrong, especially because a Law interposed, but (with
all possible respect to that great Man) we cannot easily admit this
supposition: We do verily believe Ridley was in the wrong, and though he acted
according to his Judgment, which was really great in other matters, yet in this
it was misinformed, and we think our selves obliged to believe him when he
expressly says, it was his simplicity to jarr with Hooper in this matter.

And that which made his Rigor the more blameable was, that he persisted in it,
notwithstanding the King's earnest Request to the contrary, first by the Earl
of Warwick, then under his own Signet, wherein he highly commends Hooper's
Learning, Judgment, Discretion and Probity, and promises to save the Bishops
from all Penalties they might incur by passing over those Rites and Ceremonies
that were offensive to his Conscience, but instead of complying herewith,
Hooper is sent to Prison; no wonder if this caused Ridley to make such
reflections upon himself, when he was under the like Confinement.

The Learned Author adds, That Ridley spoke these diminishing things of himself
in the absence of the Law when it was repealed; but that I suppose does not in
the least alter the case; for if his contending with Hooper was justifiable at
first, it would have remained so still, and the quality of the action could not
be changed by any thing [ex post-facto] but must needs stand good or bad as it
was when first done; and under those Circumstances no doubt it was reviewed
when the simplicity thereof was acknowledged; and I fear it will not so well
consist with the honor that is due to the Memory of that blessed Martyr, to
think that out of mere Complement to Hooper, he would disapprove of what he had
done, had he really believed he had done well in it: He that was ready to
suffer the utmost extremity for the great Truths of Religion, would not upon
any account have recanted his Judicious Zeal, for the Unity of the Church, and
Decency of Religion, if he had so esteemed of it; but his Sentiments were now
changed, and that which before he thought to be Wisdom and Zeal, he now
confesses was simplicity.

Whilst this good Bishop was thus acknowledging his weakness, and gladly
embracing those to whom he had been formerly somewhat troublesome; others of
his Brethren, who had escaped the Fiery Trial, and were not humbled enough to
see their folly, werefomenting differences even in the Sanctuaries to which
they fled.

The most famous Congregation of English Exiles was seated at Frankfort, where
they had a Church granted them by the Magistrates, Troubles of Frankfort,
printed 1575
who required them to observe the Model of the French Churches in their
Service, which they willingly consented to, forbearing to answer aloud after
the Minister, omitting the Litany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies as
superfluous and superstitious; instead of the Confession in the English
Liturgy, used another, better fitted to the present time and state of Affairs,
then sang a Psalm in Meter in a plain Tune, then the Minister prayed for the
Divine Assistance, and so proceeded to the Sermon, then followed a prayer for
all States, particularly for England, which ended with the Lord's Prayer, then
the rehearsal of the Articles of our Belief, then another Psalm, and the
Minister concluded with the Blessing.

In this posture the Affairs of that Church stood, Fuller Chapter Histor. Cent. 16.
l. 8. p. 30.
when Dr. Cox arrived there out of England, who being a man of a high Spirit
(as Dr. Fuller speaks of him) came one day into the Congregation and made a
great disturbance amongst them, answering aloud after the Minister; and the
next Lord's day one of his company, without the knowledge and consent of the
Congregation, got up into the Pulpit, and there read all the Litany, using the
English Ceremonies therein; this, no doubt, was done for the sake of Decency
and Order, and Church-Unity, though impartial men will think, it was a very
improper Method for the accomplishment of such designs.

These Irregular proceedings, Dr. Burnet acknowledges that this Dr. Cox was the
unhappy occasion of all the Troubles at Frankfort. Observat. upon Ridleys
Letter to Hooper, p. 4. Dr. Fuller, ib.
had almost ruined all; for the Principal Magistrates of the Place protest, if
the Reformed Order of the Churches of Frankfort were not observed, the Doors
should be shut upon them again; and thus says Fuller, the Coxan Party
depressed, embraced a strange way to raise themselves, accusing Mr. Knox (the
Pastor of the Church) of High Treason against the Emperor in words spoken
several years before in another Land and Language, when he owed no Allegiance
to him; and this was so zealously urged, that the Magistrates could do no less
than will him to depart the City, lest they should not seem tender enough of
the Emperor's Honor; so that at last Dr. Cox might say, (as the Historian
observes) With great rather than good Wrestlings, have I wrestled, and have
prevailed.

When Queen Elizabeth came to the Throne, there seemed a fair prospect of
further Reformation and Union, and diverse of the Bishops that had been
sufferers, were willing to have promoted it; but others were still tenacious of
their Old Customs, and greatly affected External Pomp and Gallantry in Divine
Service, and the Queen her self was very much of that humor, as appears by
Grindal's Letter to Bullinger dated August 27. Burnets Letters, p. 52.
1566. where he writes that all the Bishops who had been beyond Sea, dealt with
the Queen to let the matter of the Habits fall, but she was so prepossest, that
though they endeavored to divert her from prosecuting that matter, she
continued still inflexible.

And Bishop Jewel in a Letter to the same Person, dated July 16. 1565. writes
of the Act concerning the Habits with great regret, and expresses some hopes
that it might be Repealed the next Session of Parliament, Ibid. p. 53.
if the Popish Party did not hinder it: And the present Bishop of Salisbury,
who has obliged us with the Account of these Letters, adds, that he saw other
Letters wherein it was asserted, that both Cranmer and Ridley intended to
procure an Act (in King Edward's Reign) for the abolishing of the Habits, and
that they only defended their lawfulness, but not their fitness.

The same Learned Prelate, who favored the World with these ingenious Letters
whilst he was beyond Sea, has discovered the same Integrity and Regard to Truth
and Moderation since his return, and in the presence of the most August
Assembly, expresses himself thus:

Here suffer me to tell you, that in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign
our Adversaries saw no hopes of retrieving their Affairs, Dr. Burnets
Thanksgiving Sermon. before the House of Commons, Jan. 31. 1688.
which had been spoiled by Queen Mary's Persecution, but by setting on foot
Divisions amongst Protestants, upon very inconsiderable matters, I my self have
seen the Letters of the Chief Bishops of that time, from which it appears that
the Queen's stiffness in maintaining some Ceremonies, flowed not from their
Counsels, but from the practices of some disguised Papists; And I have had in
my hand the Original Journal of the lower House of Convocation in the fifth
year of that glorious Reign, in which the matter of the Ceremonies was first
argued, and when it came to the Vote, it was carried by the greater Number of
the Voices of the Members that were present, to lay down all those Subjects of
Contests, but the Proxies turned it to the severer side.

How unhappy the Effects of this Act for Conformity were, (which in the
Convocation turned upon so narrow a Point) may appear by the words of a worthy
Person then living, which are these; For some five years together before the
Subscription was urged, Mr. Nichols Plea of the Innocent, p. 206, 207
there was such Unity amongst the Ministers, and they joined together, in all
places so lovingly and diligently, that many thousands were converted from
Atheism and Popery; but when Subscription was urged, many godly worthy learned
Preachers were silenced, and deprived, the Nation distracted, many good Persons
grieved and offended, and Papists and wicked men encouraged and emboldened.

These things were so obvious, that diverse Lords of the Privy Council earnestly
solicited for Moderation; and in an excellent Letter to A. See the Letter at
large in Fuller C.H. Book 9. p. 151.
Bishop Whitgist, and the Bishop of London set forth, that a great number of
Learned and Zealous Preachers, were suspended from their Cures, and the County
of Essex and other Places, and many of their Rooms filled with Persons, neither
of good Learning, nor good Name, but chargeable with great faults, as
Drunkenness, Filthiness, Gaming, Haunting of Alehouses, etc. wherein they
earnestly entreat the Prelates, to take some charitable consideration of these
Causes, that the People of the Realm may not be deprived of their Pastors,
being Diligent, Learned and Zealous, though in some Points Ceremonial, they may
seem doubtful in Conscience, etc. Subscribed by the Lord Burleigh, Earl of
Shrewsbury, E. Warwick, E. Leicester, L. Howard, J. Croft, Hatton, Walsingham.

But they were put off with the common Answer, that the Ministers were
Factious, and Contemners of the Ecclesiastical Laws, and Authors of
Disquietness, and must not be suffered to exercise their Ministry without
further Conformity.

Not long after, Ibid. p. 174.
these things were taken notice of in Parliament, and the Honorable House of
Commons Passed some Bills in favor of the Nonconformists, but the Archbishop
was importunate with the Queen not to give her consent, and so nothing was
effected. Still the Nation grew more and more sensible of the ill Consequences
of the Bishops proceedings, and in the year 1587. The House of Commons
presented to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, a Petition in sixteen
Particulars, some against scandalous and insufficient Ministers, others
desiring the abatement of certain Oaths and Subscriptions, tendered to persons
at their entrance on the Ministry, and yet not expressly prescribed by the Laws
of the Realm, and that Ministers might not be troubled for their omission of
some Rites, Ibid. p. 191.
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, etc. And diverse of the Lords approved
of this Petition, and spoke to it; But the Archbishop betook himself to his
old Weapon, cries out the Church was a falling, O Dea. cert.
makes his Prayers to the Queen, calls her a Goddess, and carries the point
against them all.

Having thus baffled the Parliament, they proceed to the Imprisonment of Mr.
Cartwright, the silencing of Mr. Travers, of whom Dr. Fuller gives us such a
Character, P. 216.
as is no way to the credit of those that dealt so harshly with him; But this
was not all, Mr. Udall, and diverse others were condemned to dye, for writing
against the Male Government of these Ecclesiastics, which was now become a
capital crime by one of the greatest stretches of Law that ever was heard of in
England. P. 222.


We now come to the Reign of K. James the first, and here I think it may be
seasonable to wipe off that Dirt which T. W. has cast upon the Vindicator, for
saying, that when this Prince ascended the English Throne, the Prelatick party
dreading lest the Puritans should have too great a share of his favors; Bent
all their Studies to create prejudices in him against them. The Citizen
replies, The ill opinion which the King had of the Puritans, was founded upon
his own experience, and published long before he had any converse with the
English Bishops; and transcribes a passage out of his ASILIKON DOPON, where He
says, Take heed my Son, of such Puritans, very Pests in the Church and
Commonwealths, Whom no Deserts can oblige, etc.

But the Gentleman ought not to have insulted over his Adversary in such
opprobrious Language, till he had considered: That not a word of this was
intended of the English Puritanes, concerning whom the Vindicator spoke; For
this Prince had but a little while before writ three Letters to Queen Elizabeth
in favor of them, and therein speaks very honorably of Mr. Cartwright and Mr.
Udal, who were esteemed the Leading Men of that party; And kindly interceeded
for those that Dissented from the Bishops, in the things at that time
controverted amongst them.

Nor by the word Puritan did the King mean the Presbyterians, as such, if we
may believe his own words, in the Preface to the aforesaid Book; wherein he
declares, That the Name Puritan did properly belong to that Sect amongst the
Anabaptists called The Family of Love; Because, says he, they think themselves
Pure, and in a manner without Sin, the only true Church, and only worthy to
partake of the Sacraments, of this special Sect I principally mean: when I
speak of Puritans, diverse of them, as Brown, Penry, and others, having at
sundry times come into Scotland to saw their Popple; -- And indeed, I give this
Title to such Brainsick and heady Preachers, their Disciples and Followers,
who refusing to be called of that Sect, yet participate too much with their
Humors, in maintaining the abovementioned Errors; and (the King further adds)
I Protest upon my Honor, I did not mean it generally of all those Preachers or
others, that like better the single Form of Policy in our Church, than of the
many Ceremonies of the Church of England; or that are persuaded that their
Bishops smell of a Papal Supremacy; No, I am so far from being contentious in
these things, that I equally love and honor the Learned and Grave Men of
either Opinion.

And that those called Puritans at that time in England, were not such Persons
as are here described, appears sufficiently, from the earnest Endeavors both
of the House of Commons and Lords of the Privy Council on their behalf, and the
different account they give of them, who must needs be acknowledged very
competent Judges; and it is observable, that the Familists in England took
notice of this censure of the King's, Fuller Church Hist. Book 10, p. 30.
and in their Petition to him when he came into England, they disown all
Affinity with the Puritans, and speak reproachfully of them under that Title
themselves.

I hope this will abundantly acquit the Old English Puritans from being the
Persons aimed at in those Royal Reflections, and therefore notwithstanding any
thing in that Book, it may be very true that the Bishops flattered that King
into an ill Opinion of them.

That some of our English Prelates endeavored to do very ill Offices betwixt
the King and Presbyterian Party even before he came into England, is most
certainly true, and it cannot be imagined that they would be less busy when
they had him amongst them, Bishop Bancroft was more than ordinary active in
such Designs, as appeared amongst other things by a Letter from one Norton a
Stationer in Edinburgh, directed for him, and intercepted; Calderwood's Hist.
of the Chapter of Scotland, p. 248.
upon Examination Norton acknowledged, that he was employed by Bancroft to
disperse certain Questions, that tended to the Defamation of the Kirk, and
Presbyterial Government. The same Bishop writ frequent Letters to Mr. Patrick
Adamson, the Titular Archbishop of St. Andrews, (which were many of them
intercepted) wherein he stirs him up to Extol and Praise the Church of England,
above all others, and to come up to London, Ibid. p. 259.
assuring him that he would be very welcome, and well rewarded by the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

This Adamson had composed a Declaration, which passed under the King's Name,
wherein the whole Order of the Kirk was greatly traduced and condemned; The
Commissioners of the General Assembly complained to the King of the many false
Aspersions contained therein, which were so shameful, that the King disowned
it, and said, It was not his doing, but the Archbishops, and prudently
discarded that great Favorite, and gave the Rents of the Bishopric to the
Duke of Lenox.

The poor Gentleman thus abandoned, professes himself to be truly Penitent for
what he had done, and makes a full Recantation which he Subscribed in the
presence of a great many Witnesses, and directs it to the Synod convened at St.
Andrew's; Confessing, That he had out of Ambition, Vainglory and Covetousness,
undertaken the Office of an Archbishop; That he had labored to advance the
King's Arbitrary Power in Matters of Religion, and Protested before God that he
was commanded to write that Declaration by the Chancellor, the Secretary, and
another great Courtier, and that he was more busy with some Bishops in
England, in Prejudice of the Discipline of the Kirk, partly when he was there,
and partly by Mutual Intelligence than became a good Christian, much less a
Faithful Pastor, etc.

Now although the King fondly adhered to such kind of Men, whilst he hoped to
advance his Prerogative thereby, yet when he began to perceive the ill Effects
of such Conduct, Ibid. Preface.
he still deserted them, and in those prudent Intervals, would freely declare
his good Opinion of the Presbytery, and their Form of Government, particularly
in the National Assembly, 1590. He thanked God that he was King of such a
Country, wherein, says he, there is such a Church even the sincerest Church on
Earth, Geneva not excepted, seeing they keep some Festival Days, as Easter and
Christmas, and what have they for it? As for our Neighbors in England, their
Service is an ill mumbled Mass in English, they want little of the Mass but the
Liftings: Now I charge you, my good People, Barons, Gentlemen, Ministers, and
Elders, that you all stand to your Purity, and Exhort the People to do the
same; and as long as I have Life and Crown, I will maintain the same against
all deadly.

Nay, Calder. p. 473.
when he took his leave of Scotland upon the Union of the two Kingdoms, he
solemnly promised the Ministers of the Synod of Lothian, that he would make no
Alterations in their Discipline; but when he came up to London, those who had
been tampering with him and his Courtiers before, had a fair opportunity to
accomplish their Design, which was the utter Abolition of the Presbytery in
Scotland, and the Suppression of the Puritans in England; And (says my Author)
as soon as the English Prelates had got King James amongst them, R. Baylie's
Vindication and Answer to the Declarat. p. 11.
they did not rest till Mr. Melvill and the Prime of the Scots Divines were
called up to London, and only for their Just Defense of the Truth and Liberties
of Scotland against Episcopal Usurpations, were either Banished or Confined,
and so sore Oppressed, that it brought many of them with Sorrow to their
Graves, and the whole Discipline of the Church was over-thrown, notwithstanding
the King's parting Promise to the contrary.

The Nonconformists in England were so far from being brought over by the
Severities of the former Reign, that they drew up a Petition about this time
Signed by Seven hundred and fifty Ministers, desiring Reformation of certain
Ceremonies and Abuses in the Church, which Fuller gives us at large; this was
designed to have been presented before the Conference at Hampton Court, but was
deferred till after.

The Relation of this (so much talked of) Conference, as Fuller reports it out
of Barlow, is justly suspected of great Partiality, and the Historian himself
speaks doubtfully of it; and yet even in that we have a plain Indication of
what temper the Court and Bishops were: It looks very odd, that when the King
had allowed several of Dr. Reynold's Exceptions, he should threaten if they had
no more to say, He would make them to Conform, or hurry them out of the Land,
or do worse; a poor business! for a Prince to menace his own Subjects for
Nonconformity to that which himself had formerly called an Ill-mumbled Mass in
English, and even now acknowledged, wanted some Reformation.

But we have this Matter set in a truer Light, by Mr. Patrick Galloway, in his
Account of it from London to the Presbytery of Edinburgh, Calder. p. 474.
after it was Revised by the King's own Hand: The words are,

Beloved Brethren, after my hearty Commendations, these Presents are to show
you, that I received Two of your Letters; One directed to His Majesty, the
other to my Self for my Perusal, the same I read, closed and three days before
the Conference, delivered into His Majesty's Hand, and received it back again
after some short Speeches, upon those words in your Letter, the Gross
Corruptions of this Church, which were then expounded; and I was assured, all
Corruptions dissonant from the Word of God or contrary thereunto, should be
amended: The Twelfth of January was the day of Meeting, at which time the
Bishops were called upon, and gravely desired to advise upon all the
Corruptions of this Church, in Doctrine, Ceremonies and Discipline; and as they
would answer it to God in Conscience, and to His Majesty upon their Obedience,
that they should return the Third day after, which was Saturday. Accordingly
they returned to His Majesty, and when the Matter was propounded to them, as
before, they answered, All was Well. And when His Majesty with great fervency
brought instances to the contrary, they upon their Knees with great
earnestness, craved that nothing should be altered, lest the Popish Recusants
punished for Disobedience, and the Puritans punished by Deprivation ab officio
and beneficio, for Nonconformity, should say, they had just Cause to insult
upon them, as Men who had endeavored to bind them to that which by their own
Mouths now was confessed to be Erroneous. After five Hours Dispute had by His
Majesty against them, and his resolution for Reformation intimated to them,
they were dismissed for that day -- etc. but it appears by the result, their
importunity overcame him at last.

Dr. Fuller observes, That whereas before this Conference, it was disputable,
whether the North where he long lived, or the South, whither he lately came,
would prevail most on the King's Judgment in Church Government, now this
Question was clearly decided. I hope now the Vindicator may be allowed to have
some Grains of Shame and Modesty common to Humane Nature, though he ventured to
say, That the English Prelates flattered King James into an ill Opinion of the
Puritans, and the thing is not so plain or known a Contradiction as the Citizen
pretends; and for him to tell the World at this time a day of the famous Piety
and Virtue of that Prince, is ridiculous enough. Alas, the History of his Reign
is too well known; his Contending with Parliaments; his Encouraging of Papists;
his Secret Articles upon the Treaties with Spain and France; his greedy Desire
of Arbitrary Power; his Prostituting the Honors, and Wasting the Treasures of
the Nation, after a most inglorious manner, produced those ill Effects, under
which these Kingdoms have labored and languished ever since, till by the late
happy Revolution our Ancient Rights and privileges were raised out of the
Grave, recognized, and settled upon their true Basis once more.

The Unhappy Government of K. Charles the First, is now sufficiently Unveiled;
especially by Rushworth's Impartial Collections. The Vindicator briefly hinted
at those Irregular and Arbitrary Practices, that forced the Parliament to take
up Arms for the Defense of their Liberties, and for rescuing the King out of
the hands of those Counselors that had so fatally misled him; T. W. calls this
Notorious Calumny, and says, he could answer all the Instances particularly,
but he refers to the Rolls and Acts of Parliament; The Vindicator is willing to
join issue with him here, and appeals to the several Petitions, Remonstrances
and Speeches made in Parliament as they stand upon Record in the Journals of
both Houses, and they are now made so public, that no Man but one who has no
Reputation to lose, would have offered to deny that which all the Nation that
can read, Books, know to be true. And I will also tell him, that there is not
one passage mentioned by the Vindicator concerning the Male Administration of
that King, but what he may find in the Supplement to Baker 's Chronicle, a
History never suspected for Disloyalty, but evidently partial the other way.

The Vindicator renewed the Challenge to Name four Persons in that Parliament,
Dr. Burnet tells us, the Duke of Hamilton was dissatisfied with the Courses
some of the Bishops had followed before the Troubles began, and could not but
impute their first rise to the Provocations that had been given by them,
Memoirs, p. 408.
that were not in full Communion with the Church of England when the War began:
It is true, many of them that were for Episcopacy, were highly offended at the
Behavior of some of the Bishops, as appears by the Speeches of the Lords
Falkland and Digby, both great Royalists; and for my part, I desire no other
Evidence of the intolerable Usurpations of the Laudensian Party, than what
those Noble Lords have given us, which being now in so many Hands, by the
Publishing the third part of Rushworths Collections I will not transcribe.

The Nonconformists indeed generally joined with the Parliament in that Cause,
which was doubtless as just and necessary, when first undertaken as ever was
carried upon the Point of a Sword; But that it was without the least design
upon the Kings Person, their Solemn League and Covenant plainly proves, and the
many Declarations, and Remonstrances which they afterward made, when they saw
new designs laid and pursued.

In the Year, 1648. When the Republican Faction was at the highest, the
Ministers called Presbyterian, in and about London, fearing that which
afterward happened, boldly Published a Vindication of themselves, and
Exhortation to the People, part of which, I shall here Transcribe to let the
World see, how shamefully they have been abused about the Death of that King,
their Words are these.

To this Vindication we are compelled at this time, Vindicat. of the Minist.
Printed for T. Underhil, Ann. 1648. Subscribed by C. Burgess, D. D. W. Gouge,
D. D. E. Stanton, D. D. T. Temple, D. D. G. Walker. E. Calamy, B. D. J.
Whitaker. D. C^wdrey. W. Spurstow. L. Seaman, D. D. Sim. Ash. T. Case. N.
Proffect. T. Thorowgood. E. Corbet. H. Roborough. A. Jackson. J. Nalton. T.
Cawton. C. Offspring. Sa. Clark. Io. Wall. F. Roberts. M. Haviland. J.
Sheffield. W. Harrison. W. Jenkin. J. Viner. E. Blackwel. J. Cross. J. Fuller.
W. Tailor. P. Witham. Fra. Peek. Chapter (...). J. Wallis. T. Watson. T. Bedford.
W. Wickins. T. Manton, D. D. Tho. Gouge. W. Blackmore. R. Mercer. R. Robinson.
J. Glascock. T. Whately. J. Lloyde. J. Wells. B. Needler. N. Staniforth. S.
Watkins. J. Tice. J. Stileman. Jos. Ball. J. Devereux. P. Russel. J. Kirby. A.
Barham.

because there are many who very confidently (yet most unjustly) charge us, to
have been formerly instrumental toward the taking away the Life of the King;
and because also there are others, who in their Scurrilous Pasquils and Libels
(as well as with their Virulent Tongues) represent us to the World as a Bloody
Seditious Sect, and Traitorous Obstructors, of what all the Godly People of the
Kingdom do earnestly desire for the establishing of Religion and Peace in that
we stick at the Execution of the King, while yet we are (as they falsely affirm)
content to have him Convicted and Condemned, all which we must and do from our
Hearts disclaim, before the whole World.

For when we did first engage with the Parliament (which we did not till called
thereunto) we did it with Loyal Hearts, and Affections toward the King and his
Posterity; not intending the least hurt to his Person, but to stop his Party
from doing further hurt to the Kingdom, not to bring his Majesty to Justice,
(as some now speak) but to put him into a better Capacity to do Justice, to
remove the wicked from before him, that his Throne might be established in
Righteousness; not to Dethrone and Destroy him, which we fear is the ready way
to the Destruction of all his Kingdoms.

That which put any of us on at first to appear for the Parliament was, the
Propositions and Orders of the Lords and Commons in Parliament ( June 10.
1642.) for bringing in of Money and Plate, etc. Wherein they assured us that
whatsoever should be brought in thereupon, should be employed upon no other
occasion, than to maintain The Protestant Religion, The Kings Authority, and
His Person in his Royal Dignity, the Free Course of Justice, the Laws of the
Land, the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Privileges of Parliament, against any
force which shall oppose them.

As for the present actings at Westminster, since the time that so many of the
Members were by force secluded, diverse imprisoned and others thereupon,
withdrew from the House of Commons (and there being not that Conjunction of the
two Houses as heretofore) we are wholly unsatisfied therein, because we
conceive them to be so far from being warranted by sufficient Authority, as
that in our Apprehensions, they tend to an actual Alteration, if not
Subversion, of that which the Honorable House of Commons in their Declaration,
of April 17. 1646. have taught us to call the Fundamental Constitution and
Government of this Kingdom, which they therein assure us (if we understand
them) they would never alter.

Yea, we hold our selves bound in Duty to God, Religion, the King, Parliament
and Kingdom, to profess before God, Angels and Men, That we verily believe,
that which is so much feared to be now in Agitation, the taking away the Life
of the King, in the present way of Trial, is contrary to the Word of God, the
Principles of the Protestant Religion (never yet stained with the least drop of
the Blood of a King) the Fundamental Constitution and Government of this
Kingdom, as also to the Oath of Allegiance, the Protestation of May 5.1641. and
the Solemn League and Covenant; from all or any of which Engagements, we know
not any Power on Earth, able to absolve us or others.

Therefore according to our Covenant, we do in the Name of the great God (to
whom all must give a strict account) warn and exhort all who either more
immediately belong to our respective Charges, or any way depend on our
Ministry, or to whom we have administered the said Covenant (that we may not by
our Silence, suffer them to run into that provoking Sin of Perjury) to keep
close to the ways of God, and the rules of Religion, the Laws and their Vows,
in their constant maintaining the true Reformed Religion, the Fundamental
Constitution and Government of this Kingdom, as also in preserving the
Privileges of both Houses of Parliament, and the Union between the two Nations
of England and Scotland, to mourn bitterly for their own Sins, the Sins of the
City, Army, People and Kingdom, and the miscarriages of the King himself (which
we cannot but acknowledge to be many and great) in his Government that have
cost the Kingdoms so dear, and cast him down from his Excellency, into a horrid
pit of Misery almost beyond Example; and to pray that God would give him
effectual Repentance, and sanctify that bitter Cup of Divine displeasure, that
Divine Providence has put into his hand; and also that God would restrain the
Violence of men that they may not dare to draw upon themselves and the Kingdom
the Blood of their Sovereign, etc.

This was backed with a Letter to the General, and his Council of War to the
same effect; and yet all this has not been sufficient to defend them from the
malicious slanders of men, that either were then unborn or had not the Courage,
to run those hazards for the sake of their unfortunate Prince as they did. The
deplorable Death of this King, has been made great use of in the Late Reigns,
to run down Dissenters, and to justify those unmerciful Laws that have been
made and executed against them; and to make it the better serve such designs,
they have made the highest Panegyricks upon that Prince, and his extraordinary
Piety and Devotion, in which they have commonly taken their Text out of EIKON
ASILIK, a Book which next to the Bible, excelled all others in pure Seraphick
strains, but alas the grave Cheat is at length discovered, and though some men
are very angry, there is no remedy; for heat and ill Language will never
retrieve its blasted Reputation; only the best on it is, there is another of the
same kind, pourtraying his Unhappy Son in his Solitudes and Sufferings too, and
those that regret the Disparagement of the former, may try whether they can
support the Credit of the latter; but the World I hope grows too wise to be
enamoured of such Pageantry.

The Vindicator affirmed, That it was by the Address and Interest of the Party
called Presbyterian (under God:) That King Charles the Second was restored, and
(he adds) the solemn Promises, fair Words and great Assurances, that were given
them by the Church and Court Party, upon the Treaty of Restoration, are very
well known, and the speedy and barefaced Violation of all, is not to be
paralleled in Story; which T. W. misreports, as if the Vindicator had said
that King Charles the Second was not to be paralleled in Story, though
afterward, having cleared his Eyes he confesses, these things are charged upon
the Church and Court Party, and how will be bring them off; he says, All is
Fiction and Forgery, for the King referred all to the Parliament, and they
re-established and Confirmed all things to the satisfaction of the Nation in
General.

Well, if we cannot prove these things to be true, we will own the Forgery, and
submit to all the Reproaches this Gentleman can heap upon us; I would feign
know where the Fiction lies. Were there no Promises made by the Court and
Church Party? or were they not broken? It is strange we should be obliged to
prove that such Promises were made, when the Kings Declaration speaks it so
plainly in these Words.

We do declare a Liberty to tender Consciences, and that no man shall be
disquieted, or called in Question, for differences in Opinion, which do not
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, and that we shall be ready to Consent to such
Acts of Parliament, as upon Mature Deliberation, shall be of fered to us for
the full granting that Indulgence.

And in his Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, Oct. 25. 1660. he
says, When We were in Holland, we were attended by many Grave and Learned
Ministers from hence, who were looked upon as the most able and principal
Assertors of the Presbyterian Opinions, and to our great satisfaction, we found
them Persons full of Affection toward us, of Zeal for the Peace of the Church
and State, and neither Enemies to Episcopacy nor Liturgy, but modestly to
desire such Alterations in either, as without shaking the Foundations, might
best allay the present Distempers, which the Indispositions of the times and
tenderness of some men's Consciences had contracted for the better doing,
whereof we did intend to call a Synod, and in the mean time, We published in
our Declaration from Breda, a Liberty to tender Consciences -- We need not
profess the high Affection and Esteem, which We have for the Church of England,
as it is established by Law, nor do we think, that Reverence in the least
diminished by our Condescentions, not peremptorily to insist upon some
particulars of Ceremony, which however intruduced, by the Piety, and Devotion,
and Order, of the former times, may not be so agreeable to the present, but may
even lessen that Piety and Devotion for the improvement whereof, they might be
happily first introduced, and consequently may be well dispensed with -- And We
have not the least doubt, but the Bishops will think the Concessions now made
by us, just and reasonable, and will cheerfully conform themselves thereunto --
that Kneeling at the Sacrament shall not be imposed, nor the Cross, nor
Surplice, nor any compelled to the Subscription, or Oath of Canonical
Obedience, etc.

Behold the Promises that were made, I hope, he would not have us prove that
they were not performed; But it seems the King left all to the Parliament, and
they re-established matters to satisfaction, but this will not prove that these
Promises were not broken, but only that they should not have been made: The
King at that time seemed willing to have kept his Promise, and he had some
honest Counselors about him that advised him to it; and in Order thereunto by
his Commission, He authorized diverse Learned Persons of both Persuasions to
consult together and agree on such Alterations in the Liturgy as were necessary
to tender Consciences.

The Presbyterian Divines not one Dissenting, offered to submit to Archbishop
Usher's Primitive Form of Episcopacy, and to a stated Liturgy, and drew up a
most excellent One for that purpose, which for aptness and gravity of
Expression, excellent Coherence and Method, and suitableness to all the
Emergencies of humane Life, was incomparably beyond the old one; And when that
would not be received, offered some amendments of the old one, and would have
complied with it; but the Bishops treated them after a disdainful, imperious
manner, and would yield to nothing for accommodation, the Truth of this cannot
be doubted by any that have seen the Proposals to the King, the Petition for
Peace, and Account of the Proceedings of the Commissioners at the Savoy, which
an ingenious Conformist having lately read, confessed to me, that was a brave
Opportunity for Comprehension, and he was fully satisfied that the after Schism
lay at the Bishops door.

And indeed it is no wonder that Consultation was so unsuccessful, when it
appears the leading men amongst the Bishops, were so far from intending any
such thing as Comprehension, that their great design in Treating with the other
Party was, to know what they would stick at, that so they might be sure to shut
them out; and it is credibly reported that Archbishop Sheldon should say, now
we know their Minds, we'll make them all Knaves if they Conform, and it was a
remarkable saying of a Reverend Dean ( T. W. has often heard of) when a sober
Gentleman showed some regret that the door was so strait that many sober
Ministers could not have Admission, replied, it was no Pity at all, if we
thought so many of them would have Conformed, we would have made it straiter.

The Act of Uniformity, which they got in 1661. is justly esteemed the Source
and Spring of all that Discord, Persecution, and Distraction the Nation has
groaned under for many years, and indeed no better Fruits could be expected
from it, if we consider the scandalous Arts that were used for the obtaining of
it; and though I am weary of Transcribing, yet I will insert that remarkable
Story, that Captain Yarranton tells us, in His full discovery of the first
Presbyterian Sham-Plot, Printed at London for Francis Smith near the Royal
Exchange, 1681.

Where speaking of the Kings Gracious Declaration touching Ecclesiastical
Affairs in 1660. (part of which I have already recited) he says, If the
Parliament had passed it into an Act, it had probably cemented the greatest
part of the Protestants throughout the Nation, but some, both of the Clergy and
Laity, that bore the greatest sway, rejected it, and so his Majesty's good and
peaceable Intentions proved Abortive. These men (by whose Instigations you may
imagine) instead of an Act of Union, resolve upon an Act of Uniformity, which
they could not but know would prove the greatest B^ne of Contention that ever
was in the Nation, and some of the Leading Churchmen were heard to say, they
would have an Act so framed, as would reach every Puritan in the Kingdom, and
that if they thought any of them would so stretch their Consciences as to be
comprehended by it, they would insert yet other Conditions and Subscriptions,
so as that they should have no Benefit by it; But the King and Parliament they
feared were not yet fully prepared for the passing of such an Act, thereupon a
Contrivement was set on Foot to make a Presbyterian Plot, and this was the
first they ever took in band, and because it was never taken Notice of by some,
and forgotten by others, I shall therefore set it down at large; which I can
the better do, because I was a great sufferer therein, and what I relate, if
occasion be, I can prove by Letters and many living Witnesses.

This Sham-Plot was laid in about thirty six Counties of England, but I shall
write principally of that part of it which was executed in Worcestershire, the
Month of November in the Year 1661. Several Letters were drawn up and delivered
by Sir John P -- to one Richard N -- his Neighbor, to carry to one -- Cole of
Martly, about four Miles from Worcester, who is now living. This -- Cole
according to Instructions, delivers a Packet of Letters to one -- Churne of
Witchinford, (who also is, or lately was alive, and dwelt near Martly;) This
Packet of Letters was carried by Cole and Churne unto Sir John P. (from whom
it came) and before him Churne makes an Affidavit, That going early in the
Morning to his Labor, he struck his Bill upon a Hedge to cut a Thorn, and by
and by on the other side the Hedge, he spyed a Scotch Pedlar, putting up
Letters hastily in his Pack, and being affrighted (as he supposed) he left that
Packet behind in the Ditch, and went down a Lane leading to Coll. John Birch
his House.

This Oath being made, and the Packet delivered (as aforesaid) and opened, it
presently appeared that there was a Conspiracy on foot to stir up Rebellion in
the Kingdom, and to raise an Army for that purpose, and that Capt. Andrew
Tarranton was to Command a Party in those Parts, for which purpose there were
several Letters directed to him from some Ministers and others; Who then lived
at London.
Particularly, one from Mr. Baxter Minister of Kidderminster, intimating that
he had provided a considerable Body of Men, well armed, which should be in
readiness against the time appointed. Another from Mr. Ambrose Sparry,
intimating that he had ordered him 500 l. which was lodged in a Friends hand
(not named) and should be ready for him whenever he should send for it; Several
other Letters and Treasonable Papers were pretended to be in that Packet, all
which occasioned the raising of the Militia of that County, and the City of
Worcester was filled that Night with Horse and Foot; Nov. 9.
Early the next Morning about Two of the Clock, an Officer with a Troop comes
to Mr. Yarranton's House, and seeing Lights in most of the Windows for a Season
he made a halt, but anon he drew near the House, and demanded Entrance. Mrs.
Yarranton told him, she would open the Doors, provided he would come in with no
more than two Persons besides himself, to which he assented, and when he was
come in, demanded of Mrs. Yarranton, where her Husband was? She answered, he
was not at Home. The Officer replied, he was at Home the Evening before. She
told him, he was; but he is now gone to one Mr. Mitchel's House at Hittinton;
but to let you see that he knows upon what Design you come, He has left his
M^n with a Horse ready Saddled, to Conduct you to him. Some of the Party being
Volunteers out of Worcester, observing the words and deportment of Mrs.
Yarranton, went presently Home again, amongst whom was Mr. Winter Hains an
Apothecary, and since Mayor of the City (and still alive,) who has often said,
that very instant he smelt the Design; The Officer with his Party was brought
by Henry Cowell, Mr. Yarranton's Servant, to the House of Mr. Mitchel, where
finding the said Yarranton, the Officer told him, he was his Prisoner, and must
go along with him to Worcester; and about Ten of the Clock the same day they
all entered the City, where all the Trained Bands of the County were up in Arms.
The same day several other Persons were secured, as Mr. Ambrose Sparry Minister
of Martly, (near which place the Sham-Pacquet was pretended to be found) Mr.
Henry Osland Minister of Bewdly, Mr. Edward Osland of the Rock, Dr. Jackson of
Kidderminster, Mr. Moor Minister of Worcester, Mr. Jarvis Brian Minister of
Old-Swinford, Capt. Wells, (living now at Bednal-Green) Mr. Henry Baldwin, Mr.
George Wilson, Mr. John Vicars (now living in Smithfield) Mr. Mekine, all four
of Worcester, with sorne Scores more which I for bear to mention; all which
Persons were disposed of into several Prisons or Places of Confinement, so that
they could not speak one with another, having Sentinels always standing at
their several Doors. Amongst the common People there was a great noise of a
Horrid Plot, a Presbyterian Plot, and they were so confirmed in the belief of
it, that the several Prisoners as they marched with their Guards through the
Streets, were greatly reviled and affronted.

All things continued in this Posture for the space of Ten Days, after which
time, the Trained Bands would continue no longer, they were grown a little
sensible of the Sham; and upon their departure, the Deputy Lieutenants (out of
their great Clemency) Discharged all the Prisoners then in Custody, (except Dr.
Jackson, Mr. Sparry, Mr. Hen. and Mr. Edw. Osland, Capt. Wells, and Capt.
Yarranton) only they must Pay their Fees, and find good Security not to go five
Miles from their Habitations, without leave first obtained from the
Lord Lieutenant or two Deputy Lieutenants, and to appear when they were sent
for, and to keep all the King's Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil. This done, Mr.
Sparry, Dr. Jackson, the two Oslands, and Capt. Yarranton, were ordered to be
kept close Prisoners in several Chambers of the George-Inn in Worcester; so
that no Person whatsoever must come to speak with any of them but in the
presence of the Marshal. The Trained-Bands being gone, as was said before, Jo.
Shuler, Marshal.
to their several Homes, Care was taken for the Securing of these Criminals, by
the Dignified Clergy of Worcester, together with some of the fattest Clergymen
of the County, who provided about 60 Foot Soldiers which they Armed and Paid
(as some of them said) with double Pay, who were to attend as Sentinels upon
each of the Prisoners, and the rest to keep a Court of Guard at the Town Hall
of Worcester: These were commonly called the Clergy-Band; and had for their
Captain one Mr. William Sheldon of Stoke-Prior, who has of a long time (as it
is said) belonged to the Rules in Southwark.

I cannot omit acquainting you with one renowned Act of Chivalry that was done
in this Church-Court-Guard; There came to Worcester a poor Old Man to enquire
after the welfare of Mr. Henry Osland his Minister, and speaking with one of
those Soldiers, the Soldier liberally charged Mr. Osland with being a Traitor,
a Rebel, a Plotter against the Government, with some other hard Names; he
stoutly defended his Minister, and said he was an honest peaceable Man, and he
could never believe he was concerned in any Treason, or Plot against the
Government; The Church-Militant-man in great Wrath laid hold of this poor old
Zealot, and carried him to the Court of Guard: He that then presided in that
Court Marshal was also a Church Officer, and no meaner Man than an Apparitor;
he commanded the Old Man to be tied Neck and Heels, charged him with having a
hand in this Presbyterian Plot, and threatened him with severe Usage unless he
would make a Confession: The Old Man bore all this with a great deal of
Patience, answering him never a word; which so enraged this Man in Authority,
that he put lighted Matches betwixt his Fingers, and burnt them to the very
Bone, and all to force from him a Confession of a Presbyterian Plot. The Name
of the Person thus Tortured is Roger Waldern of Bewdly, who for ought I have
heard to the contrary is still alive, and carries about him the shrivelled
Skin caused by those burning Matches, and so are many others alive that saw him
in his Misery, and that contributed their help to the healing of his hands.

This feigned Plot was not only laid in Worcestershire, but in other Shires and
Counties of England, as I hinted before, I could fill many Sheets of Paper, if
I pleased, with particulars; but give me leave to inform you only of some
Passages in Oxfordshire with respect to this Plot, which fell out about the
same time. There dwelt in Oxford one Mr. Matthew Martin, who was then
Town Clerk there, In Old-Street, London.
he is now a Brewer in London, and in good reputation both for Estate and
Integrity; There came one Evening to his House in Oxford, a Stranger with a
Letter, who had no sooner delivered it, but he withdrew and went his away, when
Mr. Martin had opened it, and a little considered the Contents, he took a
Prudent Course to carry it to the Mayor, as you will hear by and by, and to do it
immediately; for had he tarried a Night, or an Hour, it might have been found
about him, and Oxford had quickly been as full or fuller of Plotters and
Prisoners than Worcester; The Copy of this Memorable Letter I here insert word
for word.

Mr. Martin,
I Pray you warn all these Men to be all in their Arms upon Wednesday next in
the Night, you know already where they must meet; there will come to Oxford Two
hundred Men all in their Arms, you know who does Command them; Dr. Greenwood
has sent to Mr. Combs the Barber to get his Party of Scholars ready that Night;
and I have sent to Mr. Hickman to get his Men ready at the same time, and Dr.
Owen has sent to Mr. Fogg to get his Men ready at the same time; and Dr. Gawin
has sent to Mr. Cornish to get his Men ready at the same time, and I have sent
to Dr. Connaught to get his Men ready, and all the Scholars are to meet in Dr.
Rogers his Garden, I pray send the Blunderbusses thither, for I intend to be
there my self, and I pray give the Bearer hereof five Pounds out of the Stock,
and I pray remember me to the six Men unnamed; five Counties are to rise that
Night without fail: I need write no more to you. The Word is, God is the Word,
and pray tell them all so.


In this Letter there was a List of the Persons Names he was to warn; For
brevity, I omit the List of Names which Mr Yarranton gives us, p. 9. as also
the Mayor's Letter to the Lord Falkland, p. 10. at large.
the Mayor of Oxford presently dispatched a Messenger with an Account of these
Transactions to the Lord Falkland, who was then a Member of Parliament, and I
think Lord Lieutenant of the County; and another Letter with the like Account
was sent to the Recorder of Oxford, one of their Members in Parliament; wherein
they declare their Opinion that it was a Trick, many of the Persons mentioned
being of known Fidelity to the King. These Letters were showed to one of the
Secretaries of State, and thus this pretty Project Miscarries in Oxford by the
Providence of God and the Prudent Management of the Discoverers, to the regret
no doubt of those who had cunningly enough contrived it. I cannot learn that
any further Progress was made in it, save only that two Deputy Lieutenants sent
next day for Mr. Martin, and threatened at first to commit him to Custody; but
by and by they dismissed him with this Injunction, not to go out of the City
within Fourteen days, without Special License; and that very Night came into
the Town many of the Militia, who kept Guard for two days in the City.

It Is high time now that I return to Worcester and give you an Account of the
forementioned Plotters in close Confinement there. Dr. Jackson by the
assistance of Sir R. C. gets his Enlargement. Mr. Sparry and one of the
Oslands, moved that they might be Bailed or brought to Trial, but could obtain
neither. Yarranton, and the other Osland, were altogether Passive and Silent,
waiting to see what issue God in his Providence would put to these Arbitrary
and Extrajudicial Proceedings, and it was not long ere they were strangely
delivered; the manner was thus; Richard H.
On the Second of April 1662, the Person that was employed (as I have showed
you before) to carry the Packet of Sham Letters from Sir J. P. to one Cole of
Martly, acquaints his Brother how he came by the said Packet; his Brother
immediately upon this Discovery, repairs to Mrs. Yarranton and informs her of
it; She went to Worcester, and prevails with the Marshal's Maid to deliver a
Paper to her Husband wherein was a Relation of the whole Matter. This being
done, Mr. Yarranton perused the Paper, and being thereby let into the knowledge
of this Malicious Design, He ordered six Actions to be immediately Entered
against some of those that brought him to Prison: And the next day being
Saturday, in the time of high Market, he took two Bedstaffs in his hands, and
broke all the Windows in the Chamber where he was Confined, The George in the
High Street.
and which looked toward the Street; upon which the Town was in an Uproar, and
a Multitude of People crowded before the Chamber in the broad Street to know
what the matter was! He told them how he and others were maliciously and
wrongfully Imprisoned; that he could give an Account of the Contrivance of this
Plot, and who were the Contrivers of it.

On the Wednesday following, the Lord Lieutenant and Six of his Deputies came
to Town, and sent one Fulk Fisher (an Officer of theirs) to Mr. Yarranton to
know the reason of his mis-behaving himself in the place of his Confinement: He
sent them word, He did it on purpose that he might be brought the sooner before
them, to make a Discovery of the Presbyterian Plot so much talked of, which he
was ready and willing to do. After some debate between the Lord Lieutenant and
his Deputies about this Matter, it was at last resolved that Yarranton should
be brought before them, which was done; There he offered to discover to them
the whole Plot how it was laid, and by whom and for what Ends; he desired that
the Doors might be set open, for he had many Friends and Witnesses without; He
prayed also that he might have Pen, Ink and Paper, and he would write down the
whole Matter; for words might be wrested to wrong intents: This was a while
debated, but in reason it could not be denied, and Mr. Yarranton no sooner
began to write, but the Lord Lieutenant and Sir John P. left the Room, and went
down the Back Stairs, and after followed the rest of the Deputy Lieutenants,
only Esquire Bromely of Holt staid behind. He it seems was no way Privy to this
Design, and told Mr. Yarranton, he was Sorry with all his heart to see such
things practiced, to the disturbance of Honest Men, and the dishonor of the
Government.

The Enemy having thus fairly quitted the Field, Mr. Yarranton demanded of the
Martial, What he had further now to say to him? The Marshal only made it his
Request, that he would not trouble him for holding him so long in Restraint,
forasmuch as he was a Poor Man, and had many Children, and did only follow the
Orders of his Superiors in what he had done. Mr. Yarranton told him, He did
freely forgive him.

These dangerous Plotters being now at Liberty, they depart every Man to his
own Home, and were never prosecuted or further questioned about this Matter:
There was no need of that, for the Contrivers had now obtained their End, which
was to possess the King and Parliament, that it was absolutely necessary to
make some severe Act against this restless sort of Men, who not contented with
the King's Gracious Pardon, were always Plotting to disturb the Government:
Accordingly when the Parliament met together upon the 20th of November 1661.
(to which time they were Adjourned) the King makes a Speech to them, wherein
are these words:

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am Sorry to find that the General Temper and Affections of the Nation are
not so well Composed as I hoped they would have been, after so signal Blessings
of God Almighty upon us all, and after so great Indulgence and Condescentions
from me toward all Interests; there are many wicked Instruments still as
active as ever, who labor Night and Day to disturb the Public Peace, and to
make People jealous of each other; it may be worthy of your Care and Vigilance
to provide proper Remedies for Diseases of that Kind, and if you find new
Diseases, you must find new Remedies, etc.


No sooner was this Parliament in their geers, Note, this was before the Sham
was discovered to Mr. Yarranton.
but Sir J. P. one of the Knights for Worcestershire, with open mouth informs
them of a dangerous Presbyterian Plot that was on foot; that many of the chief
Conspirators were now in Prison at Worcester. The like Information was given by
some of their Members that Served for Oxfordshire, Herefordshire,
Staffordshire, and other places; yea, this was the general Vogue, Some say, but
by a very few Votes.
as may appear by the Printed Pamphlets of those times. Hereupon a Bill of
Uniformity was excogitated, and carried on in the Parliament, and passed that
Sessions.

I have done with the First Part of this Sham Plot, when I have added a Passage
or two more concerning Mr. Yarranton; As soon as he was Discharged (as before)
he goes up to London, and prevails with the Lord of Bristol to acquaint the
King with the great wrong he had received, and with the wicked Contrivance of
some of his Ministers by Sham-Plots to divide the King from his People, and his
People from one another: Hereupon an Order of Council was directed to the
Deputy Lieutenants of Worcestershire that were then in and about London, to
appear before the Council, and to give an Account of this Matter. They seemed
to clear themselves from being concerned therein, and desired such as were in
the Country might be consulted: The next Post they inform their Brethren in the
Country how Matters stood before the Council, and that the Lord of Bristol did
Patronize Mr. Yarranton; upon this Sir J. W. one of the Deputy Lieutenants,
hastens up to London, and brings with him one Hales an Attorney, his Kinsman
and Tenant, (now living in Tenbury) which Hales, with a Constable of St. Mary
Overies, and one Halborn a Waterman (now living in Pepper-Alley in Southwark)
Arrested Mr. Yarranton (when he was Bowling in Winchester-Park) for High
Treason; and being further assisted by some of the Horse-Guards then in
Southwark, conveyed him in Halborn's Boat to White Hall, where he was that
Night in Custody; but on the Morrow, the Earl of Bristol sent the King's Privy
Seal to a Friend of Mr. Yarranton's, who brought it to him, wherein it was
declared, That it was the King's Pleasure, he should Travel where he pleased,
and not to be molested by any Person whatsoever, without a Special Warrant from
the King.

Mr. Yarranton seeing how Matters went in London, resolved to return again into
the Country; where he prosecuted Major Wild and others, for Imprisoning of him
wrongfully; but within Six Months after, a Design is laid by some of the
Criminals in the former Sham-Plot, to Suborn Persons to Swear against him, that
he had spoken Treasonable Words against the King and the Government; the
Witnesses were, one Dainty (a Mountebank, formerly an Apothecary in Derby) who
afterward acknowledged that he had Five Pounds for his Pains; The other
Witness lived in Wales and went by two Names; this was done at the Assizes in
Worcester, the Bill being found by the Grand Jury, Twisden, then Judge.
Mr. Yarranton put himself upon his Trial, and though he did not except against
any one of his Jury, yet upon a full Hearing of the Case, they presently
acquitted him, to the great disappointment of the designing Gentlemen.

This Narrative Mr. Yarranton Published under his own Hand, and I never could
understand that any Answer was made to it; and by mentioning the Names of
Persons then living, and therein appealing to them, it appears to be of
undoubted credit; and if any shall take upon them to contradict it, there are
so many of the Persons concerned still alive, as are sufficient to make out the
truth and certainty of it.

This Act of Uniformity which was gained by such an Infamous Stratagem, Some of
the Ejected Ministers had been Sufferers for the King, as Mr. Cook, Mr.
Harrison, Mr. Kirby, Mr. Seddan, sent up Prisoners about Sir Geo. Booth's
Attempt. Collection of Debates, p. 212.
obliged all Ministers to Subscribe to the Book of Common Prayer by
Bartholomew-Day, upon pain of Deprivation ab officio and beneficio, which about
Two thousand Ministers could not do, and were accordingly ejected; and it is a
wonder that all the Ministers in England were not Silenced by it; for it is a
known and certain Truth, that the Liturgy with its new Alterations to which
they assented, came not out of the Press till about Bartholomew-Eve; so that
all those that Conformed, excepting perhaps one or two in London, Subscribed to
they knew not what; and thus the Effects of that Edict, were as scandalous as
the cause and rise of it. An honorable Member of the House of Commons observed
in Parliament in the Year 1680. If the Laws against Dissenters were projected
in favor of the Protestant Religion, it is strange they were so promoted (as
many Members now here, that Served in that Parliament do remember) by Sir
Thomas Clifford, Sir Solomon Swale and Sir Roger Strickland, who have all since
appeared to be Papists.

When the lamentable Effects of this Act began to appear more visible every day
than other, and the King was sensible how they had been cheated into it, by a
pretended Plot, the Forgery whereof was now discovered; He set forth the very
same Year December. 26. his Declaration of Indulgence, and in February next when
the Parliament was met, Journal of the House of Lords, Dit Merc. 18. Feb. 1662.
in his Speech to both Houses, told them, He was willing to set bounds to the
Hopes of some, and the Fears of others; that in his own Nature he was an Enemy
to all Severity for Religion and Conscience, how mistaken soever it be, and
wished he had a Power of Indulgence to use upon such Occasions.

The House of Lords ordered a Bill to be brought in to enable the King to grant
Licenses to such of His Majesty's Subject of the Protestant Religion, Ibid. Die
Veneris 13. die Martii. Commons Journal, Die Mercur. 25. die Feb. 15 Car. 2.
of whose inoffensive and peaceable Disposition His Majesty should be
persuaded, to enjoy and use the Exercise of their Religion and Worship, though
differing from the Public Rule; but the House of Commons when it came before
them divided upon it, No's 161, Yea's 119. and so it was rejected, and greater
Severity used than before.

In the Year 1665. That dreadful Plague in London drove a great many Ministers
out of the City, and left open a Door for some Nonconformists to Preach in
their Pulpits; and Men being a little startled and their Spirits softened by
that Stupendous Judgment of God, there was a Connivance, and Private Meetings
were set up and multiplied greatly.

In the Year 1667. The King in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament Die
Lunae, 10 die Febr. thus expressed himself -- One thing more I hold my self
obliged to recommend unto you at this present; which is, That you would
seriously think of some Course to beget a better Union and Composure in the
Minds of my Protestant Subjects in Matters of Religion, whereby they may be
induced not only to submit quietly to the Government, but also cheerfully give
their Assistance to the Support of it. But there was nothing done at that time
toward it.

In 1672. The King again gives Liberty of Conscience, upon what design,
Conjectures were various; many believed it to be in favor of Popery, but
others said the Papists had as much Liberty before, being generally winked at,
and the Penal Laws wholly turned upon Protestant Dissenters; However the House
of Commons took notice of it, and would not allow the King any Power to
Dispense with the Laws, and yet were grown so sensible of the Hardships put
upon Dissenting Protestants, that a Bill was brought in, in favor of them and
passed the House, and was sent up to the House of Lords, and it is verily
believed had passed them too, but for want of time.

In 1675. The Parliament met again, in which the Church and Court Party laid
aside their Zeal against Popery, and all the Cry was against Dissenters; and a
Bill that was Voted in the former Session, for Marrying our Princes only to
Protestants, was carried in the Negative by the Unanimous Vote of the Bishops
Bench and rejected; And a Test brought in, requiring all Officers in Church and
State, and all Members of both Houses to take this following Oath.

I A. B. do Declare, That it is not Lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever, to
take up Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traitorous Position of
taking up Arms by his Authority against his Commission, or against those that
are Commissioned by him in pursuance of such a Commission. And I do Swear, that
I will not at any time endeavor the Alteration of the Government either in
Church or State.

The learned and weighty Reasons that were brought against this Bill by the
Country Lords (as they were then distinguished from those of the Court and
Church) we have published by one of the protesting Peers in the same Year. This
lasted five days, before it was committed to a Committee of the whole House;
They Pleaded against it as a Breach of the Privilege of Peerage, that it was in
Effect to establish a Standing Army by Act of Parliament, That if whatever is
done by the King's Commission may not be opposed, by his Authority, then a
Standing Army is Law when ever the King pleases; That it struck at the very
Root of our Constitution, obliging every Man to Abjure all Endeavors to alter
the Government in the Church, without regard to any thing that Rules of
Prudence in the Government, or Christian Compassion to Dissenters, or the
Necessity of Affairs at any time may require. The Names of those Noble Peers
that with so much hazard to their own Persons endeavored to stem that
impetuous torrent, are, Buckingham, Bridgwater, Winchester, Salisbury, Bedford,
Dorset, Denbigh, Pagett, Hallifax, Howard, Mohun, Stamford, Clarendon,
Grey-Roll, Say and Seal, Wharton, Bristol, Aylesbury, Audley, Fitzwater.


But all was in vain, for (says our Honorable Author) the Earl of Winchelsea
put an End to the Debate, and the Major Vote Ultima ratio Senatuum and
Conciliorum carried the Question as the Court and Bishops would have it, and
all they could do was to enter their Protests against it, and were menaced for
so doing.

And thus with Wind and Tide our Churchmen bore down furiously upon the
Dissenters, and all that durst but seem favorable to them, for two or three
Years together, till the Popish Plot broke out in 1678. which gave such an
Alarm to the Nation, as reduced some Men to their Wits, and others to their
Wits-end; Now the Humor was diverted another way, and a year or two spent in
searching into the depth of the Design, and while some zealous Protestants were
diligently employed in tracing out the Plot; others that called themselves by
the same Name, were as busy by their Counter-mines and Counter-paces to spoil
the track and make it undiscernable.

In the mean while the Dissenters were pretty easy, the Meetings increased and
were greatly frequented; And there being now a Parliament of true Englishmen,
they ordered a Bill to be brought into the House of Commons for the Uniting of
Protestants, and in their Journals we have this Resolve, That it is the Opinion
of this House, that the Prosecution of Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, is at
this time grievous to the Subject, a weakening of the Protestant Interest, an
Encouragement to Popery, and Dangerous to the Peace of this Kingdom.

But as the Plot died, Persecution revived; New Sham-plots were forged and
fastened upon Presbyterians: Then was our Land stained with the No, blessed and
most Innocent Blood of Essex, Russel, Sidney, etc. whose invaluable Lives were
sacrificed to the Lusts of Papists and Tories, whilst Ecclesiastics sung Te
Deum, and the injured Nation durst scarcely be seen to lament their fall.

When the Duke of York arrived at the Crown, the Stream of Persecution was very
strong and violent, and all men thought the unhappy attempt of the Duke of
Monmouth, would have made it rage more furiously when almost all the Gentlemen
in England that were counted Whiggs were under Confinement; but not long after
a Declaration was set forth for a General Liberty of Conscience; I am sure it
was unexpected by the generality of Dissenters; it found some of them in
Prison, and like a good Angel made their fetters fall off, and the doors fly
open; others were forced to abscond from their Families, and Employments, for
fear of the Excommunication Writ, and these it rescued from impending ruin;
and indeed it found them all insulted over, scorned and trampled upon by the
Bigots of the other Party, but this Declaration put a respect upon them, and
gave them the Opportunity of letting the World see they were neither so few,
nor so bad, nor contemptible as their Adversaries had represented them.

There are two things for which Dissenters are frequently reproached in the
late Reign. First, Their accepting that Liberty with such Addresses of Thanks.
Secondly, Their writing so few Books against Popery; I have something to say in
their just Defense upon both Accounts.

As to the First, It had been the greatest Madness in the World for them, to
have refused the Advantages of that Liberty; they thought themselves obliged to
Worship God according to the Dictates of their Consciences, when they run the
Risque of Prisons, and Banishment for so doing; and to neglect it, when they
were freed from those hazards, would have been such a piece of sullen
unaccountable perverseness, as these Gentlemen would soon have upbraided us
with. I know it is commonly said, that Toleration was promoted in favor of the
Papists, and I believe few of the Dissenters ever questioned it; but they knew
very well, that when it was granted, for them to have sat still, and suffered
the Papists alone to enjoy the Benefits of it, would have strengthed Popery
much more; the Papists would have had never the less Liberty, though Dissenters
had been silent, and when they were let loose, it was time for all hands to be
at work, to countermine them, and there is no better weapon to subdue Error,
than the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God.

It is objected, this Declaration was founded upon a Dispensing Power and to
accept of it was owning such a Power; But the Dissenters never by Word or
Writing ascribed any such Power unto the King as to Dispense with the Laws,
that are for the good of the Nation; indeed they always esteemed the Laws by
which they were excluded to be very unjust and unreasonable Edicts, contrary to
the Law of God, and the common Interest, and that they ought not to have been
made, or ever executed when they were made, they never thought them binding in
Point of Conscience, and though they were forced heretofore to submit to the
Penalty, yet they were not so forsaken of common Sense, as to court the
Continuance of that Penalty, or cast themselves into Prison, when the
Magistrate did not think fit to do it.

But the Clergy of the Church of England had often in the Pulpit, and from the
Press told the King that he had such a Power, as the Author of Vox Cleri pro
Rege, shows us in abundance of Instances. And the Judges who were of the Church
of England, had given it for Law, as the other had declared it for Gospel; and
all the Magistrates in England thought fit to acquiesce in it, which surely
they would not have done, if they had not thought it a just and reasonable
thing; for indeed the Kings Declaration would have signified little, if the
Magistrates had put the Laws in Execution still; and if they did not think
those Laws were really suspended, they were bound by their Oaths to have done
it, and their forbearance was a plain acknowledgment of such a Power at least,
as to such kind of Laws, as were hereby suspended, but the Dissenters, only
persisted to do that which they thought themselves obliged to (as they had
opportunity) by the Law of God, any thing in humane Laws to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

And as to their Addresses of Thanks, it least becomes the Churchmen of all
others to Reflect upon them, not only because it was their Cruelty that made
Indulgence so very pleasant, and Oppression sometimes makes a wise man mad, but
also because they fall vastly short of those high flights of Complement, which
these men themselves took in their Addresses of a far worse Nature and
Occasion. If it be so Criminal to Thank the King, for not suffering Protestants
to destroy one another, what shall we say of those that in the most Luxuriant
manner, thanked him for dissolving one of the best of Parliaments, E. of W's
Speech.
and as a Noble Peer lately told them, Were so forward in the Surrender of
Charters, and their fulsom Addresses and Abhorrences, making no other claim to
their Liberties and Civil Rights but Concessions from the Crown, telling the
King every one of his Commands was stamped with Gods Authority, etc. Besides, I
am informed by one of those that joined in an Address of Thanks to the King in
Cheshire, that the Nonconformists never moved in it till the Churchmen had led
them the way; these Gentleman therefore are too Imprudent to provoke us to
Recriminations that will be so vastly to their own dishonor; I am sure the
Dissenters thanked the Late King for nothing, but what our present King and
Parliament have Confirmed to them, as the likeliest way to unite Protestants in
Interest and Affection, as the Preamble of the Act speaks; and if there was any
thing in that Liberty that was serviceable to the Papists, it must be in the
manner of giving it, not in the thing it self, as far as we are concerned in
it; and if the Episcopal Party had been so wise as to have promoted a legal
Comprehension when it was in their Power they had disabled the Papists from
serving themselves of any Liberty of ours.

As to the Second, That Dissenters writ so little against Popery in the Late
Reign, it may be very easily accounted for.

They have sufficiently demonstrated their Abhorrence of Popery at all times,
and their Leading Men, as Mr. Baxter, Mr. Pool, and the Preachers of the
Morning Lecture, have acquitted themselves very well in the Confutation of it;
and Malice it self cannot really believe that they are in the least favorable
to the Romish Heresy, the Crime that has been generally objected against them,
has been their too great aversation and distance from it.

As for the late Discourses upon that Subject, that are so much boasted of, it
is observable that most of them were begun upon Personal Engagements, The
Preface to the Exam. of the Council of Trent by Catholic Tradition.
as one of the Principal Managers thereof acknowledges; There is (says he) a
Train in Controversies as well as in Thoughts, one thing still giving start to
another, Conferences produce Letters, Letters, Books, and one discourse gives
occasion for another, etc. Now in such Cases it would not been have decent, for
a Third Person to have stepped in and invaded another man's Province.

Besides there was no manner of Necessity for it, the Papists in England have
been a baffled party for some Ages, and their Errors so often exposed that it
was too easy a Task these Gentlemen were engaged in, to require so much help,
it is a beaten Road in which they were to Travel; and as I do not find that the
Papists offered any thing of late, but what has been in substance answered a
thousand times, so it was not necessary for our Doctors, to set their Wits on
the Rack for a Reply, not indeed do I perceive any thing, Method and Language
excepted, that pretends to be new; nor is this any Diminution of their Honor,
but a Peace of Justice to the Memory, and worth of those that have gone before
them.

And I might add, Fuller C. H. l. 9. p. 74. This clause was left out of the
Art. in 1571, but A. B Land, would have it inserted again. Parker, Cartwright,
Walker, Boys, Farmer, Slater, Manby, Good all, etc.
the Presbyterians had little Reason to fear that any of their Persuasion would
be perverted, their distinguishing Principle of the sufficiency of the
Scripture, will infallibly secure them, whilst they adhere unto it; But many of
our Churchmen had instilled into their Followers very odd Notions concerning
the Power of the Church in Matters of Faith, (as in the twenty Article) and of
the Apostolical Succession and Authority of Bishops, and their Power of Judging
what is fit and decent in the Worship of God to which all others must submit;
and concerning the binding force of old Canons and Councils; and such Doctrines
as these would be in danger to betray men into the Arms of that Church, that
can pretend as high in these matters as any; and it is certain in Fact some of
their Bishops and Doctors and Clergy fell in with them, and it was time for
them to bestir themselves, to deliver their men out of the Snares which they
had helped to lay for them.

And the Dissenters were very well pleased to see those Learned Men baffling
the Papists, upon such Principles, as they had reason to hope, would set the
Authors themselves more upright, than before some of them had been; those that
read Dr. Sherlocks Preservatives against Popery, and what he there says
concerning the Nature of Gospel Worship, That God will not now have a Temple,
nor is his Presence appropriated to any place, and the like, and compare it
with that he has formerly writ, especially in that Book wherein he told us,
Vind. Defense of Dr. St. p. 13.
that Christianity is nothing else but Mystical Judaism, will find that his
late Polemical Engagements, were so very beneficial to himself that it had been
a thousand pitties, to have taken the work out of his Hands; And what I have
collected out of these Modern debates concerning Church-Unity, Communion,
Succession, etc. may convince any man that we had all the reason in the World,
to make them fair way and room, when they were got into the good old Road of
Scripture Catholic Notions, that would infallibly confound the Papists and
when they had done that, would very much contribute to the reconciling of
Protestants amongst themselves.

The Author of the Review takes upon him to affirm, that none of our Ministers,
endeavored at that time to fortify his Conventicle against Popish Delusions,
but how can he expect to be believed in that, which it is as impossible for him
to know, as to be an Ubiquitarian, and in all the Conventicles in England at
the same time, and as he can never prove it to be true, so there are thousands
in England know it to be false, and are able to testify, that notwithstanding
their Obligations to the Government, their Ministers never failed, to confute
Popish Tenets, when they fell in their way, and that not seldom they would go a
step or two out of their way to meet them.

As unhappy is he, in the little stories that follow, Dr. Owen was in Fee with
King James, and yet was dead, several years before; Our present Patrons were
the men picked up at Court to complete our Ruin; and yet I know of no Patrons
we have for our Liberty, but the King, Lords and Commons, I hope he does not
mean them. We know very well what Bishops and others were of the Ecclesiastical
Commission, in the Bishop of Londons Case, and in that of Cambridge and Maudlin
College in Oxford; not one Presbyterian amongst them. Let this Gentleman
prove, that any Ministers of ours assisted at Jesuitical Intreagues, or had
Money sprinkled amongst them to carry on those designs and by my Consent,
whoever is found Guilty shall be his Bondslave, but by no means let Confidence,
and Noise, and loud Appeals be taken for Evidence against them.

Amongst all that Crowd of Writers, that give us the History of the late
Revolution, there is scarcely one of them, but acknowledges that the
Dissenters, were aware of the Popish design of taking away the Test, and would
not consent to it; though for the Penal Laws, they thought many of them might
be very well spared; and I challenge him to prove that either Mr. Lob or any
other Person amongst those called Presbyterian and Congregational (and we have
nothing to do with others) ever advised King James to any thing, but what our
Present King and Parliament, have thought fit to establish by Law:

If (as this Gentleman tells us) a little Money, Review, p. 33.
and a Toleration will make the Dissenters so easy and quiet, and well
satisfied; it is a sign they are not the worst tempered People in the World;
and it were well if our Churchmen were as easily pleased, for what my Lord
Falkland (a great Royalist) said of some of the Bishops in 1641, they were so
cordially Papists, that it was all that fifteen hundred Pounds a Year could do
to keep from Confessing it; I am afraid is too true concerning many of our
Clergy in another respect, it is as much as some hundreds a year can do to keep
them Quiet, and Content under the present Government.

However we are obliged to him for telling us, what the sober thinking People
judge of us, it seems, They do not stick to say, that our Zeal against Popery
is all Counterfeit, that we would be better Conformists if Popery should
prevail than we are now; but he should have told us, who these sober thinking
People are, for many will presume to dignifie themselves with those Epithets,
See the Review. Ibid.
that have as little right to 'em, as any People in the World; and it is usual
enough, for a Mob of Ecclesiastical Politico's to get together, and when they
are well heated with drinking Healths to the Church of England, and have
liberally Cursed and Damned the Dissenters, then step forth, and look big, and
think themselves capable of reporting the opinion of all the sober thinking men
of the Nation; and I am the more inclined to believe that it is a Cabal of such
men as these, that have chosen this Gentleman for their Speaker, because our
own experience assures us, those Conformists that are really most sober, have
always expressed far different Sentiments concerning us, and we hope we shall
never do any thing to forfeit their Friendly respect, but be always as ready to
return, as receive it.

I must not omit, what this Gentleman has replied to the Vindicator concerning
the Penal Laws, as they have been executed upon Protestant Dissenters; He
pretends, they reclaimed many, and did a great deal toward bringing English
Protestants to Uniformity, it was well he did not say to Unity, for that had
been one of the grossest Fallacies in the World; And I will not deny but that
many Dissenters went to Church, when they had no where else to go, their
Ministers being some in Prison, others beyond Sea, and many not daring to show
their Heads, and perhaps some of them were forced, by those severe Proceedings
to comply further than their Consciences could well allow, and such kind of
Conversions the French Dragoons may boast of too, but it is nevertheless
certain that these things tend to alienate the Minds of Men one from another,
and the present numbers of Dissenters, may convince him such Methods will never
effect a general Unity; and it was some years ago observed in Parliament, by an
Honorable Person. That neither the Oxford Act, 1680. Coll. of Debates. p. 211.
nor that of the thirty fifth of the Queen, nor any other had ever been
executed in favor of the Church, that Dissenters were as many if not more than
ever.

And the present Bishop of Worcester, will tell this Gentleman, Charge in his
Primary Visitation, p. 25, 26.
That distance and too great stiffness of behavior toward Dissenters, have
made some of them more their Enemies than they would have been; That
Persecution was a Popular Argument for them, the Complaining side having always
the most pity, but now that is taken off (says he) you may deal with them upon
more equal Terms; Some think Severity makes men consider, I am afraid it heats
them too much, and makes them too violent and refractory.

That this Gentleman may see, that not the Vindicator only, but the most
eminent Fathers of the Church of England condemn the Severities that have been
used toward Protestant Dissenters, and how unbecoming as well as imprudent a
thing it is in him to justify them, I shall leave their own Words to his
Consideration.

The present Archbishop of Canterbury, who Honors the Metropolitan See, more
than he can be honored by it, in a Fast Sermon before the Queen, Sept. 16,
1691.
speaking of the Clergy expresses himself thus. And it can never be
sufficiently lamented, no though it were with Tears of Blood, that we whose
particular Charge and Employment it is to build up the Souls of men in a Holy
Faith, and in the Resolution of a good Life, should for want of due
Instruction, and by the Dissolute and Profligate Lives of too many amongst us,
and by inflaming our needless differences about lesser things, have so great a
hand in the pulling down Religion and in betraying the Souls of men, etc.

The Bishop of Worcester, in his Visliation Charge, acknowledges that the
Persecution of Dissenters, was promoted by the Papists, his Words are; I hope
they are now convinced, that the Persecution which they complained lately so
much of, was carried on by other men and for other designs than they would then
seem to believe. Indeed we always thought the Papists had the chief hand in it,
and we are glad, others begin to see it.

None has spoke more freely to this matter than the Bishop of Sarum, in his
Observations upon Ridleys Letter to Hooper, P. 4.
he puts this Objection. But when the Clergy of the Church of England, saw that
good and great Men and the glorious Martyrs of Jesus Christ, such as Hooper
was, were offended with these Ceremonies, they should have used their utmost
endeavors, to have gotten them discharged by Law, as they were imposed by Law,
and not have left them to remain, as a standing offense, and a perpetual
stumbling block to all others of Hoopers mind.

Now to this he Answers: This I confess would be an Objection very much to the
Prejudice of the Church of England, could it not be truly said, that the Clergy
did heartily endeavor to procure this ease to scrupulous Consciences, though
without success, for all the eminent Bishops of England in Queen Elizabeth's
time did labor in this Point, and could not prevail with the Queen to Consent
to it. And a little further blaming the Nonconformists, for crying out so much
of Persecution, excuses it thus. If any man take my right hand, and therewith
bruise and batter my left hand; is my right hand therefore become a Persecutor?
Is it not really persecuted as well as the other? and has it not a
fellow-feeling and share of the Misery?

and in his Exhortation to Peace and Union, God be thanked for it that there is
an End put to all Persecution in matters of Religion, P. 27.
and that the first and chief right of Humane Nature, of following the dictates
of Conscience in the Service of God is secured to all men amongst us, and that
we are freed I hope for ever, of all the Remnants of the worst part of Popery,
I mean the Spirit of Persecution.

The Seven Bishops, in their Petition to the late King, declared they would not
be wanting in due Tenderness to Dissenters, but willingly come to such a temper
as should be thought fit when the matter should come to be considered and
settled in Parliament and Convocation; and about the time of the P. of Orange's
Landing, all their discourse was of Union and Comprehension; insomuch as that a
Reverend Prelate told a dissenting Minister, He need never to fear Persecution
from the Church of England again; adding, If any such thing should ever happen,
let me be accounted a false Prephet. I hope these Gentlemen will not give us
occasion to say as Demades the Orator was wont to say of the Athenians, That
they never came to consult of Peace (nisi atrati) but in Mourning under some
Public Calamity or Danger.

Our gracious Sovereign, when P. of Orange, in his Declaration. promised to
endeavor a good Agreement between the Church of England and all Protestant
Dissenters, and to cover and secure all those who would live peaceably under
the Government, from all persecution upon the account of their Religion, and
has all along strictly adhered to that Royal Promise and Design; and in
pursuance thereof, encircled with his Lords and Commons in Parliament, has
given us our present Indulgence, as that which the Wisdom of the Nation judged
the likeliest way to Unite us all in Interest and Affection; and I hope the
Sentiments of all these will more than balance what our Gentleman has offered
to Vindicate the Execution of the Penal Laws, and he must be a man of more than
ordinary assurance, that durst take upon him to oppose his private peevish
opinion to such an august and venerable Determination.

This Gent. as well as T. W. threatens the Vindicator, with I know not what
rebukes from the Government, for reflecting upon the Doctrines of
Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience; but this is a Subject that has been so
thoroughly canvass'd of late, and the Folly of those Opinions (in the sense they
have been advanced) laid open, that he needs not any one should defend him
therein.

The Honorable Sir Robert Howard in his Defense of Mr. Johnson's Answer to
Jovian, takes notice of the same thing objected against him; His Adversary had
said, I know not how these Arguments against Non-Resistance and Passive
Obedience can make for their Majesty's Service, and the honor of the
Reformation it is possible the Noble Author does.

To which Sir Robert Answers, I think I do, and shall endeavor to demonstrate
it; But first give me leave to be a little surprised that Dr. Hicks or his
Friend, should be concerned for His Majesty's Service, or the Safety, and
Honor of a Government which Dr. Hicks renounces: And though it seems he could
not with a safe Conscience officiate in his Calling under an unlawful Power,
made so by virtue of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience; yet, he says, he
understands not how the Opposition to this Doctrine can be for the Service of
the Government; this is a strange Riddle that the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, made Dr. Hicks against the Government, and yet he understands not
how the Opposition to that Government can be for the Service of it. -- I shall
readily confess, that the Principles I assert are for the Safety of one of Dr.
Hick's his complicated Tyrants, but they may be for a good Prince that opposes
Tyranny. It was against these Principles (of Passive Obedience) that the Nation
implored and obtained Relief, and according to their Original Right fixed the
Crown upon their Reliever's Head -- Then he gives an Excellent Account of the
present Government and Rights of the Subject; and concludes, I hope by this
Account, I have showed my Adversary, that the Safety and Honor of this
Government was procured and founded against his Principles of Passive
Obedience, which had they been as Sacredly observed as he would have them, our
Redemption had never been effected, and perhaps he had been better pleased --
it is this true Understanding and undivided Interest of the King and People that
must Secure and Preserve the Honor and Safety of the Government, and the
shaking of both must proceed from the Temptation and Apprehension that Passive
Obedience and the Imperial Law must infuse into the King and People.

These two Pampleteers would gladly possess the Mi^^s of our Governors with
Indignation against the Vindicator, because he made bold to reflect upon the
Miscarriages of our former Princes; when the Citizen forced him to say what he
did in defense of himself and his Friends, whom the other had abused by falsely
reporting Matters of Fact; for my part, I take no delight in disturbing the
Ashes of the Dead, much less those of Princes, but when such kind of Men as
these have ruined them by their Flatteries and infatuated Counsels, and would
then cast the Odium of all upon those that are Innocent, it becomes absolutely
necessary to declare the Naked Truth, let it fall where it will.

And as our Present Illustrious Princes are too Just and Righteous in every
thing to fear any future Reflections, so they are too Wise and Generous to be
incensed against those that lay open the Faults of such as have gone before,
the remembrance whereof is an excellent foyl, to set off the unspotted
brightness of their own Administrations; Works of the Learned, p. 206. 1692.
and it is a remarkable Passage which De la Crose gives us in his Abstracts,
and fit to be here inserted, viz. I remember a wise Saying of her Present
Majesty, which I was told four or five Years ago by a Reverend Divine who was
then present; Some would have incensed her Royal Highness against that famous
French Minister Monsieur Jurieu, who in his Answer to Father Maimbourg, that he
might the better justify the Reformation in Scotland, made a very black
representation of their Queen Mary. Is it not a shame, said one of the Company,
that this Man without any Consideration for your Royal Person, should dare to
throw such Infamous Calumnies upon a Queen from whom your Royal Highness is
Descended? No, not at all, replied the Ingenious Princess; for is it not
enough, that by fulsom Praises Kings be lulled asleep all their lives; But must
Flattery accompany them to their very Graves? How then should Princes fear the
Judgment of Posterity, if Historians were not allowed to speak the Truth after
their Death?

We can never thank God sufficiently, for giving us Rulers that love plain
dealing, and scorn to be flattered; and were it not so, the truth might be
smothered, and the Nation imposed upon by these Men, as it has been heretofore;
they must not expect that our Princes will so undervalue themselves as to be
the Executioners of every little Menace of their own; the Royal Lion will not
devour all that the waspish Jackcalls have marked out for a Prey: If one party
Accuse, the other shall have liberty to make their Defense; though it would be
most pleasing to our Superiors, that there might be a mutual forbearance and
agreement on both Sides.

FINIS.

