A VINDICATION OF THE Protestant Doctrine Concerning JUSTIFICATION, And of its
Preachers and Professors, From the unjust charge of ANTINOMIANISM. In a LETTER
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country.

LONDON: Printed, for Dorman Newman, at the King's-Arms in the Poultrey in the
Year, 1692.

A LETTER FROM A Minister in the City to a Minister in the Country, about the
present Difference concerning JUSTIFICATION.
YOUR Earnest Desire of Information about some Difference amongst
Nonconformists in London, whereof you hear so much by flying Reports, and
profess you know so little of the Truth thereof, is the Cause of this Writing.

You know, that not many Months ago, there was a fair-like appearance of Unity
betwixt the two most considerable Parties on that Side; and their Differences
having been rather in practice than principle, about Church Order and
Communion, seemed easily reconciliable, where a Spirit of Love, and of a sound
Mind was at work. But how short was the Calm? For quickly arose a greater Storm
from another Quarter, and a Quarrel began upon higher Points, even on no less
than the Doctrine of the Grace of God in Jesus Christ, and the Justification of
a Sinner by Faith alone. Some think that the Reprinting of Dr. Crisp's Book,
gave the first Rise to it. But we must look further back for its true Spring.
It is well known, but little considered, what a great Progress Arminianism had
made in this Nation before the beginning of the Civil War: And surely it has
lost little since it ended. What can be the Reason, why the very Parliaments in
the Reign of James I. and Charles I. were so alarmed with Arminiamsm, as may be
read in History, and is remembered by Old Men; and that now for a long time
there has been no talk, no fear of it; as if Arminianism were dead and buried,
and no man knows where its Grave is? Is not the true Reason to be found in its
Universal prevailing in the Nation?

But that which concerns our Case, is, That the Middle way betwixt the
Arminians, and the Orthodox, had been espoused, and strenuously defended and
promoted by some Nonconformists, of great Note for Piety and Parts, (and
usually such Men that are for middle ways in points of Doctrine, have a greater
kindness for that Extreme they go half way to, than for that which they go half
way from) And the Notions thereof were imbibed by a great many Students who
labored (through the Iniquity of the Times) under the great Disadvantage of
the want of grave and sound Divines to direct and assist their Studies at
Universities; and therefore contented themselves with studying such English
Authors, as had gone in a path untrod, both by our Predecessors, and by the
Protestant Universities abroad.

These Notions have been preached, and wrote against, by several Divines
amongst our selves; and the different Opinions have been, till of late, managed
with some Moderation, to which our being all born down by Persecution, did
somewhat contribute.

It is a sad, but true Observation, That no Contentions are more easily
kindled, more fiercely pursued, and more hardly composed, than those of
Divines; sometimes from their Zeal for Truth, and sometimes from worse
Principles, that may act in them, as well as in other Men.

The Subject of the Controversy is about the Justifying Grace of God in Jesus
Christ. Owned it is by both, and both fear it be abused, either by turning it
into Wantonness, hence the Noise of Antinomianism; or by corrupting it with the
mixture of Works; hence the Fears on the other side of Arminianism. Both
Parties disown the Name cast upon them: The one will not be called Arminians,
and the other hate both Name and Thing of Antinomianism, truly so called: Both
sometimes say the same Thing, and profess their Assent to the Doctrinal
Articles of the Church of England, to the Confession of Faith and Catechisms
composed at Westminster, and to the Harmony of the Confessions of all the
Reformed Churches, in these Doctrines of Grace. And if both be Candid in this
Profession, it is very strange that there should be any Controversy amongst
them.

Let us therefore, first, take a View of the Parties, and then of their
Principles. As to the Party suspected of Antinomianism, and Libertinism, (in
this City) it is plain, That the Churches wherein they are concerned, are more
strict and exact in trying of them that offer themselves unto their Communion,
as to their Faith, and Holiness, before their admitting them; in the
Engagements laid on them to a Gospel-walking at their Admission, and in their
Inspection over them afterward. As to their Conversations, they are generally
of the more Regular, and Exact Frame, and the Fruits of Holiness in their
Lives, to the Praise of God, and Honor of the Gospel, cannot with modesty be
denied. Is it not unaccountable, to charge a People with Licentiousness, when
the Chargers cannot deny, and some cannot well bear the Strictness of their
Walk? It is commonly said, That it is only their Principles, and the tendency
of them to loose Walking, that they blame. But (waying that at present) it
seems not fair to charge a People with Licentious Doctrines, when the
Professors thereof are approved of for their Godliness, and when they do
sincerely profess, that their Godliness begun with, and is promoted by the
Faith of their Principles. Let it not be mistaken, if I here make a Comparison
betwixt Papists and Protestants. The latter did always profess the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone. This was Blasphemy in the Papists Ears. They
still did, and do cry out against it, as a Licentious Doctrine, and destructive
of Good Works. Many sufficient Answers have been given in to this unjust
Charge. But to my purpose, the Wonder was, that the Papists were not convinced
by the splendid Holiness of the Old Believers, and by the Visible Truth of
their holy Practice, and their professing, that as long as they lived in the
Blindness and Darkness of Popery, they were profane, and that as soon as God
revealed the Gospel to them, and had wrought in them the Faith thereof, they
were sanctified, and led other Lives. So witnessed the Noble Lord Cobham, who
suffered in K. Henry the 5th his Time, above an 100 Years before Luther. His
Words at his Examination before the Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Clergy,
were these: As for that Virtuous Man, Wickliff, (for with his Doctrine he was
charged) whose Judgment ye so highly disdain, I shall say of my part, both
before God and Man, that before I knew that Despised Doctrine of his, I never
abstained from sin; but since I learned therein to fear my Lord God, it has
otherwise, I trust, been with me. So much Grace could I never find in all your
glorious Instructions. Fox's Book of Martyrs, Vol. 1. p. 640. Col. 2. Edit.
1664. And since I am on that excellent Book, I entreat you to read Mr. Patrick
Hamilton's little Treatise, to which Frith does Preface, and Fox does add some
Explication, Vol. 2. p. 181. to p. 192, where ye will find the Old plain
Protestant Truth about Law and Gospel, delivered without any School-Terms. To
this, add in your reading, in the same Vol. 2. p. 497. to p. 509. Heresies and
Errors falsty charged on Tindal 's Writings. Where ye will see the Old Faith of
the Saints in its Simplicity, and the Old Craft and Cunning of the
Antichristian Party, in sland ering the Truth. I must, for my part, confess,
That these plain Declarations of Gospel Truth, have a quite other Savor with
me, than the Dry Insipid Accounts thereof, given by Pretendders to humane
Wisdom.

But passing these things, let us look to Principles, and that with respect to
their Native and Regular Influence on Sanctification. And I am willing, that
that should determine the Matter, next to the Consonancy of the Principles
themselves to the Word of God. It can be no Doctrine of God, that is not
according to Godliness. Some think, that if Good Works, and Holiness, and
Repentance, be allowed no room in Justification, that there is no room left for
them in the World, and in the practice of Believers. So hard seems it to be to
some, to keep in their Eye the certain fixed bounds betwixt Justification and
Sanctification. There is no difference betwixt a Justified and a Sanctified
Man; for he is always the same person that partakes of these Privileges: But
Justification and Sanctification differ greatly in many Respects, as is
commonly known. But to come a little closer:

The Party here suspected of Antinomianism, do confidently protest before God,
Angels and Men, That they espouse no New Doctrine about the Grace of God, and
Justification, and the other coincident Points, but what the Reformers at home
and abroad did teach, and all the Protestant Churches do own; And that in sum
is, That a Law-condemned Sinner is freely Justified by God's Grace through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, that he is Justified only for the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to him by God of his free Grace and received by
faith alone as an Instrument, which faith is the gift of the same Grace. For
guarding against Licentiousness they constantly teach out of God's Word, That
without Holiness no man can see God, That all that believe truly on Jesus
Christ, as they are Justified by the sprinkling of his Blood, so are they
Sanctified by the effusion of his Spirit. That all that boast of their Faith in
Christ, and yet live after their own Lusts, and the course of this World, have
no true Faith at all; but do in their profession and contradicting Practice,
Blaspheme the Name of God, and the Doctrine of his Grace, and continuing so,
shall perish with a double Destruction beyond that of the openly Profane, that
make no Profession. And when they find any such in their Communion, which is
exceeding rarely, they cast them out as Dead Branches; They teach that as the
daily Study of Sanctification is a necessary exercise to all that are in
Christ, so that the Rule of their Direction therein is the Holy spotless Law of
God in Christ's Hand, That the Holy Ghost is the Beginner and Advancer of this
Work, and Faith in Jesus Christ, the great Mean thereof. That no Man can be
Holy till he be in Christ, and united to him by Faith, and that no Man is truly
in Christ, but he is thereby Sanctified. They Preach the Law to Condemn all
Flesh out of Christ, and to show thereby to people, the necessity of betaking
themselves to him for Salvation. See the savory words of blessed Tindal, called
the Apostle of England, in his Letter to John Frith, written Jan. 1533. Book of
Martyrs, Vol. 2. Page 308. Expound the Law truly, and open the Vail of Moses to
condemn all Flesh, and prove all Men sinners, and all deeds under the Law
before Mercy have taken away the condemnation thereof, to be Sin and Damnable;
and then as a faithful Minister set abroach the Mercy of our Lord Jesus, and
let the wounded Consciences Drink of the Water of him. And then shall your
Preaching be with Power, and not as the Hypocrites. And the Spirit of God shall
work with you, and all Consciences shall bear record unto you, and feel that it
is so. And all Doctrine that casts a mist on these two, to shadow and hide
them, I mean the Law of God, and Mercy of Christ, that resist you with all your
power. And so do we.

What is there in all this, to be offended with? is not this enough to
Vindicate our Doctrine from any tendency to Licentiousness? I am afraid, that
there are some things wherein we differ more than they think fit yet to
express. And I shall guess at them:

1. Is about the Imputed Righteousness of Christ. This Righteousness of Christ,
in his Active and Passive Obedience, has been asserted by Protestant Divines,
to be not only the Procuring, and Meritorious Cause of our Justification, for
this the Papists own; But the Matter, as the Imputation of it is the Form of
our Justification: Though I think that our Logical Terms are not so adapted for
such Divine Mysteries. But whatever Propriety, or Impropriety be in such
School-Terms, the common Protestant Doctrine has been, That a convinced Sinner
seeking Justification, must have nothing in his Eye but this Righteousness of
Christ, as God proposes nothing else to Him; And that God in justifying a
Sinner, accepts him in this Righteousness only, when he imputes it to him.

Now about the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, some say, That it belongs only
to the Person of Christ: He was under the Law, and bound to keep it for
himself, that he might be a fit Mediator, without Spot or Blemish: That it is a
Qualification in the Mediator, rather than a Benefit acquired by him, to be
communicated to his People. For they will not allow this Personal Righteonsness
of Christ to be imputed to us any otherwise than in the Merit of it, as
purchasing for us a more easy Law of Grace; in the Observation whereof they
place all our Justifying Righteousness: Understanding hereby our own Personal
inherent Holiness, and nothing else. They hold, That Christ died to merit this
of the Father; viz. That we might be Justified upon easier Terms, under the
Gospel, than those of the Law of Innocence; Instead of Justification by perfect
Obedience, we are now to be justified by our own Evangelical Righteousness,
made up of Faith, Repentance, and sincere Obedience. And if we hold not with
them in this, they tell the World, we are Enemies to Evangelical Holiness,
slighting the practice of all Good Works, and allowing our Hearers to live as
they list. Thus they slander the Preachers of Free Grace, because we do not
place Justification in our own inherent Holiness, but in Christ's perfect
Righteousness, imputed to us upon our believing in him. Which Faith, we teach,
purifies the heart, and always inclines to Holiness of Life. Neither do we hold
any Faith to be true and saving, that does not show it self by Good Works,
without which no man is, or can be Justified, either in his own Conscience, or
before Men. But it does not hence follow, that we cannot be justified in the
sight of God by Faith only; as the Apostle Paul asserts the latter, and the
Apostle James the former in a good Agreement.

2. There appears to be some difference, or misunderstanding of one another,
about the true Notion and Nature of Justifying Faith. Divines commonly
distinguish betwixt the Direct Act of Faith, and the Reflex Act. The Direct Act
is properly Justifying and Saving Faith, by which a lost sinner comes to
Christ, and relies upon him for Salvation. The Reflex Act is the looking back
of the Soul upon a former Act of Faith. A Rational Creature can reflect upon
his own Acts, whether they be Acts of Reason, Faith or Unbelief.

A Direct Act of saving Faith, is that by which a lost Sinner goes out of
himself to Christ for help, relying upon him only for Salvation. A Reflex Act
arises from the sense that Faith gives of its own inward Act, upon a serious
Review; the truth and sincerity of which is further cleared up to the
Conscience, by the Genuine Fruits of an unfeigned Faith, appearing to all men
in our good Lives, and holy Conversation. But for as plain as these things be,
yet we find we are frequently mistaken by others; and we wonder at the Mistake;
for we dare not ascribe to some Learned and Good Men, the Principles of
Ignorance, or Willfulness, from whence mistakes in plain Cases usually proceed.
When we do press Sinners to come to Christ by a Direct Act of Faith, consisting
in an humble Reliance upon him for Mercy and Pardon: They will understand us
(whether we will or not) of a Reflex Act of Faith, by which a Man knows and
believes that his sins are pardoned, and that Christ is his: When they might
easily know, that we mean no such thing. Mr. Walter Marshall in his excellent
Book, lately Published, has largely opened this, and the true Controverly of
this day, though it be 8 or 9 Years since he died.

3. We seem to differ about the Interest, and Room, and Place that Faith has
in Justification. That we are justified by Faith in Jesus Christ, is so plainly
a New Testament-Truth, that no Man pretending never so bately to the Christian
Name, denies it. The Papists own it, and the Socinians and Arminians, and all
own it. But how different are their senses of it? And indeed you cannot more
speedily and certainly judge of the spirit of a Man, than by his real inward
sense of this phrase (if you could reach it) a Sinner is justified by Faith in
Jesus Christ. Some say, that Faith in Jesus Christ justifies as it is a Work by
the (...) credere, as if it came in the room of perfect Obedience, required by
the Law. Some that Faith justifies, as it is informed and animated by Charity;
so the Papists, who plainly Confound Justification and Sanctification. Some
say, That Faith justifies, as it is a fullfilling of the Condition of the New
Covenant, if thon believe, thou shall be saved. Nay, they will not hold
there, but they will have this Faith to Justify, as it has a Principle, and
Fitness in it to dispose to sincere Obedience. The plain Old Protestant
Doctrine is, That the place of Faith in Justification, is only that of a Hand,
or Instrument, receiving the Righteousness of Christ, for which only we are
justified. So that though great Scholars do often confound themselves, and
others, in their Disputations about Faith's justifying a Sinner, every poor
plain Believer has the Marrow of this Mystery feeding his heart, and he can
readily tell you, That to be justified by Faith, is to be justified by Christ's
Righteousness, apprehended by Faith.

4. We seem to misunderstand one another about the Two Adams, and especially
the latter. See Romans 5.12. to the end. In that excellent Scripture a Comparison
is instituted, which if we did duly understand, and agree in, we should not
readily differ in the Main things of the Gospel. The Apostle there tells us,
That the First Adam stood in the Room of all his Natural Posterity; He had
their Stock in his hand, While he stood, they stood in him; when he fell, they
fell with him; by his Fall he derived Sin and Death to all them that spring
from him by Natural Generation. This is the sad side. But he tells us, in
opposition thereto, and in comparing therewith, that Christ, the Second Man, is
the New Head of the Redeemed World. He stands in their Room, his Obedience is
theirs, and he communicates to his Spiritual Offspring, the just contrary to
what the first sinful Adam does to his Natural Offspring; Righteousness
instead of Guilt and Sin, Life instead of Death, Justification instead of
Condemnation, and Eternal Life instead of Hell deserved. So that I think, the 3
d, 4 th, and 5 th Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, for the Mystery of
Justification, and the 6 th, 7 th, and 8 th, for the Mystery of Sanctification,
deserve our deep Study. But what say others about Christ's being the Second
Adam? We find them unwilling to speak of it; and when they do, it is quite
alien from the Scope of the Apostle in that Chapter. Thus to us they seem to
say, That God as a Rector, Ruler, Governor, has resolved to save Men by Jesus
Christ; That the Rule of this Government is the Gospel, as a new Law of Grace:
That Jesus Christ is set at the Head of this Rectoral Government; That in that
State he sits in Glory; ready, and able, out of his Purchase and Merits, to
give Justification, and Eternal Life, to all that can bring good Evidence of
their having complied with the Terms and Conditions of the Law of Grace. Thus
they antedate the Last Day, and hold forth Christ as a Judge, rather than a
Savior. Luther was wont to warn people of this distinction, frequently in his
Comment on the Epistle to the Galatians. And no other Headship to Christ, do we
find some willing to admit, but what belongs to his Kingly Office: As for his
Suretiship, and being the Second Adam, and a public person, some treat it with
Contempt. I have heard, that Dr. Tho. Goodwin was in his Youth an Arminian, or
at least inclining that way, but was by the Lord's Grace brought off by Dr.
Sibbs his clearing up to him this same Point of Christ's being the Head and
Representative of all his People. Now though we maintain steadfastly this
Headship of Jesus Christ, yet we say not, That there is an actual partaking of
his Fullness of Grace, till we be in him by Faith, though this Faith is also
given us on Christ's behalf, Phil. 1.29. and we believe through Grace, Acts
18.27. And we know no Grace, we can call nothing Grace, we care for no Grace,
but what comes from this Head, the Savior of the Body. But so much shall serve
to point forth the main things of difference and Mistakes.

Is it not a little provoking, that some are so captious, that no Minister can
preach in the hearing of some, (of the Freedom of God's Grace, of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, of sole and single believing on him for
Righteousness and Eternal Life, of the Impossibility of a Natural Man's doing
any good Work, before he be in Christ; of the impossibility of the mixing of
Man's Righteousness and Works, with Christ's Righteousness in the business of
Justification, and several other Points,) but he is immediately called, or
suspected to be an Antinomian. If we say, that Faith in Jesus Christ is neither
Work, nor Condition, nor Qualification in Justification, but is a mere
Instrument, receiving (as an empty Hand receives the freely given Alms) the
Righteousness of Christ, and that in its very Act, it is a renouncing of all
things but the Gift of Grace, the fire is kindled. So that it is come to that,
as Mr. Christopher Fowler said, That he that will not be Antichristian, must be
called an Antinomian. Is there a Minister in London, who did not preach, some
twenty, some thirty years ago, according to their standing, that same Doctrine
now by some called Antinomian. Let not Dr. Crisp's Book be looked upon as the
Standard of our Doctrine; there are many good things in it; and also many
expressions in it, that we generally dislike. It Is true that Mr. Burgess, and
Mr. Rutherford wrote against Antinomianism, and against some that were both
Antinomians and Arminians: And it is no less true that they wrote against the
Arminians, and did hate the New Scheme of Divinity, so much now contended for,
and to which we owe all our present contentions. I am persuaded that if these
godly and sound Divines, were on the present Stage, they would be as ready to
draw their Pens against two Books lately printed against Dr. Crisp, as ever
they were to write against the Doctor's Book. Truth is to be defended by Truth,
but Error is often, and unhappily opposed, by Error under Truth's Name.

But what shall we do in this case? What shall we do for peace with our
Brethren? Shall we lie still under their undeserved Reproaches, and for keeping
the peace, silently suffer others to beat us unjustly? If it were our own
personal concern, we should bear it: If it were only their charging us with
ignorance, weakness, and being unstudied Divines (as they have used liberally
to call all that have not learned, and dare not believe their New Divinity) we
might easily pass it by, or put it up. But when we see the pure Gospel of
Christ corrupted, and an Arminian Gospel new vanmpt and obtruded on people, to
the certain peril of the souls of such as believe it, and our Ministry
reflected upon, which should be dearer to us than our lives, can we be silent!
As we have a charge from the Lord, to deliver to our people what we have
received from Him, so as he calls and enables, we are not to give place by
subjection not for an hour, to such as creep in, not only to spy out, but to
destroy, not so much the Gospel Liberty, as the Gospel Salvation we have in
Christ Jesus, and to bring us back under the Yoke of Legal Bondage. And indeed
the case in that Epistle to the Galatians, and ours have a great affinity.

Is it desired that we should forbear to make a free offer of God's Grace in
Christ, to the worst of Sinners? This cannot be granted by us, for this is the
Gospel faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance (and therefore worthy of
all our preaching of it) that Jesus Christ came into the world to save inners,
and the chief of them, 1 Timothy 1.15. This was the Apostolic practice according
to their Lord's command, Mark 16.15, 16. Luke 24.47. They began at Jerusalem,
where the Lord of Life was wickedly slain by them, and yet Life in and through
his Blood was offered to, and accepted, and obtained by many of them. Every
believers experience witnesses to this, That every one that believes on Jesus
Christ, acts that faith as the Chief of Sinners. Every man that sees himself
rightly, thinks so of himself, and therein thinks not amiss. God only knows
who is truly the greatest Sinner, and every humbled Sinner will think that he
is the Man.

Shall we tell men, that unless they be holy, they must not believe on Jesus
Christ? That they must not venture on Christ for Salvation, till they be
qualified and fit to be received and welcomed by him! This were to forbear
preaching the Gospel at all, or to forbid all men to believe on Christ; For
never was any sinner qualified for Christ. He is well qualified for us, 1 Cor.
1.30. but a sinner out of Christ, has no qualification for Christ but sin and
misery. Whence should he have any better, but in and from Christ? Nay, suppose
an impossibility, that a man were qualified for Christ, I boldly assert, that
such a man would not, nor could ever believe on Christ. For Faith is a lost,
helpless, condemned sinner's casting himself on Christ for Salvation; and the
qualified man is no such person.

Shall we warn people that they should not believe on Christ too soon? It is
impossible that they should do it too soon. Can a man obey the great Gospel
Command too soon? 1 John 3.23. or do the Great Work of God too soon? John 6.28,
29. A man may too soon think that he is in Christ, and that is when it is not
so indeed; and this we frequently teach. But this is but an idle Dream, and not
Faith. A man may too soon fancy that he has Faith, but, I hope, he cannot act
Faith too soon? If any should say, a man may be holy too soon, how would that
saying be reflected upon? And yet it is certain, that though no man can be too
soon holy, (because he cannot too soon believe on Christ, which is the only
Spring of true Holiness) yet he may, and many do set about the study of that he
counts holiness, too soon, that is, before the Tree be changed, Matthew. 12.33,
34, 35. before he have the new heart, Ezekiel. 36 26, 27. and the Spirit of God
dwelling in him, which is only got by Faith in Christ, Gal. 3.14. And therefore
all this man's studying of Holiness, is not only vain labor, but acting of Sin.
And if this study, and these endeavors be managed, as commonly they are, to
obtain Justification before God, they are the more wicked Works still. And
because this point is needful to be known, I would give you some Testimonies
for it. Doctrine of the Church of England, in her 39 Articles, Art. 13. Works
done before the Grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are not
pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ, neither
do they make men meet to receive Grace, or (as the School Authors say) deserve
Grace of Congruity: Yea, rather, for that they are not done as God has willed
and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the Nature of Sin. So
Confession of Faith, Chap. 16. Art. 7. Calvin. Instit. Lib. 3. Cap. 15. Sect.
6. They (says he, speaking of the Popish Schoolmen) have found out, I know not
what, moral good works, whereby men are made acceptable to God before they are
engrafted into Christ. As if the Scripture lied, when it said; They are all in
death who have not the Son, 1 John 5.12. If they be in death, how can they
beget matter of life? As if it were of no force, whatsoever is not of Faith is
Sin; as if evil trees could bring forth good fruit. Read the rest of that
Section. On the contrary, the Council of Trent, Sess. 6. Cannon 7. say boldly,
Whosoever shall say, That all Works done before Justification, howsoever they
be done, are truly sin, and deserve the hatred of God, Let him be Anathema. And
to give you one more bellowing of the Beast, wounded by the Light of the
Gospel, see the same Council Sess. 6. Can. 11. Si quis dixerit, Gratiam qua
justificamur, esse tantum favorem Dei, Anathema sit. This is fearful blasphemy,
says Dr. Downham, Bishop of Londonderry, in his Orthodox Book of
Justification, Lib. 3. Cap. 1. Where he says, That the Hebrew words, which in
the Old Testament signify the Grace of God, do always signify favor, and
never grace inherent. And above fifty Testimonies may be brought from the New
Testament to prove that by God's Grace, his favor is still meant. But what was
good Church of England Doctrine, at, and after the Reformation, cannot now go
down with some Arminianizing Nonconformists.

If then nothing will satisfy our quarrelling Brethren, but, either Silence as
to the Main Points of the Gospel which we believe, and live by the faith of,
and look to be saved in, which we have for many years preached with some seals
of the Holy Ghost in converting sinners unto God, and in building them up in
holiness and comfort, by the faith and power of them, which also we vowed to
the Lord to preach to all that will hear us, as long as we live, in the day
when we gave up our selves to serve God with our Spirit in the Gospel of his
Son; If either this Silence, or the swallowing down of Arminian Schemes of the
Gospel contrary to the New Testament, and unknown to the Reformed Churches, in
their greatest purity, be the only terms of peace with our Brethren, we must
then maintain our peace with God, and our own Consciences in the defense of
plain Gospel Truth, And our Harmony with the Reformed Churches, and in the
comfort of these, bear their Enmity. And though it be usual with them to
vilify and contemn such as differ from them, for their fewness, weakness and
want of Learning; yet they might know that the most Learned and Godly in the
Christian World, have maintained and defended the same Doctrine we stand for,
for some Ages. The Grace of God will never want, for it can and will furnish,
Defenders of it. England has been blessed with a Bradwardine, an Archbishop of
Canterbury, against the Pelagians, a Twiss and Ames against the Arminians. And
though they that contend with us would separate their Cause altogether from
that of these two pests of the Church of Christ, I mean Pelagius and Arminius;
yet judicious observers cannot but already perceive a coincidency, and do fear
more, when either the force of Argument shall drive them out of their lurking
holes, or when they shall think fit to discover their secret sentiments, which
yet we but guess at; Then as we shall know better what they would be at, so it
is very like, that they will then find Enemies in many, whom they have seduced
by their craft, and do yet seem to be in their Camp, and will meet with
Opposers both at home and abroad, that they think not of.

Our Doctrine of the Justification of a Sinner by the free grace of God in
Jesus Christ, however it be misrepresented and reflected upon, is yet
undeniably recommended by four things.

1 It is a Doctrine savoury and precious unto all ser ous Godly Persons Dr.
Ames his observation holds good as to all the Arminian Divinity, that it is
contra communem sensum fidelium, against the common sense of Believers. And
though this be an argument of little weight with them, that value more the
judgment of the Scribes and the Wise, and Disputers of this World, 1 Cor. 1.18,
19, 20, 21. than of all the Godly; Yet the Spirit of God by John gives us this
same argument 1 John 4.5, 6. They are of the World, therefore speak they of the
World, and the World hears them. We are of God; he that knows God, hears
us; he that is not of God, hears not us: Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth,
and the Spirit of Error. How evident is it, that several who by Education, or
an unsound Ministry, having had their Natural Enmity against the Grace of God
strengthened, when the Lord by his Spirit has broke in upon their hearts, and
has raised a serious Soul-exercise about their Salvation, their turning to God
in Christ, and their turning from Arminianism, have begun together? And some of
the greatest Champions for the Grace of God, have been persons thus dealt with,
as we might instance. And as it is thus with men at their Conversion, so is it
found afterward, that still as it is well with them in their inner man, so does
the Doctrine of Grace still appear more precious and savoury. On the other
part, all the ungodly and unrenewed have a dislike and disrelish of this
Doctrine, and are all for the Doctrine of doing, and love to hear it, and in
their sorry exercise, are still for doing their own business in Salvation,
though they be nothing, and can do nothing, but Sin, and destroy themselves.

2. It is that Doctrine only, by which a convinced sinner can be dealt with
effectually. When a man is awakened and brought to that, that all must be
brought to, or to worse, What shall I do to be saved? Acts 16.30, 31. We have
the Apostolic answer to it, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be
saved, and thy house. This Answer is so old, that with many it seems out of
date; But it is still, and will ever be fresh and new and savoury, and the only
Resolution of this grand Case of Conscience, as long as Conscience and the
World lasts. No Wit or Art of Man, will ever find a crack or flaw in it, or
devise another or a better answer; nor can any but this alone, heal rightly the
wound of an awakened Conscience. Let us set this man to seek resolution in this
case, of some Masters in our Israel. According to their Principles, they must
say to him, Repent and Mourn for your known Sins, and leave and loath them, and
God will have mercy on you. Alas! says the poor Man, My Heart is hard and I
cannot repent aright; yea I find my heart more hard and vile, than when I was
secure in sin. If you speak to this man of qualifications for Christ, he knows
nothing of them: if of sincere Obedience, his answer is native and ready,
Obedience is the work of a living man, and Sincerity is only in a renewed Soul:
sincere Obedience is therefore as impossible to a dead unrenewed sinner, as
perfect Obedience is. Why should not the right answer be given, Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved. Tell him what Christ is, what he
has done and suffered to obtain eternal Redemption for sinners, and that
according to the Will of God and his Father. Give him a plain downright
Narrative of the Gospel Salvation wrought out by the Son of God; tell him the
History and Mystery of the Gospel plainly; it may be the Holy Ghost will work
faith thereby, as he did in those first fruits of the Gentiles, Acts 10.44. If
he ask, what warrant he has to believe on Jesus Christ, Tell him, that he has
utter indispensible Necessity for it (for without believing on him, he must
perish eternally.) That, he has God's gracious Offer of Christ and all his
Redemption, with a promise, that upon accepting the Offer by Faith, Christ and
Salvation with Him is his. That he has God's express commandment, 1 John 3.23.
to believe on Christ's Name, and that he should make conscience of obeying it,
as well as any command in the Moral Law. Tell him of Christ's ability and
good will to save, that no man was ever rejected by him, that cast himself upon
him, that desperate cases are the glorious Triumphs of his Art of saving. Tell
him that there is no midst between Faith and Unbelief; that there is no excuse
for neglecting the one, and continuing in the the other. That believing on the
Lord Jesus for salvation is more pleasing to God, that all obedience to his
Law, and that unbelief is the most provoking to God, and the most damning to
man, of all sins. Against the greatness of his sins, the Curse of the Law, and
the severity of God as Judge, there is no relief to be held forth to him, but
the free and boundless Grace of God in the Merit of Christ's Satisfaction by
the sacrifice of himself. If he should say, What is it to believe on Jesus
Christ? As to this, I find no such question in the Word; but that all did some
way understand the notion of it: The Jews that did not believe on him, John 6
28, 29, 30. the Chief Priests and Pharisees, John 7 48 the blind Men, John
9.35. When Christ asked him, Believe thou on the Son of God? He answered, Who
is he Lord, that I may believe on him? Immediately, when Christ had told him,
ver. 37. he says not, what is it to believe on him? but, Lord, I believe, and
worshipped him: and so both professed, and acted Faith in him. So the Father of
the Lunatic, Mark 9.23, 24. The Eunuch, Act, 8.37. They all, both Christ's
Enemies and his Disciples, knew, that Faith in him, was a believing that the
Man Jesus of Nazareth, was the Son of God, the Messiah, and Savior of the
World, so as to receive, and look for Salvation in his Name, Acts 4.12. This
was the common Report, published by Christ, and his Apostles, and Disciples;
and known by all that heard it. If he yet ask, What he is to believe; you tell
him, that he is not called to believe that he is in Christ, and that his Sins
are pardoned, and he a Justified Man; but that he is to believe God's Record
concerning Christ. 1 John 5, 10, 11, 12. And this Record is, that God gives;
that is, offers to us Eternal Life in his Son Jesus Christ. And that all that
with the heart believe this Report, and rest their Souls on these glad Tidings,
shall be saved, Romans 10.9, 10.11. And thus he is to believe, that he may be
justified, Gal. 2.16. If he still say; That this Believing is hard. This is a
good doubt, but easily resolved. It bespeaks a Man deeply humbled. Any body may
see his own Impotence, to obey the Law of God fully; but few find the
Difficulty of believing; For his Resolution, ask him, what it is he finds,
makes believing difficult to him. Is it unwillingness to be justified and
saved? Is it unwillingness to be so saved by Jesus Christ, to the praise of
Gods Grace in him, and to the voiding of all boasting in himself? This he will
surely deny. Is it a Distrust of the Truth of the Gospel-Record? This he dare
not own. Is it a Doubt of Christ's Ability, or Good Will to save? This is to
contradict the Testimony of God in the Gospel. Is it because he doubts of an
Interest in Christ and his Redemption? You tell him, That believing on Christ
makes up the Interest in him. If he say, that he cannot believe on Jesus
Christ, because of the difficulty of the acting this Faith? and that a Divine
Power is needful to draw it forth, which he finds not? You tell him, that
believing in Jesus Christ is no work, but a resting on Jesus Christ. And that
this pretense is as unreasonable as that if a Man wearied with a Journey, and
who is not able to go one step further, should argue, I vm so tired, that I am
not able to lie down; when indeed he can neither stand nor go. The poor wearied
sinner can never believe on Jesus Christ till he finds he can do nothing for
himself; and in his first believing does always apply himself to Christ for
Salvation, as a man hopeless and helpless in himself. And by such reasonings
with him from the Gospel, the Lord will (as he has often done) convey faith,
and joy, and peace by believing.

3. This Doctrine of free Justification by Faith alone, has this Advantage,
That it suits all men's Spirits and Frame, in their serious Approaches to God
in Worship. Men may think and talk boldly, of inherent Righteousness, and of
its worth and value, of good Works, and Frames, and Dispositions; but when men
present themselves before the Lord, and have any discoveries of his Glory, all
things in themselves will disappear, and be looked upon as nothing. Zophar,
though the hottest Speaker of Job's Friends, did yet speak rightly to him, Job
11.4, 5. For thou have said, My Doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes.
But, O that God would speak! And so Job found it, when God displaid his Glory
to him, and that only in the works of Creation and Providence, Chap. 38, 39. He
then changed his note, Job 40.4, 5. and 42.2, -- 6. So was it with Isaiah, Chap
6.5. till pardoning Grace was imparted to him. No man can stand before this
Holy Lord God, with any peace and Comfort, unless he have God himself to stay
upon. His Grace and Mercy in Jesus Christ, can only preserve a man from being
consumed, and the Faith of it, from being confounded. Hence we see the
difference betwixt men's frame in their Disputes and Doctrine about these
points, and their own sense and pleadings with God in Prayer.

4. This Doctrine of Justification by Faith without any mixtures of man
(however and by what Names and Titles soever they be dignified or
distinguished) has this undoubted advantage, that, it is that, which all not
judicially hardened and blinded, do, or would, or must betake themselves unto,
when dying. How loath would men be to plead that Cause on a Deathbed, which
they so stoutly stand up for with Tongue and Pen, when at ease, and that evil
day far away? They seem to be jealous, least God's Grace and Christ's
Righteousness have too much room, and Men's Works too little, in the the
business of Justification; But was ever a sensible dying person, exercised with
this jealousy as to himself? Even bloody Stephen Gardener, when a dying, could
answer Dr. Day, Bishop of Chichester, who offered comfort to him, by this
Doctrine, What, my Lord, will you open that Gap now? then farewell altogether.
To me, and such other in my case, you may speak it, but open this Window to the
People, then farewell altogether. Book of Martyrs, V. 3. p. 450. In which words,
he bewrayed a conviction of the fitness of the Doctrine to dying persons, and
his knowledge that it tended to the destroying the Kingdom of Antichrist. As
Fox in the same Book of Martyrs, Vol. 2. p. 46. gives this as the reason of
Luther's success against Popery, above all former attempts of preceding
Witnesses. But, says he, Luther gave the stroke, and plucked down the
soundation, and all by opening one vein, long hid before, wherein lies the
touchstone of all Truth and Doctrine, as the only Principal Origin of our
Salvation, which is our free Justification by Faith only, in Christ the Son of
God. Consider how it is with the most holy and eminent Saints, when dying? Did
ye ever see or hear any boasting of their works and performances? They may and
do own to the praise of his Grace, what they have been made to be, what they
have been helped to do or suffer for Christ's sake. But when they draw near to
the Awful Tribunal, what else is in their Eye and Heart, but only Free Grace,
Ransoming Blood, and a Well-ordered Covenant in Christ the Surety? They cannot
bear to hear any make mention to them of their Holiness, their own Grace and
Seize. In a word, the Doctrine of Conditions, Qualifications, and
Rectoral Government, and the distribution of Rewards and Punishments, according
to the New Law of Grace, will make but an uneasy Bed to a dying Man's
Conscience, and will leave him in a very bad condition at present, and in dread
of worse, when he is feeling in his last Agonies, that the Wages of Sin is
Death, if he cannot by Faith add, but the Gift of God is Eternal Life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23. He is a wise and happy man that anchors his
Soul on that Rock, at which he can ride out the storm of Death. Why should men
contend for that in their life, that they know they must renounce at their
death? Or neglect that Truth now, that they must betake themselves unto then;
why should a man build a House, which he must leave in a Storm, or be buried in
its ruins? Many Architects have attempted to make a sure House of their own
Righteousness; but it is without a Foundation, and must fall, or be thrown down
sorrowfully by the foolish Builder, which is the better way. It is a great Test
of the Truth of Doctrine, about the way of Salvation, when it is generally
approved of by sensible dying men. And what the Universal Sense of all such in
this case is, as to the Righteousness of Christ, and their own, is obvious to
any man. He was an ingenuous Balaamite, who being himself a Papist, said to a
Protestant, Our Religion is best to live in, and yours best to die in.

But notwithstanding of these great advantages (and they are but a few of many)
that this Doctrine is attended with; There are not a few disadvantages, it
labors under, which though they are rather to its commendation than reproach,
yet they do hinder its Welcome and Reception.

As 1. This Doctrine is a Spiritual Mystery, and lies not level to a Natural
Understanding, 1 Cor. 2.10, 14. Working for Life, a man naturally understands;
but believing for Life, he understands not. To mend the Old Man, he knows, but
to put on the New Man by Faith is a Riddle to him. The study of Holiness, and
to endeavor to square his Life according to God's Law, he knows a little of,
though he can never do it; but to draw Sanctification from Christ by Faith, and
to walk holily, in and through the force of the Spirit of Christ in the Heart
by Faith, is mere canting to him. A new Life he understands a little, but
nothing of a New Birth and Regeneration. He never saw himself stark dead. Nay,
not only is it unknown to the Natural Man, but he is by his Natural State, an
enemy to it: he neither does, nor can know it, nor approve of it, 1 Cor. 2.14.
Wisdom that is Christ's way of saving men revealed in the Gospel, is justified
of all her Children, and of them only, Matthew. 11.19. Luke 7.29, 30, 35. This
Enmity in Men to the Wisdom of God, is the cause not only of this contempt of
its Ministry, but is a Temptation to many Ministers to patch up and frame a
Gospel that is more suited to, and taking with, and more easily understood, by
such men, than the true Gospel of Christ is: this Paul complains of in others,
and vindicates himself from, 1 Cor. 1: 17. and 2.2. he warns others against it,
Col. 2.8. 2 Cor. 11.3, 4. Gal. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. And it is certain that doing for
Life, is more suited to corrupt Nature, than Believing is.

2. Our Opposers in this Doctrine have the Many for them and against us, as
they of old boasted, John 7.48. This they have no ground to glory in, though
they do, not we to be ashamed of the Truth, because we cannot vie numbers with
them. With our Opposers, are all these sorts (and they make a great number)
though I do not say or think that all our Opposers are to be ranked in any of
these Lists, for some both Godly and Learned may mistake us and the Truth in
this matter. 1. They have all the Ignorant People, that know nothing of either
Law or Gospel. They serve God (they say, but most fasly) and hope that God will
be merciful to them and save them. To all such, both the clear explication of
God's Law, and the Mysteries of the Gospel, are strange things. Yet sincere
obedience they love to hear of (for all of them think there is some sincerity
in their hearts, and that they can do somewhat.) But of Faith in Christ they
have no knowledge, except by faith you understand a dream of being saved by
Jesus Christ, though they know nothing of him, or of his way of saving men, nor
of the way of being saved by him. 2. All Formalists are on their side. People
that place their Religion in Trifles, because they are strangers to the
substance thereof. 3. All proud secure sinners are against us, that go about,
with the Jews, to establish their own Righteousness, Romans 10.3. The secure are
whole, and see no need of the Physician; the proud have physic at home, and
despise that that came down from Heaven. 4. All the zealous devout people in a
Natural Religion, are utter enemies to the Gospel. By a Natural Religion, I
mean that, that is the product of the remnants of God's image in fallen man, a
little improved by the Light of God's Word. All such cannot endure to hear,
that God's Law must be perfectly fulfilled in every tittle of it, or no man can
be saved by doing. That they must all perish for ever that have not the
Righteousness of a man that never sinned, who is also God over all blessed for
ever, to shelter and cover them from a holy God's anger, and to render them
accepted of him. That this Righteousness is put on by the Grace of God, and a
man must betake himself to it, and receive as a naked blushing sinner. That no
man can do any thing that is good, till Gospel Grace renew him and make him
first a good man: This they will never receive, but do still think that a man
may grow good by doing good.

3. Natural Reason is very fertile in its Objections and Cavils against the
Doctrine of the Grace of God. And especially when this corrupt Reason is
polished by learning and strong natural parts. When there are many to broach
such Doctrines, and many so disposed to receive it, is it any wonder that the
Gospel Truth makes little progress in the World? Nay, were it not for the
Divine Power that supports it, and the promises of its preservation, its
enemies are so many and strong, and true friends so few and feeble, we might
fear its perishing from the earth. But we know it is impossible. And if the
Lord have a design of mercy to these Nations, and has a vein of his Election
to dig up amongst us, we make no doubt but the Glory of Christ, as a crucified
Savior, shall yet be displaid in the midst of us, to the joy of all that love
his salvation, and to the shame of others, Isa. 66.5.

4. I might add the great Declension of some of the Reformed Churches from the
purity and simplicity of that Doctrine they were first planted in. The new
Methodists about the Grace of God, had too great an increase in the French
Churches. And which was very strange, this Declension advanced amongst them, at
the same time when Jansonism was spreading amongst many of the Church of Rome:
So that a man might have seen Papists growing better in their Doctrine, and
Protestants growing worse. See Mr. Gale's Idea of Jansenism, with Dr. Owen's
Preface. What there is of this amongst us in England, I leave the Reader to Mr.
Jenkyn's Coleusma, and to the Naked Truth, Part 4. And if there be any warping
toward Arminian Doctrine, by some on our side, in order to ingratiate
themselves with that Church that has the secular advantages to dispense, and
to make way for some accommodation with them, I had rather wait in fear till a
further discovery of it, than offer to guess at.

Lastly, It is no small disadvantage this Doctrine lies under from the Spirit
of this Day, we live in. A light, frothy, trifling temper prevails generally:
Doctrines of the greatest weight, are talked of and treated about, with a vain
unconcerned frame of Spirit, as if men contended rather about Opinions and
School-points, than about the Oracles of God, and matters of Faith. But if men's
hearts were seen by themselves, if Sin were felt, if men's Consciences were
enlivened, if God's Holy Law were known in its exactness and severity, and the
Glory and Majesty of the Lawgiver shining before men's eyes, if men were living
as leaving Time and launching forth into Eternity, the Gospel Salvation by
Jesus Christ, would be more regarded.

Object. 1. Is there not a great decay amongst Professors in real practical
Godliness? Are we like the Old Protestants, or the Old Puritans? I answer, That
the Decay and Degeneracy is great and heavily to be bewailed. But what is the
cause? and what will be its cure? Is it because the Doctrine of Morality, and
Virtue and Good Works is not enough preached? This cannot be; For there has
been for many years a public Ministry in the Nation, that make these their
constant themes. Yet the Land is become as Sodom for all lewdness; and the Tree
of Profaneness is so grown, that the Sword of the Magistrate has not yet been
able to lop off any of its Branches. Is it because men have too much Faith in
Christ? or too little? or none at all? Would not faith in Christ increase
Holiness? did it not always so? and will it not still do it? Was not the
holiness of the first Protestants eminent and shining? And yet they generally
put assurance in the definition of their faith. We cannot say that Gospel
Holiness has prospered much by the correction or mittigation of that
harsh-like definition. The certain spring of this prevailing Wickedness in the
Land, is peoples ignorance and unbelief of the Gospel of Christ, and that grows
by many Prophets that speak lies to them in the Name of the Lord.

Object. 2. But do not some abuse the Grace of the Gospel and turn it into
Wantonness. Answer. Yes, Some do, ever did, and still will do so. But it is
only the ill-understood and not-believed Doctrine of Grace that they abuse; the
Grace it self no man can abuse, for its power prevents its abuse. Let us see
how Paul, that blessed Herald of this Grace (as he was an eminent instance of
it) deals with this Objection, Romans 6.1, etc. What does he to prevent this
abuse? Is it by extenuating what he had said, Chap. 5.20. that Grace abounds
much more, where Sin had abounded? Is it by mincing Grace smaller, that men may
not choke upon it, or surfeit by it? Is it by mixing something of the Law with
it, to make it more wholesome? No: But only by plain asserting the power and
influence of this Grace, wherever it really is, as at length in that Chapter.
This Grace is all treasured up in Christ Jesus, offered to all men in the
Gospel, poured forth by our Lord in the Working of Faith, and drunk in by the
Elect in the exercise of Faith, and becomes in them a living spring, which will
and must break out and spring up in all holy conversation. He exhorts them to
drink in more and more of this Grace by Faith. And as for such as pretend to
Grace and live ungodly, the Spirit of God declares they are void of Grace,
which is always fruitful in good works, 2 Pet. 2. and Jude's Epistle. The
Apostle orders the Churches to cast such out, 1 Cor. 5. 2 Timothy 3.5. And to
declare to them as Peter did to a Professor, Acts 8.20, 21. That they have no
part nor portion in this matter, for their heart is not right in the sight of
God, though the Doctrine be right, that they hypocritically profess.

But if our Brethren will not forbear their charge of Antinomianism, we entreat
them that they will give it in justly. As 1. On them that say that the sanction
of the Holy Law of God is repealed, so that no man is now under it, either to
be condemned for breaking it, or to be saved by keeping it; which to us is rank
Antinomianism and Arminianism both. Yea that it does not now require perfect
holiness; but indeed what can it require? For it is no Law, if its Sanction be
repealed. 2. On them let the charge lie, that are ungodly under the name of
Christianity. And both they and we know where to find such true Antinomians in
great abundance, who yet are never called by that name. And is it not somewhat
strange that men who have so much zeal against an Antinomian principle, have so
much kindness for true Antinomians in practice? 3. Let him be called by this
ugly name, that judges not the Holy Law and Word of God written in the Old and
New Testament to be a perfect rule of life, to all Believers, and says not
that all such should study conformity thereunto, Romans 12.2. 4. That encourages
himself in Sin, and hardneth himself in Impenitence, by the Doctrine of the
Gospel. No man that knows and believes the Gospel, can do so. What some
hypocrites may do, is nothing to us, who disown all such persons and practices,
and own no principle that can really encourage the one, or influence the other.
5. That thinks holiness is not necessary to all that would be saved. We
maintain not only that it is necessary to, but that it is a great part of,
Salvation. 6. Whoever thinks, that when a Believer comes short in obeying God's
Law, he sins not, and that he ought not to mourn because of it as provoking to
God, and hurtful to the new creation in him, and that he needs not renew the
exercise of Faith and Repentance for repeated washing and pardoning. Lastly,
That say that a Sinner is actually justfied before he be united to Christ by
faith. It Is strange that such that are charged with this, of all men do most
press on Sinners to believe on Jesus Christ, and urge the damnation threatened
in the Gospel upon all Unbelievers. That there is a decreed Justification from
Eternity, particular and fixed as to all the Elect, and a Virtual Perfect
Justification of all the Red emed, in and by the Death and Resurrection of
Jesus Christ, Isa. 53 11. Romans 4.25. Heb. 9.26, 28. and 10.14 is not yet called
in question by any amongst us; and more is not craved, but that a Sinner for
his Actual Justification must lay hold on and plead this Redemption in Christ's
blood by Faith.

But on the other hand, we glory in any name of Reproach (as the honorable
reproach of Christ) that is cast upon us for asserting the absolute boundless
freedom of the Grace of God, which excludes all merit and every thing like it;
The Absoluteness of the Covenant of Grace (for the Covenant of Redemption was
plainly and strictly a conditional one, and the noblest of all conditions was
in it; the Son of God's taking on him man's nature, and offering it in
Sacrifice, was the strict condition of all the Glory and Reward promised to
Christ and his seed, Isa. 53.10, 11.) wherein all things are freely promised,
and that Faith that is required for sealing a man's Interest in the Covenant, is
promised in it and wrought by the Grace of it, Ephesians 2.8. That Faith at first,
is wrought by, and acts upon, a full and absolute offer of Christ, and of all
his fullness; an Offer that has no condition in it, but that native one to all
Offers, acceptance; and in the very act of this Acceptance, the Accepter does
expressly disclaim all things in himself, but Sinfulness and Misery. That Faith
in Jesus Christ does justify (although by the way it is to be noted, that it
is never written in the Word, that Faith justifies actively, but always
passively, that a man is justified by faith, and that God justifies men by,
and through faith, yet admitting the phrase) only as a mere instrument
receiving that Imputed Righteousness of Christ, for which we are justified; and
that this Faith in the Office of Justification, is neither condition nor
qualification, nor our Gospel-Righteousness, but in its very Act is a
renouncing of all such pretenses.

We proclaim the Market of Grace to be free, Isai. 55.1, 2, 3. It Is Christ's
last offer and lowest, Rev. 22 17. If there be any price or money spoke of, it
is no price, no money. And where such are the terms and conditions, if we be
forced to call them so, we must say that they look liker a renouncing, than a
boasting of any Qualifications or Conditions. Surely the Terms of the
Gospel-Bargain, are God's free giving, and our free taking and receiving.

We are not ashamed of teaching the ineffectualness of the Law, and all the
works of it, to give Life, either that of Justification, or of Regeneration and
Sanctification, or of Eternal Life. That the Law of God can only damn all
sinners, that it only rebukes, and thereby irritates and increases sin, and
can never subdue it, till Gospel Grace come with power upon the heart, and then
when the Law is written in the heart, it is copyed out in the life.

That we call men to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, in that case the first
Adam brought them to, and left them in, in that case that the Law finds and
leaves them in, guilty, filthy, condemned, out of which case they can only be
delivered by Christ, and by believing on him.

That we tell Sinners, that Jesus Christ will surely welcome all that come to
him, and as he will not cast them out for their sinfulness, in their Nature and
by past Life, so neither for their Misery in the want of such Qualifications
and Graces, that he only can give.

That we do hold forth the Propitiation in Christ's Blood, as the only thing to
be in the eye of a man that would believe on Christ unto justification of Life;
and that by this faith alone a sinner is justified, and God is justified in
doing so.

That God justifies the Ungodly, Romans 4.5. neither by making him godly before
he justify him, nor leaving him ungodly after he has justified him; But that
the same Grace that justifies him, does immediately sanctify him.

If for such Doctrine we be called Antinomians, we are bold to say, that there
is some ignorance of, or prejudice at, the known Protestant Doctrine, in the
hearts of the Reproachers.

There are some things we complain of; as, That they load their Brethren so
grievously with unjust calumnies, either directly, or by consequence; As when
they preach up holiness and the necessity of it, as if it were their proper
Doctrine and disowned by us, when they cannot but know in their Consciences,
that there is no difference betwixt them and us, about the nature or necessity
of Holiness, but only about its Spring and Place in Salvation. We derive it
from Jesus Christ and Faith in him, and know assuredly that it can spring from
nothing else. We place it betwixt Justification and Glory, and that is its
Scripture place and no where else can it be found or stand, let men try it as
much and long as they will.

That they seem very zealous against Antinomianism, and forget the other
extreme of Arminianism, which is far more common, as dangerous, and far more
natural to all men. For though there have been, and may be this day, some true
Antinomians, either through ignorance, or weakness, reeling to that extreme, or
by the heat of contention with, and hatred of Arminianism (as it is certain,
some very good and learned men have inclined to Arminianism, through their
hatred of Antinomianism, and have declared so much.) And some may, and do
corrupt the Doctrine of the Gospel. through the unrenewedness of their hearts;
yet how destructive soever this abuse may be to the souls of the seduced, such
an appearance of Antinomianism, is but as a Meteor or Comet, that will soon
blaze out, and its folly will be quickly hist off the Stage. But the principles
of Arminianism are the natural dictates of a carnal mind, which is enmity both
to the Law of God, and to the Gospel of Christ, and next to the Dead Sea of
Popery (into which also this stream runs) have since Pelagius to this day, been
the greatest plague of the Church of Christ, and its like will be till his
Second Coming.

We do also justly complain that in their opposing of true Antinomian Errors,
and particularly the alleged Tenants of Dr. Crisp, they hint that there is a
party of Ministers and Professors that defend them, whereas we can defy them
to name one Minister in London at least, that does so.

That expressions capable of a good sense, are strenuously perverted, contrary
to the scope of the Writer or Speaker. But this and such like are the usual
methods of unfair Contenders. Were the like method taken on the other side, how
many Popish, Arminian, yea and Socinian expressions might be published? If any
Gospel Truth be preached or published, that reflects on the Idol of
Self-Righteousness, and Justification thereby, it is soon quarrelled with: Put
Reproaches cast on the free Grace of God, and the imputed Righteousness of
Christ, are with them, if not approved, yet but Venial well meant Mistakes. Let
men's stated Principles be Known, and their Expressions explained accordingly,
or Mistakes and Contentions will be endless.

We do also complain, That Love to Peace has made many grave and sound Divines
forbear to utter their Minds freely in public on these Points; Whereby the
adverse Party is emboldened, and such Ministers as dare not purchase Peace by
silence, when so great Truths are undermined, are exposed as a Mark. But we do
not question but these Worthy Brethren, when they shall see the Points of
Controversy accurately stated (as they may shortly) will openly appear on
Truth's side, as we know their hearts are for it.

Lastly, We complain, that the Scheme of the Gospel contended for by our
Opposers, is clouded, veiled and darkened by School-Terms, new, uncouth, and
unscriptural Phrases; whereby, as they think to guard themselves against
Opposition, so they do increase the Jealousies of their Brethren, and keep
their Principles from the Knowledge of ordinary people, who are as much
concerned in those Points as any Scholar or Divine.

This Controversy looks like a very bad Omen. We thought we might have healed
our Old Breaches, in smaller things; and behold a New one is threatened in the
greatest Matters. We did hope, that the good Old Protestant Doctrine had been
rooted and rivetted in the hearts of all the Ministers on our side; but now we
find the contrary, and that the sour Leaven of Arminianism works strongly.
Their Advocates do not yet own the Name, but the younger sort are more bold and
free; and with them no Books or Authors are in esteem and use, but such as are
for the New Rational Method of Divinity ( Rational is a fitter Commendation of
a Philosopher, than of a Divine; and yet it is somewhat better applied to a
Divine than to Divinity: For true Divinity has a higher and Nobler Original
than Man's Reason, even Divine Revelation? and it can never be rightly learned
by them that have no higher Principle in them than Reason, even the Teaching of
the Holy Ghost.) But for Luther, Calvin, Zanchy, Twisse, Ames, Perkins, and
Divines of their Spirit and Stamp, they are generally neglected and despised.

We were in hope, that after the Lord had so signally appeared for his Truth
and People, in preserving both, under the Rage of that Antichristian Spirit of
Persecution, and Apostasy to gross Popery, that wrought so mightily under the
Two Last Reigns; and when he had given us the Long-desired Mercy of a Legal
Establishment of our Gospel-Liberty, in This, that all Hearts and Hands should
have been unanimously employed in the advancing the work of Christ. But we
find, that as we have for a Long Time lost, in a great measure, the Power, we
are now in no small danger of losing also the Purity of the Gospel; And without
them what signifies Liberty!

It is undoubted, that the Devil designs the obstructing of the Course of the
Gospel; and in this he has often had the Service of the Tongues and Pens of
Good Men, as well as of Bad; yet we are not without hope, that the Lord in his
Wisdom and Mercy will defeat him, and that these Contentions may yet have good
Fruit, and a good Issue.

For furthering of this good End, let me request a few things of my Brethren.

1. Let us not receive Reports suddenly of one another. In times of Contention,
many false Reports are raised, and rashly believed. This is both the Fruit and
the Fuel of Contention; For all the Noise of Antinomianism, I must declare,
that I do not know (and I have both Opportunity and Inclination to inquire) any
one Antinomian Minister, or Christian in London, who is really such as their
Reproachers paint them out, or such as Luther and Calvin wrote against.

2. Let us make Christ Crucified our great Study, as Christians, and the
preaching of him, our main work, as Ministers, 1 Cor. 2.2. Paul determined to
know nothing else. But many manage the Ministry, as if they had taken up a
contrary determination, even to know any thing, save Jesus Christ, and him
Crucified. We are amazed to see so many ashamed of the Cross of Christ, and to
behave as if they accounted the Tidings of Salvation, by the slain Son of God,
an Old An iquated Story, and unfit to be daily preached. And what comes in the
room thereof, is not unknown, nor is it worth the mentioning: For all things
that come in Christ's room, and justle him out, either of Hearts, or Pulpits,
are alike abominable to a Christian. How many Sermons may a man hear, and read,
when printed; yea, and Books written, about the way to Heaven, wherein is
hardly the Name of Jesus Christ? And if he be named, it is the Name of Christ,
as a Judge and Lawgiver, rather than that of a Savior. And as little room has
Christ in many men's Prayers; except it be in the conclusion. When we cannot
avoid the observing of those sad things, let it be a sharp Spur to us, to
Preach Christ more, to Pray more in his Name, and to Live more to his Praise.
Let us not be deceived with that pretense, That Christ may be Preached, when he
is not Named. The Preaching of the Gospel, is the Naming of Christ, and so
called, Romans 15.20. And Paul was to bear Christ's Name before the Gentiles, and
Kings, and the Chrildren of Israel, Acts 9.15.

3. Let us Study hard, and Pray much, to know the truth and to cleave unto it.
It is an Old Observation, Ante Pelagium, securius loquebantur Patres. Before
Pelagius, even the Fathers spoke more carelessly; meaning well, and fearing no
Mistakes in their Hearers. Now it is not so; the more careful should we be in
our Doctrine. Let us search our own Consciences. and see how we our selves are
justified before God. So Paul argued, Gal. 2.15, 16. And let us bring forth
that Doctrine to our People, that we find in our Bibles, and have felt the
power of upon our own hearts.

Let us not run into Extremes upon the Right or Left Hand, through the heat of
Contention; but carefully keep the good Old way of the Protestant Doctrine;
wherein so many thousands of Saints and Martyrs of Jesus; have lived holily,
and died happily, who never heard of our New Schemes and Notions.

And for this end, let us take and cleave to the Test of the Assemblies
Confession of Faith and Catechisms. More we own not our selves, more we crave
not of our Brethren; and because we deal fairly and openly, I shall set it
down, Verbatim, Conf. Chap. 11. Of Justification, Art. 1. Those whom God
effectually calls, he also freely Justifies; not by infusing Righteousness
into them, but by Pardoning their Sins, and by accounting and accepting their
Persons as Righteous; not for any thing wrought in them, or done by them, but
for Christ's sake alone; not by imputing Faith it self, the Act of Believing,
or any other Evangelical Obedience, as their Righteousness; but by imputing the
Obedience and Satisfaction of Christ unto them, they receiving, and resting on
him and his Righteousness by Faith; which Faith they have not of themselves, it
is the Gift of God.

Art. 2. Faith thus receiving and resting on Christ and his Righteousness, is
the alone Instrument of Justification; yet is it not alone in the Person
Justified, but is ever Accompanied with all other saving Graces, and is no dead
Faith, but works by Love.

Art 3. Christ by his Obedience and Death, did fully discharge the Debt of all
those that are thus Justified, and did make a proper, real, and full
satisfaction to his Fathers Justice in their behalf; yet in as much as he was
given by the Father for them, and his Obedience and Satisfaction accepted in
their Stead, and both freely, not for any thing in them, Their Justification is
only of Free Grace, that both the exact Justice, and rich Grace of God, might
be glorified in the Justification of Sinners.

Art. 4. God did, from all Eternity, Decree to Justify all the Elect, and
Christ did, in the fullness of time, Die for their Sins, and Rise again for
their Justification: Nevertheless, they are not Justified, until the Holy
Spirit does in due time, actually apply Christ unto them.

Art. 5. God does continue to forgive the sins of those that are Justified: And
although they can never fall from the state of Justification, yet they may, by
their sins, fall under God's Fatherly displeasure, and not have the light of
his Countenance restored unto them, until they humble themselves, confess their
sins, beg pardon, and renew their Faith and Repentance.

Art. 6. The Justification of Believers under the Old Testament, was in all
these Respects, one and the same with the Justification of Believers under the
New Testament. This is the whole Chapter exactly.

Larger Catechism. Q. How does Faith Justify a sinner in the sight of God?
Ans. Faith Justifies a sinner in the sight of God, not because of those other
graces which do always accompany it, or of good Works, that are the Fruits of
it, nor as if the grace of Faith, or any Act thereof, were imputed to him for
his Justification; but only as it is an Instrument, by which he receives and
applies Christ and his Righteousness.

Let these weighty words, be but heartily assented to, in their plain and
Native Sense, and we are one in this great point of Justification. But can any
considering Man think, that the new Scheme, of a real Change, Repentance and
Sincere Obedience, as necessary to be found in a person that may Lawfully come
to Christ for Justification, of Faith's Justifying as it is the spring of
sincere Obedience, of a Man's being Justified by, and upon his coming up to the
Terms of the new Law of Grace (a new word, but of an old and ill meaning) can
any man think that this Scheme and the sound words of the Reverend Assembly, do
agree? Surely if such a Scheme had been offered to that Grave, Learned and
Orthodox Synod, it would have had a more severe Censure past upon it, than I am
willing to name.

Do not we find in our particular Dealings with Souls, the same Principles I am
now Opposing?

When we deal with the Carnal, Secure, Careless Sinners (and they are a vast
Multitude) and ask them a Reason of that hope of Heaven, they pretend to, Is
not this their common Answer? I live inoffensively, I keep God's Law as well as
I can, and wherein I fail, I repent, and beg God's Mercy for Christ's sake: My
Heart is sincere, though my Knowledge and Seize be short of others. If we
go on to inquire further, what acquaintance they have with Jesus Christ, what
Applications their Souls have made to him, what workings of Faith on him, what
use they have made of his Righteousness for Justification, and his Spirit for
Sanctification, What they know of living by Faith in Jesus Christ? We are
Barbarians to them; and in this sad state, many Thousands in England live and
die, and Perish Eternally. Yet so thick is the darkness of the Age, that many
of them live here, and go hence with the Reputation of good Christans; and some
of them may have their Funeral Sermon and Praises Preached by an Ignorant
Flattering Minister, though it may be the poor creatures never did, in the
whole course of their Life, nor at their Death, employ Jesus Christ so much,
for an Entry to Heaven, purchased by his Blood, and only accessible by Faith in
him, as a poor Turk does Mahomet, for a Room in his Beastly Paradise. How
common and fearful a thing is this in this Land and City!

When we come to deal with a poor awakened sinner, who sees his lost state,
and that he is condemned by the Law of God; we find the same Principles working
in him; for they are Natural, and therefore Universal in all Men, and hardly
rooted out of any. We find him sick and wounded; we tell him where his Help
lies, in Jesus Christ; what his proper work is, to apply to him by Faith. What
is his Answer? Alas! says the Man, I have been, and am so vile a sinner, my
heart is so bad, and so full of Plagues and Corruptions, that I cannot think of
believing on Christ. But if I had but Repentance, and some Holiness in Heart
and Life, and such and such gracious Qualifications, I would then believe. When
indeed this his Answer is as full of Nonsense, Ignorance, and Pride, as words
can contain or express. They imply, 1. If I were pretty well recovered, I would
employ the Physician, Christ. 2. That there is some hope to work out these good
things by my self, without Christ. 3. And when I come to Christ, with a Price
in my hand, I shall be welcome. 4. That I can come to Christ when I will. So
ignorant are people Naturally of Faith in Jesus Christ; and no Words or
Warnings repeated, nor plainest Instructions can beat into men's heads and
hearts, that the first coming to Christ by Faith, or believing on him, is not a
believing we shall be saved by him, but a believing on him, that we may be
saved by him. And it is less to be wondered at, that ignorant people do not,
when so many learned men will not understand it.

When we deal with a Proud, Self-Righteous Hypocrite, we find the same
Principles of Enmity against the Grace of the Gospel. A Profane Person is not
so enraged at the rebukes of Sin from the Law, as these Pharisees are at the
discovery of their ruin by Unbelief. They cannot endure to have their Idol of
Self Righteousness touched, neither by the Spirituality of God's Law, that
condemns all Men, and all their Works, while out of Christ, nor by the Gospel,
which Reveals another Righteousness than their own, by which they must be
Saved; but they will have God's Ark of the Covenant to stand as a Captive, in
the Temple of their Dagon of Self-Righteousness, until the Vengeance of God's
despised Covenant, over throw both the Temple, and Idol, and Worshippers.

There is not a Minister that deals seriously with the Souls of Men, but he
finds an Arminian Scheme of Justification in every unrenewed Heart. And is it
not sadly to be bewailed, that Divines should plead that same Cause, that we
daily find the Devil pleading in the Hearts of all Natural Men? And that
instead of casting down, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. they should be making defenses for
such strong holds, as must either be levelled with the dust, or the Rebel that
holds them out, must eternally Perish?

It is no bad way of Studying the Gospel, and of attaining more Light into it,
that may be used in dealing particularly with the Consciences of all sorts of
Men, as we have occasion. More may be learned this way, than out of many large
Books. And if Ministers would deal more with their own Consciences, and the
Consciences of others, in and about these Points, that are most properly Cases
of Conscience, we should find an increase of Gospel Light, and a growing
fitness to Preach aright, as Paul did, 2 Cor. 4.2. By manifestation of the
Truth, commending our selves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God.

Let us keep up in our Hearts and Doctrine, a reverend regard of the Holy Law
of God, and suffer not a reflecting, disparaging word, or thought of it. The
Great Salvation is contrived with a Regard to it, and the satisfaction given to
the Law by the Obedience and Death of Christ our Surety, has made it glorious
and honorable, more than all the Holiness of Saints on Earth, or of the
Glorified in Heaven, and than all the Torments of the Damned in Hell, though
they do also magnify the Law and make it honorable. But if men will teach
that the Law and Obedience unto it, whether perfect or sincere, is the
Righteousness we must be found and stand in, in our pleading for justification,
they neither understand what they say, nor whereof they affirm. 1 Timothy 1.7.
They become Debtors to it, and Christ profits them nothing. Gal. 2 21. and
5.2.5. And we know what will become of that man, that has his Debts to the Law
to pay, and has no Interest in the Suretys Payment: Yet many such offer their
own Silver, which whatever coin of Man be upon it, is reprobate and rejected
both by Law and Gospel.

Let us carefully keep the bounds clear betwixt the Law and Gospel (which
whosoever does is a right perfect Divine, says blessed Luther in his
Commentary on the Epistle to the Galatians. A Book that has more plain sound
Gospel, than many Volumes of some other Divines.) Let us keep the Law as far
from the business of Justification, as we would keep Condemnation, its
contrary. For the Law and Condemnation are inseparable, but by the Intervention
of Jesus Christ, our Surety. Gal. 3.10, -- 14. But in the practice of Holiness,
the fulfilled Law given by Jesus Christ to Believers as a Rule, is of great and
good Use to them, as has been declared.

Lastly, Be exact in your Communion, and Church Administrations. If any walk
otherwise than it becomes the Gospel, if any abuse the Doctrine of Grace, to
Licentiousness; draw the Rod of Discipline against them the more severely, that
ye know so many wait for your halting, and are ready to speak evil of the Ways
and Truths of God,

The Wisdom of God sometimes orders the Different Opinions of Men about his
Truth, for the clearing and confirming of it; while each side watch the
extremes that others may be in hazard of running into. And if controversy be
fairly and meekly managed this way, we may differ, and plead our Opinions, and
both love and edify them we oppose, and may be loved, and edified by them in
their Opposition.

I know no fear possesses our side, but that of Arminianism. Let us be fairly
secured from that, and as we ever hated true Antinomianism, so we are ready to
oppose it with all our might. But having such grounds of jealousy as I have
named (and its well known that I have not named all) men will allow us to fear,
that this Noise of Antinomianism is raised, and any advantage they have by the
Rashness and Imprudence of some Ignorant Men, is improved to a severe height,
by some, on purpose to shelter Arminianism in its growth, and to advance it
further amongst us, which we pray and hope the Lord will prevent.

Yours, N. N.

POSTSCRIPT.
THis Paper, presented to thee, was in its first design intended as a private
Letter to a particular Brother, as the Title bears. How it comes to be
published, I shall not trouble the World with an account of: I think that Dr.
Owen's Excellent Book of Justification, and Mr. Marshal's Book of the Mystery
of Sanctification by Faith in Jesus Christ, are such Vindications and
Confirmations of the Protestant Doctrine, against which I fear no effectual
Opposition. Dr. Owen's Name is so savoury, and famous, his soundness in the
Faith, and ability in Learning for its defense, so justly reputed, that no
sober man will attempt him. Mr. Marshal was a holy retired Person, and is only
known to the most of us by his Book, published lately. The Book is a deep,
practical, well-jointed Discourse, and requires a more than ordinary attention
in the reading of it with profit. And if it be singly used, I look upon it as
one of the most useful Books the World has seen for many years: Its excellency
is, that it leads the serious Reader directly to Jesus Christ, and cuts the
sinews, and overturns the foundation of the New Divinity, by the same argument
of Gospel-Holiness, by which many attempt to overturn the Old. And as it has
already the seal of high approbation, by many judicious Ministers and
Christians that have read it; so I fear not, but it will stand firm as a Rock
against all Opposition, and will prove good Seed, and Food, and Light, and Life
to many hereafter.

All my design in publishing this, is plainly and briefly to give some
Information to ordinary plain people, who either want Time or Judgment to
peruse large and learned Tractates, about this point of Justification, wherein
every one is equally concerned.

The Theme of Justification has suffered greatly by this, That many have
employed their Heads and Pens, who never had their Hearts and Consciences
exercised about it. And they must be frigid and dreaming speculations, that all
such are taken up with, whose Consciences are not enlivened with their personal
concern in it.

These things are undoubted, 1. That, as it is a point of highest concern to
every man, so it is to the whole-Doctrine of Christianity. All the great
Fundamentals of Christian Truth, center in this of Justification. The Trinity
of persons in the Godhead; The Incarnation of the only Begotten of the Father;
The Satisfaction paid to the Law and Justice of God, for the sins of the World,
by his Obedience, and Sacrifice of Himself in that flesh he assumed; and the
Divine Authority of the Scriptures which reveal all this; Are all straight
lines of Truth, that center in this Doctrine of the Justification of a Sinner
by the Imputation and Application of that Satisfaction. No Justification,
without a Righteousness; No Righteousness can be, but what answers fully and
perfectly the Holy Law of God: No such Righteousness can be performed, but by a
Divine Person; No benefit can accrue to a Sinner by it, unless it be someway
his, and applied to him; No application can be made of this, but by Faith in
Jesus Christ. And as the connection with, and dependence of this Truth upon, the
other great Mysteries of Divine Truth, is evident in the plain proposal of it;
So the same has sadly been manifest in this, that the forsaking of the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Christ's Righteousness, has been the
first step of Apostasy in many, who have not stopped till they revolted from
Christianity it self. Hence so many Arminians, and their chief Leaders too,
turned Socinians; from denying Justification by Christ's Righteousness, they
proceeded to the denying of his Satisfaction, from the denial of his proper
Satisfaction, they went on to the denying of the Divinity of his Person: And
that man's Charity is excessive, that will allow to such Blasphemers of the Son
of God, the Name of Christians. Let not then the Zeal of any, for so
fundamental a point of Truth, as that is of the Justification of a Sinner by
Faith in Christ, be charged with folly. It is good to be always zealously
affected in a good thing; and this is the best of things.

2. It is undoubted, That there is a Mystery in this Matter of Justification.
As it is God's act, it is an act of Free Grace and Deep Wisdom. Herein Justice
and Mercy kiss one another in saving the Sinner. Here appears God Man, with the
Righteousness of God, and this applied and imputed to sinful men; Here man's Sin
and Misery, are the field in which the Riches of God's Grace in Christ are
displayed. Here the Sinner is made Righteous by the Righteousness of another,
and obtains Justification through this Righteousness, though he pays, and gives
nothing for it; God declares him righteous, or justifies him freely, and yet he
is well paid for it by the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.24, 25,
26. It is an act of Justice and Mercy both, when God justifies a Believer on
Jesus Christ. And must there not then be a great Mystery in it? Is not every
Believer daily admiring the depth of this way of God? This Mystery is usually,
rather darkened, than illustrated, by Logical Terms used in the handling of it.
The only defense that good and learned men have for the use of them, is (and it
has great weight) that the craft of Adversaries does constrain them to use
such Terms to find them out, or hedge them in. It Is certain that this Mystery
is as plainly revealed, in the Word, as the Holy Ghost thought fit to do in
teaching the Heirs of this Grace; and it were well if men did contain
themselves within these bounds.

3. It is certain, That this Doctrine of Justification proposed in the Word,
has been very differently understood and expressed by men, that profess that
God's Word is the only Rule of their thoughts and words about the things of the
Spirit of God. It has been, and will be still a Stone of Stumbling, as our
Lord Jesus Christ himself was, and is, Romans 9.32, 33. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8.

4. That whatever Variety and Differences there be in Men's Notions and
Opinions (and there is a great deal) about Justification, They are all
certainly reducible to two; one of which is every man's opinion. And they are,
That the Justification of a sinner before God, is either on the account of a
Righteousness in and of our selves, or on the account of a Righteousness in
another, even Jesus Christ, who is Jehovah our Righteousness. Law and Gospel,
Faith and Works, Christ's Righteousness and our own, Grace and Debt, do equally
divide all in this matter. Crafty Men may endeavor to bend and mix these
things together in Justification; but it is a vain attempt. Is it not only most
expressly rejected in the Gospel, which peremptorily determines the Contrariety,
Inconsistency, and Incompatibility, betwixt these two; But the Nature of the
things in themselves and the sense and conscience of every serious person, does
witness to the same, that our own Righteousness and Christ's Righteousness, do
comprehend all the pleas of men to Justification (one or other of them, every
man in the world stands upon;) and that they are inconsistent with and
destructive one of another in justification: if a man trust to his own
Righteousness he rejects Christ's, if he trusts to Christ's Righteousness he
rejects his Own. If he will not reject his own Righteousness as too good to be
renounced, if he will not venture on Christ's. Righteousness as not sufficient
alone, to bear him out, and bring him safe off at God's Bar, he is in both a
convicted Unbeliever. And if he endeavor to patch up a Righteousness before
God, made up of both, he is still under the Law, and a despiser of
Gospel Grace, Gal. 2.21. That Righteousness that justifies a Sinner, consists
in aliquo indivisibili, and this every man finds when the case is his own, and
he serious about it.

5. These different Sentiments about Justification have been at all times
managed with a special Acrimony. They that are for the Righteousness of God by
Faith in Jesus Christ, look upon it as the only foundation of all their hopes
for eternity, and therefore cannot but be zealous for it. And the contrary side
are as hot for their own Righteousness, the most admired and adored Diana of
proud Mankind, as if it were an Image fallen down from Jupiter, when it is
indeed the Idol that was cast out of Heaven with the Devil, and which he has
ever since been so diligent to set up before sinful men, to be worshipped, that
he might bring them into the same condemnation with himself; And by true Sin,
and false Righteousness he has deceived the whole world, Rev. 12.9.

6. As the Holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures, is the Supreme and Infallible
Judge and Determiner of all Truth; So where he does particularly, and on
purpose deliver any Truth, there we are specially to attend and learn. And tho
in most points of Truth, he usually teaches us by a bare Authoritative
Narration, yet in some Points, which his Infinite Wisdom foresaw special
Opposition to, he does not only declare, but debate and determine the Truth.
And the Instances are two especially. One is about the Divinity of Christ's
Person and Dignity of his Priesthood, reasoned, argued, and determined in the
Epistle to the Hebrews. The other is about Justification by Faith, exactly
handled, in the Epistles to the Romans, and to the Galatians. In the former of
these two, the Doctrine of free Justification, is taught us most formally, and
accurately. And tho we find no Charge against that Church in Paul's time, or in
his Epistle, for their departing from the Truth in this Point, yet the Wisdom
of the Holy Ghost is remarkable in this, That this Doctrine should be so
plainly asserted, and strongly proved in an Epistle to that Church, the
pretonded Successors whereof, have Apostatized from that Faith, and proved the
main Asserters of that damnable Error, of Justification by Works. That to the
Galatians is plainly written, to cure a begun, and obviate a full Apostasy,
from the purity of the Gospel, in the point of Justification by Faith, without
the Works of the Law. And from these two Epistles, if we be wise, we must learn
the Truth of this Doctrine, and expound all other Scriptures, in a harmony with
what is there so setly determined, as in Foro contradictorio.

Lastly, It is not to be denied, nor concealed, That on each side, some have
run into Extremes, which the generality do not own, but are usually laden
with. The Papists run high for Justification by Works; yet even some of them in
the Council of Trent, discoursed very favorably of Justification by Faith. The
Arminians have qualified a little the grossness of the Popish Doctrine in this
Article; And some since have essayed to qualify that of the Arminians, and to
plead the same cause more finely. Again, some have run into the other extreme,
as appeared in Germany a little after the Reformation; and some such there have
been always, and in all places, where the Gospel has shined; and these were
called Antinomians. But how unjustly this hateful Name is charged upon the
Orthodox Preachers and sincere Believers of the Protestant Doctrine of
Justification by Faith only, who keep the Gospel-midst betwixt these two Rocks,
is the design of this Paper, to discover. What we plead for, is in sum, That
Jesus Christ our Savior is the fountain opened in the House of David, for Sin
and for Uncleanness, wherein only men can be washed in Justification and
Sanctification. And that there is no other fountain of man's devising, nor of
God's declaring, for washing a Sinner first, so as to make him fit and meet to
come to this, to wash, and to be clean.

As for In herent Holiness, Is it not sufficiently secured by the Spirit of
Christ received by Faith, the certain Spring and Cause of it, By the Word of
God, the plain and perfect Rule of it, By the declared necessity of it to all
them that look to be saved, and to justify the sincerity of a man's Faith?
Unless we bring it in to Justification, and thereby make our own pitiful
Holiness sit on the Throne of Judgment, with the precious blood of the Lamb of
God.

Though I expect that a more able hand will undertake an Examination of the New
Divinity; yet to fill up a little room, I would speak somewhat to their
Achillaean Argument, that is so much boasted of, and so frequently insisted on
by them, as their Shield and Spear. Their Argument is this, That Christ's
Righteousness is our Legal Righteousness; but our own, is our Evangelical
Righteouness; that is, when a Sinner is charged with Sin against the Law of
God, he may oppose Christ's Righteousness as his Legal Defense; But against the
Charge of the Gospel, especially for Unbelief, he must produce his Faith as his
Defense or Righteousness, against that charge.

With a great deference to such Worthy Divines as have looked on this as an
argument of weight, I shall in a few words, effay to manifest, that this is
either a saying the same in other odd words, that is commonly taught by us, or
a Sophism, or a departing from the Protestant Doctrine about Justification.

1. This Argument concerns not at all the Justification of a Sinner before God.
For this end, no more is needful, than to consider, what this charge is,
against whom it is given, and by whom. The charge is said to be given in by
God, and a charge of Unbelief, or disobeying the Gospel. But against whom? Is
it against a Believer or Unbeliever? And these two divide all mankind. If it be
against a Believer, it is a false charge, and can never be given in by the God
of Truth. For the Believer is justified already by Faith, and as to this charge
he is innocent. And Innocence is defense enough to a man falsely charged, before
a Righteous Judge. Is this charge given us against an Unbeliever? We allow it
is a Righteous charge. Ay, but say they, Will Christ's Righteousness justify a
man from this Charge of Gospel-Vnbelief. The answer is plain, No, it will not,
nor yet from any other charge whatsoever, either from Law or Gospel: for he
has nothing to do with Christ's Righteousness, while an Unbeliever. What then
does this arguing reprove? Is it, that no man's Faith in Christ's Righteousness
can be justified in its sincerity before men, and in a man's own Conscience, but
in and by the fruits of a true lively faith? In this they have no Opposers,
that I know of. Or is it, That a man may have Christ's Righteousness for his
Legal Righteousness, and yet be a Rebel to the Gospel and a stranger to true
Holiness? Who ever affirmed it? Or is it, That this Gospel-Holiness is that,
that a man must not only have (for that we grant) but also may venture to stand
in, and to be found in before God, and to enter into judgment with God upon,
in his Claim to Eternal Life? Then we must oppose them that think so, as we
know their own Consciences will, when in any lively exercise. These plain
Principles of Gospel Truth, while they remain (and remain they will on their
own foundation, when we are all in our Graves, and our foolish contentions are
buried) do overthrow this pretended charge. 1. That Christ's Righteousness is
the only Plea and Answer of a Sinner arraigned at God's Bar for Life and Death.
2. This Righteousness is imputed to no man but a Believer. 3. When it is
imputed by Grace, and applied by Faith, it immediately and eternally becomes
the man's Righteousness, before God, Angels, Men and Devils, Romans 8.33, 35, 38,
39. It is a Righteousness, that is never lost, never taken away, never
ineffectual, answers all charges, and is attended with all Graces.

2. I would ask, What is that Righteousness that justifies a man from the Sin
of Unbelief? We have rejected the imaginary charge, let us now consider the
Real Sin. Unbelief is the greatest Sin against both Law and Gospel: More
remotely against the Law which binds all men to believe God speaking, say what
he will; more directly against the Gospel, which tells us what we should
believe, and commands us to believe. Let us put this case (and it is pity the
case is so rare, when the Sin is so common) that a poor soul is troubled about
the greatness of the Sin of Unbelief, in calling God a Liar. 1 John 5.10. in
distrusting his faithful promise, in doubting Christ's ability and good will to
save, in standing aloof so long from Jesus Christ; as many of the Elect are
long in a state of Unbelief, till called; and the best of Believers have
Unbelief in some measure in them, Mark 9.24 Abraham's faith staggered
sometimes, Genesis 12. and 20. What shall we say to a Conscience thus troubled?
Will any man dare to tell him, that Christ's Righteousness is his Legal
Righteousness against the Charge of Sins against the Law, but for
Gospel-Charges, he must answer them in his own Name? I know our hottest
Opposers would abhor such an Answer, and would freely tell such a man, that the
Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all Sin, and that his Justification from
his Unbelief, must be only in that Righteousness which he so sinfully had
rejected while in Unbelief, and now lays hold on by Faith.

3. But some extend this Argument yet more dangerously. For they say, That not
only men must have their Faith for their Righteousness against the Charge of
Unbelief but Repentance against the charge of Impenitence, Sincerity against
that of Hypocrisy, Holiness against that of Unholiness, and Perseverance as
their Gospel-Righteousness against the charge of Apostasy. If they mean only,
that these things are Justifications and Fruits of true Faith and of the
sincerity of the Grace of God in us; We do agree to the meaning, but highly
dislike the expressions, as Unscriptural and Dangerous, tending to the
dishonouring of the Righteousness of Christ, and to run men on the Rocks of
Pride and Self-Righteousness, that natural corruption drives all men upon. But
if they mean, that either jointly or separately, they are our Righteousness
before God, or that either separate from, or mixed with Christ's Righteousness,
they may be made our Claim and Plea for Salvation, I must say, that it is
dangerous Doctrine, and its native tendency is to turn Christ's imputed
Righteousness out of the Church, to destroy all the solid Peace of Believers,
and to exclude Gospel Justification out of this world, and reserve it to
another, and that with a horrible uncertainty of any particular man's partaking
of it. But these Blessed Truths of God, and blessings of Believers, stand on
firmer foundations than Heaven or Earth, and will continue fixed against all
the Attempts of the Gates of Hell. Blessed be the Rock, Christ, on which all is
built, blessed be the New Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, and blessed
is he that belieneth, for there shall be a performance of those things which
are told him from the Lord, Luke 1.45. Amen.

London, Sept. 1. 1692.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
MR. Rutherfoord's Letters, the Third Edition, Now divided in Three Parts; The
First containing those which were written from Aberdeen, where he was confined
by a Sentence of the High Commission, drawn forth against him, partly upon the
account of his declining them, partly upon the account of his Nonconformity The
Second and Third containing some, which were written from Anwoth, before he was
by the Prelates persecution thrust from his Ministry: and others upon occasions
afterward, from St. Andrews London, etc. Published for the use of all the
People of God; but more particularly, for those who now are, or afterward may
be put to suffering for Christ and his Cause. By a well-wisher to the Work, and
People of God. Printed for Dorman Newman at the King's Arms in the Poultry.


