Treason in Grain: That Most TRAITOROUS, OR LIBEL OF FITZ-HARRIS,
Whereby he designed to raise a Rebellion amongst us the better to make way for
a French Invasion, and our utter destruction, as it was read in both Houses of
Parliament at Oxford, and upon which the House of Commons Impeached him of High
Treason.
Falsely and Maliciously called by him,
The True Englishman speaking plain English, in a Letter from a Friend to a
Friend.
I thank you for the Character of a Popish Successor which you sent me, wherein
our Just fears, and the grounds of them, are justly set out. But I am in
greater fear of the present Possessor, why do we frighten our selves about the
Evil that is to come, not looking to that which is at hand? We would cut off
the Budding Weeds, and let the Poisonous Root lie still; we would stop the
Channel of our Evils, and let the Fountain still run: My meaning is this, can
Pylades Know and Act all these Bloody Conspiracies, and not impart them to his
dear Orestes? if James be Conscious and Guilty, Charles is so too: Believe me,
these two Brethren in Iniquity, they are in Confederacy with Pope and French to
introduce Popery and Arbitrary Government, as all their Actions demonstrate:
the Parliament, Magna Charta, and Liberty of the Subject are as heavy Yoaks
which they would cast off to be as absolute as their Br. of France; and if this
can be proved to be their only aim and endeavor, why should not every True
Britain be a Quaker thus far? Let the English rise, and move as one Man to self
defense, to open Action, and fling off their intolerable Riders. Blow the the
Trumpet, stand on your Guard, and withstand them as Bears and Tigers, And since
there can be no trust given to this goodly couple of Popish Brethren, nor no
relief expected from a Parliament; Trust to your Swords in defense of your
Lives, Laws, Religion and Properties, like the stout Earl of Old, who told a
King that if he could not be defended by Magna Charta, he would be relieved by
Longa Spada.

Yet to convince the World that this Scottish Race is Corrupt Root and Branch,
and Popish from the very beginning, be pleased to consider these reasons
following.

The Grandfather of these Men, James the Scot, was of no Religion at the
bottom, but entered by a pretense of a Sham-plot of the Papists against his
Life, whilst really he collogued with the Popish Party under hand; h^s Mother,
his Kindred with great Submission, yet afterward thinking it for h^s purpose
to Cajole the Parliament, and write against the Pope and Cardinals, he sends a
Scots Bird to blind the Eyes of the Vatican Keeper with Money, and to steal his
Letters from off the Roman File, and then he crows as boldly as an unsuspected
Harlot for the Protestant Religion and Interest.

That Man's Son Charles the First, held a Secret Correspondency with the Pope,
calling him his Dear and Holy Father, as is to be seen in his Letters recorded
in Rushworth's Collections: Were not his Wife and Courtiers Papists? Did he not
countenance and promote the Rebellion in Ireland? As the Irish Grandees and his
very Commissions testify and declare, was there not a Popish Plot, and an
Universal Conspiracy of the Papists discovered to him and his Confessor Laud,
and did they not piously stifle it lest they should have discovered the
Nakedness of their Mother Church? Whilst that goodly Protestant Prince
pretended to relieve the poor besieged Protestants at Roshel by his confident
Buckingham, did he not hold Correspondency with the French Cardinal how to
betray them for a Sum of Money (which his obstinacy with his Parliament made
him stand in need of.) But they who so ill approved themselves to be Heads of
the Protestant Church, Charles and Laud, did they not loose their own Heads by
a manifest Judgment of God? And was not the false heart of their Emissary
Buckingham, found out by an Assassins Knife?

But to come nearer to our purpose, these two goodly Imps of our days are stark
naught; arrived at the height of Wickedness, and of professed Arbitrariness and
Popery.

As for James, he was a Papist whilst he had a Regiment in the French, and
afterward in the Spanish Service beyond Seas. And as for Charles, he was
reported, e're he came into England, to have been reconciled to the Church of
Rome in one of the French Kings Country Houses; and since they came in, how
have they wheedled and played fast and loose, in their profession of Religion
as occasion and their Affairs required? Have they not all along maintained
Secret Correspondency with France and Rome? As Colemans Letters may
sufficiently instruct such who have not seen more Secret Memories.

But let us come to Examine their Actions which are a better proof of their
hearts, were not the Dukes Servants and Confidents all Papists? Witness his
Talbots, Patricks and other Irish Teags, were not the Duke and such of his
Creatures as were known Papists promoted to all public Offices of trust both
at Sea and Land? Witness Bellasis now a Traitor in the Tower, did not James by
Coleman, Throgmorton and others, hold open Correspondency with the Pope and
Cardinals? and could Charles be Ignorant of all this? Nay he liked all so well,
that he hardly employed any about him but Papists, as Clifford whom he made
Treasurer; or employed any abroad but Persons of the same stamp, Witness
Godolphin whom he sent Ambassador into Spain, as he did others elsewhere, what
more obvious than that though the Duke's Treachery against the Kingdom and
Protestant Religion be fully made out, and the People and Parliament seek to
bring him to a Legal Trial, yet Charles obstructs Justice, and will not suffer
it? How can this be, but that he is joined in Will and Deed in all the Dukes
Villainies, and that he is afraid to be discovered and found out to be a Papist,
and a betrayer of his People and the Protestant Religion. If he was heartily
concerned for our Religion, would he not oppos(...)cessor, who will Infallibly
overthrow it? Can there be any thing more ^^^^^^t than that he continues the
Dukes adherents, and those who were advanced by him, in all Offices of Trust?
And has he not turned out of his Council the most Zealous Protestants, such as
Shaftesbury, Essex and others, and introduced in their Rooms other mere Tools,
or those that are Popishly and Arbitrarily affected? Has he not modeled all
the Sheriffs and Justices throughout England in subserviency to a Popish
Design? Was not Sir William Waller and Dr. Chamberlain, and diverse others
turned out of the Commission in and about London, merely for being Zealous
Prosecutors of Priests and Papist^? Does not Charles all he can to hinder the
further detection of the Popish Plot? And does he not to his utmost
discountenance the Discoverers of it, and suffer them to want Bread? And does
he not in the mean time plentifully encourage and reward Fitzgerald and all
the Sham-plotters? Whereas Dangerfield had 8 l. a Week whilst a Forger of Plots
against the Protestants, he is cast off with scorn and in danger of his life
since he laid open the Popish Engineers. Is not Chapter so much in love with his
Popish Irish Rebels (therein treading in his Fathers steps) that he promotes
Montgarret (Carlingford, Fitz Patrick and others who were the Heads of the
Rebellion, to Honors and Preferment, though Charles took the Covenant and a
Coronation Oath to preserve the Protestant Religion, yet has he not palpably
broken them? He made large promises and protestations at Breda for the allowing
a perpetual Liberty of Conscience to Nonconforming Protestants, but he soon
forgot them all: To what end was the Act which was made soon after his
restoration, prohibiting any to call him P^ or to say he Popishly inclined, and
rend^^^g such as should offend Ge^^ry of a premu^ire, but to stop the Peoples
Mouths when ever he should Act any thing in Favor of Popery as he was then
resolved to do?

Is it not manifest therefore, that Scotch Oaths, Breda promises, Protestant
Profession, liberty of Conscience, War with France, saving of Flanders is all
in Jest to delude Protestant Subjects? Is it not apparent that breaking of
Leagues, Dutch Wars, Smirna Fleet, French measures to favor their Conquests,
loss of Ships, War in Christendom, Blood of Protestants, reprieving of Popish
Traitors, is all in earnest, and done in Favor of Popery? And are not his fa^r
Speeches, his true Protestant Love to Parliaments Just rights, and English
Liberties, his pretended Ignorance of the Plot, and his Hanging of Traitors to
serve a turn, but in mere jest? Are not his great Debaucheries, his Whoring
Courtiers, Popish Councels, cheating Rogues, Hellish Plottings, his saving of
Traitors, his French Pensioners, his Nests of Whores and Swarms of Bastards,
his Macks, his Cutthroats, his Horrid Murderers, his Burning of London and the
Provost's house too, his Sham-plotting, his suborned Villains, his Popish
Officers by Sea and Land, his Struglings for a Popish Successor, his agreements
with France, his frequent Dissolutions of Parliaments, his buying of Voices,
his false returns all of them designs to ruin us in good earnest, and in favor
of Arbitrary Government? And is it not in order to this Ble^^^d end that you
see none Countenanced by Charles and James, but Church Papists, betraying
Bishops, Tantivy abhorrers, barking Touzers, Popish Scriblers to deceive the
People and fix the Popish Successors Illegal Title? Are not Jesuits Councels,
French Assistance to conquer Ireland, subdue Scotland, winn Flanders, beat the
Dutch, get their Shipping, be Masters of the Seas? And are not facing a
Rebellion, the letting the Plot go on, the endeavoring to retrieve the Popish
C^use by getting a Popish pentionary, abhorring Parliaments, who shall betray
their Country, enslave posterity and destroy themselves at last, means only to
save a Popish Traitorous Successor, and a present Popish Possessor? James and
Charles are Brethren in Iniquity, corrupt both in root and branch, and who
study to enslave England to a French and Romish Yoke, is not all this plain?
Have you not Eyes, Sense or Feeling? Where is the Old English Noble Spirit? Are
you become French asses to suffer any load to be laid upon you? And therefore
if you can get no remedy from this next Parliament (as certainly you will not)
and if Charles does not repent and comply with it, then up all as one Man. O
brave English Men, look to your own defense e're it be too late; rouse up your
Spirits, remember your Predecessors, remember how that the asserting of their
liberties, justified both by success and Law, the War of the Barons against
wicked Counselors who misled the King, And will you now let that go which cost
them so dear? How many oppressing Kings have been deposed in this Nation, as
appears in Records referred unto in that worthy Patriots History of the
Succession; were not Rich. 2^. And Hen. 6. both laid aside, not to mention
others, and was there ever such a King as this of ours? was not K. John.
deposed for going about to embrace the Mahometam Religion, and for entering into
a league with the K. of Morocco to that purpose? Though Mahometarism and the K.
of Morocco, were no such Enemies to our rights and liberties as Popery and the
French King are. Is it not time then that all should be ready? Let the City of
London stand by the Parliament for the maintaining of their Liberties and
Religion in an extreme way, if Parliame^^ary ways be not consented unto by the
King, let the Counties be ready to enter into an Asso^iation, as the County of
York did in H.


