AN ACCOUNT OF THE Imperial Proceedings Against the TURKS: With an exact DIARY
of the Siege of Newheusel, And its Taking: As also a Relation of all the noted
Performances of the Imperialists in all Parts, from the beginning of this
Summers Campaign, till the 27th of August.

As it was taken by Mr. Travestin, an English Gentleman, who was all the while
Resident in the Army at Newheusel, and now in the Imperial Army; and by him
sent by way of Letter to a Person of Honor of this Kingdom.

With an exact MAP of the Town, and the Works of the Besiegers.

This may be Printed.

Sept. 15. 1685. R. L. S.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Crouch at the Flower-de-luce in Cornhil, and John
Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry, over against the Compter. 1685.

Explanation of ye Letters and Figures
A. The works begun and carried on bye Impertalists. B. The works carried on by
the Lunenburghers. C. The works and entrenchments of ye Bavarians. D. Several
of the first raised Batterys. E. The Bastion chiefly attackt bye Imperialists.
H. The bridge and Curtain heaven ye Bastion E and ye Bastion 27. g.h.i.k and l
to w.w. are Several trenches and Batterys of ye Christians. X. A little plain
on east side ye Town where anetable battle was fought. Z. The other Chief
attackt Bastion by ye Lunenburghers. 1.2.3. Several Redoubts and Batterys. 4.
ye left hand Northren Bastion near (...) they let water out of the Ditch. 5.6.
Entrenchments and Batterys of the Bavarians. 7. Several Gallerys made over ye
ditch in order to place ye Miners. 10.18. ye Canall that carried ye water out
of ditch. 11. A Battery of 16 pieces of Cannon. 17.18.19. the 3 Southern
Bastions attackt by ye Bavarians 13. The 2 bridges and gates. 14. 3 Trees on
which were heads of Christians. 15. The River Hewtra. 16. Several gardens on
the East side ye town. 20. Draw bridges.


NEWHEUSELL as it was beseiged by the IMPERIALISTS July 7. 1685. And taken by
assault Aug. 1685.



AN ACCOUNT OF The Siege of Newheusel, etc.
Honored Sir,
I Have received your last, wherein you were pleased to command me to give you
an exact account of the Proceedings against the Turks, and the Siege of
Newheusel: my ambition to serve your Honor had put me upon it before, though
the sense of my weakness for such a Performance, made me proceed with a great
deal of caution and fear, especially it being to be presented to your Honor,
who has so admirable an insight into all Warlike Affairs; but your Commands
gave new life to my Proceedings, not questioning but your Native Goodness would
pardon those Faults your Commands were the occasion of. I therefore humbly
present these my rude Observations to you, being an account of the Siege, the
manner of its taking, with a Map of the place, and the Besiegers Entrenchments,
as performed. In my last, June.
I acquainted you of the Imperial Armies Encampment between Newheusel and
Barkan, and of the Duke of Lorrain's arrival at the Camp, on the 13th of June;
Novigrad, to cut off by that means the Communication between Buda and
Newheusel; and afterward, formally to besiege Newheusel. On the 17th Col.
Heusler venturing as far as Pest with 1000 Horse, Turks of about 500 Horse, who
upon sight of him, retired in great haste and disorder. Lorrain could not yet
proceed to action, for want of the Artillery and the great Carriage of
Provisions, which he expected every day. In the mean time the command of the
Army was thus ordered, the Duke of Lorrain being General, and having absolute
power to proceed in the War as he pleased.

Prince Waldeck was made Commander of the Foot, as Marshall de Camp General,
and had under him the Duke de Croy, who was constituted General of the
Artillery; the Prince of Newbourg Great Master of the Teutonick Order, the
Count de Souches, and the Count de Scherffenberg, to be in quality of
Major-Generals.

The Count de Caprara to command the Horse as Marshall de Camp General, and
under him Prince Louis of Baden one General of the Horse, and the Count de
Dunewaldt as another; the Count de Palfi to be Lieutenant General; Count Taff,
the Baron de Mercy, the Count de Lodron, and the Count de Stiram,
Major-Generals.

The Prince de Salms to command the Cavalry in Croatia; and the Marquess de
Lavergne, the Infantry under General Leslie.

The Emperors Forces that are in Upper Hungary to act against the Rebels, are
commanded by General Schultz.

We had an account at the Camp, Hussars being abroad toward Buda, had met 200
Janissaries, whom they defeated, killing the greatest part of them upon the
place, and taking the rest, with the Aga that commanded them, Prisoners: That
this Officer had Letters from the Vizier of Buda to the Bassa of Newheusel,
wherein he exhorted the said Bassa, in case he be attacked, to defend the place
to the last, and assured him of Relief.

We had also an account, that General Schultz had made himself Master of the
Fortress of Casnahauka, and that most of the Hungarians of that Garrison were
now in the Emperors service.

Whilst these things were doing abroad, the Duke of Lorrain every day advising
with his Council of War, at last changed his former resolution of attacking
Novigrad, thinking it to be of little advantage toward the Siege of Newheusel,
and that it would take up vast time, being so far off: Besides, not hearing any
certainty of the Turks being abroad in any considerable Body, and finding his
own Forces able to repulse a greater Army than the Turks could probably bring
into the Field, and continue the Siege at the same time, he resolved
immediately to attack Newheusel.

However, June the 28th the Duke of Lorrain took with him 3000 Horse, and went
to observe the situation of Novigrad; out of which a small Party, without his
Highness's order, advancing too near the place, they were attacked by some
Janissaries, who were ambuscaded in an Enclosure, and several of them wounded,
among which were two French Volunteers.

Immediately upon his return,

June the 30th there was taken several Persons that came out of Newheusel; and
amongst the rest, an Officer who in the disgnise of a Peasant was going to Buda
with Letters from the Bassa of Newheusel, who therein tells the Vizier of Buda
what distress the Garrison was in; that they had eaten the Flesh of Horses,
Dogs, etc. since the beginning of the month and that they could not defend the
place without a speedy Relief.

This day also an Officer, who came from Buda with 100 men, endeavored to put
himself into Newheusel; but he and most with him were taken.

On the first of July two Christians who got out of the Town, July 1.
were brought to the Duke of Lorrain, who assured him that the Garrison
consisted not of above 1500 men at most, and that they were in want of all
manner of Provisions.

July the 4th our Army began a slow march toward Newheusel; which it had done
sooner,

July the 5th the Duke of Lorrain sent Order to the several Troops, Barkan,
Lewentz, and Newtra.

July the 6th we encamped all together on the fide of a little River called
Sohit, Danube near Comorra; which we passed on the 7th, and the same day came
before Newheusel.

The true ancient name of this place is Oywar, though the Germans call it
Newheusel; it is a large Fort; and seituated upon a firm foundation, though the
Plain about it is full of Moras, and Fenny Grounds, which makes the Town almost
inaccessible, as its strength is invincible, having six Bastions lined with
very good Stone work, without which there is a vast Ditch of about ten foot
deep, and twenty broad. The River Newtra is on the East side, not above a
Pistol-shot from it: On the South it has the Danube, at about two furlongs
distance; and on the West it has the River Schit.

This City, after a long Siege, was surrendered to the Turks upon fair Terms,
Anno 1663, and has continued in their hands ever since.

In May 1683. the Duke of Lorrain being General of the Imperial Forces,
resolved upon the Siege of this place at that time, with the approbation of the
other Generals, and particular assistance of Count Staremberg, then
Master-General of the Ordnance, who thereupon venturing very far to view the
situation of the Town, was in great danger of a Shot from the Turks, who
played very warmly upon the Imperialists. However, the Attack was carried on by
him with so much Vigor and Success, that the Imperialists made themselves
Masters of part of the Subburbs, and of a Building that had formerly been made
use of for a Church; into which Count Staremberg having ordered fifty men with
a Lieutenant, and Count of Herberstein, Major of the Regiment of Scherffenberg,
bringing with him, by mistake, 150, filled the Church so full, that they could
not turn themselves in it, much less use their Arms, so that they were forced
to break down the Benches and Seats to make room for themselves; which
occasioning a great Noise and Confusion, it happened that some of the
Imperialists that came to strengthen the Party, hearing Noise and Disorder in
the Church, and believing the Enemy to be there, made several Discharges upon
their own men; by one of which, Captain Silberberg was killed, as were several
others by the Shot of the Turks. In which Action Captain Craus of the Regiment
of Staremberg, who served as Adjutant to the General, and Count Taxis, were
also killed; and Count Kobb Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Beck wounded,
whereof he soon after died at Presburg. The Grand Visier's coming with so
numerous an Army, with which he soon after besieged Vienna, was the occasion of
the raising of the Siege at that time.

But now we resolved to pursue it closer, and to that end to have three
Attacks: one by the Imperial Troops, Lorrain; another by the Bavarian Troops,
commanded under the Duke of Lorrain by the Count de Serini; and the third by
the Troops of Lunenburg, commanded by Monsieur Chauvet.

This day we took several Prisoners, who assured us that the Garrison consisted
yet of Eighteen hundred or Two thousand resolute men, and that they had a great
many Cannon in the place. This Evening the Duke of Lorrain, accompanied with
diverse Prince and General Officers, went very near the place to observe it;
which the Besiege observing, fired very fiercely upon them with their Cannon,
de Conti was killed, who being a little distant from the rest of the Company,
had his head taken off by a Cannon-Bullet.

This night we took another Deferter, who told us, that the Besieged had broke
one of their greatest Pieces of Ordnance, which had killed John de Souches, who
was formerly a Christian, and now their chief Cannonier, with five more. He
told us further, That they wanted Provisions, and that the Bassa kept his
Soldiers in heart, by assuring them, that the Serasquier is marching with a
hundred thousand men to relieve them.

July the 8th the Troops of the Princes of Lunenburg, Chauvet, came up to us
with their Artillery; these were in all about Twelve thousand men, and by the
Duke of Lorrain's order were encamped on a Line on the left hand the
Imperialists, being on the North part of the Town, toward the River Newtra at
(B) the Imperial Army designing to proceed with their Attack at (A).

July the 9th the Bavarian Troops arrived here, commanded by the Count de
Serini; Comorra.

This day the besieged made a Sally of Two hundred men, with a design to
hinder our Works; but finding Five hundred of the Bavarians ready, to receive
them, were forced immediately to retire; and the Bavarians pursuing very
desperately, took three of their men, without any loss on our side; one of
these, in hopes of better usage, told us, that the Garrison contained yet
Eighteen hundred men; that there had been great want of Provisions, but that
the Bassa had now opened the great Magazine which he had reserved for the Siege.

July the 10th, about eight a clock in the morning, de Roch-sur-Yon, and de
Conti, accompanied with several Volunteers, went presently to charge them; but
the Count de Serini, with the General Officers, caused them to retire,
perceiving the danger by which many might have been lost. The Prince de
Roche-sur-Yon was in great danger, a Cannon-bullet, having taken off one of his
Horses legs, but he was presently remounted. The Prince de Wirtemberg, Colonel
of the King of Denmark's Guards du Corpse, received a dangerous Wound, by a
Musket-bullet, in the head; the Prince de Commercy was wounded in the thigh;
and four other brave Volunteers were hurt. However, the Salliers were obliged,
without any more effect, to retire; the Baron de Rosencrans was also
dangerously wounded on this occasion.

The same day the Duke of Lorrain observed the place very near, and appointed
the chief Attack to be about the Bastion at (E) and the Western Gate (F) which
is in the same place where the Turks made theirs, when they took this Fortress
from the Christians Anno 1663. The following night Colonel Beck, with two
Lieutenant-Colonels, two Majors, twelve Captains, with Lieutenants and
Ensigns, and Twelve hundred men, were detatched to take several Posts: The
Enemy fired upon them very warmly, but with little effect, there being only
three killed, and four slightly wounded.

July the 11th the rest of our Cannon and Mortars arrived in the Camp,

This day the Duke of Lorrain sent to the Inhabitants of Newtra, commanding
them to provide a hundred thousand Faggots for the filling up of the Ditch, and
to bring them to the Camp.

This night the Trenches were opened by Three thousand Foot; the besieged fired
upon them, but did very little execution: One of the chief Commanders in this
Action was the Baron de Beck, who posted himself very advantageously about (G)
though he was fired upon so fiercely, that he had much ado to maintain that
Post.

This day arrived here the Count de Rabata Commissary-General of the Army, who
took such care that Provisions coming down the Damibe every day, we never had
amongst us the least scarcity. Besides, other money from the Emperor, he
brought with him a hundred thousand Florens, which were given toward this
Siege by Cardinal Bonvisi the Popes Nuncio at Vienna.

July the 12th little passed this day worthy of remark, Beck was fain to retire
a little into the Trenches; notwithstanding which, there was a Lientenant and
three common Soldiers killed, and five wounded.

July the 13th, doubt made at the head of each Trench, to secure them from the
Enemies Sallies.

July the 14th, John Martin Trach, a Captain of Foot, one Corporal, and three
common Soldiers, and the Duke de Croy's Page, besides some few that were
wounded. But we in the mean time stood not idle; for from the foresaid Battery,
and that at (K) we dismounted several of their Cannon from the Bastion at (E)
and by the Carcasses and Bombs, of a new invention, made by Don Risco a
Spaniard, which we now began to cast into the Town, we perceived some part of
the Town that was next us on fire; but it was soon extinguished by the care of
the besieged.

Toward evening, about One hundred and twenty Horse came out of the Town, and
with great sury made toward a Guard of the Bavarians at (L) which consisting
of only about Thirty Horse, retired; but Colonel Soyer, with about Three
hundred, immediately horsed them selves, and approaching the Enemy, with great
bravery soon beat them back into the Town, with the loss of four or five on the
Enemies side.

July the 14th,

This night we also began a false Attack at (O) on the South side opposite to
the true one, which diverted the besieged that way; so that we had the greater
liberty to make our approaches to the Ditch, which was carried on with all the
expedition imaginable; and all this night we had only one man wounded.

July the 15th,

This night we got to the Ditch at several places at (O) both on the right and
left, which was a very desperate Attempt, but was favored by the darkness of
the night; notwithstanding which, the besieged behaved themselves so briskly,
that we had above fifty men killed and wounded; amongst which, the Baron de
Asty, Lieutenant Colonel, was one, two Engineers, and two Ensigns; also John
Colalto a Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Grana, was likewise killed; and
Joshua Pentz, a Captain of the Regiment of Baden, was wounded: We had in all
fifteen killed. We also this night tried the Ditch with long Sticks, but to
little purpose, by reason of the Enemies Fire, and a Party of Turks that
sallied out upon us, but were soon forced to retreat.

July the 15th, we had advice sent us by our Scouts abroad, that the Turkish
Troops that assembled at Novigrad, had passed the Danube at Pest, and had
joined with a Body encamped near Buda, making together an Army of Sixty
thousand men, and that they had provided all things necessary for a Siege;
which made us suppose they had a design upon Vicegrad, or Gran. In which case
the Duke of Lorrain resolved to march with the Imperial Army, only leaving
about Fourteen thousand here to maintain the Siege; to which end the Duke had
before provided three Bridges for passing the Army over the Danube near Comorra.

July the 16th, Turks observing him, followed and took him, and cut off his
head: upon which, I cannot but observe the ingenuity of one Rummel, a Relation
to the Major General of that name, who from our Trenches at (R) at two shots
with his Musket killed two of the Turks, and perhaps the third had not escaped,
but that he got so nimbly into the Town.

This day we began a new Battery against the Pallisadoes before the Gate at (S)
which had so good effect, that we made them abandon that place, and set fire on
the Pallisadoes, on which there were three or four hundred heads of Christians.
We observed them also making Retrenchments, and raising Batteries within the
two attackt Bastions, which we had almost ruined.

This night the Enemy made a continual fire upon us, and shot a great many
Arrows which much annoyed us, and threw Stones; by all which means they killed
us twenty men, and wounded about twice so many.

This day we intercepted a Younster who was slily getting away with Letters
from the Bassa to the Vizier of Buda, telling him, That without Relief, it was
impossible to hold out a fortnight longer.

July the 17th. Lunenburg Forces on the left to cut a Canal to let the water
out of the Ditch at (T) from whence it may fall into the River Newtra, which is
much lower.

This day the Duke of Lorrain received advice, that the Turkish Army marched
toward Gran; upon which he (...) out Colonel Heusler with about seven hundred
Horse, and one thousand Hussars, commanded by the Count de Zabor, with orders
to pass the Bridge of Barkun, and to march toward Vitegrad to learn in what
posture the Enemy was, and at the same time he sent the Count de Stirum with a
Body of five hundred Dragoons, to pass one of the Bridges near Comorra, and
post himself near Grun.

In the mean time the Duke of Lorrain bestirred himself here with wonderful
activity, being every day himself in the Trenches and upon the Batteries, to
give the necessary orders, and to push on the Siege with the greatest
expedition imaginable, mightily desiring to be Master of this place before he
be forced to meet the Turkish Army.

We had no great mischief done us this day, only there was about ten killed
and wounded of those that were working about the Canal.

July the 18th,

We plied them so close this day with our Bombs and Carcasses, that we set
their new Pallisadoes on fire, and ruined the aforesaid Mosque, and put that
part of the Town on such a flame, that it continued on fire for Sixteen hours
together; they within having little water to quench it, and the water out of
the Ditch began to vanish apace.

July the 19th proved a very fatal day to us, de Wirtemberg, who died of the
Wounds he had received on the 10th, to the lamentation of the whole Army, being
a man of such Courage, Prudence, and Generosity, that perhaps he has left few
of his Equals behind him. We lost also this day the Sieur Mengers, one of our
principal Engineers, who raising his arm in managing a Mortarpiece, was
surprised by a Cannon-bullet which took off his arm, and likewise dashed out
his brains.

This day we had a very brisk and handsome Encounter, about one hundred and
fifty Turks issuing out of the Town at the East side at (X) thinking to
surprise us on that side, lying pretty quiet; but de Craus a Captain in the
Regiment of Steinau, being at a Post thereabouts, mounted about as many of our
Party, who met the Turks with a great deal of Courage, charging one another
thorough and thorough, the Engagement lasting almost two hours, till a greater
Party of the same Regiment making toward them, the Turks were obliged to
retire. We had in this Encounter betwixt thirty and forty killed and wounded,
and the Turks came scarce off so well.

We could now advance our Trenches no farther, till we had either filled the
Ditch, or let the water out, which we were employed about; only we made our
Trenches deeper, and by that means so well secured our selves, that the
besieged could do us but little injury. We were well provided with Faggots,
which were now brought in from Newtra, with other necessaries for filling up of
the Ditch.

July the 20th,

This night the besieged, as well as they could, repaired the breaches made in
the day, remounted several Cannon upon new Batteries, from whence they played
so effectually upon us at the Redoubt (1) that John Ludovic Braun, a Captain of
the Regiment of Gondola who commanded there, had much to do to maintain that
Post, the Earth being beaten in upon them, and lying open to the Enemies Fire.

July the 21st.

This night we began to lodge our selves in the Ditch, which the Enemy
perceiving, fired upon us continually: Nevertheless, we proceeded in it on the
right and the left, and notwithstanding it was so dangerous a Work, yet we lost
only a Captain of the Regiment of Metternich, and Velus Henry another Captain
of the Troops of Brunswick, with about ten Soldiers wounded.

The same night we finished the Lines of Communication along the Ditch from one
Battery to the other.

July the 22th. Bavaria and Brunswick, together with the Imperial Dragoons,
making in all about five thousand men, were sent under the command of the Count
de Lodron, toward Comorra, to cover the Bridges which the Duke of Lorrain had
caused to be laid there over the Danube.

This day the Duke of Lorrain wrote a Letter to the Bassa of Newheusel, telling
him, That in what manner soever he Treated the Christian Slaves now in his
hands, he and his Garrison must expect to be Treated, if the place be taken;
but when the Messenger went to deliver it, he refused to admit him, bidding his
men fire upon him.

This night we raised two new Batteries of eight Pieces of Cannon each, very
near the Ditch at (3) and a thousand men were commanded to pursue the Work very
close toward the Bastion (4) to let the water out of the Ditch into the River
Newtra; which they did to such effect, that they let out five foot of the
water, but not without loss: for we had five men killed, and near twenty
wounded. However, it had so dried the Ditch on the side where our chief Attack
was, that there was not above four foot of water left.

July the 23th, Turks made them appear there to excite our compassion, and make
us forbear firing.

This day the Prince of Conty coming out of the Trenches was lightly wounded in
the head.

This night we attempted to fix our Miners, and to that end made a Trench to
the Ditch for two covered Boats to enter into it, in which some persons were to
pass with Planks and Rafters to the foot of the Bastion, to make a Lodgment
there for the Miners; but one of these Boats sunk presently, and the other had
little better success: the Lieutenant of the Miners being wounded, we were fain
to desist from that design.

This night our Bombs and Carcasses had such success, that the whole Town
appeared for twenty four hours in a flame.

July the 24th, Sieur Peickhard, Lieutenant Colonel, was chief Commander of
about three hundred Suabian Troops, who were all cut to pieces, with the
Colonel and Daniel Rumlingen, and Cornelius Fockius, Captains.

We now finding the forementioned way of passing the Ditch by Boats, to fix our
Miners, to be useless and of no effect, began to think of Galleries, the first
of which we began at (7) they were contrived with some covering of boards for a
defense against the Enemies small Shot; but these proved to be very desperate
and dangerous Attempts: and the besieged were so fierce upon us, that by this
means we lost a great many men.

July the 25th, Rose, a Colonel in the Bavarian Troops, was killed, and above a
hundred more killed and wounded.

This day also a barrel of Powder took fire near (8) by which there was thirty
men killed and wounded.

This day Colonel Heusler and Colonel Zabor, who were sent out to observe the
Enemy, came back; they had met with a sinall Party of Turks near Gran, and had
killed about thirty, and taken several Prisoners. They gave the Duke of Lorrain
an account, that the Ottoman Army commanded by the Serasquier Bassa, was
marching toward Gran; that his Army consisted of about fifty or sixty thousand
men; that his resolution was, if possible, to relieve Newheusel; and that some
Prisoners they had taken, informed them also, that there were twelve thousand
Tartars at Novigrad ready to join the Turks.

July the 26th, Waldeck arrived in the Camp, and this day and night he and the
Duke of Lorrain were almost perpetually in the Trenches, giving necessary
Orders, and encouraging their men, who were now a little dejected, and
proceeded with a great deal of caution, having so many lately killed. The chief
Work was making the Gallery, and filling the Ditch, in which work we had this
day, the Count de Buckheim, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Souches,
killed, with about fifty more, and near a hundred wounded.

July the 27th, Schenick, being at the next Redoubt, made toward them with
about six hundred, upon which they soon retired into the Town, though they had
before killed and wounded near a hundred of our men: the Works they had ruined
were repaired in some few hours. And they then set upon making a new Redoubt
for security from any more such Sallies.

We fired our Cannon, and cast Carcasses and Bombs all this day, without
intermission, hoping by this means to keep the besieged from obstructing our
Workmen about the Galleries; these had no greater effect than that we could
perpetually observe the Town on fire in one place or other; but the besieged
from under the Walls so pelted us with Stones and Hand-Granado's, that they
killed a hundred of our men, and wounded many more.

July the 28th, Lorrain and Prince Waldeck came up with a strong Body, and
forced them to retire.

This day the Duke of Lorrain receiving advice that the Serasquier Bassa made
immediately toward Gran, sent five hundred Foot under the command of Major
Rummel, to reenforce that Garrison.

July the 29th,

This day the Elector of Bavaria arrived in the Camp, and was received with the
discharge of all the Cannon and Mortars against the place.

The Duke of Lorrain sent an Express to the Auxiliary Troops of Cologne and
Franconia, with Orders to hasten their March to Comorra and halt there, staying
for the Imperial Army which should pass the Danube there, in case they went to
fight the Ottoman Army.

This night the besieged made a Sally by a covered way which had a
Communication into the Ditch near (9) and filled up part of the Canal that let
the water out of the Ditch. They likewise filled up some other of our Works,
and burnt some Galleries that we had begun to make that way at (10) being the
Attack of the Troops of Brunswick, and assaulted our men that defended the
Work, with such courage, that they almost got to our Powder and Ammunition;
they killed us above a hundred men, and wounded near two hundred.

July the 30th, Lorrain coming there, with his Sword killed one or two that
were running away, and set the Officers back to the Posts they had quitted, and
left them not till the fire was put out; though in the mean time he was
continually exposed to the Enemies fire, and many persons were killed about him.

Also about midday the besieged made another Sally on the other side of the
Town, and notwithstanding what opposition our Forces there could make, they
quite filled up the Canal which let the water out of the Ditch.

July the 31th, had also quite repaired our Galleries, and advanced them to the
Walls. We also finished the Lines of Circumvallation, from one Gallery to
another, notwithstanding the opposition of the Enemy, which was very great; and
with our Cannon we so ruined the attackt Bastions, that we quite disabled them
for making any farther use of their Cannon.

This night the Turks came out in great numbers on the West side, and killed
Captain John Dupigne, and two Lieutenants, and near a hundred Soldiers that
had the Guard, and Sibert Kucklander, a Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of
Gallenfels, was dangerously wounded. The Turks endeavored to have proceeded
farther, but were repulsed by the Regiment of Picolomini, most part of which
were at the next Post.

We perceived this day new Retrenchments raised within the attackt Bastions by
the besiegers, where they had remounted their Cannon, and played upon one of
our Batteries so fierce, that they set fire to it, which put those about it
into a great consternation, so that no one offered to put out the fire, till
the Duke of Lorrain came and began himself to shovel upon it.

August the first, August.
the Duke of Lorrain received advice from Gran, Rounkel, had got into the Town
on the 30th of July, and that the same day the Serasquier Bassa, with between
fifty and threescore thousand men, began to besiege the place, immediately
falling upon Intrenchments, which the next day they opened, and began to batter
upon the place with seven Pieces of Cannon, and four Mortars, from the Hills of
St. Thomas and St. George. Upon this the Duke of Lorrain immediately called a
great Council of War to advise upon Affairs, where many moved, that the
Governor of Gran being so well provided that he could easily secure the Town
for two months: therefore it was the best way vigorously to pursue the Siege of
Newheusel, and not meddle with the Turkish Army, till they had something
weakened themselves before Gran. But the majority concluded to march with the
greatest part of the Army to meet the Turks; upon which the Count de Lamberg
was sent to Vienna to acquaint the Emperor herewith.

In the mean time the Siege was pursued with all possible vigor, having made
several Galleries, and fixed the Miners in many places, the Ditch on this side
being half filled up, and but little water left in it.

This day the besieged made a Sally with four hundred men; but lighting upon a
Post where General Souches kept the Guard, they prevailed but little, being
driven back into the Town, though with the loss of fifty men on our side, and
the General himself received a wound by an Arrow.

August the second, Lorrain, in order to secure the Camp before Newheusel, when
he was gone with the greatest part of the Army to fight the Ottomans, fearing
they should be surprised by a Body of the Turks, who lay near Novigrad, with
design to attack us in the Duke of Lorrain's absence, began to make several
Retrenchments about the Camp, resolving not to leave us, till we were secure
from such an Attempt. In the mean time our Attacks being carried on with all
imaginable Vigor, we so disinayed the besieged, that they desired a Parlee,
wherein the Bassa offered to surrender it upon Condition he might march out of
the Garrison with their Arms, all sorts of Ammunition, and Cannon, and take
with him all the Christian Slaves, with Drums beating, Colors flying, etc. But
to these Conditions the Duke of Lorrain would by no means yield.

This night the Enemy came into the Ditch in small Boats, on the Eastern side;
but finding all Posts so well guarded, and the Redoubts so well manned, they
durst not enterprise any thing of moment, and were therefore forced to retire.

August the third, we sounded the Ditch,

This day the Count de Lamberg arrived in the Camp again from Vienna, with an
account from the Emperor to the Duke of Lorrain, That he approved of the
Resolution he had taken, and ordered him to pursue the same with all
expedition; upon which all things were disposed for a March as soon as possible.

This night we raised on the edge of the Ditch at (11) a now Battery of
eighteen Pieces of Cannon, which much disturbed the Town on that side. But
Colonel Burgsdorff, Governor of Dusseldorf, who was but just arrived in the
Camp, had the misfortune to be killed by a Musket-bullet: we had besides this
day about fifty killed and wounded.

August the 4th, we betimes received advice from Gran, that on the first
instant the besiegers wonderfully advanced their Trenches; but the besieged had
so good luck, as from the Castle to dismount several of their Cannon.

On the second, the besieged made a Sally, which had so good effect, as to kill
above two hundred of the Turks, with the loss of very few on our side. The same
day the Turks attackt the Lower Town; but with little advantage: for after they
had lost about three hundred men, they were obliged at that time to desist.

This day we began to undermine on the side attackt by the Troops of Brunswick;
but the Work proceeded but slowly, we were so molested by the small Shot of the
besieged, which was poured upon us continually, and killed many of our men.
However, the Work was carried on to the Line of Communication in the new Works;
and we raised a new Battery of four Mortars in the turn of one that was newly
beat down.

August the 5th, we had proceeded so far in our Retrenchments, Lorrain resolved
upon his March next day. The whole Army being thus composed, the Imperial Army
in all was about twelve thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot; the Lunenburgers
were eight thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse; the Bavarians six thousand
Foot, and three thousand Horse; the Elector of Cologne's Forces three thousand
five hundred Foot, and two thousand Horse; the Franconians about two thousand
Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse. These in all made an Army of about two and
fifty thousand men; whereof eleven thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse being
of the Imperial and Lunenburg Troops, were left with fifty eight Pieces of
Cannon, and eighteen Mortars, to continue the Siege of Newhousel, under the
command of the Count de Caprara Marshall de Camp General, and the Duke de
Croy, General of the Artillery.

This day the besieged fired so warmly from a new Battery they had raised
within, that they much disordered our Workmen, and ruined part of the
last-mentioned Gallery; they killed and wounded near a hundred of our men, so
that we were obliged to discontinue the Work till night, at which time we
repaired the foresaid Breaches, and got good covert for our Workmen.

August the 6th, Lorrain, with the Elector of Bavaria, and Prince Waldeck,
began to march from the Camp toward Comorra, designing there to pass the
Danube and go fight the Enemy with their Army, which consisted of about six and
thirty thousand men, besides many Illustrious Volunteers.

The besieged observing our Camp to move in so vast a Body, presently concluded
that we were all running away. However, they durst not venture a Sally, but
confined themselves within at present, being all Rapture upon so unexpected a
happiness, which they expressed by loud Shouts and Acclamations, after their
wonted way; which we permitted for some hours, having by that means a more safe
opportunity of carrying on our Galleries and other Works. But at last we
diverted this Cry by our more than usual Vollies of small Shot, and a continued
fire from our Batteries.

August the 7th, we had an account by a Messenger, Gran, That the Turkish Army
there, was not above forty thousand strong, and that they were most of them
new-raised Forces, and that they had been repulsed in several Attacks they had
made upon that place; and that though their chief Attack was upon the Lower
Town, yet they had prevailed but little there.

This day we had carried our Galleries so near the place, that the Miners began
to work safely; the Flanks of the two attackt Bastions were so beaten down by
our firing, which had now continued almost two days without intermission, that
they almost filled the Ditch in those places; and we made use of the Stone
which did us a great kindness about the Galleries. We had also now so battered
the Walls of the Town in all parts, that there was not a place strong enough to
support a Cannon left; but the besieged continually labored about
Retrenchments within the Bastions, from whence they played with their Cannon.

August the 8th, about seven a Clock, besieged, I suppose, thinking us now a
little more remiss in our business than usual, which opinion might be also
confirmed by the peaceableness of our Cannon, made an issue on the East side,
with a strong Body of men; but the Duke de Croy, who took it upon him to manage
Affairs at this time on that side the Town, had so well provided for reception,
that after a short Skirmish they were forced to retire, having killed about
thirty of our men, and wounded twice the number; with the loss of about as many
on their Party.

This night a Gallery near the Bridge, on the West side the Town, being almost
finished, so much distasted the besieged, that they not only issued out upon
it, but also threw Hand-Granadoes, and other artificial Fire upon it, till they
had put it on fire; which so frighted our men there, that had not Ernest Pentz,
a Noble and Resolute Captain, quickly come, it had been burnt to Ashes.

August the 9th, We were endeavoring the same by several Galleries about the
attackt Bastions on the North side the Town, and had now let as much water out
of the Ditch, as the height of it above the River Newtra would permit;
notwithstanding, there was yet on some parts between three and sour foot water
left.

August the 10th, Lorrain to General Caprara; he told us, that the ninety three
Squadrons and forty Batalions that went from hence on the 6th, had on the 8th
been joined with four thousand five hundred Hungarians, under the command of
the Count de Esterhasi, and that on the same day they had passed the Bridges
near Comorra, which the Duke of Lorrain had before caused to be laid there.
That on the 9th they marched to Dotis, and that the Count de Rabata, who took
care for Provisions, had sent a vast number of Boats down the Danube, laden
with all Necessaries for the Army, which were to go forward as the Army
advanced.

This day there happened with us nothing worthy of remark, being employed about
mining altogether; and we had so well ordered our affairs, that they within
could not at all injure us.

August the 11th, de Caprara being of opinion that we might easily break down
the West Bridge and the Gate, and entrench our selves so that the besieged
could neither sally out there, nor do us any injury from thence, we accordingly
set about it; but in the end found it to be very hot service: for the Enemy had
so advantageously placed their Cannon about the Gate, both within and without,
that there was no coming near them. Colonel Heister and Captain Some, who were
the foremost in this Attempt, were killed, and a hundred common Soldiers
either killed or wounded. However, we prevailed so far, that the little
Fortification before the Bridge was ruined to all intents and purposes; and we
raised a new Battery of Cannons and Mortars at (12) which beat full upon the
Gate.

This night Colonel Brecy being upon the Guard, took a Turk who in a Christian
habit was endeavoring to escape; he, in hopes of pardon, told us the condition
the Town was in, that their Wall had not been useful, as to supporting of their
Cannon, for many days, and that their chief defense was from newraised
Batteries: That as to the number of their men, they yet consisted of eighteen
hundred Soldiers, but that at least five hundred were sick and wounded, and of
no use: That the Garrison was quite out of heart, but that the Bassa
endeavored to animate them with hopes of Relief every moment; and 'twas only
upon this hopes that they now relied, and therefore made so vigorous a defense.

August the 12th,

Some small Scouts we had abroad came in this day; they had by chance in their
progress met with about twenty of the Enemy, and killed and taken them all: One
of the Prisoners told us, that the Vizier of Buda and three other Bassa's were
encamped with a Body of men, with a design to relieve Newheusel; but hearing
what a strong Guard was left about the place, they durst not attempt it, till
they were re-enforced by the Serasquier for that purpose, which they expected
every day.

August the 13th, Turk, who by accident, in the heat of this days work, tumbled
from one of their new-raised Fortifications, over a broken place in the Wall,
down into the Ditch, where soon recovering himself without injury,
notwithstanding he was to oppose our whole Party, bravely drew his Cymiter and
with it laid about him so briskly, that he killed five upon the spot, before a
Musker-bullet came, which hitting him on the head, he immediately expired.

August the 14th,

The 15th of August, Hasner immediately entered the greatest Breach with about
a hundred and fifty men; but as it happened, the Turks chief Post was just
within, so that many hundred rushing upon our Party, forced them to retine into
the Ditch, though the Captain first lost above sixty of his men, and before he
got off, was himself mortally wounded by a Musquet-bullet. In this Engagement a
Christian being singly engaged with a Turk, they by chance closed, and both
tumbled together into the Ditch, where the Christian getting the Turks Cymiter,
soon cut off his head.

This day a Cannon-bullet from the besieged sell upon one of our Demi-Cannon,
and breaking the Carriage, turned it over; and it suing at the same time,
killed the Cannoneer and it we more men that were near it.

The 16th of August, Scultz, who had began to besiege Esperkes on the 19th of
July, had proceeded against the place with great advantage, that he had
finished many Batteries; and notwithstanding, the besieged as yet made a
resolute defense, in hopes of Teckiley's coming to relieve them, who was
assembling Forces for that purpose at Caschaw, yet they questioned not taking
the Town in a short time. We had at the same time advice, that General Leslie
understanding that the Turks had left but four thousand men to defend the
Bridge of Esseck, the rest being gone with the Serasquier Bassa to fight the
Imperialists, decamped from the place of his Rendezvous near the Drove, on July
the 28th, with a resolution, if possible, to burn the Bridge of Esseck.

In the mean time we continued to push on the Siege of Newheusel with all
Vigor imaginable, and were now preparing some more Mines, which when finished,
we resolved on a general Assault; but these Mines proved more tedious than we
expected for they within so pestred our Workmen with fired Pitch and Tar, and
Hand-Granadoes, that they made our men very cautious, and consequently tedious.

On the 17th of August, Lorrain, That on the 12th instant they had come in view
of the Turkish Army before Gran, and that upon sight of him the Serasquier
Bassa had left Gran, and that the two Armies stood in view of each other for
two days, without any Action; and that on the 14th a Renegado-Christian who had
for some time served the Turks, came into the Imperial Army, and told them,
That the Turks thinking themselves stronger in men and Arms, had resolved to
attack the Christians; whereupon the Duke of Lorrain retreated a little that
night for a more convenient Station; which confirming the Turks in the foresaid
Opinion, they presently decamped, thinking to surprise the Imperialists in
their Retreat: but this proved a great Error, the Imperialists being drawn up
in good order. However, with their usual Shouts they charged the Imperialists,
but were very firmly received, first by Colonel Heusler, who had the Vanguard,
and the Elector of Bavaria who commanded the right Wing, and afterward by the
Duke of Lorrain, who had the left Wing; so that the Fight continued not long
upon equal Terms: for the Duke of Lorrain having before ordered all his Cannon,
which were about forty two, in a good posture, and charged with small Shot,
made his men open to the right and left, and fired upon the Enemy with a full
Volley, which killed vast numbers; and having repeated the same once more, the
Enemy presently betook themselves to their heels, and fled to their Camp. He
could give us no more account, by reason of his quick departure after the
Battle.

This day we sprang a Mine on the right side the Bastion at (4) but to our own
prejudice: for it not being well stopped, brake out upon our men, of which it
killed five, and set fire to the Gallery that was near; so that we had enough
to do to put it out.

August the 18th, Caprara and the Duke de Groy having called a Council of War,
resolved next day upon a general Assault, and sent their Commands into all
Quarters to provide accordingly.

In the moan time they within, though they were weak, were not idle; for they
continually fired so warmly from their Batteries, that this day they dismounted
many of our Cannon; so that we had business enough to repait them against the
next day. They also killed us Captain Feluck of the Regiment of Caprara, and
above forty common Soldiers.

Upon the 19th of August, de Scherssenberg was the first that entered the Town
on the right side the Bastion (E); the Sieur Rummel about the same time pushing
in at the new Breaches, a little on the left; and the General Dumont, who
commanded the Lunenburghers, backed the Assault. In the mean time the besieged,
the first thing they did, set up two white Flags upon their Retrenchments,
intimating thereby, that they would surrender upon Condition. But our men were
now so eager, that there was no bridling them: They immediately mounted the new
Retrenchments, and there found a little opposition, but it was soon quelled;
and the rest of the Turks housing themselves, our men rushed all into the Town,
and put all they could find to the Sword; only Hassan the Bassa was brought by
Captain Trash to General Caprara, though wounded desperately in the head and
breast; about ten more of the chief Officers were saved: And there was in all
killed at the taking of the place, two thousand men. Of our side there was not
one man of Note killed, only two Lieutenants, and about a hundred common
Soldiers. They had in the place vast quantities of Ammunition and Provisions,
and seventy five Pieces of Cannon, which we had all dismounted but six. They
might have held out longer, but their Spirits were damped by having no prospect
of relief. We understood that the Garrison at first consisted of three thousand
five hundred men, and that besides these, there had been slain fifteen hundred
of the Inhabitants. And truly I believe that from the beginning of the Siege,
we lost near as many. We released very many Christian Slaves from their
Imprisonment and Irons, and gave all the Riches of the place for Pillage to the
Soldiers.

The Count de Scherffenberg was immediately sent to acquaint the Emperor
herewith: and this day the Prince of Comercy arrived here, going also to
acquaint the Emperor with the Defeat of the Turkish Army near Gran.

August the 20th, Lorrain's Army, arrived here, and gave us a more full account
of the Turks Defeat, and of the Siege of Gran, which cost the Turks between
three and four thousand men, in fifteen days; and that the Garrison had not
lost a thousand. That the place was battered in many places, about which they
were now employed in the repairing. That after the great Fight with the
Serasquier, in which there was near six thousand. Turks killed, the Christians
pursued them very close, cutting all Opposers in pieces, and immediately
entered their Camp, which was soon abandoned by the Enemy. That in the Camp all
their Baggage and Artillery, being twenty five Pieces of Cannon, and six
Mortars, was left by the Enemy for a Prey to our Conquering Army: And that in
this notable and wonderful Victory, the Christians lost not two hundred men;
amongst which was no Person of Note, only the Sieur Van Dingen, General of the
Troops of Franconia, received a slight Wound. The Baron de Mercy, Colonel
Heusler, and Count Stirum, were sent in pursuit of them; with the Hungarians,
who were commanded by the Count de Esterhast; and the Croats, who had a great
part in the honor of this great Action. There was also sent in pursuit of the
Turks, a Detachment of Cuirassiers and Dragoons, under the command of the
forenamed Persons.

They told us moreover, that whilst the Turks besieged Gran, the Serasuier had
sent twelve thousand to attack our Garrison of Vicegrad, in which Garrison
there was but three hundred, yet they withstood this great Force for some time;
but upon the loss of many of their men, they were forced to capitulate, and
agreed to relinquish the Garrison, and take with them their Arms and Baggage,
and thereupon came over the Danube to the Imperial Army. They likewise advised
us, that the Turks being beaten, the Duke of Lorrain was making toward us with
a design first, if possible, to take Newheusel, (in which we had prevented
him) and afterward, to march against the Serasquier, who had passed the Danube
at Buda.

August the 21st. Turks, who when the Town was taken, got into a Cellar
together to hide themselves, whose entrance was stopped up by the Rubbish of
some Houses that were burnt; but now the Soldiers fury being over, they were
only made Prisoners.

This day Hassan the Bassa of this place, who was a Renegado Native of Bohemia,
though a man of great Parts and Resolution, having been always serviceable to
the Turks, died of his Wounds, that in his head, which was by a Musket-bullet,
proving mortal.

Our Pioneers had now fuller employment than ever in filling up the Trenches
which they had before made, though it was more secure. The Country hereabouts
was also summoned in by Count Caprara, to repair the Walls and Houses, above
two hundred of which had been ruined by our Bombs and Carcasses during the
Siege.

The 22th day of August, Caprara, and the Duke de Croy, having given the
necessary Orders for repairing the Fortifications ruined during the Siege, and
demolishing the Trenches, as also for burying the Dead which lay in vast heaps,
and having left a Garrison of three thousand five hundred men, at present under
the command of General Dumont, till the Emperor should please to give the
government of the place to another (which he afterward did to Count
Scherffenberg, who commanded the chief Attack, and first entered the Town with
his Sword in his hand when it was taken) marched with the rest of their Forces
to join the Imperial Army, which they did on the 24th near Comorra, where the
Imperial Army repassed the Danube that day.

We are advised from Upper Hungary, that upon the general Pardon which the
Emperor has sent there, wherein Count Teckeley and two more only are
excepted; the Counts Party decreases daily, and the Count Sizmay, amongst the
rest, has accepted the Pardon. That at Esperies the besieged make a very
resolute defense, but yet it was no question but the Town would be gained in a
short time: That Count Teckeley had sent five hundred men to re-enforce that
Garrison; but General Scultz having notice of it, sent out a Detachment of a
thousand men under Count Raster, who meeting them, killed three hundred upon
the place, and took near a hundred more Prisoners, with little loss on the
Imperial side.

The Princes de Conty, de la Roche-sur-Yon, parted from the Imperial Army, in
which I now am, near Barkan, on the 25th instant, in order to their return home.

The 26th instant our Scouts brought us in several Turkish Prisoners, Buda,
fearing to return home with so ill success, resolved upon a second Battle. They
told us moreover, that there had been a great bustle in the Turkish Camp,
arising upon Disputes about the ill management of Affairs in the late Battle,
which was the reason that some of the chief Officers were strangled.

From General Leslie we have an account that he has proceeded with all the
success imaginable in all his Attempts: That he has taken Michalowitz, and the
Town of Esseck, and had burnt the Bridge of Esseck, from the Town to the Drove,
which is near eleven hundred paces in length. And all these great Actions were
performed with the loss of less than a hundred and fifty men. So that the
Emperors Forces in all parts have hitherto had wonderful success this Summer;
which if it be not confined by a Peace with the Turks, which is much suspected
by the Soldiers, there is no question but in a short time the Emperor, having
so many brave Commanders, and well experienced Soldiers, by the Blessing of
Almighty God, may be more Absolute in Hungary than either He or any of his
Ancestors have been for some Ages. Neither may he be confined there, but to his
eternal Honor, may extend his Arms much farther, and by that means, with the
assistance of his Allies, extirpate that Wicked and Diabolical Religion of
Mahomet even out of Europe, and so reduce this most famous part of the World
wholly to Christianity.

From the Imperial Camp wear Barkan, August the 27th 1685.
FINIS.
Some Books SOLD By Samuel Crouch and John Lawrence.
SEveral Discourses, viz. 1. Of Purity and Charity. 2. Of Repentance. 3. Of
Seeking first the Kingdom of God. By Hezekiah Burton, D. D. late Rector of
Barns near London, and Prebendary of Norwich, Published by John Tillotson, D.
D. In Octavo.

Military Duties of the Officers of Cavalry: Containing the way of Exercising
the Horse, according to the Practice of this present time. The Motions of
Horse, and the Functions of the several Officers, from the chief Captain to the
Brigadeer. Octavo.

English Military Discipline: or, the Way and Method of Exercising Horse and
Foot, according to the Practice of this present time. With a Treatise of all
sorts of Arms and Engines of War; of Fire-work-Engines, and other Military
Instruments, both Ancient and Modern. Octavo.

All three sold by John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry over against the
Compter.

Britania Languens, or a Discourse of Trade: Showing the Grounds and Reasons of
the Increase and Decay of Land-Rents, National Wealth and Strength. With
Application to the late and present State of England, France, and the United
Provinces. Octavo.

Advice to the Readers of the Common Prayer, and to the People attending the
same. With a Preface concerning Divine Worship. Humbly offered to
consideration, for promoting the greater Decency and Solemnity in performing
the Offices of God's Public Worship. Administered according to the Order
established by Law among us, by a well-meaning (though unlearned) Layick of the
Church of England. By T. S. Twelves.

Both sold by Sam. Crouch, at the Flower-de-luce at the corner of
Popes-head-Ally in Cornhil.


