A PREPARATIVE TO PLEADING.

BEING A Work intended for the Instruction and Help of YOUNG CLERKS OF THE
Court of COMMON PLEAS.

By George Townesend Esquire. Second Prothonotary of that Court.

Sparsa and neglecta coegi. LONDON, Printed for Israel Harrison, at the
Greyhound in Chancery Lane, and at his Shop within Lincolns-Inn-Gate. 1675.

I Do allow the Printing of this Book,

Fra. North.

To the Readers.
IN the time of the late Wars, proceedings at Law being ordered to be in
English; and then and from thence hitherto all Attorneys of the Court of Common
Pleas being suffered to draw and enter on Record their own Pleadings, as well
Formalities as skill of Clerkship have thereby been much decayed, and are not
likely to be restored. The chief end of this my present Treatise is, to direct
Attorneys and Young Clerks, in the formality of their Words and Writings,
whereby I may hope that their Businesses may be more Clerklike drawn, and
fairly entered on Record, than of late they have been, of which, in my present
place, I find too plentiful defects and proofs. It is very commendable in a
Clerk to write well, and necessary to write true and significant Latin, and to
make formal Dashes and Abbreviations, to the observance whereof I advise young
Clerks to addict themselves. I hope that I shall hereby further a willing Mind.
For the better formality of Writing, I have caused, in relation to this
Impression, all the small Roman Letters, which wanted or were capable of
Abbreviations or Dashes, to be newly Cut and Cast, at the cost of my Self and
the Stationer; as in like manner I caused many English Letters to be framed for
the better impression of my Tables formerly published. By which Tables I have
found more benefit for my private use than I expected; and by this little Book
I doubt not somewhat to pleasure my self, thought my chief aim be the public
Good. I intend to be adding to it deficient words, which from time to time
shall occur unto me, and I advise other Clerks to do the like. I corrected the
Composer's Work in every sheet before the impression, and hoped to have found
but few faults afterward, and looked not further thereto till above half the
Book was done. But then perusing the Sheets imprinted, I found (by his
mistakings or negligence) many Erratas, (as you will find in the end) and which
in the sequel of the Book I prevented by a review after his amendments. Vale.

Marks for Authors cited in this Book.
Abr. DAltons Abridg. of Office of Sheriffs. An. Andersons Reports. 2 Parts.
Ass. Book of Assizes. Ash. Ashtons Presidents titled Plaeita rediviva.
Ben. Bendlowes Reports. Bra. Bracton. Bri. Bridgmans Reports. Bull. Bulstrods
Reports. 3 Parts.
Co. Cokes Reports. Co. Entr. Cokes Entries. Co. Lit. Coke upon Littleton. Cow.
Cowels Interpreter.
Da. Davis his Reports. Dict. Goldmans Dictionary. Wase Dict. Wase his
Dictionary. Doc. and Stu. Doctor and Student. Dyer. Dyers Reports.
Fin. Finches Law. Fle. Fleta. Fnbr. Fitzherbert natura briu. Fo. Formule
placitand. 2 Parts.
Glan. Glanvil. Go. Godbolds Reports. Gre. Greenwood of County Judicatures,
1659.
Het. Hetlies Reports. Hob. Hobarts Reports. Inst. Institutes. 3 last Parts.
Jur. Jurisdiction of Courts.
Keil. Keilwayes Reports. Kit. Kitchen.
La. Latch his Reports. Lane. Lanes Reports. Leo. Leonards Reports. 2 Parts.
Lex. Blunts Law Dictionary.
Mon. Monasticon Anglicanum. 2 Parts. Moo. Moors Reports.
Noy. Noyes Reports.
Par. Ley. Parsons Law. Per. Perkins. Plo. Plowdens Reports. Pop. Pophams
Reports. Pry. Prynne, of Records in the Tower.
Ra. Entr. Rastells Entries. Reg. The Register Original. Reg. judic. The
Register Judicial. To. Rolls Abridgments. 2 Parts. Ry. Ryley, of Parliament
Proceedings.
Spel. Spelmans Glessarie. St. Sti. Styles Reports.
Tou. Sheppards Touchstone of Conveniences.
Vet. nabr. Old Natura breviu.
West. Wests Presidents. Win. Winches Reports.
A Table.
OF Clerkship. page 1. Requisites of Clerks. page 4. Of a Clerks writing. page
5. Writing of Presidents. page 7. Direction for a Clerks Proceedings. page 9.
Of rendering English into Latin. page 15. English Words Latinized. page 25.
Latin Words. page 43. Formality of writing. page 82. Variety of Latin words.
page 86. Improper Latin words. page 88. Doubtful Expressions. page 89.
Exposition of words. page 94. English words among Latin. page 105. English
among French. page 108. Latin among French. page 112. Feasts. page 114. Names
of Men. page 116. Names of Women. page 119. Returns and Tests of Terms. page
122. Counties how written. page 127. Bishops. page 128. Additions of Degree.
page 128. Philizers. page 129. Exigenters. page 130. Justices. page 131.
Cursitors. page 134. Doggeting of Causes. page 137. Placita's. page 140.
Different Forms of Kings Bench and Common Plea's. page 143 Parts of the World.
page 145. Weights, Quantities. page 146. Measures. page 150. Numbers. page 154.
Sums. page 156. Houses. page 159. Household Stuff. page 167. Land. page 171.
Husbandry. page 173. Apparel. page 179. Courtiers and Officers. page 184.
Lawyers. page 186. Divines. page 188. Soldiers. page 190. Physicians. page
195. Apothecaries. page 197. Chirurgions. page 199. Musicians. page 200.
Merchants. page 201. Mariners. Watermen. page 203. Tradesmen, in an Alphabet.
page 206.
A PREPARATIVE TO PLEADING.
SKill of Pleading in Actions at the Common Law, called Clerkship, is very
necessary, and has been much commended by diverse Writers; the want whereof
many times causes much loss and charge to Clients, and trouble to the Judges.
It is requisite as well for Forms, as for Substance: for without observance of
Forms there would be confusion.

Pleadings were anciently drawn, and Breviats upon Trials taken (as is
reported) by the Counselors at Law themselves, which course is for the most
part continued in the Courts of the Grand-Sessions in Wales, but of later times
Pleadings in the Courts at Westminster have been drawn, and Breviats made by
Clerks and Attorneys.

It is requisite for Clerks and Attorneys of the Court of Common Pleas (of
which I am a Clerk, and to which my present Treatise chiefly tends) to have
greater skill in Pleading, and knowledge of the Law, than the Clerks or
Attorneys of any other Court, Fines, Recoveries, and real and mixed Actions (in
which most skill is required) being appropriated to that Court. And although of
later times employment of Clerks and skill in Clerkship have more and more
declined and decayed, yet the Court of Common Pleas has always had the best of
Clerks and Writers of the Court-hand.

Of Clerkship.
CLerkship in the Court of Common Pleas was heretofore a distinct Profession of
it self, Clerks living in London being Attorneys in few Causes for proper
Clients, and most Attorneys living out of London employing Clerks living in
London in drawing and entering of their Pleadings. But Country-Attornies much
increasing in number, and being severally less employed in Causes, and some of
them having been bred Clerks, most of them (though ignorant) have of later
times (commencing in the time of the late Wars, when the Law-Pleadings were in
English) drawn and entered their own Pleadings; whereby many of them are ill
drawn, and the Records of the Court not so fairly and fitly entered as they
ought to be; which if checked, it would inevitably follow, that most of these
ignorant Attorneys would begin and prosecute most of their Causes for Clients
Plaintiffs in the Court of King's Bench, the Clerks and Attorneys whereof have
greatly increased in number of later times, and deal in Causes there for
Attorneys of the Common Pleas without any Attorneys Fees, and have an easier
course of doing business there, with more benefit to themselves (as I conceive)
than the Attorneys and Clerks of the Common Pleas have.

Attorneys ought, and anciently did attend the Courts at Westminster the whole
Term or most part thereof, whereby most businesses were finished in the
Term-time in due order. But Attorneys increasing, and their respective
businesses decreasing, Sollicitors (acting in businesses) staying in the
Countries, and gaining Clients of Attorneys from them, and many Attorneys of
the Court of Common Pleas employing in many Causes for their Clients Plaintiffs
Clerks of the Court of King's Bench, most Country-Attornies of later times have
forborne to come to London till toward the end of Terms, whereby their
businesses have come all on a huddle, and have been disorderly done in and
after the end of Terms, the Judges, Counselors, Officers, and Clerks till
toward the end of Terms wanting employment, and then becoming excessively full
of it, and most businesses forced to be done after the end of Terms, many times
to the Clients great disadvantage, and other Men's (especially Clerks)
inconvenience. For remedy whereof diverse Orders have been made and renewed in
the Courts of King's Bench, and Common Pleas, enjoining Attorneys to come to
London by the third Return of Michaelmas-Term, and the second Return of every
other Term, and to stay til the Terms be ended. All which Orders have proved
ineffectual, neither do I conceive that this mischief will be remedied without
a severe Act of Parliament.

For my own part, I conceive that it would be fit that no common Solicitor be
permitted, but inquired out in each Country: And that no Attorneys Name be used
by others: And that Attorneys should be enjoined to attend the Courts by a
certain time in each Term, whereby their businesses may be set on doing, and
motions made in the Court (when requisite) in due time, but not to be enjoined
to stay in London to the end of a Term, many of them having not businesses to
employ themselves in London half so long time; and indeed the profit of
Attorneys by Causes at the Common Law at Westminster being not to most of them
considerable, their chief gains being by Conveiances, keeping of Courts, Causes
in inferior Courts, and Soliciting in other Courts.

Clerkship in the Court of Common Pleas being much decayed, Clerks bred in
London, for their better subsistence (Clerkship of it self not affording them a
fitting maintenance for themselves and Families there) have been of late times
forced to deal as Attorneys, for Attorneys of the King's Bench in the Causes
which they have in the Court of Common Pleas, and to be Attorneys for proper
Clients in London and elsewhere, and many of them to become Country-Attornies.

The Pleadings or the Law being of good proper and significant Latin, I would
have a Clerk to be a good Latin-Scholar (and a little Greek may do him good)
able to render the English of Indentures and other Writings into true and
significant Latin; Of an able and healthy Body to endure Cold and fitting at
his Writing, And his Estate in present or future hope not to be so large as to
lessen his Industry; That he be placed a Clerk with a Prothonotaries Clerk, a
Philizer, or able Attornie; Not to be taken to be a Clerk for less than five
years. Six years time may be better for the Master and himself, if he
diligently follow his business; Skill in Clerkship being not attained without
much labor, many Presidents, and diligent Observance.

The Pleadings of the Law being to be written in Court-hand, I advise a young
Clerk to get a good Copy, of which some are in Print, and to get (if he may)
and imitate some old needless Writs or other Writings of a good Hand. And if
his Secretary-Hand be not good, let him go to some good Master to teach him a
good Set and Running-Secretary-Hand. And I would farther have him learn, and
continually practice short-Writing, for the learning whereof he may buy a Book,
and not go to any School, the swift writing of it is not got without a
continued Practice, the use of it may be necessary (if not profitable) diverse
ways in the course of his Profession, as it has been to my self in particular.

And it is necessary for him to understand the Law-French, which with a little
Observance in a small time may be gained. For the effecting whereof, let him
read the Terms of the Law, and Littleton in French and English. When he has
Written an hour or less, let him Read, and after a while Reading, fall again to
his Writing, and stand at his Reading, and sit at his Writing for the most part.

Let his Writing (especially the Court-hand) be with the full of the Pen,
endeavoring to make a full, short, and round Letter without long Heads, Tails,
or Dashes, and not a tall slender Letter, with the side of the Pen, and sit as
upright at his Writing with his Elbowes near to his sides, and Writing as
straight before him as he may.

I advise him (at least before he comes to a quick and perfect hand) to Write
all things fairly and as well as he can, unless necessity of Expedition require
his speed. Non sufficit been aliquid agere, nisi etiam fiat venuste. Especially
let Rolls be entered in a full Set-hand.

A small neat hand is most commendable for Writs, which should stand on as
little ground as may well be. And I advise a Clerk constantly to read over the
Writs which he makes, and examine other Writings, when he has done them. And
in Parchment Writings not presently upon the writing to amend any faults which
he makes, while the Ink is moist, which would make blurs, but to make a little
prick with his Pen in the Margent, and proceed, and when he has done, ere the
Ink be dry, amend his faults, and scrape out the pricks.

Let all his amendments and interlinings be done with as great exactness
neatness and care, as may be. And if any thing be written doubtfully, or not
very legible, let him blot or scrape it out, and new write the same.

Let all Towns and Sirnames be written at length, and without Abbreviations, as
Milverton, not Miluton Culpeper not Culpeper. and likewise let the forms of
words in original Writs be observed, not writing per instead of par, perochia
for parochia, pertes for parts or the like.

Writing of Presidents.
FOr writing of Presidents, I advise a young Clerk to get him at first a Book
of two or three quires of Paper in Quarto for Common-Presidents of
Declarations, Pleas, Judgments, Writs, return of Writs, Warrants of Attorney and
the like, severally, and in several places thereof, of which he has or is
likely to have most daily or common use. But after that he is a perfect Scribe,
and can do ordinary businesses, I advise him (if he desire to be a skilful
Clerk) with his Masters leave, to get diverse Books of Paper ruled on the sides
with red Ink (not needful at top or bottom) of some six quires a piece of the
best larger sort of Paper he may get, bearing Ink well, a Ream whereof is
usually sold for about fix shillings, for the writing of Presidents. Let the
Books be bound in good Vellam, or in Leather not hardly or stiffly, but easily
to ly open, and string'd with strong colored Tape, or Cotton-Ribbon, or
clasped. And let one whole Book at least be for Actions on the Case
distinguished in several parts thereof, as into Actions on the Case of
Promises, Nuisance, Disturbance, Slander, etc. of which my Table of Presidents
may be of good use to him for direction. Another Book of Actions of Debt;
Another of Trespass; Another of Replevin, etc. in like manner distinguished
into several Titles according to the several nature of the Presidents; And the
like Books for real and mixed Actions, Prohibitions and the like. By which Books
he may readily find such Presidents, as he has written, without the help of a
Table, and may avoid the writing of one President twice, which I have found
often done by the same hand in Manuscript-Books of Presidents, which I have
bought, being written confusedly and out of Order.

As the Clerk must not refuse to write some Presidents for his Master, so the
Master ought in Reason to allow his Clerk at times of leisure to read the Law,
and write Presidents for himself, which may enable him for his profession, when
he shall have served his time of Clerkship.

In writing of Presidents, I advise a Clerk to write the full matter, as well
of Form as of Substance at length, with the Term and number-Roll, if he may,
and to write the Christian-Names and Sirnames of persons, and the names of
Towns at first, and when the same come again to be written, to write only a
letter for a word as J. D. for Johannes Do; but if there be other names of the
same Letters, then write again the same at length, that when a President, is
written, it may be plainly read, and written forth fully again, as it was
taken, if there be occasion.

In Presidents let all sums be written in the larger figures, as X pound IX
shillings VI pence, the years of our Lord, or the Kings Reign in the like
Figures; the days, till past five, at length, as Primo, secundo, unus, duo,
etc. but after five, in the like numeral figures as vio die, vi dies, etc.

Before the beginning of Pleas let a little space be left, as in Printing,
whereby readily to see the beginning of the ensuing Plea; and at the end of
each side write the succeeding word, as is usual in Printing.

Let the dusting or sanding of Presidents in Books be avoided, rather using
fine brown Paper to prevent blotting, if time of the Inks drying cannot be
allowed; for Sand takes away the good color of the Ink, and getting into the
Backs of Books makes them break their Binding.

Let words be written Clerk-like at length, as clausum fregit, Armis, and not
un-Clerk-like, abbreviated words, as clm. fr. ar. etc. though it be in Draughts
for private use, much less in Records. And as good Paper, so the best Ink is to
be used, and choice of Pen-knives to be had for several occasions.

Directions for a Clerks Proceedings.
WHen my propounded-Clerk has served his agreed time with his Master, and has
a resolution of following Clerkship chiefly in the future course of his Life, I
advise him to procure himself to be admitted of an Inn of Chancery, and get him
a convenient whole Chamber if he may, and if he cannot at first get one, let
him aim to get one as soon as he can, and in the mean time get a part of a
Chamber as good as he may. For he being to make it (at least for a while) his
constant dwelling and abode, it is fit for him to have what convenient Room he
may, whereas a moiety of a Chamber may well serve a Country-Attorny, who stays
but a short time in London at the Terms, and has but small store of
necessaries useful for his stay there.

I advise a Clerk especially to get himself a large Study, which I would have
him to furnish with Shelves and Boxes fitting for his use, and two Desks, at
one whereof he may sit to write, and at the other stand, and read or write, if
he please. Variety of Motion pleases and eases the Body and Mind, and
Standing is accounted more healthful for a Student, the rule being studeto
stans. And I conceive that sitting does more breed Diseases, especially the
Stone. And it is advised by Physicians in way of Health, that a Man walk an hour
in a day, if he have time. And to forbear drinking (at least much) in a
Morning, I conceive to be healthful for most Students.

I advise him to procure himself to be sworn an Attorney of the Court, and at
first to entertain all lawful and fitting businesses for his employment as an
Attorney or Clerk, and to deal as an Attorney for proper Clients and Attorneys of
the King's Bench, and rather then want employment to take some Journy-work, the
worser sort of employment he may leave off when he pleases; but at no hand to
deal as Attorney at the Reteyner of any common Solicitor, who is looked at by
the Law with an ill Eye; he cannot lawfully give you warrant to appear plead or
Act any thing, which an Attorney of the King's Bench may do. Use no Attorneys
Name in practice, nor suffer any one to use yours. And I wish you to aim at a
Philizers Office, if you may get one; it may be a good means for the better
employment of your self and Clerks in the way of Clerkship, and gain you
Entries and other business from Country-Attornies.

And although the Collection of Presidents be chiefly to be aimed at by a
Clerk, which will give him a great insight into the Law, and furnish him with
forms of deriving of Estates pleaded and other ^^ings; yet I advise him for his
better understanding and progress, to addict himself to the study of ^he Law;
Wherein I cannot without much la^our direct him in such a method as my self do
best like. I think few Lawyers agree in the course of their Studies. Some use
no Books of Common-Places, but trust altogether to their memories, being
continually studying on their Books. But a Clerk being at several times, and
for the greatest part of his time, employed in the affairs of his Clerkship and
Practice, ought not to trust so to his memory-Reading makes a full Man,
Conference a ready Man, Writing an exact Man. I advise a Clerk therefore to
take Notes of his Reading of the Law under fit Heads and Titles. And to that
end, provide himself of several large Commonplace Books, ruled with Red Ink in
the middle of each side only; for I would not have him straiten himself in room
for his Notes.

And although the chief aim of his endeavors should be to make himself able in
the course of his profession by way of Pleadings, yet I would have him not
neglect the noting of matters of Title, Property, or any thing else, which he
may suppose to be sometimes useful to him in the way of his Studies. He may go
in an Alphabetical way, if he please, for the Heads of his Common-Place-Books;
for his direction wherein, he may peruse and take Titles out of the Abridgments
of Fitzherbert Brook, Hughes or others, in which upon perusal he will find the
Titles differing in Names, of which I must leave him to take the fittest in his
own Judgment. But I rather approve and commend one Book for Actions at
Common Law with fitting subdivisions (of which my Table of Presidents may give
him a good light) or one Book for personal Actions, as Actions on the Case,
Account, Debt, Replevin, Trespass, etc. Another for real Actions, as Cosenage,
Entry, Formedon, etc. in their several Heads, or the one Head of Praecipe quod
reddat, naming the Action in the first part of his Notes taken thereupon, with
all Pleadings and Subdivisions of them. And also of partition, Quare impedit,
Waste and other Actions. Another Book for Actions on Statutes, Debt on
Statutes, Informations, Indictments, Quo warranto, and other criminal
businesses. Another for Titles to Lands and Properties of Goods; as Feoffments,
Gifts, Leases, Assignments, Devises, Sales, etc. And other Books for the
several parts of the Law, as near as may be, placing Heads of the same nature
in one Book by themselves.

For the Order of his Reading of the Law, I propound him to read the Terms of
the Law, Cowels Interpreter, Finches Law, Littleton, Perkins, Kitchen Natura
briu new and old, with the Register, Doctor and Student, Dyer, Plowdon, Cokes
Institutes, his Crokes, and others Reports, the Year-Books, etc. v. Rolls
Preface.

Advice to a Clerk in his Course.
I Wish my propounded Clerk to have a moderate mind, not so much addicted to
his Study as to neglect his Health, or reasonable Exercise tending thereunto.
Within doors he may have a Swing, Leaden Weights, and a low narrow joynt-Stool
to be swinged about him, between his Legs, and over his Head, which I conceive
to be healthful. Abroa dat a dancing School he may exercise dancing, especially
in the Winter time; but for Music I do not approve of it, taking up much
precious time. Propound to go to Bed at nine of the Clock, and rise early in
the Morning. In the Summer-Vacation after business dispatched, I would advise
him for his Health to go to some Medicinal Waters, of which our late Age has
found many. Londoners, and others resort much to Epsham or Barnet-Waters, most
purging by Stool, or Tunbridg-Water purging by Urin. Astropp Water in
Northamptonshire fifty miles from London purges both by Stool and Urin, well
approved of by my self. And in the Summer-Vacation, he may also visit his
Kindred, or take some delightful Journey with a Friend.

I could wish that a Clerk would propound to himself to live unmarried in an
Inn of Chancery, especially where Commons are most kept, and to continue in
Commons, while any are kept, where he may have fit Diet, Company, and
Accomodations, and not complain of Solitariness. For his Diet in the Vacations
after Commons ended, I commend unto him private Commons in the Hall, with some
others of the House, if he may: If not, let him be content with some small
inconveniences. Let him pray for Charity and Chastity: for although Marriage be
honorable, and sometimes comfortable; yet it is to most more troublesome and
hindering of Studies, and to all more careful and chargeable than a single
Life. But if a Clerks Mind or Constitution of Body incline him to Marriage, let
him take his course therein, but forbear, if he may, until he be settled in
Practice, and a fitting Estate, lest he repent his haste. And single or
married, let him make his residence in London, or the Suburbs, where Business
is chiefly to be acted.

When a Clerk has got a moderate Employment, I wish him to take a Clerk, who
may do much of his ordinary businesses, and write him some Presidents, while he
addicts himself in his spare times to the perusing of President-Books, Printed
or Manuscript, or the Study of the Law; and if he find any aptness in himself
to be a Councellor at Law, let him transplant himself to an Inn of Court,
where, until he be called to the Bar, he may exercise his Clerkship with his
Study; but if he has no such desire to alter his Condition, I advise him,
as soon as he has any reasonable Ability, to draw special Pleadings, to addict
his time chiefly thereto, and to leave off all his Practice of an Attorney
either for proper Clients or Attorneys of the King's Bench, but not to leave his
Clerkship for Attorneys of the Common Pleas, which I wish him to continue, not
so much for any benefit of himself, as for the Employment and Learning of his
Clerks.

I have done with my thoughts of Advice for a Clerk of the Court of
Common Pleas in his Course. I come now to Directions for young Clerks there in
doing their businesses.

Directions to a Clerk.
IT is to be known, that there is not a sufficient number of Latin-words to
express English words, there having been inventions of many things (whereof not
a few proper to this Nation) since the Latine-Tongue flourished in Italy. And
every Art and Profession have many coined words proper and peculiar thereunto.
And so Lawyers have necessarily framed to themselves words of Law-Latin, for
the more significant expression of things, as murdrum for murder, Maneriu a
Manor, Acra an Acre; The defect of fitting words and sometimes false and
insensible Latin, vitiate and lose a good Cause. I conceive it very fit and
necessary, and I wish that these words of Law-Latin and other old Latin words
were reduced into Writing, and expounded under Heads for the young Students and
Clerks better learning, use, and understanding thereof. Many of them are so
frequent in Law-businesses, that I have often taken them for true Latin words,
but searching have not found them in Dictionaries. Most of such as have
occurred unto me in my reading, I shall hereafter set down, as orderly as I may.

I advise that the words of Indentures and other Writings be rendered out of
English into Latin, in the same order as they are in the same, not preponing or
postponing any words for any intended Elegancy of Latin: for although such
displacing of words, not altering the sense, vitiate not the pleadings, yet it
hinders the ready examination of the Latin with the English, and obscureth the
true knowledge of the Deeds.

In pleading Deeds the present tense is usually to be changed into the
Praeterperfect Tense, and the Praeterperfect Tense into the Praeterpluperfect
Tense, as for example in Indentures; Has demised granted and to farm letten;
dimisisset concessisset and ad firmam tradidisset. Does demise, grant and to
farm let, dimisit concessit and ad firmam tradidit. Is fuit, has been fuisset.
Yet witnesses is rendered Testatum sit; or quae quidem Indentura testatur. And
the Future Tense is turned into the Preterimperfect Tense, as, shall repair,
repararent, shall pay, soluent.

In Indentures, Covenants are most frequently by words of, shall and will; as,
shall and will repair; which may be rendered by deberent and vellent reparare,
or by repararent only, without deberent and vellent, for it is the same in
sense. Shall or may enjoy; valerent vel possent gaudere. Shall or lawfully may;
valerent (or deberent) vel legitime possent. It shall and may be lawful;
liceret and licitum foret, or liceret alone, or licitum foret only, being all
of the same sense; but I advise to use both liceret and licitum foret.

By these Presents or hereby; if in Indentures, are rendered by; per eandem
Indenturam, or per pdcam Indenturam; If in Articles; per Articlos pdcos. If in
Bills; per eandem billam: if in Bonds or other Writings, per scriptum pdcum.
From the date hereof, a Dat Indenture pdce. Hereunto annexed; Indenture pdce
annexat. And if an Indenture be recited in an Indenture pleaded, then for
distinction afterward is to be added, pdca recitat Indentura; to the recited
Indenture. Indentura pdca hic in cur quodlat, to the Indenture pleaded.

Usually and most properly, idem in Declaraco^ns or Pleadings is attributed to
Plaintiffs or Demandants, declaring or pleading; pdcus to Defendants or
Tenants, Places, Towns or Lands. pfat. to persons named not being Actors. Yet
if the same persons, Lands, etc. come very nearly again to be named or
mentioned in pleadings, usually and most properly, idem, is used.

Where the Latin words are obscure or of double significations, it is fit to
express them by an Anglice. Wares or the like of diverse kinds by a Vocat. But
to use Anglice Vocat both together, I conceive not to be necessary or Clerk
like, although often used by some Clerks of the King's Bench.

The quality of Wares should be expressed with as much certainty as
conveniently may be, as for Woollen-Cloth, tot. virgat. pannis lanei voc.
Kersey. For Linen Cloth, panni linei voc. Holland. For Hairy-Stuffs, panni
crinosi. For Silken-Stuffs, panni bissini. But there being hundreds of Stuffs
and other things proper to Trades, Husbandry, Household, Mills, Buildings, etc.
and the same things being called by several names in several Countries, the
Pleader not knowing of what nature or kind they be, is often inconvenienced in
pleading them; and of which it is fit that he inform himself what he may.

There are Books of Exposition of English words, but the same, as also
Dictionaries, come far short of rendering a full account of them. Some of such
as of later times have occurred to me in my employment, I shall hereafter
herein express, and cause some small spaces to be left for further addition on
any occasion.

For want of fit Latin-words, our Predecessors have used some somewhat gross
Latin-words; as tot. virgat. Velvetti or de Velvet for Velvet. Curtina; a
Curtin. And English words only with de le, les, or lez, before them, of which I
will hereafter give you diverse examples.

And sometimes our predecessors have used many improper Law Latin words,
whereas there were proper Latin-words, more fitly, (I conceive) to be used as
Muttonu for Weathers. 2. Co. 39. But I wish that significant Latin Words be
used, where they may be found.

In some small things sometimes is some small variation between the English and
rendering it into Latin in sound, not in substance, as, from time to time and at
all times; de tempore in tempus and ad o^ia tempora.

More or less, or be it more or less; sive plus sive minus.

At the most, at the least; Ad majus, ad minus.

In any wise notwithstanding; in aliquo non obstan.

Of more especial Grace; de ampliori gra^.

At his own proper costs; ad ejus quodpria custagia.

Or thereabouts; aut eo circit.

Said, is sometimes omitted and, quidem, used instead thereof in the beginning
of a Sentence. As, qui quidem finis, for, which said Fine, que quidem
Indentura, quodquidem recordum, qui quidem locus.

Many times Synonyma's, English words of the same signification, do occur in
Deeds, whereof although I conceive some may sometimes be omitted without
prejudice, yet I advise to use other Latin words of the like significations, as
near as may be, with an Anglice; of which sort are,

Award, arbitrament. Arbitriu, arbitramentum. Elect, choose. Elige, selige.
Dung, compost. Fimu, stercus. The rest and residue. Remanere and residuu.
Society, company. Societas, co^mitas. Household and Family. Domestici, familia.
Of Freehold and Charterhold. libe tenure and tenure per cartam. Of Copyhold,
and customary hold. Tenure native vel custumarie. Wittingly or willingly.
Scient vel voluntary. Harmless, losseless, and indempnified. Indempn, ino^cua
and indempnificat. Going forth and issuing out of Land. Egredien. and exeun. o
tris. Goods, Chattels and Cattles. Bona catalla and substancia Accounts,
Reckonings. Compi, raco^cinia, recensiones, calculli.

Most of which to be used with an Anglice.

Our Ancestors did use some change or additions of letters in their Latin
words, as quoth for quod, which we have now left off, as also; hostia quod
ostia, habundans quod abundans. But we often use nichil for nihil, set for sed.
Yet I conceive it not un-Clerk-like to write at all times, nihil, fed. We
constantly retain, imppiu for in ppetuu. dampnu for damnu, adding a p, as in
all words proceeding from it, as indempnis, dampnificat. solempnis for
solennis, solempnizaco^, solempnit.

I will present you with some versions into Latin of words in Indentures and
other writings with some observations thereupon.

Manors, Lordships. Mania, Dnia. Mesuages, Cotages. Mesuagia, Cotagia.
frequently in the Kings-beuch Messuagia, Cottagia. Tofts, Crofts. Tofta,
Crofta. Gardens, Orchards. Gardina, Pomaria. Waters, Watercourses. Aque,
aquarum cursus. Emoluments, Hereditaments. Emolumenta, Hereditamenta.
Commodities, advantages. co^moditates, advantagia Interruption, Molestation,
Incombrance. Interrupco^, molestaco^, incombrancia. With their and every of
their appurtenances. Cum eorum and cujuslibt, eorum pertin. Ingresse egresse
and regresse. Ingrus. egrus. and regressus. Botes (or Boots) as, House-bote.
Edificandi. Co. Litt. 41. B. Fire-bote, Ardendi. Co. Litt. 41. B. Plough bote.
Arandi. Co. Litt. 41. B. Hay-bote. Estouiu. Co. Litt. 41. B. Hedge bote.
Claudendi. Stake-bote. Surorum. Stile-bote. Climacum. Gate-bote. Januarum. With
an Anglice Except before excepted. Except. pexcept. Except and always reserved
all Trees, etc. Except. and semp. reseivat, oibs, arboribs, etc. With all the
sequel in the ablative-Case. To have and to hold. If inheritance or Freehold.
If a Lease for years. Habend. and tenend. hend. and occupand. observed in the
Common Pleas, but hend and tenend in all cases in the Kings Bench. Then next
ensuing, from thence next ensuing. Tunc quodx sequen. extunc. quodx sequeu.
From thenceforth for ever. Extunc deinceps (or de ceto. (imppm. As asoresaid.
Ut pfertur. ut pdcm. est As abovesaid. Ut si pradem. est Hereafter. Extunc
impostum. Heretofore. pantea. ante tunc. From thence if from a place. Abinde.
From thence if from a time. Extunc. Whereof. unde. cujus. quorum. de quibus.
Thereof. Inde. ejusdem. eorumdem. Hereunto, or thereunto requested. Adinde (or
ad hoc, or ad illud) requisite. Reciting. Recitando. Before in time. Ante.
pantea. Before Persons. Coram. Above. A Room. Supra romeam. Above. A Sum. Ustra
sumam. Above. in a Deed. Supius menconat. In truth, indeed. Revera, in facto.
Which shall first happen. Utrum prius accideret. Does more fully appear.
Before apparet. Does manifestly appear. Liquet manifest. Leased, dimised, or
enjoyed. Tradit, dimissa, vel gavisa. Behind and unpaid. Aretro and insolut.
Behind a House. Pone domu. Costs and charges of suite. Mise and custagia sect.
Other costs and charges. Alia onera and custagia When and as often. Quando and
quocies. Then and so often. Tunc and tocies. So often as. Tocies quocies. So
that, so as Ita quoth. As Soon as. qni. cito. As if. Acti. After, afterward. Post,
postea. Before, before that. Ante, antequam. All and every person and Persons.
o^ies and quelt. persona and person. Each and every. Altut. and quilt. Free,
freed. Liber libat. Retorn from a place. Reditus a loco. Retorn of a Writ.
Retornu bris. At a place. Apud locum. At a day. Ad diem. Default of Issue.
Defcivs exitus. Default of payment. Defalta soluco^nis. A Quick-set-Hedg. Haia.
A dead-Hedg. Seps. Hedg-wood. Busca. Wood growing. Boscus. Dead-Wood, or Wood
cut. Lignu. All for a thing entire, as a Mesuage, etc. for things of number, as
Lands, etc. Totus. integer. totum illud mesuagiu. integra tenta. o^mes ille
tree. Where farther is to be noted, that properly. Mesuagiu. est scituat. tra
jacens.

The words following in Pleadings have most properly relation as follows,
videlt.

Vigore. By force of an Act of Parliament. Virtute. By virtue of a Deed,
Feoffment, Lease, etc. per quod. Whereby. Of a descent. a right. ptextu, By
pretense of an Attornment. A License, etc. Color. By color of a supposed
Estate or Right, usually taken in the worst part. Raco^ne. By reason. pmissa.
pmissorum. Occaco^ne. By occasion. pmissa. pmissorum. Cujus. Of the matter
before pleaded.

A. ab. A. used before a word beginning with a Consonant, as a dampno. Ab,
before a word beginning with a Vowel, as ab injuria.

And, Et. ac. necnon, aceciam. These are observed in this Order by Cursitors in
their Writs, and may fitly be followed in other pleadings, not using the same
word twice together. In way of connection, ac, is usually put before, et, as, ac
blada and herbam, in Writs.

Or. Aut, vel, five, seu Aut, I conceive fit to be used in the beginning of a
sentence. vel; in connection of words. five, seu, in further proceedings of a
thing pleaded, seldom using the same word twice together.

And now having given some instructions to young Clerk, for rendering of Deeds,
and some English words into Latin, I proceed to give him an Alphabet of some
English words used in the Law or otherwise, with the Latin words which are or
may be used for the same. Many of which either English or Latin are not to be
found in our Dictionaries: And though found in Dictionaries, yet I have, as I
conceive, used the most significant words. To some few of which I have added
authorities.

A. A. Abatement Into Lands. Abatamentum, abatare. Abatement Of a writ. to
abate. Cassaco^, bris. cassare. Abutting. abuttaled. Abuttan, abuttalat. An
Acre. Acra. To acquit, an acquittance. Acquietare acquictancia. Accustomed.
Accustumat. consuet. An Action. Acco^. loquela. Accordingly. Congruent. An
advantage. Advantagiu. An adjournment. Adjornamentum. Adjourned. Adjornat. An
Adversary. Adversarius, An adventure. periclitaco^. Adventura. Ad advancement.
Advanciamentum. Affeerors. Afferatores. Affeered. Afforat. As far, so far so
much. Intantum. After. afterward. Post. Postea. An Affidavit. Sacriu. To
agist. Agistare, An agistment. Agistamentum. To agree, an agreement. Agreare,
agreamentum. Aid. Auxiliu. As if. Acsi. An Alien. Alienigena. To alien.
Alienare. An alienation. Alienaco^. To alter. Alterare. An alteration.
Alteraco^. To allow. Allocare. An allowance. Allocaco^. To allot. Allottare.
Allegiance. Ligeancia. An Ally in a Town. Augiportus. Amends. Emende. To
apportion. Apporco^nare. An apportionment. Apporco^namentum. To apprise.
Appciare. Arrerages. Arreragia. To arrive. Arrivare. An arriving. Arrivaco^. To
arrest. Arrestare. An Arrest. Arrestaco^. To article. Articlare. Articles.
Articli. An Arbitrator. Arbitrator. An award or arbitrament. Arbitriu. To
assault. Insultum face. To assemble. Assemblare. An assembly. Assemblaco^. To
assure. Assurare. An assurance. Assurancia. To assoil. Absolvere. Lex. 12. To
arrain an Assise. Arraniare assiam. To assign. Assignare. An Assign.
Assignatus. To assess. Assidere. Assesments. Assessamenta. As soon as. Quam
cito. To attempt. Attemptare. To attach. Attachiare. An attachment.
Attachiamentum. To attorn. Attornare. An Attornment. Attornamentum. To make an
Attornie. Constituere attornatum polo (quod ponc loco) attorn. Availeable.
Validus. To authorize. Authorizare. An authority. Authoritas. To averr.
uificare. An averment. uificaco^. To award or issue writs. Emanare vel dirige
bria. B. B. A Bagg. Baga. A Bailey. Ballius. A Bayliwick. Ballia. A Banckrupt.
Decoctor. To bargain, Barganizare. A bargain. Bargania. A Barrel.
Barellus-cadus. A Bar. Barra. A Barretor. Barrectator. Barretrie. Barrataria.
A Bastard. Bastardus. Battles, in Colleges. Refectus. A Bedel. Bedellus.
Before, before that. Ante anteqm. Behoof. Interesse opus. To betake. Tradere.
Beacons. Signa. Behind in payment. Aretro. Behind a house. Pone domu. A Bill.
Billa. A By-Law. Ordinaco^, plebiscitum. Blancks. Spacia. Borough goods. Bona
municipalia. Botes. v. ante Estovers. Breeding, or breed of Cattle. Incrm. Co.
Entr. 361. Brocage. Trausacco^. brocagium. Bullion. Bullio. Da. 20. A bundle.
Bundellus. A Butt of Wine. Butta Vini. C. C. A Capcion. taking. Capco^. A
Captain. Capitaneus. To carry, a carriage. Cariare, cariagim. A Carier.
Tabellarius. Vector. A Cart. a Cart load. Caruca. carectata. A Castle. Castrum.
A Caveat. Cautela. To Challenge. Calumpniare. A Challenge. Calumpnia. A
Chaldron. Celda. A Chamber. Cama. Champarty. Cambipartia. A Charter party of a
freightment. Carta partita. de affrectamento. Chimny-mony. Fornagiu. Women's
Churchings. Puerperarum. gratitudines. To claim. a claym. Clamare. clameum.
Clayed. a claying. Argillat. Argillaco^. A Clause. Clausula. A Cognisor,
cognisee. Cognitor, recognitor, cognizatus. To comfort. Comtortare. To common.
a Commoner. co^icare. co^iarius. To compass. Compassare. Comprised. Comprisat.
A Committee. Comitia To confederate. Confederare. To convey. a Conveiance.
Conveiare. Conveiancia. To confirm. a Confirmation. Confirmare. confirmaco^. To
contrive. Contrivare. To conceal. Concelare. A concealment. Concelamentum.
Construed. Construct. A Constable. Constabularius. A Copartener. Coparticeps.
In Coparcenary. Coparcina. A Cord of Wood. Corda ligni. A Cotage. a Cotager.
Cotagiu. cotarius. Costs and Charges. Mise and custagia. ona and custagia.
Covin. Covina. To Counterfeit. Controface. A Croft. Croftum. A Cropp.
quodventus. Cross a River or Way. Extransuso rivuli, vel vie. Custom, Excise.
Custuma. vectigal. D. D. A Dash. Nota. A Dayrie. Vaccaria. Deemed. Existimat.
reputat. Defeasance. Defesancia. To defend. Defendere. Vnderfended. Indefensus.
Demesne. Dnicum. Defesible. Defesibilis. Default. Defalta soluco^nis. Defcus
exitus. To devise. Devisare. To Diet. diet. Diettare. Dieta. To disable.
Dishabilitare. Disabled. Dishabilitatus. Disability. Dishabilitas. A
Dispensation. Dispensaco^. Dispossessed. Dispossessionat. Disinberitance.
Exheredaco^. To Distrain. Distringe. A Distress. Districco^. To disturb.
Disturbare. A disturbance. Disturbancia. A Ditch. Fossatum. To Disseise.
Disse^ire. A Disseisor. Disse^itor. A Donor. Donator. A Donee. Donatus. Debts.
Duties. Debita, Creditapstaco^nes debentia. A Duel. Duellum. E. E. an Easement.
Aisiamentum. Each and every. Alteruter and quilt. To enure. Opare, Operari. an
Escape. Evaco^. Escapia. an Escheat. Escaeta. an Estray. Extrahura. Escuage.
Scutagiu. Esteemed. Estimation. Estimat. Estimaco^. Estovers. Estouia.
Estrepement. Estrepamentum. Estreates. Extract. Evidences. Evidencie. Excise.
Customs. Vectigal. custumae. Extortion, Extorco^. Extorcively. Extorcive. To
extend. Extendere. an Extent. Extenta. To Exchange. an Exchange. Excambiare.
Excambiu. To make an Executor. constituere executorem. F. F. A Fardel.
Fardella. a Farm, a Farmer. Firma, Firmarius. Fealty. Fidelitas. Felony,
Feleniously. Felonia, Felonice. a Felon. Felo. a Fee. Feodum. a Feodarie.
Feodarius. a Feoffor. a Feoffee. Feoffator. Feoffatus. To enfeoffe, a
Feoffment. Feoffare, Feoffamentum, First Fruits, Primitie. Fifteenths,
quinzymes. Quintedecime. a Foder, or fother. Fodera, vel Fothera. of Lead
Plumb. a Forest, a Forester. Foresta, Forestarius. To forfeit. Forisface. A
forfeiture. Forifcura. a Fold. Falda. To forbear, Abstinere. A Forbearance.
Donaco^ Diei soluco^nis. Dilaco^. Diei soluco^nis. Free bords. Feusure. 1 Fo.
146. free. Liber. libat. Furniture. Furnitura. a Furlong. Furlongus. G. G. a
Garden. Gardinu. a Gaol, a Jailer. Gaola. Gaolarius. Gapps. Dirupco^nes.
Gagers. Gaugeatores. Gleab, Gleba. Gorse. Furzes. Jampna. a Graduate.
Graduatus. a Grove, a little Grove. Grova. Grovetta. a Groom. Gromettus.
Valletus. a Grantor. a Grantee. Concessor, Concessus. a Gutter. Gutta. Guttura.
H. H. an Hamlet. Hamlettus. an Hamper. Hanaperiu. an Hayward. Bedellus. Gre.
347. To harrow. Occare, Herciare. Lex. 68. an handful. Palmata. Lex. 93. an
Heriot. Heriottum. Herbage grass. Herbagiu. herba. an Headborow. Capitlis.
pleg. Spel. 333. an Heirloom. Principaliu. Lex. 67. a quick-set-Hedge. Haia. a
dead Hedge. Sepes. Hedge wood. Busca. Homage. Homagiu. a Horse load. Su^magiu.
Hue and cry. Hutes and clam. an hundred. Hundriu. an hundredor. Hundredarius.
an husting. Hustingus. Husbandry. Husbandria. in husband like manner. More
colonico. I. I. a Jewel. Jocale. To imagine. Imaginare. To imbesel. Imbesilare.
an imbeseling. Imbesilaco^. Impeachment of waste. Impetico^ vasti. to Improve.
Appruare. an improvement. Appruaco^. Implements. Implementa. Imparlance.
Intloquela. licentia intloquendi. in the hands and employment. in manibus and
usu 1 Roll. 454. to be employed. Implicand. 1 Fo. 252. to incroach.
Incrochiare. an incroachment. Incroachiamentum. To incomber. Incombrare.
Incombrances. Incombrancie. To enclose. an enclosure. Includere. Inclausura. an
income or fine, Landa. landicinia. an income or revenue. quodventus. revenco^.
Indesesible. Indef^sibilis. To indict. an indictment. Indictare Indca^mentum.
To engage. Suscipere. To ingross. an ingrosser. Ingrossare. Ingrossator. an
inheritance. Hereditas. a disinheritance. Exheredaco^. an enlargement.
Inlargiamentum. elargaco^ To inroll. an inrolment. Irrotulare. irrotulamentu
Interest. Intessealtnatim. mutualit. Interchangeably. Inventariu. an inventory.
Opare. opari. To inure. Intvenire. To intervene. a^ialia. Spel. 383. In tacks.
Introcapta. Spel. 383. a Jointure. Junctura. a Justice. Justiciarius. a Jury.
Jurata. L. L. A Lane. Venella. a Level. Levella. a Leete. Leta. visus franc.
pleg. a Lessee. Firmarius tminarius. Captor conductor. a Lessor. or Landlord.
Locator. a Lewne. a Levy. Levina. Liable, chargeable. Onabilis, responsibilis.
In liew. in loco. compensaco^ne. Litter for Horses. Substramen. 1 Fo. 141. a
Livery of Cloth. Libatura. Livery of Seisin. Libaco^ seie^. a Load to avoid
water. Lada. Spel. 4. Lodging. Diversoriu. 1 Fo. 32. Lectus. 1 Fo. 63.
Hospiciu. 1 Fo. 74. M. M. Maintenance. Manutenencia. To maintain. Manutenere.
To manage. Administrare. a Manciple. Opsonator. Ash. 188. a Sergeant at Mace.
Serviens ad clavam. Marle, a Marlepit. Marla. Marleriu Lex. 84. To make good.
Firmam face. 2 Roll. 738. Manurance. Manuiancia. Marches of Wales. Marchie
wallie. a Mask. Masca. larva. a Market. mcatum. To marry, a marriage. Maritare,
maritagin. Mercy. mia. a Mesuage. Mesuagiu. Mean rates. Medie rate. Mean
profits. Media proficua. a Mile. Milliare. a Mystery. Misteria. a Mortgage.
Mortgagiu. a Mortuary. Mortuariu. Monthly. Menstruatim. mensatim. a Mound.
Sepimentum. Mounds. freebords. Clausure. fensure 1 Fo. 143. To Murder, Murder.
Murdrare. murdrum. N. N. Nourishing. Nutricaco^. nutrico^. O. O. An Oath.
Sacrm. Lead Oar. Ura Plumbea. an Owner. quodprietarius. a Partowner.
Partequodprietarius. Ouster le mayns. Extramanibs. 1 Fo. 166. P. P. Pales.
Pali. tabule fisse. Coke Entr. 36. To pave. Pavire. Pavements. Pavimenta.
Passage. Passagin. a Park, a Pound. Parcus. a Parcel. Parcella. a Partner.
Partiarius. particeps. a Patentee. Concessus perliras. patentes. a Piece.
Pecia. a Perch of Land. ptieata tree. To perform. a performance. pformare.
performaco^. a Phisician. Medicus. a Pillory. Pilloriu. a Pightle. Pightellum.
a Pleynt. Querela. To plead, a plea. Plitare. Plitm. Postfines. Post-fines. a
Port-Town. Villa portum hens. Preferment. Villa portuaria 1 Fo. 64. by
pretense. pferamentum. a Prison. a Prisoner. ptextu. Privity. privy. Prisona.
Prisonarius. a Privy or house of Office. Sciencia. sciens. conscius. Provender.
Cloaca. latrina. Purport. purporting. pbenda. Lex 37.49. to purchase a purchase
Purporta, purportans. a Purchaser. perquirere, perquifitum. perquisitor. a
Purpresture. Purprestura. Q. Q. a Quarre. Quarrera. a Quarter, of a quarter
quarterly. quartiu, quartialis, quartiatim. R. R. A Rate. Rata. a Rail. A
Repagulum. a Ransone. A Redepmco^. To recompense Recompensare. a recompense.
Recompensaco^. a Reeve of a Manner. ppo^itus, Manij. pfectus, Manij. Grevius,
Manij. Gravius, Manij. a Relief. Releviu. to release, a Release. Relaxare,
Relaxaco^. Remainder. remainders. Remane. Remania. To revert, a revercion.
Reutere, Reuco^. To remedy, a remedy. Remediare. Remediu. a Rental. rent.
Rentale. Redditus. Reprizes. Reprise. Reprisals. Reprisalia. Respect of Homage.
Respcu^s Homagij. To reseise. Rese^ire. a Rescous. Rescussus. Return from a
place. Reditus. Return of a Writ. Retornu. a Riot. Rout. Riota. Routa.
Royalties. Regalitates. a Robbery. Roboria. a Robe, Roba. Rough Timber.
Maeremiu impolitum. S. S. A Sack. Saccus. To Scour. Escurare. mundare.
Seasonable. Seasonabilis. Seacoals. Pitcoals. Carbones fossiles. Seams of
Coals. Cursus carbonu. To Seize. Seisin. Sei^re. Seina. To secure. Securare. a
Securing. Securantia. a Sewer. Sewera. Strays. Estrays. Extrahure. Serving of a
subpena, or other Writ. Execuco^, Servitus, Expedico^, bris. To sequester. a
sequestration. Sequestrare. Sequestraco^. Several. Seperalis. Shift. Machina.
usutia. Shifted. usut excambiat. Shrovetide. Carnispriviu. A Shop. Shopa. To
Solemnize Solempnizare. A Solemnization. Solempnizaco^. Sollars. Garrets.
Solaria. To Solicit. a Solicitor. Solicitare. Solicitator. A Soldier.
Soldarius. State. Estate. Status. a Stock. Instaurum. To have in store. here
repo^it. 1 Fo. 116. A Stack. Acervus. A Suit. Secta. To suffer. permit.
Supremacy. Supmatus. Surplusage. Surplusagiu. A Swath in Mowing. Andena. T. T.
Tail. tayled. Talliu. Talliat. A Tally. Tallia. Tenths. Decime. Tenentable.
Tenentabil. 1 Fo. 154. A Termor. Tenen. apt. 1 Fo. 154. A Lessee. tminarius. To
Thatch. Intege. straminaco^. A Thatching. Tectoriu. Thought, esteemed. Estimat.
A Title. entitled. Titlus. intitulat. A Tithing. Decenna. A Tithingman.
Decennarius. Together. together with. Insimul. simulcum. A Town. Villa.
Tobacco. Petum. nicociana. A Tobacconist. Nicocianista. Toll at Markets.
Tolnetum. Theoloniu. Toll of Corn-ground. Mulctura. A Toft. Toftum. A
Tradesman. Opifex. A Trench. Trenchia. Trustees. Fiduciarij. Turbary. Turbaria.
V. V. A Verdict. uedcm. By Virtue. by vigor or force. Virtute. Vigore. A
Voyage. Viagiu. A Victualer. Victualarius. An Vmpier. an Vmpirage. Umpirator.
Umpiragiu. a Voucher. Advocator. Spel. 23. Vouchee. Advocatus. Spel. 23. To
Vouch. A Voucher. Vocare. Vsages. Usuagia. 1 Fo. 65. Usury. Usura. Usurpation.
Usurpaco^. Vtensils. Utensilia. An Vtlary. Vtlawed. Utlagaria. Utlagat. W. W. A
Wapentage. Wapentagiu. a Warren. Warenna. To Warant. a Waranty. Warantizare.
Warantia. a Warrant. Warrantum. To Waive. a Waife. Waiviare. Waiviat. a
Wardrobe. Garderoba. War. Guerra. a Warden. Gardianus. a Churchwarden.
Gardianus ecclic. Wast. Vastum. A Were. Kidellus. Weather. Aura. 1 Fo. 135. a
Week. Weekly. Septimana. Septimanatim. A Wharf. Wharfa. Withernam. Withernamiu.
Wittingly and willingly. Scient and Voluntary. a Widraught. Latrina. Forica.
Sentina. colluviariu. Cloaca. Wreck of Sea. Wreccum maris. a Yeoman. Homo
ingenuus. Spel. 361.381.

Of Latin words.
HAving given you an Alphabet of some English words with appropriate Latin
words for the same, I present unto you a larger Alphabet of Latin words used by
our Ancestors in their Writings, and in our Law-Pleadings, whereof few or none
are found in our Dictionaries; wherein it is not my intent to mention all the
Latin words anciently used, nor of the many varieties of writing of the same,
as excambiu, excambico^, escambiu, escambia, eschangiu, excambire, eschangiare,
of Exchange; but those, most of which I conceive may fitly and properly be used
by a Clerk, with an Anglice to those which are unusual; for most of which,
especially the most unusual I have cited some of my authorities. Where there
are proper and usual Latin words, I advise a Clerk to use them, and not to use
old, improper, absurd or insignificant words. As for example.

Dangiu. danger. 1 Mon. 723. 2 Mon. 1032. Daungiu. 1 Mon. 815. piculum. Alea,
an Ally. 34 H. 6.4. Angiportus. Batteria, a Battery. Spel. 93. Fle. 65 ubaco^.
insultus. Bolla a Boul. 2 Mon 666. 1042. poculum. Branchia, a Branch, Lex. 119.
Germen. Bussellus, a Bushel. Ra. Entr. 425. 2 Ra. 684. Bushellus. Reg indic.
24.21. E. 4.52. Modiu. Carcasiu. a Carcass. Fle, 169. Cadaver. Chamberlanus a
Chamberlain, Spel. 116. Camerarius. Damma a Dam. Spel. 44.424. Agger. Daieria a
Dairy. Fle. 171, 172. Lact^^ia. Demurrare to demurr. 1 H. 7.13. Morari in lege.
Desca, a Desk. 2 Mon. 370. Pluteus. Dosserum, a Dosser Pry 105. Corbis
Dorsuaria. Fagettus, a Faggot 2 Mon. 542. fascis. Grantum, a Grant. Glan 64.
Cow. 132. concessio. Mastivus, a Mastiff-Dog. 1 Mon. 405.175. Spel. 245.
Molossus. Muttones, Weathers. 2 Co. 39. Verveces. Pagius, a Page. Mon. 816. 2
Mon. 935. Garco^. Paiare, to pay. 2 Inst. 456. Paiagia Ry. 565. solue.
soluco^nes.
Latin words used in the Law, or other ancient Writings.
A.
ABatare to abate. Abatamentum, abatement. Co. Lit. 277. Abbatia, abbathia, an
Abbey. Lex. 1. Abeyantia, abeyance. Spel. 6. Lex. 1. Abcariare, to carry away.
Dyer 70. 1 Fo. 39. Abettum, abetment. Pry. 20.33. 2 Inst. 383.386. Abbettum
Reg. 134. Abbettator. abbettare. Ra. Entr. 24. Spel. 5. Lex. 1. Abiudicare,
abindicaco^. to forindge a foringder. Abuttare to abutt. Abuttau, Spel. 7. 1
Mon. 532. 2 Mon. 998. Accessariu^. Accessory. Fin. 7. Accustumat. Accustomed.
Co. Entr. 69. Accustomat. Ra. Entr. 657. Accustomabil. Plo. 285.
Accompliamentum Accomplishment. Co. Entr. 227. Aceciam. And also quod ac etiam.
Acquietancia. acquietarc. An acquittance. To acquit. Lex. 2. Litera
acquietancialis. Ra Entr. 513. Acquisitum. a Purchase. perquisitum. Spel. 22.
Adquisitum. 2 Mon. 380. Adjacencie. things adjoining. 1. Mon. 805. Adjornare,
Adjornamentum to Adjorn. an Adjornment. Admirallus. Admiralitas. an Admiral.
the Admiralty. Lex 4. Adnullare. Adnullaco^. to Adnul. an Adnulling.
Advantagium. an Advantage. Co. Entr. 484. Advanceamentum. an Advancement. 1 Co.
78. Adventura. an Adventure. 2 Mon. 615. Adventurare. Advisare. Advisamentum.
to Advise, advice. Spel. 22. v. Avisamentum. Advocaco^. an Advouson. Advocare.
an Avowry. Aeria accipitrum. an Aerie of Hawks Fle. 9^. Afferatores. afferat.
Affeerors. affeered. Spel. 24. Lex. 41 Fo. 165. Afferestare. to afforest. Spel.
25. Lex. 5. Affri. Plough-cattle. Spel. 25. Lex. 5. Afri. Westminster. 2 cap. 18.
Affraia. an affray. Ra. Entr 662. bis. Affrectamentum. a freightment. Ra. Entr.
24. Pry. 402. Affrectat. freighted. Ra. Entr. 409. Agistare. Agistamentum. to
agist. an agistment. Spel. 26. Agreare. agreamentum. to agree. an Agreement.
Spel. 26. Lex. 5. Aisiamentum. an easement. Spel. 27. Lex. 48. Reg. 165.
Aldermannus. an Alderman. Spel. 28. Altaragiu. Altarage. Spel. 32. Lex. 6.
Allottat. allotted. Ra. Entr. 447. Altar. altaco^. to alter. an altering. Ra.
Entr. 413. Co. Lit. 357. 1 Co. 109. Amerciamentum. amerciat. an Amercement.
amerced. Spel. 34. Pry. 53. Amortizare. Amortizaco^. to amortize. an
Amortization. Spel. 34. Lex. 7. Ra. Entr. 68. 137. Amotibilis. Removeable.
Brac. 12. sepe. Anchoragiu. Anchorage. Lex. 7. Apparentia. idem quod
comparencia. an appearance. Ra. Entr. 347. Doctor and Stu. 30. Apparella.
decrements in Commons. Vet. Entr. 240. Appellum. appellare. An appeal. to
appeal. Brac. 140. Appellans. appellat. An apellant. an appellee. Spel. 42.
appellaco^. Co. Lit. 287. Appendiciu. a dependence. an addition. Mon
553.555.606. Appertinencia. 2 Mon. 588. Aperporcona^re. apporco^namentum. to
apportion. an apportionment. Lex. 8. Apprenticius. an Apprentice. Spel. 43.
Pry. 13. Apprentisagiu. an Apprentiship. Spel. 64. Apprenticiamentum. 2. Fo.
11. Apquodpriaco^. apquodpriare. an appropriation, or impropriation.
appropriate. Lex. 8. Apquodprianciis. 1 Mon. 942. Apquodpriamentum. 37 Ass. 17.
Approbator. apquodbare. An approver. to approve. Lex. 8. v. Probator, Appruare.
appruamentum. to improve. an improvement. Reg. 8. Lex. 8. 2 Mon. 255. Decime de
araciis equorrum. of the Races (or breed) of Horses. 2 Mon. 967. Aranatus.
aranamentum. arained. an araignment. 2 Inst. 48. to arrain an Assize. arraniare
assia^m. Spel. 21. Ry. 403. bis. Arbitrator. arbitriu. an Arbitrator. an award
or Arbitrament. Awardium. Spel. 63. Archa in claustro. an Arch in a Cloister. 1
Mon. 933. Archeria. Archerie. Co. Lit. 107. Aretro and insolut. behind and
unpaid. Armirarii linearum armiturarum. Armorers of Linen Armory.
Merchantaylors of London. Moo. 576. Arraiare. arraiamentum. to array. an array.
Co. Lit. 156. Arraiatores. Lex. 9. Arrectat. rectatus. suspected. accused.
Spel. 53. Arrentare. arrentaco^. To rate a Rate or Rent. Reg. 252.254, 255. Ry.
302. Stat. de Marl. ca. 11. Stat. de progativa. ca. 7. Arreragia. Arrerages.
Spel. 53. Arrestare. arrestum. to arrest. an arrest. Reg. 106. Spel. 53.58.
Pry. 73. Arestare. Arestum. arestaco. Pry. 21.24.27. Spel. 53. Arrivare. to
arrive. 1 Co. 28. Articulare. articlus. to article. an Article. Lex. 9. Arurae.
Messurae. falcaco^nes. Earings or Ploughings. Mowings. Reapings. Brac. 35.
Assaia and Assisa panis. the assay and Assise of Bread, etc. Lex. 10. Ry. 659.
Assaisiator cambiorum Regis. Lex. 10. Assaiare. Pry. 196. Assartum. assartare.
an assart. to assart. Lex. 9. Carta de foresta. ca. 4. Ry. 2.21.50. Assarta.
tot acre. 1 Mon. 403.483.513.814. assartaco^. 1. Mon. 585. Essartum. Spel. 240.
Assemblare. assemblaco^. to assemble. an assembly, or assembling. Assisa. an
Assise. Spel. 56. Lex. 10. Assisare mensuras. Ry. 569. Redditus assise. 2 Mon.
523.614. Assurare. assurancia. To assure. an assurance. Bri. 16. Assecurare.
Reg. 107. Spel. 55. 2. Mon. 653.659. Attachiare, attachiamentum. to attatch. an
attatchment. Spel. 58. Lex. 12. Attemptare. to attempt. 1. Co 80. Attentare.
Reg. 40.41. Attincts. an attaint. Spel. 58. Lex. 13. Pry. 31.47. Attinctus. one
attainted. Attornatus. an Atotorny. Atturnatus. Spel. 58. Scriptum
Attornatoriu. a Letter of Attorney. Co. Entr. 683. Attornare, attornamentum. to
Attorn. an Attornment. Co. Lit. 309. Brac. 41. Averagiu. Average. Spel. 60.
Lex. 14. Averia. Cattle. Spel 60. Avisamentum. advice. Ry. 43.299.601 Pry.
85.230. Avisat. Ry. 303. vide advisare.
B.
Baccalaureus artiu. a Bachelor of Arts. Wase Dict. Baga a Bagg. Lex. 29. Coco
170. Pry 49. bis. Bagea. a Badg or Cognizance. West, licenses. 550. Baia. an
Haven. in dict. a bay of Building. Co Entr. 707. Balancea. a Balance. Pry 196.
Bilanx, in Dict. Balliu. a Bail. Spel. 69. Ballivus. Balliva. a Baily. a
Bayliwick. Spel. 67. Pry. 14.51.53. Balus. a Bale of goods. Ra. Entr. 15. Fle
33. Bancus. a Bench. Banda Militaris. a Band of Soldiers. Spel. 70. Banna.
Banes of Matrimony. Ra. Entr. 178 Cow. 33. Lex. 15. Banneriu. a Banner. Spel.
70. Banerettus. a Banneret. Spel. 71. Bannitus. Bannico^. Banished. a
Banishment. Reg. 312. Spel. 73. Barcaria. a Sheep-house, Tan-house, or
Heath-house. Ra. Entr. 69.697. Barca. a Bark. Spel. 75. Barellus a Barrel. Ra.
Entr. 16.204.653. Het. 93. 1 Bull. 126. Barga. a Barge. in Dict. Spel. 73.
Bargea. Co. Entr. 536. Barganizare. Bargania. Barganizaco^. to bargain. a
bargain. a bargaining. Baro. a Baron. Spel. 76. a Baronie. baronia, baronatus.
1. Mon. 851. Baronettus-a Baronet. Spel. 88. Barra. a bar, to an Action, the
bar of a Court. Co. Lat. 373. Ra. Entr. 654. Lex. 17. Barrand. Ra. Entr. 619.
Barrat Plit Cor 91. quod pcludend, pclu^s. Barrectator. barratria. a Barretor.
Barratry. 8. Co. 36, 37. In epistola. Fol. 5. Bartona. a Barton. Spel. 92.
Bassus. low. 8 Co. 138. Bastardus. bastarda. bastardia. A Bastard. bastardy.
Lex. 17. Brac. 12. Spel. 93. Batus. batellus. a Boat, a little Boat. Lex. 17.
Ra. Entr. 3. 2 Mon. 281.1005. Spelman. 931. Batellagiu. 1 Mon. 754. Beconagiu.
Beconage. Spel. 94. Bedellus. bedellaria. a Bedel, a bedellary, Lex. 18. Ra.
Entr. 191. 8 Co. 11. 2 Ra. 73. Beneficiu. beneficiatus. a Benefice, beneficed.
Beneficiarentur. Ra. Entr. 599. Billio. Bullion. Davis 20. Billettum. a Bill or
Billet of delivery of a Writ. Stat. de Westminster. 2.39. Ry. 121. Fle. 151. Blada.
Corn. tree bladate. Ra. Entr. 561. Bogetta, a Budget. Ra. Entr. 404. Boscus.
Wood growing, a Wood. Bosculus, a little Wood. 2 Mon. 239.242. Lex. 20.
Boscaria. 2 Mon. 304. Botha. a Booth or Stall. Lex. 21. Bovatatre. an Oxgang of
Land. Spel. 104. Boveria. an Ox house. Lex. 21. 2 Mon. 210. Bovarii. Oxkeepers
1 Mon. 1021. Boviclus. a Bullock. Breve. a Writ. Spel. 104. Brocagiu. Brocage.
Fo. 162. Brocarii. Brokers. Lex. 21. Broccator. broctagiu. Ry. 593.597. Bruera.
Heath-ground. Bullaria aque salse. a Bullery of Salt Water. Co. Entr. 324.
Buollariis Pry 180. Bultellum. bultel. refuse of Meal. Lex. 22. Bunda. a bound.
Spel. 102. Lex. 21. Bundellus. a bundle. Co. Entr. 416. Pry. 49. Burgagiu. a
burgage. Ra. Entr. 101.486. Burglaria. a Burglarie Spel. 110. Burgus,
Burgensis. a Borough, a Burgess. Lex. 22. Bursarius. a Burser of a College.
Busca. Hedging-Wood. Reg. 105. bis. Butta. a Butt. Ra. Entr. 159.168.
C.
Calcetum. via calceata. a Causie, a way causied. Spel. 116. Calcifurni. a
Lime-kil. Spel. 116. Calendariu. calendare. a Table or repertory, to make
repertories. Ry. 572.573. Calumniare, calumnia. to challenge, a challenge.
Spel. 116. Co. lit. 155. Cambipartia. champertie. Co. Lit. 368. Cambiparticeps.
A Champertor. Spel. 117. Cambiu. a change. Lex. 10. Cambire denar. Ry. 527.
litere combitorie. Pry. 146. Camera. a Chamber. Spel. 117. Cameralis, 2 Mon.
338. Campio. a Champion. Spel. 118. Canopiu. a Canopie. 10. Co. 130.
Cancellare, cancellatura. to cancel, a cancelling. Fle. 426. Cappa. a Cap.
Capa. a Cope. Spel. 137. Coco. 95. Capellania. a Chapelry. Lex. 26. Capellaria.
1 Mon. 577. Capitaneus. a Captain. Ra. Entr. 492. Capitlm. a Chapter. Decanus
and capitlm. a Dean and Chapter. Carcare, carcat. to freight, freighted. Ry.
26.891.184. Pry. 112. Carcare and discarcare. Ry. 26. Caristia. dearness. Pry.
376. Ry. 527. Caruca, carectata. a Cart, a Cart-load. Caruca signata. a
Car-room. 1 To. 525. Carrus. a Car, Coach, or Chariot. Ra. Entr. 538. Co. Entr.
526. Lex. 19. Cariare. cariagiu. to carry, a Carriage. Ra. Entr. 115.538. 2
Mon. 196.231. Pry. 60. Cassare. cassaco^. to quash. an abatement. Catalla.
Chattels. Spel. 152. Celda. a Chaldron. v. Measures. Chacea, chaciare. a Chase,
to chase or drive. Cigninota. a Swan-Mark. 7 Co. 17. Cirographum finis. the
Cirograph of a Fine. 5 Co^ 39. Cirographat. Ry. 19. Circumhabitantes. near
dwellers. Ry. 401. Civilista. a Civil-Lawyer. Dyer 267. Clameus, clamare. a
claim, to claim, Spel. 160. Co. Lit. 107.291. Clava. a Mace. Clerimonia.
privilege of Clergy. 2 Infr. 635. Cloca. coclariu. a Clock, a Clock-house.
Spel. 160. 2 Mon. 210. Dict, Clocca. Coadunaco^. an assembling together. 9. Co.
56. Cofeoffati- Joynt-Feoffees. Co. Ent. 217. Cofera. a Cofer. Ry. 177. cof^is.
2 Mon. 473. a Coferer. coferarius. Fle. 78. Cognitor. cognizatus. a Conusor, a
Conusee. Cognizarius. Spel. 273. Cognico^. a Cognizance. Coifa. a Coif. Spel.
99.162. Lex. 31. Baro de gradu de la coife. Cokettum cokettat. a cocket,
cocketted. Reg. 279 Pry. 394. Lex. 30. Collecta oviu. a Flock of Sheep. Reg.
120. Collecta bladi. an heap of Corn. 1 Mon. 782. Colonellus. a Colonel. Spel.
219. Comfortare. to comfort. Ra. Entr. 486. confortare. 1 Mon. 526. Comitiva
Soldariorum. a Band or Troop of Soldiers. Co. Entr. 436. Comitativa. Stat. de
malefco^ribs in parcis. Commensare. co^mensaco^. to commence. a beginning.
Co^menfalis, co^mensale. a Boorder. board, or diet. 2 Mon. 406. Co^muniarius.
Ash. 188. quodco^ibs. quod comensali. Vet. Entr. 240. Co^missio.
co^missionarius. a Commission, a Commissioner. Lex. 32. Co^munia, pasture,
turbarie, estouiorum piscarie. Common of Pasture, turbarie, estovers, piscarie.
Lex. 32. Co^muniare. to Common. Ra. Entr. 539. a Commoner. Co^iarius.
Comperassare. to compass. Co. Entr. 351. Concelare, concelamentum. to conceal,
a concealment. Fle. 22, 23. Concern, concernen. concnat. to concern,
concerning, concerned. Conquestus. a Conquest, Conquestari. Pry. 413.
Constabularius. a Constable. Spel. 170. Lex. 35. Constabularia,
constabulariatus. Pry. 71. Contiguatur. is near. 2 Mon. 244. Contrariare. to do
contrary. Ra. Entr. 531. Co. Lit. 107. Contraplacitum. a Counterplea.
Contraveniens. offending. going against. Ra. Entr. 467. Contrivare. to
contrive. Ra Entr. 207. Controface. controfcu^ra. to counterfeit, a
counterfeiting. Ry. 542. West offenses Fol. 115. ter. Controllamentum. a
controlment. Contrarotulator. (...) Controller. Fle. 78. Controrotlus. a
Counter-Roll. Fle. 173. Conveiare. conveiancia. to convey, a conveyance. Co.
Entr. 83. Cooptura. a covering. coverture. Coparcenaria. Coparcenary.
Coparticeps. a Coparcener. Co. Entr. 477.711. Copia. ad copiand. A Copy, to
copy. Co. Lit. 57. 1 Mon. 597. Copicia. a Copice. Corda. a Cord. a String. 1
Mon. 850. bis. 2 Mon. 349. Corda ligni. Co. Entr. 36. Arcus sive corda. Lex.
20. Corneriu. Angulus, a Corner. 1 Mon. 408.685.817. 2 Mon. 1038. Costera
maris. the Seacoast. Magna Carta. 23.10. Co. 138. 2 Inst. 38. Spel. 180.
Costera Montis, 1 Mon. 835. su^mitas costere, 1 Mon. 886. Cotagiu Cotarius.
Coterellus. a Cotage, a Cotager, Spel. 180. Covina, covinosus. Covin. covinous.
deceitful. Co. Lit. 357. Ra. Entr. 207. Cranare, Cranagiu. to Crane. Cranage.
Ra. Entr. 3. Lex. 39. Creca, Crecum, a Creek Ra. Entr. 3. Plo. 1. Lex. 39.
Croftum. a Croft. Spel. 182. Cunagiu. coinage. 8 Co. 21. Cuneus. Coin. Cow. 62.
Coinagiu Plo. 328. Cunicularu. a Conigree. Fle. 160. Curtilagiu. a Curtilage.
Spel. 187. Curtina. a Curtine. Ra. Entr. 152. Fle. 71. Custagiu. Custus. Costs.
Spel. 188. Reg. 112. Pry. 49.50. Custuma. Custom for Wares. 8 Co. 126. 11. Co.
98. Spel. 188. Custumaria. te^nta. tenentes custumarii. Copiholds. Copiholders.
Ra. Entr. 131. Co. Entr. 645.657. Custumabilit. Ra. Entr. 137.
D.
Damma. a Dam. Spel. 44.424. Lex. 8. Agger. Data. the Date of a Deed, of a
Writ. Brac. 188. ter. Deadvocare. to disavow. Spel. 194. Debatum. a debate.
Reg. 111. br judi^. 173. Spel. 194. Decanus, Decanatus. a Deau, a Deanery.
Spel. 104 Decenna, Decennarius. a Titbing, a Tithiugman. Decimaco^, decime.
Tithing, Tithes. 1 Mon. 106. Declarare, declaraco^. to declare, a Declaration.
1 Fo. 2.36.208. Defalta, a default. Reg. iudic. 1. Defesancia, a Defeisance.
Co. Entr. 147. Deforciare, deforciator, deforciamentum. to deforce, a
deforcior, a deforcement. Lex. 42. Demanda, demandare, a demand, to demand.
Pry. 278. Westminster. 2.9. Co. Lit. 281. Doctor, and Stu. 57. Denarata reddit. a
penny rent. Reg. 1. Denarat olei. a penniworth of Oil. Spel. 198. Denlzatus. a
Denizen. Lex. 43. Departura, departire. a departure, to depart. Co. Entr. 295.
Ra. Entr. 162. Depasturare, depasturaco^. to depasture. a depasturing.
Desponsalia- Marriage. Devisare, devisum, devisaco^, Devisamentum. to devise, a
device. Ra. Entr. 486. 1 Co. 80. Dimidiu unius acre. half an Acre. dimidia
acra, hida, piscaria. 1 Mon. 469. 2 Mon. 641.643.968. Diraco^nare,
diraco^namentum. to disprove, a disproof. Plit Cor. 28. 2 Mon. 26. Spel. 204.
Discarcare, to unlade. Ra. Entr. 3.409. Lex. 44. Dishabilitare, to disable.
Disseisire, disseisina, disseisitor. to disseise, a disseisin, a disseisor.
Disparagare, disparagaco^. to disparage, a disparagement. Spel. 105.
Disturbare, disturbaco^. disturbancia. to disturb, a disturbance. Divisa, a
bound. Reg. 157. Dividenda, a dividend. Stat. de escaetor. Ry. 230. Divorciu,
divorce. Lex. 45. A diu, for a long time. Dola, a dole. Spel. 207. Lex. 46.
Dolea. Ry. 185. bis. Dominicum, demesne. Spel. 214. Donator, donatorius. a
Donor. Brac. 11.13, 14. sepe. Co. Lit. 123. Donatus, a Donee. 2 Co. 13.
Draparius, a Draper. Ry. 294. Drana, a Dram.
E.
Ebba, an Ebb. Ebba and Fluctus. Brac. 255.338. bis. Flumen and ebba. Fle. 216.
Fluvius and ebba. Fle. 383. Effectualis, effectualit. effectual, effectually.
Elargiare. elargaco^, elargiamentum. to enlarge, an enlargment. Reg. 250.255.
bis. 8 Co. 109. Emenda, emende. an amends. Hill. 4. E. 3. plito. 25. 1 Fo. 360,
361. Spel. 230. Endurare. to endure. Co. Entr. 205. Engrallat. ingrailed. 1
Mon. 930. Enitia pars. the elder sisters part of Lands. Co. Lit. 166. Kit. 148.
Equitatura. traveling Furniture. Reg. 100. 2 To. 160. Escapia, escapiare. an
escape, to escape. Doctor and Stu. 16. 1 Fo. 30. Ra. Entr. 583. Co. Entr. 532.
Escaetor, escaeta. an Escheator, an Escheat. Pry. 66. Cow. 102. Spel. 239.
Escurare, to scour. Eseripta, Escripts. Co. Entr. 135.146. Esculenta,
poculenta. Meat, Drink. Ry. 48. Eskippare, to ship. Ra. Entr. 409.
Establiamentum, an establishment. Ry. 195. Estallagiu, an instalment, 2 Mon.
26. Ry. 333. Estouia, Estovers. 3 Inst. 229. Spel. 202. Lex. 51. Estrepamentum,
Estrepement. Cow. 104. Spel. 243. Evidentia, Evidence. Co. Lit. 283. Lex. 51.
Excambiu, excambire. an Exchange, to exchange. Excambiator, an Exchanger.
Exclusa, a Sluice. Ra. Entr. 9. Reg. 96. bis. Exclusagia molendini. 1 Mon.
587.720.760. 2 Mon. 8 Emissariu. Expirare, expiraco^. to expire, an expiring or
ending. Exples. esplees. Profits. 6 Co. 58. Extenta, an extent. Cow. 107. Lex.
52. Extorco^, Extorcive. Extorcion. Extorcively. Extorta pecunia. 1 To. 544.
Extractum, extracta. an Estreate. Cow. 105. Ry. 183.285. Lex. 51. Pry. 30.216.
F.
Falda, Faldagium. a fold, faldage. Spel. 248. Lex. 53. Fardella, a Fardel. Ra.
Entr. 15. Fle. 33. Lex. 53. Farundella. tree. A farundel, or Fardel of Land.
Plo. 78. Lex. 54. Felo, felonia, Felonice, a Felon, Felony. feloniously. Spel.
252. Lex. 54. Fensura, a Fence. Feodum, feodarius, feodi firma. A fee, a
feodarie, a Fee-farm. Spel. 263. Lex. 54. Feoffamentum, feoffator, Feoffatus. a
Feoffment, a Feoffor, a Feoffee. Spel. 263. Lex. 55. Co. Entr. 484. Feria, a
Ferry. Spel. 264. A Fair. Spel. 264. Ferlingata tree. A quarter of a Yard-Land.
Lex. 55. Ferdellum tree. Spel. 250. v. Fardel. Fidelitas, Fealty. Spel. 267.
Filare, filaciu. Filazarius. To file, a file, a filazer. Spel. 271. Lex. 56.
Filum aque. The middle of the breadth of a River. Davis 57. 2 Mon. 209. Ra.
Entr. 666. Finare, to refine. Plo. 320. Finis, a fine, or concord of Lands.
Spel. 272. Lex. 56. For an income in Lands. Spel. 273. For an offense. Spel.
273. Firma, firmarius, ad firmam tradere. A Farm, a Farmer, to let to farm.
Spel. 274. Flotans, Floting. Co. Entr. 536. Pry. 85. Flota naviu. Pry. 118.121.
Focale, Fuel. Pry. 217. focagiu. Harth money. Spel. 301. Foderum, Fodder. Spel.
282. Cow 117. Foragiu. Forage. Lex. 57. Fodera plumbi. a foder or fother of
Lead. Fogagiu, Fog. Spel. 283. Lex. 57. Forcia, force. Ra. Entr. 73. Cow. 117.
2 Inst. 182. Spel. 249. Foresta, forestarius. a forest, a forester. Spel. 286.
Lex 58. Forgea, a Forge. Co. Lit. 115. 1. Mon. 884. Forisface, forisfcu^ra. to
forfeit, a forfeiture. Spel. 292. Forma, a fourm. 1 Mon. 951. 2 Mon. 729.
Forprisa, forprisat. A forprise, forprised. Lex. 59. Forstallare, forstallator.
To forestal, a forestaller. forstallamentum. Spel. 294. 2 To. 79. Co. Lit. 161.
Davis 38. Ry. 26.29. Fortunare, to happen. Co. Entr. 483. Fossatum, a Ditch.
Spel. 295. Framea, a Frame. fabrica. Franchesia, a Franchise. franchisat. Dyer
100. Francus bancus, free Bench. Brac. 309. francbordus. 2 Mon. 241. Lex. 60.
Visus franc pleg. View of Franc-pledge. Spel. 296. Friscus, mariscus friscus.
fresh marsh. terra jacens frisca and ad warect, Land lying fresh and fallow.
Spel. 300. Lex 60.163. Frustrare, to make void. frustratoria dilaco^. Ra. Entr.
603. Furlongus, a Furlong. Spel. 302. Lex. 61. Furnitura, Furniture. Co. Entr.
13.
G.
Galo, galona, a Gallon. Spel. 305. Gaola, gaolarius, a Jayl, a Jayler. Garba,
a Sheaf. Garcio, a Page. Spel. 309. Ry. 92.156.177. Garderoba, a Wardrobe. 2
Inst. 265. Ry. 101. Garderobarius. 2 Inst. 462. Garlanda, a garland. Spel. 67.
Gartiu. a Garter. Spel. 310. Gistum, Yest, Barm. Spel. 317. Gleba, tra
glebalis. Glebe, Glebe Land. Ra. Entr. 671. Spel. 318. Graduatus, a Graduate.
8. Co. 113. Grangia, a Grange. Spel. 322. Grometus a Groom. 1. Co. 29.
Valletus. Cow. 132. Grossum, grossus. a gross, gross. se^it ut de grosso,
gross arbores. Ry 408. gross naves. Pry. 85. vendico^ in grosso. Ry. 400.
Grova, grovetta. a Grove, a little Grove. Plo. 269. Co. Entr. 111. Guarda,
Guardianus. a Ward, a Warden. Cow. 128. Spel. 324. Guerra. War. modo guerrino.
in Warlike manner. Ry. 246.253: Spel, 314. Pry. 61. Castrum de guerra. Ry. 431.
Guilda, a Guild or fraternity. 8 Co. 125. Gunna, a Gun. Spel. 101. Pace Regis
36. Guttera. a Gutter. Ra. Entr. 129. Reg. 127.199. 5 Co. 100. Guttura. Ra.
Entr. 10. Co. 141.
H.
Haia, a Quickset-Hedge. Reg. 105. bis. Spel 128. Hamlettum, hamleta. a Hamlet.
Spel. 330. Hanapiu. an hamper. Cow. 135. Spel. 331. Lex. 30. Harepipa. an
Harepipe, Ra. Entr. 405. Haspa, an hasp. Co. Lit. 48. Spel. 331. Brac. 40.
Hatchettus, an Hatchet. 4 Inst. 313. Heraldus, an Herald. Spel. 336. Herbagiu.
Herbage. Spel. 346. Ra. Entr. 541. Herciaree, to Harrow. Lex 68. Hereditas, an
inheritance. hereditamenta, Hereditaments. Heriottum, an Heriot. Cow. 135.8.
Co. 103. Hernesia, harnesia. Harness, Fnbr. 94. Ry. 302. Fle. 78. Pry. 21. Hida
tree. an Hide of Land. hidagiu. Spel. 352. Hitha, an Hyth. Lex. 70. Homagiu,
homage. Spel. 356. Cow. 138. Hous-bote and Heybote. Brac. 407. v. int.
direcco^nes ad plitand. Scripta. Hundredum, hundredarius, an hundred, an
hundreder. Spel. 364. Reg. 178. Husbandria, husbandry. Ra. Entr. 162.421. Dyer.
35. Hustingus, an husting. Spel. 369. Hutesiu. and clamor. Hue and Cry. Spel.
370. Cow. 141. Lex. 70.
I.
Jampnum, Furze or Gorse. Lex. 70. Jampnorum. of Furze. Imbefilare, to imbesil.
Ra. Entr. 186.446. Plo. 118. Imbreviare, to reduce into Schedules or writing.
Co. Lit. 155. 3 Inst. 228. Inbreviare. Spel. 373. Impannellare, to impannel.
Imparcare, to impound. imparcamentum. 1 Mon. 119. Inparcamentum. Spel. 373.
Imperpetuu, for ever. Impetere, impetico^. to impeach. an impeachment, or
hinderancc. Pry. 34, 35. Implementa, implements. Implacitare, to implead, to
sue. Impoisonare, to poison. 2 Inst. 634. Importancia, importance. Co. Entr.
204. Imposterum, hereafter. Imprisa, an enterprise. Ry. 267.287. Interprisa.
Ra. Entr. 467. Imprisonare, imprisonamentum. to imprison, an imprisonment.
Includere, inclausura. to enclose, an enclosure. Incombrare, incombrancia, to
incumber, an encumbrance. 1 To. 536. Incumbramentum. Brac. 261.392.
Incrochiare, to incroach. Spel. 375. Cow. 143. Incurramentum, an incurring. Ry.
204.205. Indebitatus. indebted. Indefecibilis, indefesible. Co. Entr. 64.83.
Indefensus, undefended. Lex. 71. Indentura, an Indenture. Indictare,
indictamentum. to indite, an indictment. Spel. 375. Fle. 30. Lex. 49.
Indistringibilis, not distrainable, 2 Inst. 402. Indivisum, held in common, not
divided, Lex. 71. Infossatus, ditched in, 1 Mon. 474. Ingrossare, ingrossator.
to ingross, an Ingrosser. Cow. 145. Spel. 382. Lex. 30. Inlagaco^. inlagatus.
inlawing, inlawed. Brac. 131.421. Spel. 382. Inquestum, inquisico^. An Inquest,
an Inquisicion. 8 Co. 108. Instaurum, instauramentum. a Stock, a stocking. Fle.
157.159. 1 Mon. 548.924.112.604. Instaurata. tra. Brac. 87. instaurare. Fle.
164. Intantum. So much, so far. Reg. 94.97. sepe. 106. In tantum. Reg. 92.94.
Interco^municare, to intercommon. Interpugnare, to fight together. Ry. 156.
Invadiare, invadiaco^. to Mortgage, a Mortgaging. 1 Mon. 478. Ry. 272. Glan.
79. Lex. 73. Inventariu, an Inventory. Cow. 146. Ry. 148. Lex. 73. Inventoriu.
Fle. 159. Investitura, investire. An investiture, to invest. Cow. 146. Spel.
385. Investaco^. West Sect. 565. Jocalia, Jewels. Pry. 142.160. Ra. Entr. 486.
Fle. 341. Irrotulare, irrotlaco^. irrotlamentum. to enrol, an enrolling, an
enrolment. Cow. 145. Spel. 387. Junctura, a Jointure. Cow. 146. Lex. 73.
Jurata, a Jury. Cow. 147. Spel. 397. Lex. 73.
K.
Kaia, caiagiu, a Kay, cayage. Ry. 400. Spel. 419. Lex. 75. Kidellus, a wear.
2 Inst. 38. Mag. carta Cap. 23. Spel. 420. Lex. 75.
L.
Laborarius, a Labourer. operarius. Landa, a Lawnd, or open Field. Lex. 77.
Fle. 90. Ry. 636. Launda. 2 Mon. 969. Lasta, a Last. Spel. 426. Pry. 25.
Lesura, a Leasowe. 1 Fo. 144. Leta, a Leet. Reg. 134. Spel. 431. Levabilis,
leviable. Ra. Entr. 513. a leavy. levina. Levella, a level. Co. Entr. 293.
Libellus, a Libel. Lex. 80. Librata, a pound-weight. Liberatura, a Livery. Cow.
162. Spel. 445. Liberata. West. indictments, 183. Ligeus, ligeancia, a
Liege-man. allegiance. Spel. 448. Lex. 8. Co. postnati 2. Lista, a List. Spel.
119.449. Logia, a Lodge. 1 Mon. 759.880. 2 Mon. 610. Lodgia, Co. Entr. 71.
Loppat, lopped. Plo. 469. Ra. Entr. 490.
M.
Maeremiu, Timber. Co. Lit. 53. Lex. 81. Mahemiu, mahemiare, a maim, to maim.
Cow. 164. Co. Lit. 126. Mutilare. Maniu. domus Manialis, a Manor, a
Mannor-house. Cow. 166. 2 Mon. 348. Mansum, Mansura. a dwelling. Cow. 167. Ra.
Entr. 610. Reg. 165. 1 Mon. 529.598. Manco^nes. 1 Mon. 523.330. Manutenere,
manutenentia, manutentor. to maintain, maintenance, a maintainer. Lex. 83. Ry.
600. Ra. Entr. 24. Marcare, to take by reprisal. 2 To. 185. Marchiare, to
march. Ra. Entr. 413. Marchie Wallie, the marches of Wales. Cow. 168. Lex. 21.
Pry. 33. Marlera, Marle. Carta de foresta. Ra. Entr. 696.697. Marlia. Reg.
indic. 23.25. tra marlanda, vel melioranda. 1 Mon. 722. Masca, a Masque. 1 Fo.
89. Medius, mesne. mean. Menialis serviens, a menial servant. Memorandum,
memoranda. Be it remembered. Remembrances. Remembrancie. Menestrallus, a
Minstrel. Co. Lit. 59.94. Ry. 553. Fle. 81. Mera, a Mere. Spel. 425. Lex. 21.
Mercatum, a Market. Cow. 169. Mercator, mcandiza, mcimonia, mcatura,
mcandizare. a Merchant, Merchandise, Wares, Trading, to Trade. Merceria,
Mercery. Pry. 197. Mercerus, a Mercer. Mesuagiu a Mesuage. Co. Lit. 56. Minera,
minetarius, a Mine, a Minter. 2 Inst. 578. Minerarius, 2 To. 547. Mise, Costs.
Cow. 174. Lex. 86. Misprico^, a Misprision. Misteriu, a Mystery, a Trade.
Mixtilio, Maslin, or Meslin. Wheat and Rye. Mora, Moorish ground. Morina, the
Murrain. Fle. 169. Morsellatim, by Morsels. Mortgagiu, a Mortgage. Ra. Entr. 3.
Co. Entr. 114. Co. Lit. 205. Morganizand. Ra. Entr. 4. Mossetum, Mossy-Ground.
Mossa, a Moss. 2 Mon. 632.636. Multura, Toll for Greist. Reg. 153.127. Lex. 88.
Mulctura, Ra. Entr. 9. Murdrum, murditor, murderare. Murder, a Murderer. to
murder. Ra. Entr. 11. Cow. 177. Brac. 134. Cow. 84. Co. Entr. 24. Multrum,
mustraco^. a Muster, Mustering.
N.
Nimietas ponderis, too much weight. Reg 100. Noca tree, a nook of Land. 2 Mon.
254. bis. 331. Noka tree Lex. 90. Noctuatim, Nightly, Night, by Night. West.
Indictments, 239.
O.
Ora, Oar. 2 Inst. 579. Ura.
P.
Paccum mcerie, a Pack of Mercery Wares. Pry. 197. Comitatus Palatinus, a
County Palatine. Spel. 168. Palus, a Pale. Pry. 383. Ra. Entr. 646. Paliciu
parci. 2 Mon. 420. Palmata, an handful. Lex 93. Panellum Jur. a Panel of
Jurors. Lex. 93. Pandoxator, Pandoxatoriu. a Brewer, a Brewhouse. Parcellare,
to parcel out. Ra. Entr. 2. Parcus, parcarius. a Park, a Pound, the Keeper of a
Park. Ra. Entr. 75. plita Cor. 18. Stat. de malefco^ribs. in parcis. Pynfolda.
Lex 119. titlo. Stray. Pardonare, pardonaco^. to pardon, a pardon. Passare,
passagiu. to pass, a passage. Co. Entr. 521. Brac. 163. 8. Co. 46. Ry. 258.344.
Lex 94. passagiu ultra aquam, a Ferry. Reg. 2. Fnbr. 191. Pasturaco^,
depasturaco^, pasturare, depasturare. a pasturing, to depasture. Pavilo, a
Pavilion. Pry 196. sepe. Pegasus, a Post-horse. Noy. 114. Performare,
performaco^. to perform, a performance. Perquirere, perquisi^o^, perquisitum,
perquisitor. to purchase, a purchase, a purchasor. Pertinentia, an
appurtenance. Brac. 36. 1 Mon. 555.586. ter. Picagiu, Picage. Pightellum, a
Pightel. Fo. 144. Lex 96. Pilloriu, a Pillory. Stat. de Collistrigio. Vet.
intr. 107. Pilloria. Ra. Entr. 359.540. Pilloralis. Brac. 101. Co. Lit. 287.
Pipa de allome, A Pipe of Allome. Ra. Entr. 557. 1 Bull. 126. Lex. 30. Placea
tree, a place of Land. Ra. Entr. 145.155.539.618. Placea prati. 1 Mon. 179. 2
Mon. 419. Placea bosci. 2 Mon. 310. locis and placeis. Co. Entr. 93. Reg.
indic. 83. Placitare, placitum, plitaco^. To plead, a Plea, pleading. Platea, a
Street. 2 Inst 38. Plegius, a Surety, a Pledge. plegiagiu, plegiaco^.
Surety-ship. Lex 97. Ra. Entr. 467. Reg. 158.180. Contra vadiu and plegiu Brac.
156 ter. vadiu and Plegios. Brac. 156.157. Plevina, Plevin, replevin. Lex
97.109. plita. Cor 45. Brac. 365. bis. Pola, a Pole, or Perch. Lex 46.
Pondagiu, poundage, Davis. 7. Pontagiu, Pontage. 8 Co. 46. Ry. 252.303.336.
Porteria, the place of Porter. 8 Co. 47. Portgrevius, a Portreve. Spel. 68.
Postdissei^a, Post-disseisin. Potagiu, Pottage. Lex 83. Practizare, to
practice. 160.80. Prebenda, prebendarius. a Prebend, a Prebendary. Lex. 98.
Prebenda, provender. ibm. Precaria, a days work. Lex 99. Brac. 160.
Preferamentum, preferment. Co. Entr. 36. pferementum. 1 Co. 78. pferencia. Co.
Entr. 664. 1 Co. 161. Preficco^ diei. the prefiction or assigning of a day.
Prelacia, Prelacy. 14. H. 4.10. Presidens, a President. Ra. Entr. 443.
Prepositus ppositure. the Provost of a Provostship. 2 H. 5.9. Prerogativa,
Prerogative. Lex 99. Prescripco^, prescription. Lex 100. Presbiteratus,
Presbitery. Fle. 211. Prisa, a drift of Cattle, depasturing in a Common. Ra.
Entr. 578. Prise, or taking. Prisagium. Lex. 100. Principaliu, an Heyre-Loom.
Lex 67. Prisona, prisonarius, imprisonamentum. a prison, a prisoner,
imprisonment. Prodico^nalit. treasonably. Reg. 102. Propars, quodpartia; a
pourparty of Lands held by parceners. Lex 98. Ra. Entr. 447.515, 516, 517.
Proporco^nabilis, proportionable. Co. Entr. 5. quodporco^nare, to proportion.
Ry. 52. Prorogaco^, quodrogat. a prorogation, prorogued. Pry. 21. Prostrare, to
threw down. Proviso, provided. 1 Co. 109. Pulletria, Poultry. Computatoriu in
pulletria. the Poultry Compter. Co. Entr. 345. Purportans, purporta.
purporting, a purport. Co Entr. 196.35. 1 Mon. 754. Purprestura, a purpresture.
Ra. Entr. 135. Co. Lit. 277. Purprisa, purprisum. a purprise. purprisa and
usurpaco^. Ra. Entr. 533.
Q.
Quarentena tree. a quarentine, a quantity of Land of forty perches. 1 Mon. 313.
2 Mon. 547.555. quarentena mulieris. Lex 104. Brac. 60. Stat de Merton.
Quarera, a quarre. Reg 105. 1 Mon. 707.811. 2 Mon. 281.252. Quartiu,
quartialis. a quarter, quarterly. Quartiatus. Spel. 51. Quominus potuerunt so
that they could not, or might the less. Reg 106.
R.
Rata, a Rate. Ratum. Dyer 82. Ratando. Ra. Entr. 505. Ratihabitio, a
confirmation. Co. Lit. 301. Receptamentum, a receiving, entertaining, or
harboring. Reg. 80. 2 Inst 645. Brac. 157. Fle. 57. Receptare. West.
Indictments. 81. Rechaciare, to drive forth again. Recognico^, a Recognizance.
Recognitor, a Conusor. Parat sacro^ Recognoscere, ready to try. Assiu venit.
recognitura. Recompensare, to recompense. Ra. Entr. 12. Recompensaco^, a
recompense. Rectatus, arrectatus. charged with an offense. Lex 9. Ry 85.
Rettum, rectatus. Reg. 77.83. Fin. 130. 2 Inst 42.151. 1. Mon. 763. Redisseia^,
a Redisseisin. Refeoffare, to reinfeoffe. Co. Entr. 291. Refullum aque; an
overflow of water. Fle. 268. 2 Mon. 913. Regalia, Royalties. Ra. Entr. 468.
Pry. 146. Regardum, rewardum. a reward. 3 Bull. 91. Regardum foreste. a regard
of a Forest. Ry. 2.24.651. Rewardum foreste. Ry. 2. 1 Mon. 513. 2 Mon. 631.
Regardans. regarding. West indict. 239. Registrarius, registrum. a Register.
the Register. Lex. 108. Regratarius, a Regrator. Stat. de Collistrigio. Ry.
248. Regratiaria. Pry. 181. Remanere, a remainder. Co. Lit. 49. Remaneribus. 1
Co. 109. 2 Co. 11. dare ad remanentiam, to give in perpetuity. Remediare, to
remedy. Reg 80. remediat Ra. Entr. 24. Remembrancia, a remembrance. Rengi
famellrum carnificum. Ranges of Butchers Stalls. 1 Mon. 113. Rengia tree. 1 Mon.
515. Rentale, a rental. Ra. Entr. 209. Co. Entr. 146. Repassagiu, repassage.
Ra. Entr. 335. Repellaco^, a repealing. Co. Entr. 204. Repellum. repellat 2
Mon. 702. Replegiare a Replevin. Replegiamentum. Reg 180. to be replevied.
replegiari. Reportare, to report. Ra. Entr. 14. Ry. 259. Pry. 420. Reportus, a
Report. Cow. 226. Dyer. 166. Reprisa. a reprise, a deduction. Lex 110.
Reprisale, a reprisal. Cow. 226. 10 Co. 133. Residentia, resiancia, residere.
Residence, to reside. Lex. 110. Cow. 227. Reseantisa. Brac. 337, 338. 1 Mon.
577. Resians. Plo. 119. Rescuslus, a rescue. Lex 109. Co. Lit. 160. Resortare,
to resort. West Indictments. 199. Resortiebatur jus, the right did resort, as
from Uncle to Nephew. Ra. Entr. 29. bis. Restaurus equorum: a breed or store of
Horses. Ry. 253. v. staurus. Retalliu, retail. Retallia. Reg 184. Ry. 400.
Retinencia, a Retinue. Pry 309. Retirare, to retire. West Indictmis 74.
Retornare, retornu. to retorn, a retorn. Revella, Revels. 1 Fo. 89. Rifflura,
Rifling. plita Cor. 79. Brac. 144. Riga, a ridg. Lex. 111. Rima, a Rhyme. Lex.
111. Riottum, a Riot. Cow. 230. Pace Rs. 30. Riotum. Keil. 194. Pace Rs. 26.
Riotose and Routose. Pace Rs. 30. Riparia, the Bank of a River, or the River it
self. 2 Inst 30.477.478. 2 H. 4.8. Pry. 185. bis. 383. Roba, a Robe. Brac. 60.
Roboria, a Robbery. Roberia. Reg. 272. Co. Lit. 288. Dyer. 213. Robbator. a
Robber. tmes de ley. Cow. 84. Roberatores. Ry. 178. Robbauit. Pry. 153. Brac.
102, 112. Rogus, a Rogue. Lex. 112. Romea, a Room. Rotulus. a Roll. Lex. 112.
Irrotlare, to enrol. Routum, a Rout. an unlawful assembly. Keil. 194 Pace Reg.
26. Rossinu, Rosin. Dyer. 75. Rubbosa, Rubbidg. Pry. 415. bis. Russetum,
Russet. 2 Mon. 377. Russatorum pannorum Mag. Cart. cu 25. 2 Inst 41.
S.
Salsariu a Saliseller. 2 Mon. 666. Sappum, Sapp. Fle. 163. Succus. Scandalum,
Slander. Scandalizare, to slander. Scarletum, Scarlet. Pry. 25. Scavagiu.
scavage, a kind of toll. Cow. 234. Scire face. to cause to know. Sciri. 2 Inst
473. Ry. 52. Scituatus, scitus, situated. Scitus, a Site. Lex. 117. Scota, a
Scot. 1 Mon. 413.1006. Scottare. 1 Mon. 666. Scutagu, Escnage. Seasonabile
tempus. Seasonable time. Ra. Entr. 667. Seisonis. 1 Mon. 164. Sectare, secta.
to sue, a suit. Secta molendini. suit to a Mill. Secta shirorum. 2 Mon. 660.
Secta prisone. sewettum prisone. Ra. Entr. 337. Secta ad Cur. Suit of Court.
Securare, securantia. to secure, an assurance. Co. Entr. 30. Seisina, seisitus,
seisire. Seisin, seized, to seize. disseisina. a disseisin. post disseisina, a
post disseisin. Selda, a Stall, Shed, or Shop. Lex 114. Shopa, five Selda. Ra.
Entr. 558. Selio, a Selion. Sema pisciu. a seem of Fish. v. numbers.
Semoventia, things moving alone. 2 Mon. 511. some watches are called movements.
Sententiare, to sentence. Ra. Entr. 413. Sepalis, several. Sequestrare,
sequestrum, sequestraco^. to sequester, a sequestring. 2 Inst 624. Serviens ad
legem. a Sergeant at Law. Sewera, a sewer. Cow. 240.10. Co. 143. Lex. 115.
Shippare, to Ship. 2 R. 3.11. Shira, a Shire. Lex. 116. Capitla itinis. Cow.
240.264. Shopa, a Shop. 10. Co. 133. Lex. 116. Signetum Regis, the Kings
Signet. Ra. Entr. 443. 2 An. 120. Signettum. Pry. 36. Siligo, Rye. Simulcum,
simul cum. unacum, una cum. together with. Soca, a Soke. Socagiu, Socage. Lex.
117. Solariu, a Solar or upper room, a Garret. Lex 117. Sollariu. 10 Co. 133.
Co. Entr. 377. Soldarius, a Soldier. Ra. Entr. 493. Co. Entr. 436. Solicitator,
a Solicitor. Lex. 117. Stalla, a Stall. Ra. Entr. 667. Lex 118. Stallum. ^ Mon.
657. Stallagiu, Stallage. Lex. 118. Cow. 245. Standarda, a Standard. Ry. 555,
568, 569. Standardum. Spel. 71. Pry. 24. Fle. 71. Stapula, Stapulum; a Staple
for Wares. Cow. 245. Lex 118. Statutum stapule. Reg 151, 152. Staurus, a store
or stock. 2 Cro. 567. 1 Mon. 944. Sticca anguillarum. a stick of Eeles, 1 Mon.
137.329. Sticcus. 2 Mon. 815. Straminari, to be covered with Straw. Fle. 164.
Strata, a Street. Reg. 98. Stubula, Stubble. Fle. 162, 166. Stuffura, Stuffing.
Vet. intr. 228. Subboscus, underwood growing. Breve de Subpena, a Writ of
Subpena. Doctor and Stu. 48. Suera, sewera. a Sewer. Lex 116. 10 Co. 141.
Su^magiu^, an Horseload. Roll. 103. Cow. 250. Pry. 184. Ry. 104, 105. Lex.
114.120. Supedificiu, an over-Building. 2 Mon. 242. Supertunica, an over-coat.
Reg. 93. Supervisor, supervisus: a Surveyor, a Survey. Surplusagiu surplusage.
Cow. 251.
T.
Tallagiu, Tallage. Cow. 253. Ry. 254. Lex. 122. Tallia, a Tally. Cow. 258. Ry.
450. Pry. 7. Lex. 122.133 Contratallia. Ry. 450. Pry. 571. Talliu, talliare. an
Entail, to entail. Cow. 99.253. Ry. 110.248. Lex 122. Tamdiu, as long as. Reg
92. Quamdiu. Tannarius, a Tanner. Ra. Entr. 602. Tannare, to Tann. Reg. 602.
Ry. 27. Tannaria, a Tanners craft. Tanna de bosco. 1 Mon. 507, 508. Tappa, a
Tap. 2 Mon. 746. Lex 20. Tastare vinu. to taste Wine. Ry. 295. Pry. 196.
Tassum, a Cock on heap. Lex. 122. Fenu in tassis. Reg 94.96.102. Tassari. Fle.
162. Taxa, taxaco^. a Tax, a taxing. Lex. 122. 1 Mon. 976. Taxatores. Ry. 250.
Tenentia, a Tenancie. Ry. 219.376. Tenura, a Tenure. Tentio, an holding.
Tenatura. 2 Mon. 141. Tentoria mcatoria. Merchants Tents. 1 Mon. 987.
Terminarius, a Termor, a Lessee. Reg 197. Terraria, Terriors. Co. Entr. 146.
Territoriu, a Territory. 1 Mon. 500.594. 2 Mon. 99.132. Theoloniu, Toll. 8 Co.
96. Ry. 11.13.48.199. Thesauraria, a Treasure-House. Ry. 96. Domus the
sauraria. Tillagiu, Tillage. Minera, tinnei, a Mine of Tin. Plo. 319. Domus
tipularia, a tipling-House, or Alehouse. Tithinga, a tithing. 2 Inst 73.
Decenna. Todda, a Todd. 1 Bull. 131. Toftum, a Toft. 10 Co. 133. Tolnetum, Toll.
8 Co. 46. Lex. 125. Ry. 10.16.127. Tolta, a Tolt. 1 Mon. 763. Lex. 125. Tonna,
a Tunn. 2 Mon. 528. Tonnagiu Lex. 127. Toppare arbores, to top Trees. Plo. 469.
Ra. Entr. 490. Torcherus, a Torch. 4 Co. 98. Torticius. Fle. 709. Tortum face,
to do wrong. Co. Lit. 158. Tortitude. 1 Mon. 580. Tracea, a Trace, or Tract.
Brac. 106. bis. Ex transverso. Ripe. Ry. 252. vie. 1 Cro. 302. Vallis. 2 Mon.
649. Aque Reg 95. Ra. Entr. 616. Cross the Bank, Way, Vallie, Water. Eundo^ in
transverso usq, ad. 2. Mon. 425. Trava bladi, a Tbrave of Corn. 2 Mon. 391. 1
Mon. 985. Trausia, a Traverse. Trenchea, a Trench. Ra. Entr. 441. Reg 127.252.
10 Co. 143. Trenchia. Fo. 369. 1 Mon. 911. Tressoria mulierum. Women's Tresses.
Fle. 69. Trestoria, Tressels. Fle. 79. Triare, triaco^, triator. to try, a
Trial, a trier. Spel. 204, Doct and Stu. 20. Trimestre spaciu^. three Months
space. Ry. 299. Tumbrellum, a Tumbrel. Ra. Entr. 540. Cow. 265. Turba,
turbaria. a Turf, turbary. Co. 265. Ry. 339. Ra. Entr. 540. Co^ia turbarie,
Common of turbary. Turbagiu. Lex. 127. 1 Mon. 632. Turnu: Vic. the Sheriffs
turn. Cow. 265. Keil. 76.
V.
Vaccaria, a Cow-house. Cow. 267. Ry. 341. 1 Mon. 527. Vadiu, Surety-ship, or
security. Reg 93. Ra. Entr. 59. Ry. 247. Vadius, a Surety. Ra. Entr. 561.4. Co.
6. Vadiare, to wage, as Vadiare legem, vel libaco^nem auiorum. Vadiu. Wages,
avails. Pry 65. Valectus, a Groom. Reg 161. Valletus. Cow. 133. Valettus. 2
Inst 509. Valentia, Value. Valibilis, valuable. Vet. intr. 185. Vastum Wast.
Velvetum, Velvet. Ra. Entr. 3. Venaria parci. the Game of a Park. Ra. Entr. 75.
Venella, a Lane. Ventriticum molendinu. a Windmil. v. Veredictum, a Verdict.
Verificare, uificaco^. to aver, an averment. Co. Lit. 362. Vestura tree. the
Crop or profits of Land. Vestitura bosci. 1 Mon. 780. Viagiu, a Viage. Reg.
191. Pry. 85.121. 2 Mon. 367. Vicinetum, the Neighborhood. Cow. 238.268. Co.
Lit. 155. 11 Co. 25. Brac. 73. Victualarius, a Victualer. Lex. 130.
Vitellarius, Vittellaco^. Ra. Entr. 211. Victualia, Victuals. Viculus, a little
Street. 1 Mon. 138. Villula, a little Village. 1 Mon. 599.650. 2 Mon. 610.
Vintenarius, a Vintner. Stat. de collistrigio. Viridarius, a Verderor. Co. 168.
1 Mon. 574. Virgatores, Vergers. Lex. 129. Vivarium, a Fishpond or Warren. Lex.
130. 2 Inst. 100. Umpirator, an Vmpire. Unciata, an ounce Weight. 1 Mon. 708.
Ura plumbea. Lead Oar. Usagium. an Usage. 1 Mon. 502.978. 2 Mon. 1016. Usuagiu.
1 Mon. 504.981. Utlagare, utlagaria; to utlaw, an utlary. Utlagaco^. Pl^ta.
Cor. 18. Lex. 131. Utterare, to utter. Waga, a Weigh. Spel. 226. Lex. 134.
Waiviaria, a Wayver. Femina waiviata. a Woman wained. Reg. 132, 133.277.
Waiviu, a Waife. 2 Inst 163. Brac. 8. bona waiviata. goods waived. waife,
Stray. 1 Co. 29. Wallia, Wales. Wallensica. Davis 35. Wallia, a Wall. Reg.
92.108.127.5. Co. 100. Ry. 548. Wallatur fossato. Fle. 313. Wapentagiu, a
wapentage. 2 Inst. 99. Wapentakiu. Cow. 277. Warantizare, warantia. to warant a
waranty. 2 Inst. 137. Ry. 92. Co. Lit. 383. Lex. 131. Warda in Civitate, a
ward. Warda de guerra. Pry. 139. Warda Castri. Castlegard. Warrantum a Warrant.
Warectum, Fallow. Co. Lit. 5. Lex. 133. tra jacens frisca and ad warectum,
tempus warectandi. time of fallowing. Fle. 162. Warenna, a Warren. Reg.
109.93.96.110. Warennarius a Warrenuer. Plita. Cor. 140. Stat de malefact in
parcis. Warennat. Ry. 129. Wepon voca a Bill. Ra. Entr. 384. Wharfa, a Wharf. 1
Co. 19. Co. Entr. 536. Lex. 134. Wilda. Sussex. the Wild of Sussex. Hob. 266.
Walda. Woodwardus, a Woodward. Wreccum, Wreck. Cow. 285. 5 Co. 106. 2 Inst.
167. Bona wreccata. 5 Co. 106. Yarda, a Yard. Co. Entr. 377.
Formality of Writing.
I Advise young Clerks to observe the formality of Writing Latin-words; not to
write that short which should be written at length, nor that at length, which
should be written short. As, quam quod, for which or what, are no be written at
length. Quod, for that, to be written short, quoth. quam for, as, or then, to be
written short, with a dash over, qm. so likewise dashes in the middle or ends
of words to be abbreviated wherein are any, b, h, or l, are struck through
those letters. as Robtus, here.

If words have but five Minums at the end, write them at length, as, cum, dum,
clausum, modum, nondum, though this is not observed in the Kings bench. If
above five, turn up the last; as unu, mediu, m^suagiu, Coragiu. So where words
have above five Minums in the middle, use a dash over instead of an m, as in
immunis, write it i^munis. co^modum.

Use a round v, in the beginning of words, and al^^ before vowels in words,
either in secretary or Courthand for the readier distinguishing it from an n,
as performavit, perimplevit, ^bavit, u^uavit. not performauit, perimpleuit,
ubauit, Uuluerauit.

Where words are in both the singular and plural, umber, write the same at
length, as Justice, and Justices. Justiciarius and Justiciarii-Assignee, and
Assign^s, Assign^tus and Assignati.

Write, Existens, and the like in the nominative case at length, and not,
existen. tenen for tenens.

In pleading of quodces of the Common Pleas, in the same Court, we use hic; if
in another Court, or of another Court; ibm.

Where is isto eodem tmino; we plead it, illo codem tmino.

In pleading of writs, we add immediately after the ^etorn, tunc quodx sequen.
as a die Pasche in unu mensem tunc quodx sequen, though quodx sequen be not in
the Writ.

It is fit for a Clerk to take notice of difficult things ^o be rendered in fit
and significant Latin, as firmu fa^ere; to make good.

^iduciam su^m dare. to give his word. 1 Fo. 34. ^irige bria. to award Writs.
Bri. 17. ^re sub testimonio Capitlis Justice. Reg indic 32. On the part and
behalf. ex part and vice. Will and pleasure, voluntas and been plitm. Going
forth and issuing. Emanan, egredien. exeun quodceden. ^t is to be noted, that
we use many words promiscuously, active and passive. As Habend. to have, and to
be had. ^aciend, for fiend, as, foret faciend. restat faciend. Conficiend. to
be made. ^^end. to use and to be used. ^^equend, fore quodsecut. ^enend, to
hold, to be held. ^xequend, for fore execut. ^formand and perimplend. to be
perfermed and fulfilled. ^olvend, for fore solut.
I advise a Clerk to write in all his business words Clerk like, and not
unfittingly, abbreviated, as for example.

A. A. Ar. ar. for Armig. armis. Aliqm. Aliquam. Als. ald. Alias, alias dcu^s.
B. B. Bar. Baronettus. C. C. Clm. Clausum. Cro^. crm. Crastino. crastinu. Cons.
Consideraco^. consuetudo. Cont. Coutinuaco^. continuando. D. D. D. def.
Defendens. E. E. Exec. Executor. Execuco^. Edrus. Edwardus. Edus. Edmundus. F.
F. Fr. Fregit. G. G. Genesis for Genosus. M. M. mt. mtini. Martis. martini. P. P.
pervus. Parvus. pertem. Partem. percellam. Parcellam. perochia. Parochia. Q. Q.
quoth. qm. Anglice which. Quod. quam. quer. Querens. queritur. R. R. Rs. Regis. T.
T. Tene. teni. Tenere. teneri. Testm. Testamentum. V. V. Viz^. Videlt. Vid.
Vidua. Volunt. V^l^ntas.

There are no Dipthongs used in Law-Pleadings, and therefore I use none in this
Book.

And it is to be known, that Printers have for many years past left off in
printing, letters unnecessary for the sounds of words, as e, in term, terms.
The word (Latin (is often written and printed) Latin without an e, as in the
Title and Preface to the last edition of Goldmans Dictionary.

Of the variety of Latin words.
IT much concerns a Clerk to use apt significant and certain Latin words in
all Pleadings, and particularly and especially in actions of Trover and
Trespass.

There are four sort of Latin words. 1. Good Latin allowed by Grammarians. 2.
Words significant, and known by the sages of the Law. 3. False or ill Latin, or
no Latin words, and yet having the countenance of Latin. 4. Words insensible,
and of no signification, and which have no countenance of Latin. Of which see,
10 Co. 133 Osbornes Case.

Where are not elegant and proper Latin words to express things, we must use
barbarous words, if they be known. And where are no such, we may coin Latin
words, adding an Anglice. Sti. 313. 328.

Where a Latin word signifies many things, there an Anglice is properly to be
added, otherwise not. Sti. 313.

Where an Anglice ascertains things. Sti. 80.136.327.

Vocat. is as much as to say, Anglice. 2 Cro. 129.

Where are proper Latin words to deseribe a thing, improper Latin words with an
Anglice are not to be used, as Instrumentum ferri Anglice an Horselock.
Instrumentum ferri Anglice a Gridiron. Sile Mortar, Exandirons, etc. Sti.
194.313.

It is sufficient to describe things by words that a Jury may know what is
meant by them, if there be no proper words to express them. Sti. 136.

De quinque peciis stanni Anglice Pewter dishes. Stanni is good of it self, and
the Anglice is void. Sti. 102. De sex parcellis plumbi cinerii. Anglice Pewter
dishes. Sti. 199.

If a word in a Declaration of Trover signifies nothing, then the Jury is
supposed to have given no damages for it. Sti. 194.

Unu lenat, Anglice a Mat, being no word. uru adustum ferreum ( 2 adjectives)
signify nothing. Sti 95.

Trespass, quare cepit 10 velamina Anglice C^ifs, pilum (quod pileum) Anglice a
Cap. 14 colores Anglice Neckbands, cruralia Anglice Garters; instrumentum
vocat. a Plate for a Jack. Opimentum Anglice a Rail. Adjudged sufficient. for
we must not be too curious to express things in Latin in all cases, for it
cannot be done. And therefore a description with an Anglice must serve. Sti.
125.

Trespass, quare cepit palos, ralos, etc. being no Latin words, without an
Anglice, good after Verdict. Hob. 191.

Exceptions taken to false Latin or doubtful improper words or expressions, (of
which see the Judgments in the Books hereafter cited) viz. Salore, quod
salar^o. Sti. 244.

Retiis, quod retibus. 3 Bulstrod 178. duos retes. voc Nets. Keil. 100. Morbus
mortalis Anglice the Murrain, for which lues, is a proper word. Intiora, quod
intestinis, averiorum. Sti. 50. Quedam ars Anglice of a Draper. Sti. 37.
Octungenta, quod octingenta. quinginta, quod quingenta. and silia. 10 Co. 133.
Sti. 24. Uitriu, quod vitrum. 10 Co. 133. Aeris quod eris. brass. Sit. 69.
Armentarius, quod armamentarius. Sti. 29. Wapentagiu, quod Wapentachiu. Sti.
24. Erexauunt, quod erexerunt. Cro. Eliz. 231. Vestigiu, Anglice a Footstool.
Sti. 69. Truncus Anglice a Trunk. Ben. 121. Hama. Anglice a Crow of Iron. Sti.
194. Suspendia, Anglice Pothooks or Hooks. Sti. 95. Coria, Anglice Hides. Sti.
64. Caruce, Anglice Cartloades, Glasti. La. 216. Due. acre-ligni. Sti. 19. De
duobus castoribus, Anglice Hats, servicio argenteo Anglice a silver Salt, and
duabus Catenis quod patinis Anglice silver dishes. Sti. 136.194. De uno
perlumbo Anglice a Lead, una alveola voc. a washing Fat, duobus articlis voc
portals cum suspensis voc Hinges, 4 ollis eriis voc Brass-pots. Et silibus. 2
Cro. 129. De instrumento ligneo composito, Anglice a Screen. Sti. 194.
Of doubtful expressions to be avoided.
INstrumenta, Anglice Fetters. St. 19.37. Qu^dam instrumenta terri, not showing
how many. Sti. 328. De ducentis ponderibus eris, and ducentis ponderibus plumbi
Anglice Brass and Lead. Sti. 247. 2 Roll. 247. Pondera without an Anglice is
uncertain. Sti. 224. La. 216. Cumulus tritici. 2 Bull. 317. Pullus, Anglice a
Colt. Sti. 31. Aves domestice. Anglice Poultry. Sti. 37. De tribus duodenis
fili, Anglice, dozens of thread. St. 80. Venire fac de visu. withou at dash. 2
Roll. 246. Questioned for uncertainty. Sex pecie panni lanei, Anglice red
yellow and black Cloth. St. 75. Caruca cum apparatu. navis cum armamentis. Sti.
352.353. Trover of two hundred weight of Drugs. Et silia. Sti. 224. Trover of a
Library of Books. Sti. 224. Trover of 10 Chests and Coffers. Adjudged good for
that they were held not to be distinct things. Cro. El^z. 818. Trover de risco
Anglice, a Trunk full of Linen, etc. good after Verdict. 2. Cro. 665. sile.
Sti. 353.360. Sile de ducentis auiis videlt bobus iuvencis, etc. not expressing
how many of each. Sti. 264. December bestie. voc Cows or whyes. Sti. 70. Trespass
with Cattle, and does not specify what Cattle, Sti. 170. Trspass for taking six
Mares and Colts, not alleging how many Mares, and how many Colts. Sti. 416.
Replevin. narr quoth. cepit centum oves matrices and vervices. Sti. 71. five Locks
and Keys. St. 353. December crinalibus and plagulis Anglice Coifs and
Cross-Cloths. Sti. 194. December quartia frumenti. 40 virgat panni, not showing of
what kind. Cro. Eliz. 837. Sile Sti. 419.533. A Beam, Scales and Weights, and
mentions not how many. Sti. 352. Loads of Corn, not mentioning Hors-loads or
Cartloads. Sti. 466. Diverse Merchandises, and shows not what. Godbold. 381.
Books and Stockings, not mentioning the kind. Sti. 25. Diverse sorts of Linen.
Sti. 44. Fardelle Anglice Packs bonorum. Sti. 370. Parcels of old Stuffs,
particions and Sheds. Sti. 38. Trespass for taking diverse pots, not showing
their number or quality. Ben. 198. Trover of diverse goods in specie, cum aliis
implementis. sile cum aliis necessariis, not showing what. and of Sowes not
showing their number. Cro. Eliz. 817. Parcels of old Stuff. Sti. 38. Four pair
of Hangings. Sti. 353.361. Assumpsit, to pay to one Fountain; omitting his name
of Baptism. Sti. 152. Mesuagiu five te^ntm. 13. Co. 48. St. 144. New
Assignment. in una acra tree sive prati. Ben. 21. Seisin de parcella tree
continen per estimaco^nem. 2 An 102. Se^it. de tris, and says not of what
Estate. Cro. Eliz. 419. Inquisico^n, that the Defendant was possessed quod
tmino Annorum ventur. 2 Leo 121. Inquisico^n, that one was seized of diverse
Mesuages, omitting their number. Lane 100. Ejectment of a Mesuage, and forty
Acres of Land, Meadow and Pasture, not showing how many Acres of each. Cro.
Car. 414. Martins Case. In consideration that the Plantiff had made for the
Defendant diverse Garments, (not showing what) he promised to pay him tantum
quantum meruit. Cro. Car. 414. Conneys Case. A promise to pay for necessaries,
but alleges not what necessaries. 3 Bull. 31. A promise to pay for a Cure, and
does not allege Medicines used. 3 Bull. 31. A promise to pay Damages, and shows
not what damages were sustained. Yel. 22. Contracts for things uncertain, or at
prices uncertain. Dyer 91.178. A promise to pay for Wares, discomputando quod
tempore, uncertain what. St. 27.58.63. A Suite prosecuted, but shows not where.
2 Leo. 187. A promise to save harmless of all Suits of Land. A Suit alleged,
but sets forth no process or effect of it. Moo. 705. Award to pay charges of
Suit. The At rnies Bill is a sufficient certainty. Cro. Car. 279. Beals Case.
A Discharge, Release, Assurance etc. pleaded, but shows not how. 2 Leo. 187.
Pop. 206. Trespass of Corn cut and carried away, and sets not forth the
quantity. Quare Pisces cepit. and shows not what Fish. 2 Cro. 435. Debt for
Rent of a Mesuage and goods dimised, and specifies not the Goods. Keil. 153. A
Horse lent to carry three Bushels of Coals, and burdened otherwise, but shows
not how. 2 Leo. 104. Administration pleaded about Funerals, Replication that he
administered otherwise, but shows not how. 2 Leo. 104. Account. The Defendant
pleads to all except ten pounds that he was never receiver, but alleges not
what ten pounds. St. 205. Case, in consideration of repair of part of a House,
but shows not what part. 2 Leo. 52. A promise to surrender certain Copihold
Lands adjoining, etc. but shows not what they were. Go. 380. La. 181. Sile.
Yel. 110. Bri. 46. Covenant of Lands in two Counties or Towns, Breach assigned
of parcel, not showing in what Town. 1 Bull. 139. Trespass of Corn cut.
Justification by several Leases of black-Acre and white-Acre. But shows not
what quantities was cut in either. La. 174. Ben. 198. Covenant to suffer the
Plaintiff to enter in tras friscas; bar. quoth permisit eum intrare in tras
friscas, but sets not forth the quantity. 1 Leo. 136. Prescription for common
appendant to a Manor or Mesuage called C. Grange. Ben. 21. Prescription for a
way quod quibusdam averiis suis, not showing for what Cattle in particular. 1
Leo. 236. The Defendant put his Cattle into a Common called I. but alleges no
Town. St. 177. A Bond to be made, and no sum expressed. 5 Co. 58. Het. 89. That
the Defendant (lately) did such an Act. St. 145. De 6 tonnis Anglice tons.
uncertain. St. 482. De 10. ulnis. quod ulmis. St. 482.
I advise Clerks (for avoiding exceptions) to use what certainties and proper
expressions they may.

Exposition of words.
It is necessary and reqnisite for Attorneys and Clerks to understand the
Exposition signification and extent of Words and Sentences used in the Law.
Some of which, whereof I have taken notice, I impart to be inquired of in the
Books following.
Of Lands, Goods, etc.
Maniu Cowel 166. Fin. 132. Gre. 349. Co. Lit. 5. Members of Manors. Moo. 56.
Maniu, est nomen collectivum. Dyer 207. Clausum, est nomen aggregativum. Sti.
109. Tenements. Cowel. 256. Co. Lit. 5.19.154. 1 Leo. 188. Tou. 91.
Hereditaments. Tou. 91. Lands. Tou. 91. Honor. Isle and commote. Tou. 92.
Manor and Castle. Tou. 92. Town or Village. Tou. 92. Farm, Grange. Tou. 93.
Oxgang, Yard Land, Plough Land, Hide of Land. Tou. 93. Fold course. Tou. 93.
Liba falda. 1 Leo. 11. Rectorie, Vicarage. Tou. 93. Tithes to be levied. 1 Bull.
175. Mesuage, House, Curtilage. Tou. 94. Moo. 24. Manco^n, the same with
Mesuage 10. H. 7.5. Cotage. Tov. 94. Land, Meadow, Pasture. Tou. 94. Wood, Tou.
94. Silva cedna. 50. Toft. Tou. 95. Bruera, mariscus. mora. juncaria, ruscaria,
jampna. Tou. 95. Alnet. Salicet. fraxinet, etc. Tou. 95. Vaccaria, bercaria,
porcaria, etc. Tou. 95. Stagnu, gurges. Tou. 95. Stadiu, ferling, quarentcna
tree, selio, porca. Tou. 95. Acre. Rood. Tou. 96. Mines, Trenches, Turfs. Tou.
96. Park, Chase, Warren, Fishing. Tou. 96. Vesture, Herbage. Tou. 96. Estovers.
Tou. 96. 2 Inst. 17. Hundred. 8 H. 7.1. Garba. 3 Cro. 633. Sti. 109. Grana.
Sti. 108. Repositoriu. Cro. Car. Sprigs Case. Raco^ne tenure sue. 33. H. 6.26.
Catalla felonu. 1^. H. 7.5. Premises. Cro. Eliz 782. 1 An. 236. Hob. 276. Cro.
Car. Conghams Case. Raco^nabiles exitus, raco^nabiles consuetudines, 2 Inst.
12. Alga maris 1 Bull. 175.
Of Estates and Deeds.
STatus. 2 Inst. 666. Gift, Demise, Feoffment. 39. H. 6.38. Tenet and retinet.
both one. R. 2.26. Dimittitur. dismission. 11 H. 4.13.44. Depone. Cro. Eliz.
470. Transpone, assignare. 2 Leo 116. Charta partita. Go. 204. Alternatim. 2
To. 248.
Persons, Time.
LIber homo. 2 Inst 27. Subject. Pop. 69. Ho^ies and servientes. 1 An. 13.
Sacerdos, quasi sacra donans. Jur 8. Custos a Gardiar. 2 Inst 12. Rape 2 Inst
180. Rape. 2 Inst. 180. Puer. Moo. 104. Alderman. La. 231. Surname. 2 Inst.
666. Status and gradus. 2 Inst. 666. Trade, Craft, Mystery etc. 2 Inst 668.
Uterque 5 Co. 103. 1 Leo. 24. Award to be delivered to either of the parties.
utrique 2 To. 580. Either, every. Cro. Eliz. 448. Quilt. Dyer 124. Sibi. where
it shall be taken in the singular or plural number. Cro. Eliz. 70. Aliquam,
quandam, arborem. Win. 101 Aliquo tempore. 2 To. 246. Aliqualit 2 To. 246. Si
qui fuerint. int pretaco^n de temps Per 741.
An Alphabet of expounded words follows.
A.
ABate, tmes de ley. 1 Co. Lit. 277. Abiudicaco^. Co. Lit. 100. Adjournment. 4
Inst. 27. tmes de ley. 22. Affeerors. 8 Co. 39. Alienare. Per. 730. Annus and
dies. Spel. 38. Array. Co. Lit. 156.
B.
Balliva. 2 Inst 105. Baro. 4 Inst. 46. Barrectator, barrataria. 8 Co. 36, 37.
Bastard. Doc. and Stu. 68. Bercaria. 2 Inst 476. Bigarnus. 2 Inst 273.
Billettum. 2 Inst. 450. Blada. Keil. 175. 2 Inst 81. Bruera. 2 Inst 656.
C.
Cablicia. Jur. 194. Cambipartia. a champarty. Co. Lit. 368. Capella.
Capellania. 2 Inst 363. Carucagiu. 1 Mon. 294. Carr room. 1 To. 525. Castellum,
Castellanus. 2 Inst 31. Cemiteriu. 2 Inst 489. Collegiu. Dyer. 233.267.
Confirmare. Par ley 28. Consciencia. 1 Co. 100. Doc. and stu. 25. Consideratum.
concessum. in indiciis. 3 Bull. 92. Constabularius. 2 Inst 31. 4 Inst 123.
Consuetudines. Co. Lit. 58. 2 Inst 12.58.222. Corrodiu. 2 Inst 630 Corona. Co.
Postnat. 11. Coronator. 2 Inst 31. Coragiu. 2 Inst 736. Covina. Co. Lit. 357.
Countenance. 2 Inst 28. Cranage. 8 Co. 47. Curatus. 3 Bull 310. Custos, a
Guardian. 2 Inst 12.
D.
Det. 3 Bull. 312. Debita. 3. Bull. 313. Desendomus. tmes de ley. 238. De^orecor.
Co. Lit. 231. Denison. Co. postnat. 18. Dispensaco^n. Co. Lit. 98. Doctor Brow
2 reports 259. Domestica. 7 Co. 17. Dominicum. Co. Lit. 17. Duellum. Co. Lit.
294.
E.
Electio. Dyer 281. Equally. Sti. 434. Equitas, Plo. 465. Equivocum. Co. Lit.
154. Escapiu. Jur. 196. Essoniu. 2 Inst 125. Exile. 2 Inst 47. Expletia. 6 Co.
58. Extortion. Co. Lit. 368.
F.
Feodarius. 4 Inst 202. Finis. 8 Co. 59. Firmarius. 2 Inst 145. Forcia. 2 Inst
182. Forestal. Ry. 29. Forisiudicaco^ and abiudicaco^. Co Lit. 100. Fundaco^.
10 Co. 33.
G.
Garba. Sti. 238 2 To. 335. Geld. Horngeld, Woodgeld. Jur 197. Glans, 2 Inst
411. Gradus. 2 Inst 666. Guidagiu, 2 Inst 526. Guilda. 8 Co. 125. Brow 2
reports. 286.
H.
Habitaco^. inhabitans, 2 Inst 702. Homicidiu. Plit. Cor 11.3 Inst 54. Hospes,
hospiciu. 8 Co. 32. Housebote, and Heybote. Vetnabr. 189. Husting. 4 Inst 247.
I.
Idoneus. 6 Co. 49. 8 Co. 41. Impetico^. 11 Co. 82. 2 Inst 146. Iujury. 3 Bull.
312. Interesse, Co. Lit. 345. Plo. 484. Judiu. 9. Co. 13.
L.
Layn. 4 Inst 104. Liber. Co. Lit. 94. Libtates, 2 Inst 47. Libe consuetudines.
2 Inst 47. Lieu. 2 Inst 243. Ligeancia. Co. Lit. 128. Co. postnat. 4. Loquela.
Co. Lit. 292. 9 H 6.59.
M.
Maeremiu. Reg 94.3 Inst. 97.4 Inst 307 Manutenencia. Co. Lit. 368. 2 Inst 212.
Mansueta. 7 Co. 17. Marches. Co. Lit. 106. Mariscallus. 4 Inst 123. Materies.
Jur 196. Mise. Co. Lit. 298. Miscricordia. Jur 196. Morrgage. Co. Lit. 205.
Mulier and Bastard. Doc and Stu. 58. Muniments. 9 Co. 17.35. H 6.37. Muragiu. 2
Inst 222.
N.
Namiu. 2 Inst 339.140. Nonna. monialis. 2 Inst 437. Nomen. 6 Co. 65.
O.
Oblac^nes. 2 Inst 489. Obvenco^. 11 Co. 16. Ordinarius. 2 Inst 398.
Overstrond. Ry. 29.
P.
Pavagiu, paviagiu 8 Co. 47. Panel. Co. Lit. 158. Parliament. 9 Co. in
Epistola. Passagiu. 8 Co. 46. Patria. Co. postnat 13. Pedagiu. 8 Co. 47.
Penetro. 5. Co. 122. Perhendinando. 2 Inst 163. Persona. Dyer. 154. Pesagiu. 8
Co. 46. Pons. ponticulus. 2 Inst 700.701. Pontagiu. 8 Co. 46. 2 Inst 701.
Possessio. 6 Co. 57. Prebenda. 3 Cro. 75. Prisage. 3 Bull. 1. Process. 8 Co. 157.
Prorogaco^n. 4 Inst 27. Puer. Dyer. 337. Pullus. Sti. 189. Purprestura. 2 Inst
272.
Q.
Qucrele. quarrels. Co. Lit. 292. 8 Co. 153. Quilibet. Dyer 154.
R.
Ransom. Redemption. Co. Lit. 127. Rebonter. Co. Lit. 365. Redditus. 10 Co.
158. Relaxare. 10. Co. 52. Repurt. reportare. Co. Lit. 193. Respectively. Sti.
434. Restringere, quod distringere. 3 Bull. 154. Retratus. 2 Inst 42. Rettum. 2
Inst 150. Romescot. 1 Mon. 268.
S.
Sacha. Socha. streme. Ry 29. Secta. Brow 2 Reports. 279. Seisin. 6 Co. 57.
Silva cedua. 50. E. 3.10. Parlaue. 205. Staple. 4 Inst 238. Status. 2 Inst 666.
Steward. Brow 2 Reports. 337. Surnosme. 2 Inst 666.
T.
Tallagiu. 2 Inst. 532. Testamentum. Co. Lit. 111. 9. Co. in Epist. Titlus. 8
Co. 153. Tolnetum, theoloniu. 8 Co. 46. 2 Inst 47. Trade Brow 2 Reports. 289.
Tritningus. 2 Inst 99. Tronagiu. 8 Co. 46. Turn de Vic. Brow 2 Reports. 121.
V.
Venenu. 3 Inst. 48. Veredictum. 9 Co. 13. Vetitum namiu. 2 Inst 339.140.
Vicinus. 2 Inst 474. Vivariu. 2 Inst 100.199. Usura. 5 Co. 70. Uterq. 5 Co.
103. Utlagat. Co. postnat. 14.
W.
Wainagiu. 2 Inst 28. Wapentagiu 2 Inst 99. Withernam. 2 Inst 339.140. Wreccum.
2 Inst 167. Ry. 12.
English words amongst Latin.
Our Ancients did sometimes use English words amongst Latin, where Latin words
might have been found, and sometimes where significant words could not be
found, sometimes with le or les or lez, and sometimes without. And without an
Anglice. As for Example.
PIpa de Allome. Ra. Entr 557. Bolles de glaunce ore. Plo. 320. Cartbote,
Ploughbote, Heybote. Ra. entr 320 Hedgbote, and Firebote. Ra. Entr. 155.
Casket. Ra. Entr 405. Pecia de Canvas. Plit. Cor 24. Pry. 49. Fili de Cotton.
Ra. Entr 78. Par precularum de Curral gauded. cum les double gaudes. Ra. Entr.
5. Damask. Ra. Entr. 161.616. Mappa de Diaper. Ra. Entr. 5. 24. Footspars. Ra.
Entr 619. Grinstone. Ra. Entr 155. Grossome. Ra. Entr. 562. le Grossome. Plo.
285. Haylofts. Co. Entr 185. Hedg-rows. Ra. Entr 132.562. Plo. 269. Kintals de
green woad. Ra. Entr. 409. Brel. implet cum Pitch. Ra. Entr 653. Cent de Rosen.
Ra. Entr 557. de Satin. Ra. Entr 18.161. Sex sakettes wodi. Ra. Entr 181.
Shokkes. Ra. Entr 620. Co^iis and sleights. Ra. Entr 657. Panis de Treet. Stat
assie panis. Salmon Trouts and al pisces 46. Ass. 9. Virgat de Velvet.
Velvettum. Ra. Entr 18.161.616. 1 Co. 133. Vinu de Romney. 9 H. 6.93. Wales.
Ra. Entr 186. Wharfe. 1 Co. 17. Wayf. Ra. Entr 540. Webbs. sup oculum. Ra.
Entr. 463. Curtina de Worsted. Ra. Entr. 152. Les bars. Ra. Entr 5. Le Butt
de Sack. Ra. Entr. 3. Les bullaries aque salse. Co. Entr 132. Lez clappers. Co.
Entr. 703. Les Courts. Co. Entr. 192. Les Cricks. Co. Entr. 130. Uno le
demisent argenteo ad zonam pertinen Ra. Entr. 5. Cama super le deys. Ra. Entr.
183. Le down. Plo. 21. Uno le Garret. 1 An. 521. Hamorrum voc les hengles. Ra.
Entr. 642. Le Key and Wharf. 1 Co. 16. Le Lessor. Co. Entr. 205. Les Lessees.
Co. Entr. 605. Le level. Co. Entr. 293. Lez Loppings. Co. Entr. 703. Le lover.
super aulam. Fo. 405. Le Northeast, le Southwest. 1 Co. 63. Les owres argenti.
Ra. Entr. 400. Plo. 310. Le Patentee. Co. Entr. 541. Le presentee. Co. Entr.
203. In uno le Ricke. Ra. Entr. 205. Les Shingles. Ra. 703. Entr. Le Shift. Fo.
103. 5 Les skeyns bissi. Co. Entr. 125. Lez Staves of Steel. Ra. Entr. 208. Les
Stews. Co. Entr. 192. Una le Storehouse. 1 An. 52. Le Waterside. Ra. Entr. 162.
Virgat de Wainscot. Ra. Entr. 208. Le Widehouse. Ra. Entr. 341. Les Yards. Co.
Entr. 192.201.
English among French words.
It is absolutely necessary for every Attorney and Clerk to understand, and in a
reasonable manner to write things in Law-French, which is very easy to learn,
by comparing the French and English together, in the Terms of the Law,
Littleton, and other such Books, without learning of true French yet some
learning of true French will be fitting to know the difference between it and
Law-French. Law-French was held good French in William the Conqueror's time.
Amongst the Law-French are many times used English and Latin words more
significant, or where the French is hard, and cannot be so well understood, or
comes not readily to Mind or hand. As for Example.
English words used among French.
A.
ACcordingly. Co. Lit. 153. Agreed with. Plo. 5. Away. Kit. 30.
B.
Bagg. Kit. 32. Blind. 11 Co. 28.
C.
Carry, Carrier. 1 To. 168. Carry about. Dyer 105. Chiefly. Dyer. 60. Corn.
Kit. 32. Credited. Kit. 7.
D.
Devil. 1 To. 378. Doubtful. 10 Co. 138. Downward, let down. 1 H. 4.1. Drawn. 1
To. 848. Drawn up. Yel. 38.
F.
Failing. Yel. 38. Farreforth. Dyer. 12. Fool. 24. E. 3 61. Foreman. Kit. 7.
Four. 21. E 3.8.
G.
Gayn. Kit. 7. Govern. 3 H 4.14.
H.
Hatred. Kit. 7. Higher end. Dyer 56. Honest. Dyer. 56.
K.
Key. 1. To. 154.
L.
Learning. Dyer 56.
M.
Malice. Kit. 7. Marry, marriage, intermarriage. 1 To. 357. Meaning. Dyer 16.
Mindful. Kit. 3. Money. Kit. 32.
O.
Old. 1 To. 466. bis.
P.
Perhaps. 3 H. 4.14. Place. Dyer. 114. Poor. Kit. 5.26. Ass. 2. Le Post. Dyer.
114. Pull down. 1. To. 378.
R.
Rich. Kit. 5. River. 3. H. 4.9.
S.
Serving. Dyer. 60. Sub le Seal. Dyer. 130.
T.
Thankful. 5. Co. 67. de understander. to understand Dyer 119.
W.
Wish. Dyer 56.
Latin among French.
A.
Armiger. 1 Co. 61. An. 1 To. 166.173.179.
E.
Etsi. 1 To. 155.163.166.157.177. Esset. 1 To. 184.190.
F.
Fuisset. 1 To. 186.
L.
London. 1 To. 556. Ad mensam. Kit. 45.
N.
Nec. 1 To. 174. bis. 175.176. bis. Nisi. 1 To. 358. In Nocte. Dyer. 128.
Nollent. 1 To. 178.
P.
Postea. Dyer. 114.
R.
Redibunt. Plo. 29.
S.
Sic. 1 To. 10. saepe. 154.161. bis. 186. saepe. Si non. 24. E. 3.51. Sub le
seal. Dyer. 130.
T.
Tam bien. 1 To. 167.173.215. Tam bon. 1 To. 424. Tam diu vive. 1 To. 436.
V.
Venellis. Kit. 35. Venderet. 1 To. 436 bis. Vellet payer. 1 To. 469.
Feasts.
The forms of rendering Festival days into Latin.

Christmas. Festum. New years day. Festum. Twelftide. Festum. Ascension day.
Festum. Easter Whitsontide. Shrovetide. Palm Sunday. The Conception. Festa. The
Nativity. Festa. The Annunciation. Festa. The Visitation. Festa. The
Purification. Festa. The Assumption. Festa.
Natlis Dni. Circumcico^nis Dni. Epiphanie Dni. Asccnco^nis Dni. Pascha.
Pentecostes. Carnispriviu. Carnivale. Dnica palmarum. Concepco^nis. be Marie
Virginis. Nativitatis. be Marie Virginis. Anu^nciaco^nis. be Marie Virginis.
Visitaco^nis. be Marie Virginis. Purificaco^nis. be Marie Virginis.
Assumpco^nis. be Marie Virginis.
Quinque festa Virginis. Vet intr 142.35. H. 6.7.

First Halyrood day. 3 May. Invenco^nis Sce^ crucis. Second holyrood day. 14.
Sept. Exaltaco^nis Sce^ crucis.
St. Ellens and finding of the holy Cross are all one. Mich. 6. E. 3.16.

Lent Season. Quadragesima. Ash Wednesday. Cineralia. Michaelmas day. Festum
sci^ Michis Archi^. Midsommer day. Festum Nativitatis sci Johis Bapte^.
Allhallontide. Festum omiu sco^rum. All Souls. Festum omiu ai^arum. Lammas day
the gule of August. Festum sci^ Petri ad vincula. gula Augusti. St. Peter's
Chair. Festum sci^ Petri in cathedra. Scu^s Petrus. Et aliquando, btus Petrus.
Scu^s Paulus. Et aliquando, divus Paulus. Sco^rum Petri and Pauli Aplorum.
Converco^nis sci Pauli. Sco^rum Phi and Jacobi Aplorum. Sco^rum Simonis and
Jude Aplorum. Sci Andree Apli, Sci Jacobi Apli. Sci Barthi Apli. Sci Johis
Evangelist. Sci Thome Apli. Sci Mathei Apli. Sci Mathie Apli. Sci Barnabe Apli.
Sci Marci Evangeliste. Sci Luce Evangeliste. Sci Steph. 1 Prothomartiris. Sci
Martini Epi^. Sci Johis ante portum latinam. Sci Johis Beverlacy. Sci Valentini
Epi^ and Martiris. Sci Nichi Epi^. Sce^ Lucie Virginis.
Names of Men.
In writing of all words, Clerks of the Court of Common Pleas ought to observe
the forms of the Cursitors of the Chancery used in Originals, which are the
Grounds of most Actions in the Court of Common Pleas, and particularly of
Christian Names, the most usual of which are as follows.
Names of Men.
A.
A Aron. Abel. Abdias. Abrahamus. Achilles. Adamus. Adrianus. Alanus. Albanus.
Albtus. Aldredus. Alex., Alexi. Ambrosius. Ananias. Andrea^. Anselmus.
Antonius. Apollo. Arthurus. Angustinus.
B.
Baldwinus. Baptista. Barnabas. Barthus. Bafilius. Beda. Benedcu^s. Benjaminus.
Bernardus. Botolphus. Brianus.
C.
Carolus. Ciprianus. Clemens. Conradus. Constantinus. Cornelius. Cristoferus.
Cutbtus.
D.
Daniel. David. Deodatus. Dionisius. Drugo. Dunsianus.
E.
Edwardus. Edmundus. Edwinus. Egbtus. Egidius. Elias. Elizeus. Ephraim, in
oibs. Erasmus. Esdras. Ethelbtus. Evanus. Everardus. Eusebius. Eustacius.
Ezechiel.
F.
Fabianus. Felix. Ferdinandus. Franciscus. Fredericus. Fulco.
G.
Gabriel. Galfru^s. Gawinus. Gedeon. Georgius. Gerardus. Germanus. Gervasius.
Gilbtus. Goutru^s. Gregorius. Griffinus. Guido.
H.
Henricus. Herbtus. Hercules. Hilarious. Hugo. Humfru^s.
I.
Jacob, in oibus. Jacobus. Jasperus. Jenkinus. Jeremias. Jeronimus.
Innocencius. Job, in oibs. Johannes. Jonathan. Jonas. Josephus. Josias. Joshua.
Isaacus. Isaias. Isidorus. Julianus. Julius. Justinus. Justinianus.
K.
Kenelmus.
L.
Lambtus. Lancelotus. Laurencius. Lazarus. Leonardus. Lionellus. Lodovicus.
Lucas. Lucianus.
M.
Malachias. Marcus. Marmaducus. Martinus. Matheus. Mathias. Mauricius.
Maximilianus. Michael, Michis. Milo. Morganus. Moses.
N.
Nathan. Nathaniel. Nichus.
O.
Oliuus. Osbtus. Oswaldus. Osmundus. Otho. Owinus. Osbtus.
P.
Patricius. Paulus. Percivallus. Petrus. Phus. Posthumus.
R.
Radu^s. Ranulphus. Raphael. Ricu^s. Riceus. Robtus. Rogus. Rolandus.
S.
Sabinus. Samuel. Sampson. Sebastianus. Sigismundus. Silvester. Simon. Simeon.
Solomon. Stephus. Swithinus.
T.
Theobaldus. Theodorus. Theophilus. Thomas. Thurstanus. Timotheus. Titus.
Tobias. Tristramus.
V.
Valentlnus. Valerius. Valerianus. Vincentius. Vitalis.
W.
Waltus. Wills. Wilfru^s. Wolstanus.
Z.
Zacharias.
Names of Women.
A.
ABigal. Agatha. Agnes. Alicia. Amata. Amicia. Avicia.
B.
Barbara. Beatrix. Blanchia. Brigitta.
C.
Cecilia. Clara. Clementia. Constancia. Gristiana.
D.
Debora. Dionisia. Dorcas. Dorothea. Dousabella.
E.
Editha. Elena. Elianora. Elizabeth. Emma. Etheldreda. Ethelburga. Eva.
F.
Fides. Florencia. Francisca. Frideswida.
G.
Gertruda. Gracia. Grisilda.
H.
Helena. Hestera.
I.
Jana. Jenetta. Jocosa. Johanna. Isabella. Iuditha. Juliana.
K.
Katina.
L.
Leticia. Lucia. Lucrecia.
M.
Mabella. Magdalena. Maria. Mariana. Margia. Margareta. Martha. Matilda.
Mercia. Millicencia. Mildreda.
O.
Oliva.
P.
Penelope. Petronilla. Philippa. Phillis. Priscilla. Prudencia.
R.
Rachel. Rebecca. Rosa. Rosamunda. Ruth.
S.
Sara. Sibilla. Susanna.
T.
Temperantia. Theodora. Thomasina.
U.
Ursula.
W.
Winifrida.
And it is to be noted that all Hebrew Names ending in l, are to be written in
the Nominative Case, without any dash or addition to the l, as Abel, Daniel,
Ezechiel, Gabriel, Michael, Raphael, Samuel, Abigal.

And so likewise properly are all Surnames ending in a double l, as Bell,
Aiskell, Battle, Flauell, without any addition of a dash.

Of the Retorns and Testes of Terms.
The Retorns are called. Briefly noted. QUindena Pasche. XV. Pas. Tres Pasche.
Tr Pas. Menic Pasche. m Pas. Quinque Pasche. Qque Pas. Crastino Ascenco^nis.
Cro^ Asc. Crastino Trinitatis. Cro^ Trin. Octabis Trinitatis. Oct Trin.
Quindena Trinitatis. XV. Trin. Tres Trinitatis. Tres Trin. Tres Michi^s. Tr
Mich. Mense Michis. m Mich. Crastino Animarum. Cro^ Aia^rum. Crastino Martini.
Cro^ mt. Octabis Martini. Oct mt. Quindena martini. XV. mt. Octabis Hillarii.
Oct Hill. Quindena Hillarii. XV. Hill. Crastino Purificaco^nis. Cro^ Pur.
Octabis Purificaco^nis. Oct Pur.

Retorns written at large.
A die Pasche in xv dies. A die Pasche in tres septimanas. A die Pasche in unu
mensem. A die Pasche in quinque septimanas. In Crastino Ascenco^nis Dni. In
Crastino Sce^ Trinitatis. In Octabis Sce^ Trinitatis. A die Sce^ Trinitatis in
xv dies. A die Sce^ Trinitatis in tres septimanas. A die Sci Michis in tres
septimanas. A die Sci Michis in unu mensem. In Crastino Aia^rum. In Crastino
Sci Martini. In Octabis Sci Martini. A die Sci Martini in xv dies. In Octabis
Sci Hillarii. A die Sci Hillarii in xv dies. In Crastino Purificaco^nis be
Marie. In Octabis Purificaco^nis be Marie.
In each Retorn are usually four special days, 1. Of Essoines. 2 Of Exceptions.
3. Of Retorna brevium. 4. Of Appearance, which is the last day of the Retorn.
USually the day of Appearance of each Return in the time of Terms is seven
days distant from other. But in Easter Term between quinque Pasche and Crastino
Ascenco^nis, are but five days, to wit from Wednesday on the Eve of the
Ascencon, which is the day of Appearance of quinque Pasche, until Monday after
Crastino Ascenco^nis, which is the last day of the Term. So likewise between
Crastino Trinitatis being Friday, and Octabis Trinitatis being Wednesday. And
between Crastino Animarum, being the sixth day of November and day of Appearance
of that Retorn, and Crastino Martini are nine days, the day f Appearance of the
said Crastino Martini being the fifteenth day of November; or the day after, if
that fifteenth day fail upon a Sunday.

Between Crastino Martini and Octabis Martini. Crastino Pur and Octabis Pur.
are six days.

Where the Essoin day falls on a Monday (as it does on Quindena Pasche, Tres
Pasche, Mense Pasche, Quinque Pasche, Octabis Trinitatis, quindena Trinitatis,
and Tres Trinitatis) the day of Exception, and the day of Retorna breviu are
both the same day, to wit the Tuesday.

And so likewise where any day of Appearance in Michaelmas or Hillary Terms
falls to be on a Wednesday.

Or where the Essoine day or day of Appearance in those Terms are put of for a
day longer by any Sunday or by All Souls day, or Candlemas day, having been
heretofore great holy days.

The Essoine day of Crastino Trinitatis is the Monday next after Trinity
Sunday, the day of Exception is on the Tuesday, the day of Retorna breviu is on
the Wednesday and the day of Appearance on the Friday being the first day of
Trinity Term; the Thursday being pretermitted, being Corpus Christi day,
heretofore a great Holy day.

The puisne Justice of the Court of Common Pleas keeps the Essiones at Westminster on
the Essoine day of Tres Michis, the next puisne Justice at Octabis Hillarii,
the next Senior Justice, at Quindena Pasche, and the Lord Chief Justice at
Crastino Trinitatis.

And note. That Hillary Term begins on the same day of the week, on which
Michaelmas Term before ends, and ends on the same day of the week, on which
Michaelmas Term began.

And the first day of Trinity Term is on the same day of the Month on which
Easter day falls, one Month being interposed.

The Essoine day of every Term is said to be (in) the Retorn, and every day
after said to be (post) the Retorn, as die lune in Mense Pasche, die Martis
quodx post mensem Pasche, in Rules or Writs.

All original Writs in Actions are retornable on a Retorn, as in Octabi, S^^
Hillarii, A die pasche in xv. dies, etc. And so all Process and proceedings
thereupon. All Writs and Actions not by Originals out of the Chancery, and
proceedings thereupon, as Attachments of Privilege, Bills against privileged
persons, Prohibitions, and the like are retornable and have continuance to days
certain, as, die lune in Mense pasche, die Martis quodx post mensem pasche.

The Counties in England and Wales are thus written.
BEd. Berk. Buk. Cantebr. Cestr. Cornub. Cumbr. Derb. Devon. Dors. Essex.
Eborum. Glouc. Heref. Hertf. Hunt, Kanc. Lanc. Leic. Lincoln. Midd. Monmouth.
Norff. Northt. Northumbr. Notingh. by the Curfitors, Not. by the Philizers.
Salop. Soms. Suff. Surr Sussex. Sutht. War. Westml. Wigorn. Wiltes. Angles.
Brecon. Cardigan. Carmarthen. Carnarvon. Denbigh. Flint. Glamorgan. Merioneth.
Mountgomie Pembrock. Radnor.
Cities and Towns having Sheriffs.
LOndon. Norwic. Civitas Eborum. Civitas Bristol. Civitas Glouc. Civitas
Lincoln. Civitas Coventr. Civitas Cestr. Villa Not. 2 Vic Civitas Cantuar.
Civitas Exon. Civitas Wigorn. Civitas Lich. Villa Southampton. Villa Pool. Vil.
la novi Castri super Tinan. Villa de Kingston super Hull. quelc 1 Vic.
The Bishops in England are thus styled.
ARchicpu^s Cantuar, Epu^s, Winton, London, Lincoln, Norwicen, Sarum, Heref.
Wigorn, Exon, Elien, Cicestren, Roffen, Bathon and Wellen, Coventr and Lich,
Glouc, Bristol, Oxon, de Burgo Sci Petri alias Petriburgen, Bangoran, Meneven,
Asaphen, Landaven infra: quodvinciam Cantuar.

Archiepu^s Eborum. Epu^s, Dunelm, Carliolen, -- Cestr infra quodvinciam Eborum.

Additions of Honor or Degree.
Du^s Rex. Dux. Marchio. Comes. vicecomes, Baro. Du^s. Baronettus. Miles. Miles
and Baronettus. Miles Balnei. Armig. Genosus. Aldru^s London. Sacre Theology
Doctor, seu quodfessor. sacre Theology baccaluarius. -- Clicu^s. in Medicinis
Doctor, Legum Doctor, Serviens Dni^ Regis ad Legem. Serviens ad legem.

Dna^ Regina. Ducissa. Marchionissa. Comitissa Dotissa. Dna^. vidua. Spinster.

And in Recitals, Du^s Rex. Dna^ Regina. Dux. Ducissa. Marchio. Marchionissa.
Comes. Comitissa. Vicecomes. vicecomitissa. Epu^s.

The Philizers of the Court of Common Pleas, and their Office Rolls.
LOndon. Midd. Cantebr. Hunt. Ro^ 16. Norff. Norwic. Ro^ 17. Lincoln. Civitas
Lincoln. Ro^ 11. Suff. Ro^ 5. Essex. Herts. Ro^ 9. Kanc. Surr. Sussex. Ro^ 13.
Devon. Dors. Soms. Civitas Exon. Civitas Bristol. Villa Pool. Ro^. 15. War.
Leic. Not. Derb. Civitas Coventr. villa Not To. 7. Salop. Staff. Northt.
Rotel. Civitas Lich. Ro^ 19. Wiltes. Sutht. Villa Southampton. Ro^ 18. Bed.
Berk. Buck. Oxon. Ro^ 3. Eborum. Civitas Eborum. Villa de Kingston super Hull.
Ro^ 20. Glouc. Civitas Glouc. Wigorn. Civitas Wigorn. Cornub. Heref. Ro^ 6.
Northumbr. Westml. Cumbr. Villa novi Castri super Tinam. Ro^. 21. Monmouth. One
person is Philizer, Exigenter and Prothonotarie. Ro^. 23.
Exigenters.
LOndon. Midd. Cantebr. Hunt. Kanc. Surr. Sussex. Devon. Dors. Soms. Civitas
Bristoll. Civitas Exon. Villa Pool. Ro^. 14.

Eborum. Civitas Eborum. Villa de Kingston super Hull. Salo^p. Staff. Northt
Rotel Wiltes. Sutht. Villa Southampton Northumbr. Cumbr. Westml. Villa novi
Castri super Tinam. Ro^ 21. The same person is also Philizer of the four last
Counties.

Suff. Cornub. Glouc. Civitas Glouc. Wigorn. Civitas Wigorn. Heref. Bed. Berk.
Buck. Oxon. Ro^. 4.

Norff. Norwic. Essex. Hertf. Lincoln. Civitas Lincoln. Derb Leic. War.
Civita; Coventr. Not. Villa Not. Ro^ 8.

The chief Prothonotary, has Ro^ 1. The second Prothonotary. Ro^ 2. The other
Prothonotary. Ro^ 12. The Clerk of the outlaries Ro^ 10. The Clerk of the
Juries. Ro^ 22. The Clerk of the Errors. Ro^. 24.
The chief Justices or other Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, before whom
Pleas were held, whose names must be alleged in Writs of Scire Fac. on
judgments-in their times.
EDmundus Anderson Miles Capitlis Justic de Banco tmino Pasche Anno 24. Eliz.
and obiit primo Die Augusti. Anno tcio Jacobi Regis.

Franciscus Gaudy Miles Officiu illud exercuittmino Sci Michis quodx sequen
tantum and obiis 15o. Dec

Thomas Walmesley Miles Sen Jestic locum tenuit tmino Sci Hillarii tunc quodx
sequen and continuavit usque diem lune in quinden^ Trinitatis Anno 4^ Jac, and
plita fuer coram eo Petro Warburton Milice Georgio Kingsmil Milite and Thoma
Coventry.

Edwardus Coke Miles in officiu Capitlis Justic jurat fuit dco^ die lune in
quindena T^^n. Anno 4 Jac and die lune quodx post tres septimanas sci Michis
Anno 11o. Jac fuit constitut Capitlis Justic de Banco Regis.

Henr Hobart Miles and Baronettus ei successit die Martis quodx ante Mensem Sci
Michis quodx sequen and obiit in vacacone quodx post tminu Sci Michis Anno
primo Caroli primi Regis.

Ricu^s Hutton Miles Sen Justic locum tenuit tmino Sci Hillarii tunc quodx
sequen and continuavit usque quindenam Martini Anno scdo^ Caroli primi Regis,
and plita fuerunt coram eo Francisco Harvey Georgio Croke Milite and Henr
Yelverton Milite Justic Dui Regis de Banco.

Thomas Richardson Miles Jur^at fuit in officiu pdcm ult die pdci tmini Sci
Michis Anno 2 and tmino Sci Michis Anno 7 Caroli primi Regis fuit Constitut
Capitli, Justic de Banco Regis.

Robtus Heath Miles Jurat fuit Capitlis Justic de Banco tmino Sci Michis Anno
septimo Caroli primi Regis and continuavit usque tminuu Sci Michis Anno 10
ejusdem Regis, in Oct Michis, Anno 10 dci Regis plita fuerunt coram Rico^
Hutton Milite Georgio Vernon Milite and Francisco Crawley Milite Justic.

Johes Finch Miles jurat fuit Capitlis Justic 16 die Octobris Anno decimo
Caroli primi Regis and continuavit usque 26 die Januarii Anno 15. ejusdem Regis.

Edwardus Littleton Mile s jurat fuit Capitlis Justic de banco dco^ 26 die
Januarii and con inuavit usque 26 diem Januarii Anno 16 dci Regis Caroli primi.

Johes Banks Miles jurat fuit in officu pdcu dco^ 26 die Januarii Anno 16
Caroli primi Regis and obiit 28 die Decembris Anno 20 ejusdem Regis. Et tmino
sci Hillarii tunc quodx sequen plita fuer coram Francisco Crawley Milite
Edmundo Reve Milite and Robto Foster Milite Justic. Et sic continuauunt usque
mensem Sci Michis Anno 21 dci Regis.

De mense Michis Crastino Aiarum Crastino Martini and Octabis Martini Anno 21
Caroli primi Regis plita fuer coram Francisco Crawley Mil. Edmundo Reve Milite
Robto Foster Milite and Petro Phesant Justic.

De quindena Sci Martini Anno 21. Caroli primi Regis Plita fuer coram Edmundo
Reve Milite and Petro Phesant Justic and sic continuauunt usque quind^n^m
Pasche Anno 23 ejusdem Regis Ante quem diem deu^s Edmundus Reve obiit and
Johannes Godbold fuit fact Justic qui obiit ante tminu Sci Michis Anno 24. dci
Regis and Ricu^s Cresheld fuit consti- Justic.

Oliuus St. John and Thomas Beddingfield fuer constitut Justic de Banco. Ante
oct pur Anno Dni 1648. Ricus Cresheld and Thomas Beddinfield sursum reddider
Officia sua Justic. Et Petrus Phesant, and Oliverus St. John continuauunt soli
Justic.

Oliverus St. John, constitut Capitlis Justic de quindena Martini Anno 24. Car.
1 Regis.

Note that Easter Term 1648. Anno 12 Car 2 Regis was adjourned to Crastinu
Ascenc^nis Quo die plita fuer coram Robto Foster Milite and Robto Hide Milite
Justic Dni Regis de Banco.

The Pleas so continued till Tres Trinitatis following Quo die plita fuer coram
Robto Foster Milite Robto Hide Milite and Thoma Tirrell Justic Dni Regis de
Banco.

Orlandos Bridgman Miles and Baronettus fuit Capitlis Justic de Banco tres
Michis Anno 12^. Car 2 Regis.

Johes Vaughan Miles jurat fuit Capitlis Justic Crastino Ascenco^nis Anno 20
Caroli Scdi^ Regis and obiit in vacaco^ne tmini Sci Michis Anno 26 dci Regis.

Franciscus North Miles constitut Capitlis Justic primo die tmini Sci Hillarii
Annis 26, and 27. Caroli sedi Regis.

Of the Cursitors and their forms.
OF London and Midd. are 4. Cursitors. Of Devon and Kent 2. Of Lincoln and
Somset. 2. Of York and Westml. 1. Staff. and Wiltes 1. Essex and Berk 1. Dors
and Northumbr 1. Suff. and Hunt 1. Glouc and Cantebr 1. Buk and Bed 1. Norff.
and Cumbr 1. Salo^p and Surr 1. Sussex and Wigorn 1. Hertf. and Derb. 1. Northt
and Not 1. Leic and Cornub 1. Oxon and Rotel 1. Heref. and Monmouth 1. Sutht
and War 1.

The Order of particulars used by the Cursitors Writs of Lands, is as follows.
Honor de A cum pertin. Maniu de C cum pertin. Foresta de F cum pertin. Hundrim
de H cum pertin Scitus Manerii de K cum pertin. Baronia de B cum pertin. Burgus
de D cum pertin. Chacea de E cum pertin. Parcus de I cum pertin. Scitus
Monastii de L cum pertin.
Mesuagiu. Cotagiu. Horreum. Stabulum. Shopa. Cellariu. Toftum. Molendinu.
Columbariu. Marcellum. curtilagiu. Gardinu. Pomariu. tra. Pratum. Pastura.
Boscus. Jampna and Bruer. Mora. Iuncaria. Mariscus Friscus and salsus. Alnetum.
Ruscaria. tra aqua Coopta. Reditus.

De annuali reditu centum Solidorum exeun de uno Mesuagio cum pertin. reddit
gallorum, gallinarum, unius libre piperis.

De officio ballivat de C cum pertin

De uno feodo Militis.

Co^ia pasture. Co^ia pasture que ptinet ad unu Mesuagiu, etc. pastura ad
centum oves. liba piscaria in aqua de E. libtate faldagii. Una saliua (a Salt
Pit.) Una bullaria aque salse. Una Whaita. Una Kaia. Liba Warenna. Uno Chimino
nundinis and mcat cum pertin. De visu franc pleg cum pertin.

De bonis and catallis felonu. Extrahur.

De Rco^ria de B cum pertin ac oibs and omi^mod. decimis eidem rco^rie spectan
and ptinen.

De pbenda in ecclia de C cum pertin. De porco^ne decimarum.

De advacaco^ne ecclie de C. De advocaco^ne vicarie ecclie de C, ac advocaco^ne
medictatis ecclie de Sin quatuor parts dividend.

De medietate unius mesuagii.

Co^ia pasture, ad o^es parts; and non medietas aut tcia pars. c^i s passagiu
ultra aquam Thamis.

De exitibs quodvenien de custodia jail. abbie de S and tribs rodis tree and
redditu tot panu and tot lagenarum cvisie per diem vel per septimanam vel anmi
cum pertin in villa de W.

The Rule in the Register is in these two Verses.
uagiu um endinu lumbariu dinu a Mes. Toft. Mol. Col. Gar. Terr. tum tura cus
era Pra. Pas. Bos. Bru. mora. ria cus tum caria ditus Iunca. Maris. Alne. Rus.
Re. Sectare priora.

These Writs following, must be observed for the particulars according to the
Register. Formedon. Recto clauso and paten. ingru in le post per cui vel quibus.

Note if there be any exception in the Writ it must come last. horreum,
stabulum, pomariu, lie not in a Writ of Entry, where a Mesuage is demanded,
which pass as appurtenant to a Mesuage.

A Cotage posseth by the name of a Mesuage. And an Orchard by the name of a
Garden.

But if no Mesuage be demanded, horreum will lie alone.

The Cursitors in the Testes of their Writs write, primo, scdo^, tcio, quarto,
quinto die, at length. afterward in numeral figures, as vi, vii, viii, ix, x,
xi. die, etc. without an o over. And the year of the Kings Reign at length. And
they write xv. as a die Pasche in xv dies, without cim over head. And that
order I advise to be held by the Clerks of the Common Pleas; for the
Common Pleas Clerks ought to conform themselves to them as near as may be,
their Writs being the foundation of Actions.

Forms of Doggetting Causes.
Libo in debo.
London. ss. Needler quod Bowler. -- Ro^. 341. Wild quod Child. -- Ro^. 341.
Sile. 2 narr.
L. ss. Idem quod Rogers. -- Ro^ dco^. Cragg quod Eden. -- Ro^ dco^.
Abindicaco^ Attorn in debo.
Southt. ss. Willis quod Eden. Ro^ 732. usus Pittis unu Attorn Ro^ 732.
Utl reus quod insufficien retorno cum ballio.
Midd. ss. Shorter utl. ads White. Ro^ 1273.
Non quods in tu^s.
Eborum, ss. Lawrence ads Winter. -- Ro^ dco^. Delibaco^ orig in quare impedit
de Recordo. Hertf. ss. Ellis us Tomson. -- Ro^ 407. hecorp agard sur
Attachment. H ss. Idem quodpr persona usus Holmes. Ro^ dco^ Execuco^ per
defalt. Surr. ss. Perrot quod Duck. -- Ro^ 924. usus Jenkins. -- Ro^ 924.
Subpa^ agard sur informaco^n.
Kanc. ss. Wilson qui tam, etc. usus Downs. Ro^ dco^. quodhilico^ agard. Leic.
ss. Major quod Evans usus Carpenter. Ro^ 1092. Ingrus in le post. 1 voc.
Lincoln. ss. Evers and al quodpr personis Rg 23. French quodpr persona. Rg 23.
Su^m in le post.
L. ss. Willis quodpr persona -- Ro^ dco^. Farmery quod Todd -- Ro^ dco^.
Sile, ingru^s in lepost. 2 voc per sum. 1 voc cum mittimus. 2 voc. 3 voc cum
mittimus and sum.

Lilo in casu, debo, tu^s lilo spial in debo, etc. in debo sup statut. non
inform, nic dic in casu. debo, etc.

Incripitur narr, bar, etc. in debo, trans, etc.

Nic dic al repli in dett, trans. etc. Quer non quods ad bar. quod defcu
inucco^nis in exitu. Exit spial in trans. replevin, covenant, quodhibico^n.

Non assumsit. non cul in casu.

Non cul in acco^ne super statut. exit in acco^ne sup statut.

Ne unques receiver. ne unques baylie. plene computavit.

Non cul in conspiracy. Demurrer al narr, bar, replicaco^n, in covenant, etc.

Nil debet per pria^m nil debet per legem. Non detinet per priam, etc.

per minas. per dures. non est fcm. non est fcm al release. Non est fcm spiale.

Deius age. Condico^ns perform. Condico^ns perform spia^l.

Plene adm, plene adm spia^l. ne unques exec.

Ne unques seisie que dower. Non tenure in dower.

Ne unques accouple en loyal Matrimony.

Extent. agard sur stat mchant.

Exitus spia^l in formedon. Ne dona pas.

Non tenet insimul in partico^ne

Non ccpit in Replevin. Exit spia^l inde.

Non null in rescous. riens arrere in rescous.

Null tiel record in debo. Sile in scifac. Nic dic al scifac. execuco^ per
defalt.

Non cul in trans. non cul al novel assignement.

De son assault demesne. Null wast fait.

per pria^m al part, per legem al resid.

Non inform al part, per priam (vel exit spia^l) al resid.

Placita's useful in Warrants of Attornie and Scirefac.
IN formedon, Entry, and other real Actions, the Venire fac. and Warrants of
Attornie are, deplito tree.

De plito assie nocumenti. Co. Entr 92. assie redisci^re vet intr. 191.

De plito tree unde Scire Fac. de plito debi unde Scire Fac.

De plito dotis unde nichil het.

De plito quare impedit. de plito vasti.

De plito de Quo jure. Ra entr 540.

De quo Warranto. Vet intr 133.

De plito quodhibico^nis. de plito Audite querele, Conspirationis.

De plito jurate xxiv Militum ad convincend duodecim Jur cujusdam prime
inquisico^nis de plito transgr. vel, de plito Attinct.

De plito raptus custody. intruco^nis maritagio non satisfacto. valoris
maritagii.

De plito de quid juris clamat. de quem reddit. reddit.

De plito partico^nis faciend. de plito warantic carte.

De plito Annui redditus. Ra Entr 269 bis. 11 H. 4.43.

De plito detenco^nis scriptorum M. 7. E. 4.3.34. Vet. intr. 106.

In dett and detinue, de plito debi Keil 119.

Warrants of Attornie in dett, detinue anuitie and raco^nabili part bonorum to
be, de plito debi. 17. E. 3.17. not good in Annuity. P. 8. E. 3.33.

De plito debi super statuto mcatorio. de plito convenco^nis fracte.

De plito tusgr. transgr super casum. de plito transgr and ejecco^nis firm.

Quare ejecit infra terminu. de plito sect molendine.

Acco^ usus hospitatorem de bonis perdit de plito transgr super casum Co. Entr.
347.

De plito transgr. contra formam ordinaco^nis de hospitatoribus edit. and
quodvis Plac 42.

Sile de negligente custodia ignis.

De plito capco^nis and injuste detenco^nis auiorum. vel, vuius equi.

De plito tnsgr and contempt. contra formam Statut. de scandalo Magnat edit and
quod vi^s Introd. 85.

Sile. contra formam statut de hute^s and clam edit.

Sile statut. erga eos qui fac ingrm in aliqua tras seu te^nta ubi ingiu^s non
datur per legem edit and quodvis vel. erga eos qui aliquam personam de
aliquibus tris seu te^ntis manuforti expellunt and disseiis edit and quodvis.
Ra. Entr 355.

Statut contra imaginatores fabricatores quodnunciatores and lectores Florum
fco^rum munimentorum ad destruend and per turband possessionem and titlm
ligcorum dni Regis edit and quodvi^s Ra. Entr 3.

Statut contra malefco^res in parcis and vivariis edit. Ra. Entr 336.

Statut. erga servientes nup edit. and quodvi^s vet. intr 5.

De tusgr and contempt contra formam Statut contra transportaco^nem granorum
ligni and victual edit.

Contra formam Statut de manutentoribus and sustentatoribus querelarum fact.
edit.

De plito tusgr. contra formam ordinaco^nis de muliere abduct. cum bonis viri
edit. and quodvi^s.

Contra formam Statuti quod manutenco^ne classis edit. and quodvi^s.

Contra formam statuti contra illicit. usur edit. and quodvi^s.

De plito tusgr super Statut. quoth. nullus distringatur per auia carucarum suarum
edit. and quodvi^s.

De plito tusgr and contempt. contra formam statuti de punico^ne humo^i
personarum que co^mittent seu quodcurarent aliquod voluntariu perjuriu edit.

Contra formam statuti contra rectores and vicarios qui non sunt residentes in
and ad beneficia sua nup edit. and quodvi^s. Ra. Entr. 599.

Contra formam statuti in Parliamento dui Regis nunc anno regni sui tciodecimo
capitlo scdo tent. edit. and quodvi^s. Ra. Entr. 598.

Forms different between the Clerks of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas.
King's Bench Forms.
APud London videlt. in perochia be Marie de Arcubus in warda de Cheap London.

Anno Regni dni Caroli scdi nunc Regis Angl. decimo tcio.

Si perdcu^s Qacco^nem suam pdcam inde usus eum here seu manutenere debeat, etc.

Quoad venire vi and armis seu quicquid quod est contra pacem dci dni Regis
nunc dic quoth ipe^ non est inde culpabilis.

Silit. etc. Jo^ ven inde Jurata coram dno^ Rege apud Westminster die Jovis quodx
post Octabas Purificaco^nis be^ Marie Et qui nec etc. ad recogn, etc. quia tam,
etc. Idem dies dat. est partibus pdci^s ibm, etc.

Et heas ibi tunc hoc bre.

Cepit and abcariavit.

Decimo tercio. decimo quarto. decimo quinto. decimo sexto.

Septemdecim. octodecim. novemdecim.

Et alia enormia ei intulit contra paccm dci dni Regis nunc ad dampnu ipi^us Q.
december librarum. Et inde quodduc sectam, etc.

Messuagiu Cottagiu sigillat.

Common Pleas Forms.
Apud London in Parochia be Marie de arcubus in warda de Cheap.

Anno Regin dni Regis nunctercio decimo.

Si pdcus Qacco^nem suam pdcam usus enim here debeat, etc.

Quo ad venire vi and armis dic quoth ipe^ in nullo est inde culpabilis quodut
pdcus Q superius usus eum queritur.

Silit. Jo^ prec est vic quoth venire fac hic in Octabis Purificaco^nis be Marie
xii, etc. per quos, etc. Et qui nec, etc. ad recogn, etc. quia tam, etc.

Et heas ibi hoc bre.

Cepit and asportavit.

Terciodecimo. quarto decimo. quinto decimo, sexto decimo. december and septem.
december and octo. december and novem.

Et alia enormia ei intulit ad grave dampnum ipi^us Q and contra pacem dni
Regis nunc, etc. Et in fine narr. Et alia enormia, etc. ad grave dampnu, etc.
Et contra pacem, etc. unde dic quoth deteriorat est and dampnum het ad valenciam x
lb. Et inde quodduc. sectam, etc.

Mesuagiu, cotagiu, signat.

Parts of the World.
THe East. East-part. An East Wind. West. West-part. A Western-Wind. North. The
North Wind. North-part. Northeast-part. Northwest-part. The Northeast-Wind. The
Northwest-Wind. South. A South Wind. South-part. South-east wind. South-east
part. South-west part. South-west wind. South-westernly.
ORiens. Pars Orientiis. Eurus. ventus Orientlis, Occidens. Pars occidentlis.
Ventus occidentlis. Boreas. Septentrio. Aquilo. ventus borealis. Pars borealis,
aquilonia, Septentrionalis. Pars euroaquilonia, Boreazephiralis. Cecias.
Euroaquilo. Corus. Auster. Meridianu. Ventus australis. Notus. Pars australis.
meridionalis Euronotus. Pars euronotalis. Pars notozephiralis. Africus.
Africius.
Terre abuttan super co^em viam usus le North-east and super, etc. usus le
South-west. 1 Co. 63.

Ex part australi ufus occidentem Anglice, the South-west side, etc.

Weights. Quantities.
A Balance. bilanx. Bilancea. Pry. 196. Gold-Weights. Lancule. The Scale of a
Balance. Lanx. The hole thereof. Agma. The Beam or Shank of a Balance.
Stratera. librile. trona. Cowel. The Tongue of a Balance. Lingula. examen. The
bandle of a Beam. Ansa. To weigh. Ponderare. A weighing. Libraco^. pensura. A
weight. Simbella. pondus. Pondus, pondi a pound. 2 To. 247. pondus ponderis n t
in the dictionary, but pondo, indeclinabile, is a pound-weight there. We use
librata, for a pound weight, dimidiu unius librate, quarteriu unius librat.
dimidiu quarterii. unius librate. An Ounce, uncia. dimidiu unius uncie. tria
quartria unius uncie. A Scruple. Scrupulus. A Grain. Granu. A Dram. Dram.
Duodena, Centena, Millena, I find to be used for Dozens, Hundreds, and
Thousands. as well of things in Measure, as of things in Weight and number.
Duodena panis, a Dozen of Bread. vet. intr. 3 Sile panni. Pry. 185. Sile
Cannabi. 1 Fo. 157. Due duodene tenie and tres duodene ligularum. Co. Entr 125.
An hundred-weight, an hundred in number. Centena. Centena de Madder. Kit. 252.
Pry. 185. Centena. pisciu. Pry. 303. Centena. pelliu. Pry. 185. Pondus unius
Centene. Ra Entr. 3. De centena ponderis ollarum centena de bunches allei. Pry
186. Millena. a thousand de Billets, Fagots, etc. Pry. 185.186. A Weigh. Waga.
Cypha. Wayea. continet 256 lb. Spel. 426. Waga. Minshew. 1 Mon. 515. Waga
casei. vet; intr 235. And so used in the Exchequer. Weya salis, granorum, etc.
Pry. 303. Waya. Fle. 73. A todd of Wool. Laniscus. 28 lb. Todda lane. Ash 88.
Centum serpleras and 3 perocas lane Reg. 126. Saccos and petras lane. Reg. 279.
A Clove of Wool is 8 lb. a Stone is 12 lb. in Com. Heref. A Stone. petra. Fle.
73. Unus panis ponderans octavam partem unius petre 1 Mon 482. Peisa. 1 Mon.
600. Pondus salis. 2 Mon. 1008. Trona, tronagiu Cow. a Toll paid for weighing.
A Cartload, Carectata. Pry 197. An Horsload. Su^magiu and sumagiu. Pry. 197.
Lex. 114. 1 To. 103. Su^ma unius equi. 2 Mon. 1001. Su^ma salis. 2 Mon.
256.907.978.824. Su^ma frumenti. 2 Mon. 593.210.82.886. Su^ma fabarum. 1 Mon.
149.325. tritici. 1 Mon. 1017. onus equinu. A Tun. Tonna per Wase dict Doliu. A
Chaldron of Coals. Celda carbonu. Chaldra. Pry. 183. A Fother of Lead. Fothera
plumbi. carbonu. Pry. 185 6 pecie plumbi. Reg 126. Charrus plumbi. Fle. 73. A
Last. Lasta. haleciu. piscis. Ra. Entr 161. Spel. 4^6. Lex. 78. Octo meisas
alleciu. 2 Mon. 1037. Valisonem anguiliarum. 2 Mon 299. Pensentum anguillarum
40. valet. Grossas anguillarum. 1 Mon. 363. A Seem. Sema piscis. Ra. Entr. 256.
Batellum feni. carecta feni. Pry 186. Trussum feni. Pry. 197. Paccum mcie. Pry
197. Pakellum. Pry. 197. Trussellum panni. Pry 188. Dosser pisciu. Pry 186.
Timber rerum venaliu. Pry 167. sepe. Bale Pry 185. sepe. Bala cujuslt
avoirdepois. Pry 197. Mitta. Lex. 86. Dyker corii. Pry 185. Dakris. Fle. 73. De
quolt. sendello. afforciat 2 de libra. Pry 185. quintallum cere. Pry 25.
pbendaria frumenti. 1 Mon. 149. Fotinellum. Fle 73. Pecia de fustian. Pry 185.
A Gross. Grossa. 1 Mon. 118.
Measures.
A Pint. Pinta. 1 Fo. 259. A Gill. Hemina, emina potus. 2 Mon. 727.730. A
Quart. Quarta. Vet intr. 178. Sextarius. 1 Fo. 259. Statut de mensuris. A
Pottle. Potellus. 2 sextarios. 1 Fo. 259. A Gallon. Lagena. Co. Entr. 370. Le
gallon. Co. Entr. 371. Lagena olei. 2 Mon. 509. Laguncula. 1 Mon. 712. Congios
ydromelli. 2 Mon. 838. Gallon 1 Fo. 251. Galones, potellos, and quartas. Stat
de mensur. Gades, potellos. Eodem Stat. Barillatum vini continen jalonem. Fle.
70. jalonem Fle. 72. Sextciu^. 2 To. 86. A Barrel. Cadus. Barellus. Vet intr
235. Pry. 185. Ra. Entr. 16.204.653. 1 Bull. 126. Het. 93. A Kilderkin.
Semicadus. A Firkin. Firkinus. A Runlet. Orcula. amphora. A Tunn. Tonna. 2 Mon.
528. Wase Dict. Doliu. dolit lum. A Cask. Casca. Fo. 307. Dolia de gangeto
Anglicano. Ry. 355. Doliu haleciu and cadus haleciu. 1 Mon. 83. A Butt. Butta.
A Pipe Pipa. butta vini. Ra. Entr. 168. Spel. 114. le butt. Co. Entr. 371. Pipa
de Allome. Ra. Entr. 557. Le Pipe. Co. Entr. 371. Tonellum cvisie. 1 Mon. 888.
Tunellum vini. 1 Mon. 1011. 2 Dolia sive 4 pipas vini rubei. 1 Mon. 976 Modiu
vini. 2 Mon. 962. bis 981.995.1014. Modiaco^ vini. 2 Mon. 995.1014. A Quarter
of Wheat. quartiu tritici. Brac. 35. A Bushel. modius. dimidiu modii. Busellus,
busellum. Vet intr. 57. Spel. 114. Fle. 71. Stat de mensur, and de iudicio
collistrigii. 2 Mon. 471.971. A Peck. Modiolus. Mina frumenti. 2 Mon. 209.979.
bis. 1010. Mitte brasii. 1 Mon. 136. Salis. 2 Mon. 828. Skeppe frumenti,
hordei, Salis. 1 Mon. 405.873. 2 Mon. 44.828. Unu eskeppa brafii. 1 Mon. 823.
30 eskeptas vive annone ad molendinu. 2 Mon. 96. 12 hopas frumenti and 24 hopas
avene. 1 Mon. 650. Sestera frumenti. 2 Mon. 42. Sextarius brasii. 2 Mon. 42.
frumenti. 1 Mon. 136. Salis. 2 Mon. 796. 978. Ambre salis. Spel. 33. 2 Mon.
112. Pellum salis. 2 Mon. 528. peliam. 2 Mon. 528. Waga salis de salinis. 1
Mon. 515. Coros tritici. Brac. 35. cicannocos frumenti. Pry 202. 3 Mensure
frumenti and 3 mensure brasii. 1 Mon. 665. pbendaria frumenti. 1 Mon. 149. Uua
summa de nucibus 3 Mon. 13. A Yard. Virgata. An Ell. Ulna. Ulna ferrea Regis.
Johis. 2 Mon. 383. A Fathom. Orgya. A Span. Spithama. An Inch. Pollex. Stat de
admensurac tree. A Nail. Unguis. unu le Nail. Co. Entr. 125. A Foot. Pes.
pedata. An hands breadth. Palma, palmata. A Perch or Pole. pertica. Stat de
tris mensurand. pertica 16 pedum. 2 Mon. 1012. 15 pedum and dimid. 2 Mon. 157.
18 pedum. 2 Mon. 157. 18 pedum. and dimid. 1 Mon. 828. 20 pedum. 2 Mon. 21.204.
Ry 349. 24 pedum. 2 Mon. 608. 25 pedum. 2 Mon. 1007. A Furlong. Furlongus. Spel
303. Quarentena. 1 Mon. 923. Stadiu Brac. 8. tra Longitudine 15 quarentenas and
Latitudine 9. quarentenas. 2 Mon. 853 ter. 7 perticat in Latitudine and 7
quadrentenas in Longitudine. 1 Mon. 922, 923. A Linck is the tenth part of a
Pole. Longitudo and Latitudo acre tree. Dyer 303. 1 Mon. 313. Stat de tris
mensurand. A Mile. Milliare. A League. leuca. 2 leucarum in Longitudine. 2 Mon.
853. Leucata in Latitudine. Mon. 768. 3 Ligarum Longitudine. 1 Mon. 712. A Bay
of Building. Baia. mensura 24 pedum.
Numbers.
INnumbers, the Cursitors and Clerks of the Common Pleas use, december and septem
for 17. december and octo for 18. december and novem for 19. In the Kings Bench the
Clerks use, septemdecim, octodecim, novemdecim. So the Cursitors and
Common Pleas Clerks write tciusdecimus, quartusdecimus, quiutusdecimus,
sextusdecimus. The Kings Bench Clerks, decimus tcius, decimus quartus, decimus
quintus, decimus sextus, but they agree in decimus septimus, decimus octavus,
decimus nonus.

Our Forefathers used quat viginti, for 80. Ra^. Entr. 376. Fnbr 27 Reg
48.148.240. and the like, (which now are disused) as trecies triginta. 1 Mon.
302. quinquies viginti pedes. 2 Mon. 998. sexies viginti. Ry. 18.730.740.
septies viginti. Reg 38. octies viginti. Reg iudic 48. novies viginti 1 Mon
815. decies viginti. 1 Mon 301.654. quadraginta and quinquies viginti. Reg
iudic 38.

Sometimes we yet use in pleadings sexies viginti, when a hundred is reckoned
(as in some things it is) 120 as, computan sexies viginti ad centenam. Centum
oves numo sexics viginti. 1 Mon 865. pastura ad centnm oves per magnu centum. 1
Mon 488.780. per maius centum. 1 Mon 808.780.

Sile per minus centum sexies viginti. 2 Mon. 321.

Imprimis for first, has been and is frequently used in Writings. where we
find it so we so render it, otherwise most properly we use, primo scdo, tcio,
etc.

Secondario, secondly. Pry.

We usually for one thousand write Mill; for thousands Millia, and Millibus.
as tribus Millibus acrarum tree. Mill acris prati. Co. Entr. 415.625. duorum
Milliu acrarum tree. Co. Entr. 331. Tria Millia acrarum tree. Co. Entr.
219.328.414.682. 2 Co. 85. Yet sometimes it is otherwise found, as triu Mill,
5 Mill, and duarum Mill. 2 Co. 85. 10 Co. 2. Duo Millia sexcentas and viginti
acras. Co. Entr. 329. So likewise in sums of money. Tresdecimus, quatuordecimus,
quinquedecimus, sextusdecimus. Pry 210. Duo Millenaria and dimidiu anguillarum.
1 Mon 363. Millenariu sticarum anguillarum. 1 Mon 515.676. Dimidiu Millenariu.
1 Mon 626. Dimidiu Millariu. 2 Mon. 970. Miliariu anguillarum. 1 Mon 620. 20
Millia anguillarum and Mill and quinquies Centum grossas anguillarum and 60
esterlings. 1 Mon. 518. Quatuor Centum anguillarum videlt 9 and 7 esticks. 2
Mon 880.
Of duodena, Centena and Millena, I have treated of before. Titlo weights.

Sums.
THe Cursitors, and accordingly the Clerks of the Common Pleas for all sums
demanded, not exceeding 5 lb- make their Writs by shillings and pence as,
nonaginta tres solidos, and quatuor denarios, Centum solidos. But in pleading
sums in Writings, Clerks are to follow the words of the writings.

King's Bench Clerks in sums demanded, follow not that order, but use pounds
under five, as 4 lb. 6 s. 8 d.

In sums demanded above 5 lb, the Cursitors make their Writs by pounds,
shillings and pence, as, viginti tres libras and duos solidos, viginti and tres
libras sex solidos and octo denarios. yet antiquity did not punctually observe
that order. We find Centum and quatuor solidos and the like. Co. Entr. 408.434.
M. 7. E. 3.76.

A penny denarius. denariolus. 2 Inst. 172. An halfpenny. Obolus. A Farthing.
quadrans. tcia pars quadrantis. A Groat. dram. we usually make it quatuor
denarios. A Shilling. Solidus. A Mark. Marca. which our Ancestors used in
computation of Sums. We use ordinaily, tresdecim solidos, and quatuor denarios,
unless in translation of Deeds. A pound. libra. Money. Moneta, pecunia. yet for
moneys we commonly use denarii, as possessionat de december libris in pecuniis
numatis ut de denariis suis quodpriis. A Mint. Monetariu. in Stanford, concess
Abbi. 1 Mon 65. Sile in Reading. 1 Mon 417. Falsarius cunei. Ry. 479. coined.
cuneatus.
Rent is demanded by the name of sex librat, december solidat, sex denarat and una
obolat redditus.

Solidi blanci. 3 Mon 352. blanca. Spel 100. Nu^mus unus. 1 Mon 181. Reddit 12.
nu^morum. 2 Mon 295. 5 marcas, 4 folidos, and 4 nu^mos. 1 Mon 999. 40 nu^matas
tree. 2 Mon 21.299.531. 20 solidat tree in Manio and 20 nu^matas tree in eod
manio. 2 Mon. 108. Sile. 2 Mon. 531. 60 Libras numo. 2 Mon 17.31. libras
Turronenses. Ry. 286. 20 Oras solvend. 2 Mon. 869. 30 lb. Stlingorum blancorum.
2 Mon 31. Valent Stling. 2 Mon 471. 26 lb. Blanc. 2 Mon 82. 40 lb. meri argenti
and 40 lb. purissimi argenti. 1 Mon 244. 15 Millibus argenri. Ry. 161. Duo.
Millia librarum. Ra. Entr. 19. Co. Entr. 146. 3 Millibs. librarum. Co. Entr.
147. 10 Milliu^ librarum Ra. Entr. 394. Nonies viginti and december libre. Ry.
167. Septingente marce, stupenda pecunie Su^ma. 1 Mon. 454. Dimidia Marca. T.
3. E. 3. Ry 177. 1 Mon. 1012.118. 2 Mon 610. 4 Marcat reddit and dimid. 1 Mon
1018. 2 Mon 593. dimidia marcat reddit. 2 Mon 610. Marca auri. 1 Mon 249. Marca
aagenti. 2 Mon 96. 4 Marce argenti and una Marca auri. 1 Mon 325. 2 Uncie auri
scilt. 2 marce argenti. 1 Mon 604. Libra auri, and Marca auri. 1 Mon 266. bis.
Mancusa 1 Mon 996. Mancusa auri. 1 Mon. 215.243. Aureos. 1 Mon. 999. Cassatis 1
Mon 21. 30 Talenta auri valoris 10000 lb. 1 Mon. 291. 40 Talenta aurea. Ry.
543. Bisantiu. 2 Mon 531. bisantios. 2 Mon 110.531. Bisantos. 2 Mon 81.
Florenus. Spel. 281.
Of Houses.
I have often found difficult expressions in Latin of Houses, Husbandry,
Housholdstuff, Apparel, Wares, etc. I shall therefore give you Latin words for
many of them under their Heads. And first of Houses.
A Palace. Palatiu. A House, a dwelling house. domus. domus manco^nalis. A
little House, domiciliu. domuncula. A Castle, a Tower. Castrum, turris. A
Message. Mesuagiu. A Cotage. Cotagiu. A Barn, Horreum. A Stable, a Manger.
Stabulum, psepe. A Dove-house, Columbarium. An Ox-house, boveria, bovile. A
Cow-house, vaccaria, armentarium. A Hay-house, fenile. A Woodhouse, lignile. A
Sheephouse, Ovile. A Goat-house, caprile. An Hogsty, Porcile. A Lamb-house,
Agnile. A Cart-house, Domus carucaria. A Cart-hovel, a Wain-house. domus
plaustraria. A Goose-house, anserarium. A Poultry-house. aviarium. A
Fatting-house, Saginarium. A Coal-house, domus carbonaria. A Treasure house,
erarium. A Council-house, Conciliabulum. A Storehouse, repositorium.
Reconditorium. A Malt-house, Brasitorium. A Brewhouse, Pandoxatorium. A Work
house, domus operaria. An Armory, Armorarium. A Gatehouse, domus portuaria. A
Milkhouse, a Dayry. domus lactearia, lactarium, A Bakehouse, pistrinum. A
Slaughterhouse. Laniena. A Wash-house, Lavatrina. A Granary, a Garner,
Granarium. A Penthouse, compluvium, imbricamentum. A Shed, a Hovel, Aleaneto,
appendix. A Privy, a house of Office. Latrina. A Siege, Cloaca. A Wydraught,
Forica. A Sink, Sentina. A Porch, porticus, vestibulum. Eaves, Eaves-boards.
Imbricamenta. suggrundia, asseres imbricantes. Domus infra mesuagium. Vet Entr.
3. Diuse domus infra manco^nem videlt, 1 perloria. 1 cama. 1 coquina, etc. Vet.
intr. 42. Unu edificiu voc an Out-house. Una domus voc a Workhouse. Vet. 3.
Domus voc, a Turf-House. Domus voc a Hen-house. Domus portuaria voc a
Gatehouse. Co. Entr. 696. Front-houses, Frontata mesuagia, Domus frontaiis.
Cotages of Sods, Tiguria cespitum. A Hall, Aula. A Parler, Parloria. A Chamber,
Cama. A Cellar, Cellarin. A Garret, a Solar; Solariu. A Kitchen, coquina.
culina. A Room, Dyning-Rooms. Rome^, romee pransorie. A Gallery, pergula,
galeria. A Closet, conclave, reconditoriu. A Larder, lardariu. A Pantry.
panariu. A Loft, Tabulatum. A Buttery, promptuariu. penaria. Inner Rooms
conclavia. Cloisters, peristilia. A Belcony, Meniariu. subdiale.
Banqueting-Rooms, Cenacuia. Bed-Chambers, dormitoria. A Door, ostiu. Two-leav'd
Doors, fores. Back-dores, ostia retrorsa, posticus. A Fore-dore, ostiu anticum.
Outward-dores, inward-dores. ostia extiora, ostia intiora. Standings before a
door, statiuncule. 2 Roll 814. Dore-cases, thece ostiorum. Archative
Dore-cases. thece ostiorum arcuat. A Window, Fenestra. A Casement, claustrum,
transenna. Luthern-windows, solariorum fenestre. Dormer-windows, tectorum
fenestre. A Flap Window, Fenestra pendula. A Window Case, fenestre
defensaculum. Window-beames, fenestralia. Bay Windows, cave fenestre. A
Cornice, a Freeze, Sumitas fenestre, fornix. A Jetty, quodjectura, supra
pendiculum. Plac 27. A Chimny, caminus. culina. A Tunnel of a Chimny,
infumibulum. A Core, foculare. A Dresser-board, asser coquinarius. A Hearth of
a hearth, focus, focarius. A Foot-pace, vestigiu foci. A Wall, murus, paries. A
Party Wall, paries intergerinus. Partition Walls, Muri dividentes. Front-Walls,
Muri antiores. Toothing of a Wall, dentaco^. A Buttress, buttria. A
Swallowtail, or Dovetail to join Timber together, subscus. Hovels of Hurdles
gurgustia, cratitia, luto circumlata. A Ground work, fundamentum. Ground
pinning, or under pinning, Substructura. A Pavement, a Flore, pavimentum, area.
A Floor, for Flooring. area, quod tabulaco^ne. A Threshold, Limen, liminare. A
Fl^re, Boarded, tabulata. arca. A Fl^re, Rammed. fistucata. arca. A Fl^re,
Paved, tessellata. arca. A Banister, columella tornata. A Water-Table, Tabula
aquaria. A Screen, Umbraculum. A Gable end fastigium. delicia. Topps,
Su^mitates. Chapiters, Coronamenta. Flat Arches, Arched, Arcus plani, proni.
arcuat. A Parapet, Lorica. A Coping, Su^mitas. The Roof, a Roof of Tiles,
Tectum, tectum tegularum. Covering of a House, imbriciu. A Dormer, Culmen
domus, tignu. A Seeling-seeled, Laqueare, laqueat. A Stair, Scala. A pair of
Stairs, Par scalarum. A Staircase, Foramen scalarum. A Winding-Stair. Choleum.
Half pac'd-Stairs, Scale dimidiate. Top of Stairs, Culmen scalarum. A Step,
Gradus. A Beam, Trabs. A Bressemor, Lacunar. Purloyns, Trabes ligantes. A
Rafter, Raftering. Tignus, tigillus, contignaco^. Sleepers, Tigni sub arcis. A
Brace, Fibula. Quarters, Trabes quadrate. A double-Quarter, Trabs crassior.
Quarters or Rafters cross a Transome, Transusaria. Party-Peers, Column
partibiles A Space between Rafters, Intertigniu. A Raising-piece, Pecia
struens. Girders, Girdaria, junctoria. A Dormer, a principal Beam. Columen.
Battayns, battained, Assamenta, assat, polit cum assamentis. Interledged,
Consert, intersert. Lined, Duplicat. Playned, dedolat. complanat. Shotten,
Co^njunct. Oyled. Oleo unctus. To prime, linire. Riveted, Depact. A Bragget,
Corbel or shouldring-piece, Mutulus sustentalis. A Shelf, Repositoriu. A Bench,
Bancus. A Dresser-board, Asser coquinarius. Boards, boarded. Asseres, tabulat.
Joysts, Assamenta. A Scutchion where posts rest, Tholus. Transoms, Transtra.
Spars, Rafters, Cantherii. A Corner jutting, quodjectura angularis. Ends of
Beams, Summers, quodceres trabiu. Beams well wrought, Trabes everganee. Beams
made of several pieces, Trabes compactiles. Tilers and Bricklayers work, opus
latale. Plaistring, Cementaco^, Plaistraco^. Dauhing, Delutatio, cementum. 2
Roll. 816. Slime, Bitumen. Genesis 11.3, M^rter, Intritum. lutum. Exo. 1.14. A
Rubbed-Brick, later frictus. Rendering. Oblimaco^. A Tiling, Tiled. Tegulaco^
tegulat. Brick-work, opus latitium. To Tile, a Tile. Imbricare, tegulare,
tegula. Tenn Inch-Tile; Dextantes tegule. Nine Inches, dodrans. The Roof,
Tectum. A Roof or Seeling, Boarded, Tabulatum. laquear. A Roof or Seeling,
Arched, Fornicatum. laquear. A Roof or Seeling, Fretted. Vermiculatum. laquear.
Shuts, Claustra. Lattises, Clathri. Shingles, Scandulae. Lids of Beams,
Su^mers. quodceres trabiu. Tops, Fastigia. Posts, Posts. A Threshold. Limen. A
Hole, Foramen. Chincks, Intertigna. Thatch, Culmen. A Lath, Asserculus. Winding
Stairs Cochlidia. A Bolt, a door bolted, Pessulus, ostiu oppessulatum. Hinges,
Cardines. A Catch or Clasp. Clavus uncinatus. A Vault, Fornix, crypteporticus.
A Platform, Exemplar. A Story, Stega, manco. Genesis 6.6. 2 Stories. 3 Stories.
Distege, tristega. Scantlings, sises, quodporco^nes Mensure. A Front,
Frontispiciu. A Facia, Facies. Cr^ss-building, Structura obliqua. Timbering,
Timbered. Matiaco^, matiat. From out, to out. Ab extra, ad extra. A Steeple
Campanile. A Belfry, Campanariu. A Bell-frame, Fabrica campanarum. A Vane,
Triton. Mills, vide Millers. and vide Masons, Joyners, Carpenters.
Of Housholdstuff.
OF Silver, vide. Goldsmiths. Of Pewter. v. Pewterers. Of Iron. v. Ironmongers.
Of Bedding. v. Vpholsters. Of Baking. v. Bakers. Of Brewing, v. Brewers,
Coopers. Of Brass. v. Brasiers. Housholdstuff. Supellex, Utensilia. Partaining
to a House. Domesticus, economicus. A Table. Mensa A Cubbord. Loculus. A Chair.
Cathedra. A Stool, Joined Stools. Sedile, juncta sedilia. A Form. Scamnu. A
Bench. Bancus. A Shelf. Abacus. A Box. Pixis. A Chest, a Cofer, a little Cofer.
Cista, cistella. A Trunck. Riscus. A Basket. Corbis, sporta. A Glass. Vitrum. A
Glass-Case. Theca vitrea. A Barrel. Cadus, barrellus. An Ale-stool. Scamnu
cvisiariu. A Poudring Tub or Trough. Conditoriu, salsameatum. A Coop. Qualus.
An Hen pen. Chors gallinaria. A Boll, or Wash-boll Linter ligneus. A Treen or
wooden dish. Catinus ligneus. A Tray. Concha. A Ladle. Capula. A Spoon.
Cochlear. Square Trenchers. Quadre lignee. Round Trenchers. Orbs. A
Spinning-wheele. Rhombus. A Reel. Girgillus. A Jack. Veruversoriu. A Pair of
Bellows. Par folliu. A Grater. Radula. A Grate. Crates. A Cup. Poculum. A Can,
a Tankard. Cantharus. A Bedsted. Fulcrum. A Trucklebed. Parabustum. Bedstaves.
Bacilli tornati. A Ladder. Scala. A Looking-Glass. speculum. A Lanthorn,
Lucerna. A Tinder-Box, Pixis igniaria, A Steel. Ferram^ntum. A Cloakbag.
Mantica. A Bag or Sack. Baga, Saccus. A Chamberpot. Trulla matula.
Earthen-pots. Olle fictiles. Stone-pots. Olle saxee. A Gally-pot. Culullus. A
Pitcher. Urceus. Glasses. Vitra. A Vial. Phiola. A Spit. Obelus. A Fireshovel.
Batillum. A Firefork. Furca igniaria. A Flesh-hook. Fuscinula. A Trevet.
Tripus, Tripodis. A Tressel. Tripus, Tripodis. An Iron-pot. Olla ferrea. A
Brass-pot. Olla erea. A Pot-lid. Ollare. A Pot-hook. Uncus ollaris. Pothangers.
Catene ollares. A Dripping-pan. Deguttoriu. A Chasing-Dish. Ignitabulum. A
Kettle. Caldariu, cacabus. A Tosting-Iron. Tostoriu. Dog-Irons. Sustentacula
ferrea. A Mortar and Pestle. Mortariu and Pestillum. A Drying Pan. Sartago.
Frixoriu. A Gridiron. Craticula. Andirons. andele. A Pair of Tongs. par
forcipum. A Chopping-Knife. culter herbarius. A Scummer. Despmutoriu^, spatha.
A Candlestick. Candelabrum. Snuffers. Emunctoria. A Skillet. Situlus, coculus.
A Posnet. Ollula. A Pan. Patella. A Warming-Pan. Caleficiu lectuale. A Bucket.
a Pail. Situla, Situlus. A Sheet. Lodix linea. A Pillowbeer. Theca pulvinaria.
A Table-Cloth. Mappa. A Napkin. Mantile. A Towel. Manutgiu. A Wallet. Mantica
linea. A Bagg or poke. Pera. A Linen Cloth or Clout. Linteolum. A
Cubbord-Cloth. Linteolum.
Lands.
A Rabble Land. tra. tra arabilis. Meadow. Pratum. Pasture. Pastura. Wood,
wood-Ground. Boscus. Heath, a Heath. Bruera. Furz, furzes. Ja^npna. A Moor,
moorish. ground. Mora. A Marsh. Mariscus. Fresh-Marsh. Mariscus friscus.
Salt-Marsh. Mariscus salsus. Rushy-ground. Iuncaria. Land covered with water.
tra aqua cooperta. A Quarry. Quarrea. A Creek. Crepido. A Flax-plot. Linarium.
A Wharf. Wharfa. A Field, a little Field. Campus, agellus. An Hill. Mons. A
Close. Clausum. A Toft. Toftum. A Croft. Croftum. A Pigbtle. Pightellum. A
Turf, Cespes. A Farm. predium, firma. A Sbeep-Coat. Ovile. An Acre. Acra. A
Rood. Roda. A Perch. pertica, perticata. A Selion. Selio. A Ridg. Porca. A
Mere. Meta. An Hade. Striga. A Ley. tra subcesiiva. A Baulk. Grumus, lira. A
Furrow. Sulcus. Water-Furrows. Colliquia. A Corn-field. Arvus. A Clod, cloddy.
Gleba, glebosus. A Way. Via, Chiminus. A Path. Semita. A Lane. Venella. Sand.
Arena. Gravel. Sabulum. Clay. Argillum. Chalk. Creta. Marle. Marga. Water.
Aqua. River-Water. Aqua fluminea. Spring Water. Aqua fontana. Well-Water. Aqua
puteana. A River. Flumen Rivus. A Lake. Lacus. A Pond. Stagnu. A Tide. Venilia,
estus marinus. Land covered with water. terra aqua coopta. Spring-tides.
Eluviones. The middle of the breadth of the Water. Filum aque.
Husbandry.
AN Husbandman. Agricola. A Farmer. Colonus, firmarius. A Ploughman. Arator. A
Carter. Auriga. A Sower. Sator. A Mower. Falcator. A Reaper. Messor. A
Thresher, to Thresh, a Threshing. Tritor, triturator triturare, trituraco^. An
Harrow, to Harrow. Occator. occare. A Bailey. Ballius. A Shephard. Pastor, oviu
opilio. A Sheephook. Agalus, pedum. A Groom, an Horsekeeper. Equiso, agaso. A
Neat-heard. Bubulcus. A Swine-heard. Subulcus. A Goat-heard. Caprarius.
Earings, Mowings. Reapings. Arure, Messure, Falcaco^nes. Brac. 35. In husbandly
manner. More colonico. An Hogs-trough. Aqualicutum. Implements of Husbandry.
Implementa husbandry. Horse-Harnies. Phalere equine. Tillage. Cultura.
Somerly. Estive cult. A Wain, a Wainload. Plaustrum, plaustrata. A Cart, a
Cart-load. Caruca-carectata. A Dray, a Sled. Traha. A Barrow. Vehiculum. A
Wheelbarrow. Vecticula. Dung, Fimus, Stercus. Dunging. Stercoraco^. A Dunghill.
Sterquilinu. A Fork. Furca. A Dunghil-Fork. Furcilla, A Pitch-Fork. a Prong.
Merga, furca. An Hook Falx. A Since. Falx messoria. A Reaping-book, a Sickle.
Falcula messoria A Weeding-book Runca. A Yoke, Iugum. A Chain. Catena. A Rope.
Restis. A Goad. Hasta stimularis, stimulus. A Whip. Flagellum. A Rake. Rastrum.
A Flail. Tribula. A Beetle. Malleas ligneus. An hurdle. Crates lignea. A
Mattock. Matta. rutrum. A Spade, a Shovel. Ligo. A Plough. Aratrum. A
Plough-Share. Vomer. A Plough handle. Stiva. A Plough-beam. Bura. A
Plough-staff Ralla. A Coulter. Dentale. A Furrow. Sulcus. Water-furrows.
Colliquia. Under furrowed. Subaratus. Furrow by Furrow. Sulcatim. Ploughed
throughout. peraratus. Wett. Uligo, uliginosus. A Trench. Elix. trenchea. An
Harrow, to harrow in. Occa. inoccare. A Roller. Cilindrum. To weed. Sarrire. A
Swath. Striga. andena. Fallow-Land. Vervactum. New broken Land. Novale. A Clod,
Cloddy. Gleba, glebosus. A Sive, Cribrum. A Fan, fanned. Ventilabrum.
Ventilatus. A Sack. Saccus. A Sachel. Sacciperiu. Chaff. Palea. A Furrow.
Sulcus. Water furrows. Colliquia. A Balk. Grumus. A Ridg. Porca. Marle. Marga.
Fodder. Stover. Fodrum. pabulum. An Hatchet. Securis. An Axe. Dolabra. ascia. A
Gimlet. an Auger, terebellum. A Saw. Serra. A Wedg. Cuneus ferr^us. Corn of all
sorts. frumentum, annona. A Cornfield. Arvus. Wheat, of Wheat. Triticum,
triticens. Rye. Siligo. Muncorn. Olicastrum. Meslin. Mixtilio, miscellaneum.
Barley, of Barley. Hordeum, Hordeaceus. A Bean, of Beans. Faba, fabaceus. A
Pease, of Pease. Pisa, pisaceus in dict pisum. A Vetch. Vicia. Buck.
Fagotriticum. An Oat, of Oats. Avena, avenaceus. A Lentile. Lens. Dredg.
Bullimong. farrago. Millet. Hirst. miliu. A Tare. Zizania. All manner of Pulse.
Legumen. Standing-Corn. Seges, blada crescentia. A Crop. quodventus, messis. A
Gavel, an handful of Corn. Palmata bladi, manipulus. A Sheaf of Corn. Garba.
fascis spicarum. A Thrave of Corn. Trava bladi. Corn in swaths or straw. blada
in garbis. Barley busked or boiled. ptysana. An Ear of Corn. Spica. Halm or
hulm. Culmus. Straw. Stramen, Stramentum. Chapt-Straw. Stramentum dissectum.
Litter. Substramen. Chaff. Palea. Malt. Brasiu. Oatmeal. Farina avenacea.
Groats. cuttings. Alica. Seed-corn. frumentum sementicum. A Rick of Corn.
Strues. nubilariu. Gurgins. Recrementa. Tailings. Grana expurgat ab aceribus.
The Beard of Corn. Arista. Corn without Beard. Spice mutice. A Sheaf-a bundle.
Fascis, merges. A Sheaf-band. Tomex. Grass. Herba. To mow Grass. Herbam
falcare. To mow or reap Corn. Blada metere. Hay, hay in Swaths or Cocks. Fenu,
Fenu in tassis, An Hay-Cock. Meta, cumulus feni. A bottle of Hay. Fasciculus
feni. A Reek of Hay. Strues feni. Stubble. Stipula. A Barn-flooer. Area horrei.
A Garner. Granariu. A Fan. Ventilabrum. A Sieve. Cribrum, incerniculum. A Sack.
Saccus. A Dairy-Maid. Lactatrix. A Dairy-House. Domus lactearia. Milk, to milk.
lac. mulcere, mulgere. A Milk-paile. Mulctra. A Wreath under a Paile.
Cesticillus. A Cheese-vat. Fiscella, forma casearia. A Cheese. Caseus. A
Cheescake. Epityrum. A Cheese-Rack, a Cheesepress. crates casearia. A
Cheese-Loft. Caseale. Whitemeats. Lacticinia. A Dairy. Vaccaria. Belouging to
Cheese. Casearius. Rennet. Coagulum. Cream. Cremor. Butter. Butirum. Whey.
Serum lactis. Buttermilk. lac serosum, lac agitatum. Curdled. Densatus. A
Strainer. Colum. A Churning, a Churn, churned. Succussaco^, fidelia, agitatus.
Apparel.
A Wardrobe, Garderoba. vestiariu. A Press for Clothes, scriniu. vestiariu. A
Garment. Vestis, vestimentum. Lace, to lace, Bonelace. lacinia. constringere.
teniola. A Robe, Roba, stola. A suit of Clothes. Series apparatus, habitus
vestiu. A pair of Stockings. Par caligarum. A Shoe, Calceus. A Latchet.
Corrigia. A Sole, Solea. A Slipper, a Pantofle, Sandaliu, crepida. A tach.
Uncus. A Button. a Clasp. fibula. A point. Ligula. A pair of Gloves. par
Chirothecarum. A Sock or startup Soccus, pedale. A cuff or Foresieeve. Manica
lintearia. A Handkerchief, sudariu. mucciniu. Handkerchief-buttons. Fibulae
quod sudariis. A Gown. Toga. A long-sleev'd Gown. Toga manicata. A Clog or
Patten. Calo, crepida, solea lignea. Locks and Tores. Capilli intorti. A
Periwig. Capillamentum. A Garter. Garteriu, Fascia tibialis. A Doublet.
Diplois. A pair of Breeches. par subligaculorum. A Jerkin. Tunicula. A Coat. a
Riding-Coat. Tunica, penula. A tatterd Coat. Cento. A Jacket. Supertunica,
tunicella. Jackettus. A short Jacket. Colobiu. A Wastcoat. Camisiola. A Cloak.
Palliu. A Cassock. Saga. A Garment for the loins. Lumbare. A Hat. Galerus. A
Hathand. Spira. A Hood. Cucullus. A Shirt. a half-shirt. Indusiu^, curtum
indusiu^. Linen Drawers. Bracce linee. A Cap, or Nightcap. Cappa, pileus,
pileus nocturnus. Linen Stockins. Calige linee. Boothose. Calige Ocreales.
Boothose tops. Ornamenta cruralia. Vpholders. Ligamenta. Bands, Crevats.
Collaria. A Buskin. Cothurnus. Bandstrings. fascie. A Band. Collare. A pair of
Boots. par ocrearum. A Spur. Calcar. A Girdle. Cingulus, zona. A Belt, a
Sword-Girdle. Balteus. A Woman's Gown. Palla, stola, toga muliebris. A Kirtle.
Tunica muliebris. A Peticoat. Subucula. A Wastcoat. Mamillare, inducula. A
Mantle. Manteliu^. A Stomacher. a Gorget. Strophiu, pectorale. A Whisk.
Humerale. A Tippet. Flammeolum. An Hood. Caputiu, capitiu. A Forehead cloth, a
Peak. Frontale, velamen quod front. A Neckcloth, Neckercher, Par tlet.
amiculum, amictoriu. A Kercher. rica. An Apron. Ventrale, semicinctoriu. A
Smock. Supparum. Bodies. Inducule. Tuckers. Cincticuli. Dressings. Capitalia
lintea. Sleeves. Cubitalia lintea. A Coif. a Head-roll. Crinale. An Hairlace.
Fascia Crinalis. Another Lace. a woman's lace. tenia, astrigmentum, Pectorale. A
Fillet. Fascia ligatoria. A Scarf. Mitella. A French Hood. Redimiculum. A Fan.
Flabellum. A Bodkin. Calamistrum. A Pin. Acicula. A Pincase. Theca acicularia.
An Owch, or broach. Monile. A Jewel. Jocale. A Vizard Mask. L^rva. A Bracelet.
Torquis brachialis. armilla. A Bonnet. Tiara. A Busk. Pectorigiu^. A Mufler.
Focale. Shifts. Indusia puerilia. Bibs, Pectoralia puerilia. A Swaddling band.
Fascia cunabulorum. A Silk Farinden Vest, lined with Silk. Vestis bombicina
voc, etc. cum bysso duplicat Anglice, etc. A Flowred Lawn Whisk. Strophiolum.
lineum voc, etc. A Flowred Silk Mantle. Loricum sericum florat. A Tufted
holland Mantle. Palliu muliebre de panno lineo, voc, etc. Laced Pinners.
Frontalia fibulat. Pinners. Vestes linee voc, etc. A Garment of Linen.
Vestitus. Lineus. A Garment of Woollen. Vestitus. Laneus. A Garment of Cotton.
Vestitus. Xilinus. A Garment of Silk. Vestitus. Sericus. A Garment of Skins.
Vestitus. Pelliceus. A Garment of Leather. Vestitus. Coriaceus. An upper
clothing. Vestitus superior. Clouts. pannieuli. Linsey Woolsey. Lineamen,
Linostema. Lyned. Duplicatus. Chains. torques. Slops, Galligaskins. Bracce.
Trowses. Femoralia. Drawers. Perizomata. Linen Drawers. Subligacula linea
interiora. Stockings of Silk, of thread. Par caligarum byssinarum, de filo.
Linen worn next the Skin. Interula. A Garment called, etc. Indumentum quod
dicitur. Buk. 2. Mon 380. A Priest's Garment. Alba. Spel. 27. A Sleeve. Manica.
A Skirt. Aclassus. A Pocket. Loculus. Socks. Socci. Woollen or Felt-Socks.
Udones cilicii. Cork Slippers. Crepide suberee. A Button, to Button. Fibula,
infibulare. A Button-hole. Unciculus. Hooks. Noduli. Eyes, Eylet holes. Ocelli.
Courtiers. Great Officers of the Kingdom.
THe Kings Majesty. Du^s Rex. Regia Majestas. A Courtier. Aulicus. A Chair of
State. Soliu. A Kings Robe. Regilla. A Groom. Gromettus. The Groom-porter.
Aleatorum arbiter. Groom of the Chamber. Cubicularius. Groom of the Stable.
Stabularius. A Yeoman of the Guard. Stipator corporis. Lord Chancellor. Du^s
Cancellarius Angl. Lord Keeper. Du^s custos magni sigilli Angl. Lord Marshal of
England. Magnus Marescallus Angl. Lord Treasurer. Du^s sumu^s Thesaurarius
Angl. Lord Chamberlain. Du^s altus Camarius Angl. Lord Steward of the Kings
Household. Du^s Senescallus hospicii Dni^ Regis. Controller of the Household.
Contrarotulator hospicii Dni^ Regis. Lord Chamberlain of the Kings-Houshold.
Du^s Camer r^us hospicii Dni Regis. Treasurer of the household. Thesaurarius
hospicii Dni Regis. Lord President of the Council. Du^s Presidens privati
concilii Dni Regis. A Lord of the Privy Council. Du^s de privato concilio Dni
Regis. One (not a Lord) of the Council. Unus de privato concilio, etc. Lord
Keeper of the Privy Seal. Du^s Custos privati sigilli Dni Regis. Chief
Secretary. Primarius Secretarius Dni Regis. A Principal Secretary. Unus
principaliu Secretariorum Dni Regis. Master of the Rolls. Magr rotlorum Cur
Cancellari^ Dni Regis. Chancellor of the Exchequer. Cancellarius and
subthesaurarius Scaccarii Dni Regis. Chamberlain to the Queen. Camerarius Dne^
Regine. Vicecamarius. Vice-Constable, Marshal. Viceconstabularius.
vicemarescallus. Keeper of the Wardrobe. Custos Garderobe Dni Regis. Master of
the Horse. Magr equorum Dni Regis. A Knight of the Garter. pnobilis ordinis
Gartii Miles. Captain General. Capitaneus Generalis omniu armorum and exercituu
Dni Regis in Anglia Scocia and Hibnia. Constable of Windsor Castle.
Constabularius Castri Dni Regis Reglis de Windsor. Warden of a Forest.
Gardianus Foreste Dni Regis de Waltham. Justice in Air. Capitlis Justic
itinans omniu Forestarum and Parcorum Dni Regis citra Trentam. Chancellor of
the Duchy. Cancellarius ducatus and com Palatini Dni Regis Lanc. Lord
President of the Marches. Du^s presidens concilii Dni Regis infra
Principalitatem and Marchias Wallie.
Lawyers.
LOrd Chief Justice of England. Capitlis Justic Dni Regis ad plita coram ipo^
Rege tenend assign. A Justice of the King's Bench, Unus Justic Dni Regis ad
plita coram ipo^ Rege tenend assign. Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
Capitlis Justic Dni Regis de banco. Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. Capitlis
Baro Sccii dni Regis. A Baron of the Exchequer. Unus Baronu Sccii Dni Regis. A
Kings Sergeant at Law. Unus servientiu dni Regis ad legem. A Sergeant at Law.
Serviens ad Legem. The Kings Attorney General. Attorn Dni Regis genalis. The
Solicitor General. Solicitator Dni Regis genalis. Custos briu of the
Common Pleas. Custos briu Dni Regis de banco. A Prothonotary there. Unus
Prothonotariorum Cur Dni Regis de Banco. A Philizer. Unus Philizariorum Cur,
etc. An Exigenter. Unus Exigendariorum Cur, etc. The Cirographer.
Cirographarius Cur, etc. Clerk of the Warrants. Clicus warrantorum and extract
Cur, etc. Clerk of the Kings Silver. Clicus argenti Regis Cur, etc. Clerk of
the Juries. Clicus Juratarum Cur, etc. Clerk of the Essoines. Clicus Esso^n
Cur, etc. Clerk of the Treasury. Clicus Thesaurarii Cur, etc.
An utter Barrister. De gradu de extetiori barra, etc.

Divines. Scholars.
A Church. Ecclia. A Collegiat Church. Ecclia collegiata. A Rectorie, a
Parsonage. Rectoria, personatus. A Rector, a Parson. Rector, Parsona. A
Vicarage, a Vicar. Vicaria, Vicarius. A Rectory impropriate. Rectoria
impropriata. A Curate. Curatus. An Incumbent. Incumbens. A Preacher, Preaching.
pdicator, pdicaco^. A Sermon. Conco^. A Deacon. Diaconus. A Patron, a
Patronage. Patronus, Patronagiu. An Advouson. Advocaco^. A Pulpit. Pulpitum. A
Surplice. Superpelliciu. An Hood for the Shoulders, Humerale. A Churchwarden.
Gardianus eeclie. A Sidesman. Gardianis ecclie Assistens. A Parish-Clerk.
Clicus Parochialis. A Sexton. Edituus. A Vestry. Vestiariu. A Belfry.
Campanile. A Bell-Tower, or Steeple. Turris Campanaria. A Churchyard.
Cemeteriu. A Bell, the Clapper of a Bell. Campana, Campanc mallcus. A Bishop.
Episcopus. An Archbishop. Archi^epus. A Primate, a Metropolitan. Primas,
Metropolitanus. An Archdeacon, an Arch-Deanery. Archinus, Archinatus. A Dean
and Chapter. Decanus and Capitlm. A Prebendary, a Prebend. Prebendarius,
pbenda. A Canon, a petty-Canon. Canonicus, infcrior Canonicus. A Commissary, an
Official. Co^missarius, Officialis. A Procter. quodcurator. A College, an Hall.
Collegiu, aula. A Master-ship, an Head-ship, Magistiu, pfectura. A President, a
Provost. Preses, psidens, ppo^itus. A Fellow, a Fellowship. Socius,
consocietas. A Graduate, Graduatus. An Organist, an Organ. Organista, Organa
Musica. A Chorister, or Querister, a Quire. Choristarius. Chorus.
Soldiers.
A Colonel. Strategus. A Captain. Capitancus. A Soldier, Soldarius. A
Standard Bearer. Signifer-vexillarius. A Standard, Banner, Flag or Ensign.
Vexillum. A Spy, a Scout. Speculator, explorator. An Horseman. Eques. A
Footman. Pedes. A Spearman. Miles hastatus. A Gunner. Sclopetarius, bombardius.
Master of the Ordnance. Machinarum pfectus. Hobelers, Hobellarii. Spel. 354.
Light-horsemen, a Light Horse. Velites, veredus. A Muster-master. Diribitor. A
Quartermaster, Quarters. Metator, Stativa. An Host of Soldiers, Exercitus,
acies. A Regiment, Chilias, legio. A Band of Men, Cohors, exercitus
Soldariorum. A Troop or Company, Turma. A Wing, Cornus. A Train-band, Cohors
disciplinata, Selecta. A Soldier under a Captain. Soldarius sub conductu
Capitanei. Forces. Milites. War. Guerra. A Muster, a mustring, to Muster.
Mustrum, mustraco^, mustrare. To array, arrayed. Arraiare, arraiat
arraiamentum. Co. Lit 156. In Battle array. Turmatim. Muster-Rolls, Rotli
Iustratorii. A Marching. Expedico^. A Fight. Pugna. A Battle. Preliu. A Flight.
Fuga. An Ambush. Insidie. Bag and Baggage, Carriages. Impedimenta. Showing of
Armor. Training. Armilustrum. Sallies. Excursiones. A Fort or Sconce.
Fortalitiu. A Bulwark. quodpugnaculum. A Tent or Pavilion. Tentoriu. A Drum,
Drummer. Timpanu, timpanista. A Dragoon. Dirnacha. A Volunteer. Volo,
voluntarius. A Plunderer, Plundering. Depopulator, depopulatio. Vanguard.
Rereward. Antegardia, Retrogardia. Kit 208. An Armorer, Armorarius. faber
Armarius. Arms, Weapons. Harnies. arma. A Coat of Mail, of defense.
Paludamentum. An Helmet, an Headpiece. Galea, cassis, capillum ferreu. Ry. 53.
A Gorget. Armatura quod collo. Gauntlets. For the hands, Manice. Gauntlets. For
the Arms, Brachialia. Gauntlets. For the Shoulders, Humeralia. Gauntlets. For
the Thighs, Femoralia. A Shield. Scutum. A Buckler. Clypeus. A Target. Parma. A
Corslet. Thorax. An Habergion. Lorica. habergettum. Ry 53. A Spear. Hasta. A
Javelin. Hastula. A Dart. Jaculum. A Sling. Funda. A Cross-Bow. Balista, arcus
crucialis. 1 Fo. 106. A Battle-Ax. Securis Bellica. A Sword, an Hanger, Ensis.
A Dagger. Pugio, daggarius. A Club, Staff. Clava, fustis. An Harneis-Girdle.
Baltheus. Defensive Weapons. Arma defensoria. Weapons offensive and defensive.
Arma offensiva and defensiva. The use of Weapons. Armatura. A Gun. Bombarda,
tormentum. A Fowling-piece, a Musket. Sclopus. An Hake. Bombarda. An Handgun,
Haguebut. Demybake. Tormentum: 1 Fo. 106. A Pistol. Sclopeta. A Dagg.
Tormentulum. Gunpowder. Pulvis Bombardicus. Bullets Plumbata. Shot. Glans. A
Musket, a Musketteer. Sclopeta peditis, Sclopetarius. Pressmony. Auctoramentum.
Pay. Stips.
Physicions.
A Physicion. Medicus. Doctor of Physic. in Medicinis Doctor, Physic... Ars
medica. A Quacksalver. Circumforaneus medicus. A Mountebanck. Medicaster, A
Physicions Fee. Sostrum. Sickly. Valetudinarius. Bedrid. Clinicus. Diet. Dieta.
Medicines. Pharmaca. Altering Remedies. Alterantia remedia. Preparatives.
pparatoria. Corroboratives, Roborantia. Lenitives. Mitigatoria. Pectorals.
Thoracica, cordiaca. Fullness. Repleco^. Emptiness. Exinanico^. Beating of the
Pulses. Arteriarum pulsus. Viewing of Vrin. Inspecco^ lotii. Fomentations.
Fomentaco^nes. Frictions. Fricco^nes. Seige. Dejecco^. Vomits. Vomitoria.
Purges. Purgantia. Diuretics. Diuretica. Sweating Medicines. Sudatoria.
Gargarizmes. Gargarismi. Sneezings. Ad stornutamentum cientia. Antidotes.
Antidota. A Relaps. Recidiva. The Stomach, for the Stomach. Ventricus
Stomachus, Stomachica. The Liver, for the Liver. Jecur, hepatica. The Spleen,
for the Spleeu. Lien, Splenetica. The Kidneys, Reins, for the Kidneys, Reins.
Renes, nephritica. Joints, for the Joints. Articuli, Arthritici.
Apothecaries.
AN Apothecary. Pharmacopola. Apothecarius. 1 Mon. 938. An Herbalist.
Botanicus. A Chimist. Chimicus. By subliming into Flowers. Sublimando. By
subliming into Salt. Calcinando. By distilling. Distillando. Glasses. Gutte
vitree. Vials. Ampulle. Balls. Pastilli. Rolls. Rotule. Confects, Comfits.
Confecta. Decoctions. Decocta. A Pill. Pilula. Conserves. Conserva. Extracts.
Extracta. A Fumigation. Fumigaco^. A Syrup. Syrupus. A Trochissk. Trochiscus.
Juices. Succi. Balsam. Balsamu. Tinctures. Tincture. Powders. Pulveres.
Magisteries. Magisteria. Cristals. Cristalli. Juleps. Julebi. Licking
Medicines. Linctus. Electuaries. Electuaria. Eyesalves. Collyria. Dentrifices.
Dentrificia. Pultices. Fomenta. Glisters. Clysteres. Suppositories.
Suppositoria. Treacle. Theriaca. A Potion. Poco^. A Purging Apozeme. Purgans
Apozema, it is. A Purging Draught. Purgans potio. A Sanative Gargarism. Sanativus
Gargarismus. Diet-Drink. Potus Dieteticus. A Compound Bolus. Bolus Compositus.
A Cordial Julep. Potio corroborans. A Restringent Injection. Restringens
iniecco^. Doses of Diaphoretick powder. Doses puluis Diaphoretici. Scorbutic
juices. Succi Scorbutici. Burdock-Water. Aqua distillata de lapatho acuto. An
emollient unguent. Uugnentum emolliens.
Chirurgions.
A Surgeon. Chirurgus. An Ointment. Unguentum. A Plaster. Emplastrum. A
Salve. Linimentum. cerotum. A Cerot, an imbalming Searcloth. Cerotum, cerotum
funerariu. To line a Coffin with Searcloth. Linire loculum cum ceroto. To
Imbalm. Pollincire. A Tent. Penicillus. linimentum. A Piercer. Terebra. A
Fleam. Phlebotoriu. Excrescencies. Excrescentia. Scaling rugged Bones. Radens
ossa scabra. Opening Imposthumes. Aperiens abscessus, apostema. Issues.
Fonticuli. To set Limbs out of joint. Reponere locis suis membra luxata.
Splinters. Festuce. Swathing of Collers. Fasciaco^ spleniorum. Tying of
Splints. Ligaco^ asserculorum.
Musicians.
A Musician, musical. Musicus. Music, musical Instruments. Musica, organa
Musica. A Fidle, a Fiddler. Fides, fidicula, fidicen. A Fidle-string. Plectrum.
A Minstrel. Ministrallus. A Whistle, a Whistler. fistula, Fistulator. A Pipe, a
Piper. Tibia, tibicen. A Trumpet, a Trumpeter. Tuba, tubicen. A Cornet, a
Cornet player. Lituus, liticen. A Fife, a Fifer. Buccina, buccinator. A
Bagpipe, a Bagpiper. Utricularis, Utriculator. An Organ, an Organist. Organon
pneusticum, Organarius. A Drum, a Drummer. Tympanu, tympanista. A Bell, a
little bell. Campana, Tintinnabulum. A Psalter, a Dulcimar. Nabliu, Sambuca. A
Cymbal, a Cittern. Cymbalum, cithara. An Harp, a Jews harp. Lyra, crembalum. A
Lute, Testudo. Rattles, Tabors. Crepitacula. Tuning of the Voice. modulaco^
vocis. A Proof of Instruments before playing. Incentivum. The distance or time
in Music. Intervallum. To play or sing sweetly. Modulari.
Merchants, Merchandise.
A Merchant, merchandising. Mercator, mercatura. A Peddler. quodpola. A Factor,
factorage. Factor, factoragiu. An adventurer, an adventure. periclitator
periolitaco^. Merchandise, mcandiza. Commodities. Bona, res, mcimonia. A
Voyage. Viagiu. To Arrive. Arrivare. To Ship. Eskippare. An Invoice. Nota
onaco^nis. A Bill of Exchange. Billa excambii. A Protest, to protest.
quodtestaco^, quodtestare. Proceed. quodcessus. Balance of Account. Examen
compi. Freight, freighted. Naulum, frectat, affrectat. A Charterparty of a
freightment. Carta partita de affrectamento. A Partowner. Parteproprietarius.
Letters of Mart or Marque, lre reprisatorie. Mart, or Countermart. lre prisales
and reprisales. Demorage, Demoragiu. To more at Anchor. Pausare ad anchoram.
Riding at Anchor. Fluctuans ad Anchoram. Marts. Emporia. A Creek. Crepido. A
Road. Staco^ navalis. The Straight of Gibralter. Fretum de Gibralter. A Crane.
Ergatum. A Dock. Wharfa, navale. An Haven. Portus. A Coast. Costera. Ry.
38.184. To sail, a sailing. Navigare, navigaco^. To sail forth. Velificare.
Shipwreck. Naufragiu. A pirat, Piracy. Pirata, piratia. Springtides. Eluviones.
Belonging to a ship or Mariner. Nauticus Fare money. Nautica sors. To pass over
the Sea. Transfretare. A Passenger. Vectus. Towage. Thowagiu batellorum. Ry 27.
towagiu. Ry. 29. Killage. Killagiu. Ry. 169. Custom. Custuma. Ry. 327.
Mariners, Watermen.
A Mariner. his Art, a Waterman's Art. Nauta, navicularia. A Waterman, to row.
Remex, remigare. A Shipwright. Navisex, naupegus. A Master of a Ship. Magr
navis, nauticus. A Pilot. Nauclerus. A Master's Mate. Socius magri. A
Quartermaster. Quartus magr. A Purser of a Ship. Questor, receptor genalis.
Fraught or fare. Naulum portoriu. A Ship, a little Ship. Navis, navicula. A
Ship of burden, Navis onaria. Men of War. Naves bellicose. A Pinnace. Liburna.
A Navy of Ships. Classis. A Carrick. Carca. Pry 341. ter. charraca. Lex. A
Bark. Barca. Spel. 75. Navicula. 1 Fo. 135. A Buss. Bussa. Spel. 114. A Crayer.
Craiera. Pry. 402. Hoyes, Catches, Mongers. Navigiola. A Gally. Phaselus,
galea. Pry. 14.134.213. Any sort of Vessels. Navigia. A Lighter. Remulus. A
Barge, Bargia. Co. Entr. 536. Barga. A Skiff. Oria. A Boat. Cimba. A Scullers
Boat, a Cock-boat. Acatum, linter. A Ship-boat. Scapha, navis linter. A
Fisher-boat. scapha piscatoria, lembus. A Passageboat. actuariu, navicula
actuaria. A Ship laden, unladen. Navis cartata, discarcata. Ry. 251.184.
Ladings, unladings. Carcaco^nes, discarcaco^nes. Ry. 30. A Ferry, a Ferry-boat.
Trajectum, feria. Spel. 264. ponto. A passage-boat. Navicula vectoria. The
Tires of a Ship. Interscalmia. Banks, Seats. Transtra. An Oar-ring. Scalmus.
The Mariners Needle, The Compass. Acus marina. A Plummet. Polis. A Pump, to
pump. Antlia. exantlare. Quicksands. Syrtes. Shelves, Flates, Cautes. Fords or
shallow places. Brevia, breviu. Shipwreck. Naufragiu. A Waterman's Pole.
Contus. Belonging to Water. Aquaticus. An Oar. Remus, tonsa. A Cable-Roap.
Funis Anchorarius, rudens. An Anchor, Anchorage. Anchora, anchoragiu. A Sail,
Sailcloths. Velum, vela. Flags or Streamers. Fluitantia vela, vexilla navalia.
The Shrouds. Rudentes. All the Tacklings of Ships. Armamenta navis, hernesia ad
navem spectantia. Ry. 188. Biscuit. Panis nauticus. Ballast. Saburra. The
Sail-Yard. Antenna. The Pump of a Ship. Sentina. A Stern of a Ship, a Rudder.
Gubernaculum, Clavus. The Keel or bottom of a Ship. Carina, ceola fregatina.
Spel. 156. The forepart or foredeck. Prora. The hinder part. Puppis. A
Merchants Pallet, or Cabin. Sequestrum. The Hatches. pergule. A Vane or
Weathercock. Triton, Versoria. Strong and stanch Fortis and sana. Victualled,
tackled, and apparelled. Cibat, velar and parat. 1 Fo. 136. Belonging to a
Ship. nauticus, navalis.
Tradesmen.
AN Handicraftsman. Mechanicus. A Craftsman, a Workman. Opifex. A Tradesman.
Negotiator. A Master Builder. Architector. An Engineer. Machinator.
Contrivances. Machinaco^nes. Trades, Arts. Mistia, Arts. Occupations,
Mysteries. Occupaco^nes, misteria. A Workhouse. Opificina. Workmanship.
Opificiu.
Armorers.
AN Armoer. Armamentarius. faber armarius. An Armory. Armariu. Armor Armatura.
Linen Armory. Armatura linea. Weapons. Armamenta. v. Soldiers.
Bakers.
A Baker. Pistor, panarius. A Bakehouse. Pistrinu, pistrina. A Boulting house.
Domus farinaria. Making of Bread. Panificiu. To Bake. Pinsere. To boult.
cernere. A Sieve, aboulting Sieve. Cribrum. cribrum farinarium. A Boulter.
Subcerniculum. A Boulting Hutch. Arca farinaria, Arca cribraria. A Kneading
Trough. Alveus pistorius. A Moulding board. Tabula pistoria. An Hair Searce.
Excussoriu ciliciu. A Meal-Trough. Farinariu. A Baking pan of Brass. Artopta
enea. A Dough-scrape. Radula. A Peel. Infurnibulum. A Colerake. Rutabulum. A
Malkin. Peniculus, penicillus. A Bread Basket. Calathus, cophinus. A Chopping
Knife. Culter panarius. Chippings. Resegmina. An Oven. Furnus. A Stillitory.
Clibanus. A Venthole Spiraculum. Barm, Yeast. Spuma, cervisie gestum. Leaven.
Fermentum. Meal. Farina. Meal of Wheat, Barley, Oats. Farina tri^ticea,
hordeacea, avenacea. Bean-meal. Lomentum. Bran. Furfur. Flowr, fine flowr.
Pollen, similago. Gurgians of Meal, the refuse of Meal. Cibariu secundariu,
appluda. Bread of Wheat, Barley, Beans, Oats. Panis Triticeus, Hordeaceus,
Fabarius, avenaceus. Brown or course bread. Panis gregarius domesticus. Crible
Bread. Panis secundarius. White bread. Panis siliginius, candidus. Manchet.
Panis similagineus. Biscuit. Panis bis coctus, panis nauticus. Wastel, Simnel,
etc. Panis de wastallo, Coketto, Simnello, treete, dulcello, -- Stat panis and
cervisisic 51. H. 3. A Simnel. Simnellum. Pry. 71. Leavened Bread. Panis
fermentatus. Unleavened bread. Azymus panis. A Loaf of Bread, a Bun. Collyra.
Dough. Massa. A Crust of Bread. Crusta Panis. The Crum of Bread. Medulla Panis.
A Crum of Bread. Mica panis, assula.
Barbers.
A Barber. Tonsor. A Barbers Shop. Tonstrina. To Trim. Tondere, ornare comam
and Barbam. To Shave. Radere. To wash. Lavare. A Basin. Malluviu. A Rasor, to
shave with a Rasor. Culter rasorius, novacula, detondere novacula. To Comb, a
comb. Comere, pecten. To Whet, a Whetstone. Acuere, cos. To Brush, a Brush.
verrere. Scopula. A Shaving cloth. linteum tonsoriu. Washing Balls. Soap-balls,
Pile mattiace. Sweet Balls. Pile odorifere, magmata. A Crisping Iron,
Calamistrum. A Pair of Cisers to clip with Cisers. par forficum, attondere
forfice. An Earpicker. Auriscalpiu. A Toothpicker. Dentiscalpiu. A Looking
Glass. Speculum. To pull off with Twisers. Divellere volsellis. To crisp Locks
with a curling-Iron. Crispare cincinuos calamistro. A Periwig, a Perruke.
Ascitiu capillamentum. False hair. Galericum. A Foretop. Caprona. The Hair of
the Head. Capillitiu.
Basketmakers, Sievemakers.
A Basketmaker. Viminarius. A Sievemaker. Rudiarius, cribrarius. A Basket.
Corbis, cophinus. A Flasket. Sporta. The twig pilled and the pith taken out.
Vimen decorticatum and alburnatum. A Sieve, alittle Sieve. Cribrum, cribellum.
A Ranging Sieve. Cribrum ruderariu, pollinariu sisactea. An Hair-Sieve. cribrum
setaceum. A Sieve to winnow Vetches, or Darnel. Cribrum viciariu, lolariu. A
very fine Sieve, nebula linea. A Box round or Oval. Capsa rotunda, vel ovalis.
Pliant Rims. Assule.
Brasiers, Tinkers, Founders.
A Brasier. Faber erarius, Erarius. A Founder, a Bell-founder. Fusor, flator
eris; campanarius. A Tinker. Ahenarius, sartor erarius. A Brasiers Shop.
Maignagiu, Law. Dict. Fol. 81. Of Brass. Ereus, eneus. Covered with Brass.
Eratus Brass-work. Erificiu, eramentum. Mixed Brass, Ollaria. A Brass pot or
Kettle. Ahenu incoctile. Copper, of Copper. Orichalcum, cuprum, cupreus. Copper
Wire. Filum Orichalci. A Bell, a Clapper. Campana, Campane malleus. Ordnance.
Tormenta bellica. Pliant Copper. Cuprum ductitiu.
Brewers.
A Brewer. Pandoxator. Potifex. To Brew, a Brewhouse. Pandoxare, Pandoxatoriu.
A Brewing. Brasinu. Spel. 116. Brewing Tubs. Cupe pandoxatorie. A Meash-vate.
Vas Pandoxatoriu. Keelers. Labra, cupe refrigeratorie. Beer-Vessels. Dolia
cervisiaria. A Rudder or Stirrer, Motaculum. Wort. Mustea cervisie. Beer.
strong, small. Cervisia lupulata, fortis, tenuis. Ale. Cervisia, cervisia
illupulata. A Stand. Sessibulum. An Ale stool. Scamnu cervisiariu, talea. Barm,
Yest. Spuma, vel flos cervisie. Grains. Brasiu madefact. An hop-Merchant.
Lupularius. Malt, sweetish-Malt. Brasiu, brasiu dulciculum. A Malster.
Brasiator. A Malthouse. Brasitoriu. Malting. Granificiu. A Malt-Kiln. Fumariu,
farrariu. A Malt-Mill. Molendinu brasitoriu. Malt meal or flower. Polenta.
Bricklayers, Tilers, Plaisterers. v. Masons.
A Bricklayer. a Brickmaker. Laterarius. A brick, made of bricks. later,
lateritius. A Brick Kiln. Fornax lateraria. Mortar. Cementum. A Tray of Mortar.
qualus cementi. A rubbed brick. Later frictus. Loam tempered with chopped Straw.
Lutum paleatum. Walls made of Clay or mud. parietes formacei. A mortis hole.
Cubile. To daub. Delutare. A daubing. Oblimaco^. A Truel. Trulla. A Line with a
Plummet. perpendiculum. The level. Amussis. A Tiler. Tegularius, imbricarius. A
Tile, a little Tile. Tegula, laterculus. To Tile. Imbricare, tegere.
Ridg-Tiles. Imbrices. Pan-Tiles, or Gutter-tiles. Tegule deliciares. A
Tile-Kiln. Fornax tegularis. A Square paving tile. Tessera. A Wooden tile or
shingle. Scandula. A Plaisterer. Cementarius, Parietarius, Tector. To parget or
Plaster. Crustrare, trullissare. Pargetting, Plaistering, roughcasting.
Incrustaco^, Tectoriu, trullisaco^. Parget or Plaster. Cementum. gypsum
intritum. Lime. Calx. Seelings. Laquearia. White. Mortar, Limework. Albariu,
opus albariu. Brushes to white with. Penicilla tectorii. v. Masons.
Brushmakers.
A Brushmaker. Scopularius. A Brush. Verriculum. A Whisk. Setariu^. To brush.
Verrere.
Butchers.
A Butcher. Lanius. A Butchers Shop. Carnariu. A Shambles. Macellum. A
Slaughterhouse. Laniarium. Belonging to a Butcher. Laniarius. Butchers meat.
Caro lanionia Fatlings, altilia. Lean Cattle. Vescula. A Chopping-Knife.
Clunaculum, clunabulnm. A Scraping-Knife. Radula. To flay. Deglubere,
excoriare. A Fly-flap. Muscariu. Beef. Caro bovina. Bubula. Veal. Caro
vitulina. Mutton. Caro Ovina. Lamb. Caro Agnina. Kid. Caro Hedina. Pork. Caro
Porcina. Hogs-flesh. Caro suilla. Bacon. Lardum. A Gamo^ of Bacon. Armus
suillus. A Pestil of Bacon. perna suilla. A Flitch of Bacon. Succidia. Haslets.
Offe penite. exta porcella. A Shoulder of Mutton. Armus ovillus. A Leg of
Mutton. Clunis ovina. A Rack of Mutton. Cervix vervicina.
Carpenters, Joyners, Wheelwrights.
A Carpenter. faber lignarius, Carpcntarius. A Joyner. Junctor, arcarius. A
Wainmaker. Faber plaustrarius. A Wheelwright. Rotarius, rotifex. A
Plough-wright. Aratrifaber. A Carver. Incisor, sculptor. A Master Builder, a
Plotter. Architectus. Architecture. Architectura. A Builder, a building.
Edificator, edificiu^. A Beam. Trabs. A Quarter. Trabs quadrata. A Rafter.
Tignu, v. Houses. A Brace to fasten Beams. Fibula. To square. Quadrare. To
plain with a Plain. Deplanare planula asciare. A Square. Norma. A Rule. Regula.
A Scaffold. quoddiu. A Leaver. Palanga. A Pully. Orbiculus. A Roller.
Cilyndrus. A Wedg. Cuneus ferreus. A Ladder, Ladder-staves. Scala, gradus.
Tressels. Cantherii. A Beetle. Malleus ligneus. A Mallet. Malleolus ligneus. An
Ax. Ascia, dolabra. An Hatchet. Securis. The Handle of an Ax or Hatchet.
Manubriu. To Smooth Boards. Edolare asseres. Joints of Planks. Assamentorum
co^missure. An Augre. Terebra. A little Augre, a Wimble, a Gimlet. Terebellum.
A Twibil. Bipennis. A Chisel. Cestis. A Saw, a whip saw. Serra. runcina. A
Greater Saw. Serra major. A Compass. Circinus. A Level, a Plumb-line. Amnssis.
A File. Lima. Mortises. Subscudes. A Pin. Impages, clavus ligneus. Chips.
Assule. Chinks. Intertigna. Fissure. Carved work. Opus incisum. To Carve.
Colare. Wainscoat. Opus intestinu. To wainscot. Tabulare, open intestino vestire
parictes. Vernish. Vernix. Glue, to Glue. Glutea, conglutinare.
Carriers Coachmen, Carters.
A Wain. Plaustrum. Carr. a Cart. Caruca. Carriages. Vehicula. A Dray, a Sled.
Traha. A Caroch. Essedum. A Coach, a Wagon. Currus, rheda. A Chariot.
Curriculum, cisiu. A Coachman. a Waggoner. Rhedarius, auriga. A Trigger,
Sufflamen. A Wheel-barrow. Pabo. A Tumbrel. Sarracum. An Horselitter. Acera. A
Sedan. Carpentum. A Pavilion. Pilentum. A Beam or Tongue. Temo. Couplings.
Iugamenta. Axels. Axes. A Wheel, a Cartwheel. Rota, orbita. A Nave. Modiolus
rote. A Spoke, a wheel with Spokes. Radius, rota radiata. A Struck. Abses.
Clonts, binders. Canthi ferrei. An Iron-bound Wheel, Rota ferrata.
Chaundlers.
A Chaundler. Candelarius. A Candle. Candela. A Watch-candle. Lucubra, A
Candle-Snuffer. Emunctoriu. A Wax-chandler. Cerarius. A Wax-Candle. Cereus.
Wax-tapers. Facule ceree. A Corn-Chandler. Frumentarius. A Cheesemonger.
Casearius.
Chirurgions. v. Phisicions.
Clothiers, Clothworkers, Drapers, Fullers.
A Clothier. Pannifex, pannificus. A Draper, a Woollen Draper. Pannicularius
Draparius, lanarius. A Clothworker, a Shereman. Panni tonsor, panni rasor. The
art of making Woollen Cloth. Lanificiu. The Art of making Linen Cloth.
Linificiu. Belonging to Cloth. Panneus. Wool. Lana. Course refuse Wool. Solox,
lana recusat. A Lock of Wool. Floccus. Wool unspun. Lana infecta. A Carder, a
carding. Carminator, carminaco^. To card. Carminare, pectinare. Cards or
Woolcombs. Hami, perectines. A pair of Woolcards. Par carptariorum. A pair of
Stock Cards. Par hamorum. Yarn, a bottom of Yarn. Lana facta, filum, Glomus. To
Spin. Spinsters. Filare, nere, netrices, lanifice. A Distaff. Colus. A
Spinning-wheel. Rhombus. A Spindle. Fusus. A Whirl, a Wheel. Verticulus,
girgillus. A Skeyn of yarn. Forago. A Bottom of Yarn, to wind bottoms. Glomus,
glomerare glomos. A Reel. Alabrum. A Web. Tela. A Sheerman. his Shop. Tonsor,
Tonstrina. To Sheare, a Shearing. Tondere, tonsura. Woollen Cloth. Pannu
laneum. voc, etc. Virga de sargio. 1 Mon. 419. Pry. 185. Sile. Wolsted, Trilix.
A Sheermans Sheers. Forfices. A Fuller. Fullo. To full Cloth. a fulling.
Fullare, fullaco^. Belonging to a Fuller. Fullonius, fullonicus. A Fullers
Shop. Fullonicum. A Fullers Craft. ars fullonica. Fullers Earth. Terra
Fullonu^. A Rack, a Tenter. Fabrica pannea, pannitendiu. A pounder. Pilum.
Linen Cloth, of Linen. Linteum, linteus. A Linnen-Draper, a Whitster.
Lintearius, insolator. Hemp, Flax. Cannabum, Linu. Wrought Flax. Linu factum. A
Brake, Frangibul um Linifrangibula. An Hichel. Hamus, pecten, linibriu. Tow,
Hurds. Stupa, lini floccus. Hulls. Cortices. Tasks, Flax ou the Distaff.
Pensum. Thread, thread by thread. Filum, filatim. Packthred. filum sarcinariu.
Linen Armory. Linea armatura. To make Linen, a linen work. linificare,
linificiu, A Flax woman, a Flax plot. Linifex Linariu. Cloth made of Hair.
Pannu ciliciu. Linsey wolsey. Linostema. Fustian. Xilinu. Flaxen. Carbasum.
Canvas. Cannabiu, cannabis. Dowlas. Stapeum. Cambrick. Byssum. Lawn, Sindon,
London Clothes. Panni Londinensis. Course Clothes. Panni pingues. Slight
Clothes. Levidenses. To fold in Pleats. Complicare in volumen. A Fring.
Fimbria.
Clockmakers.
A Clockmaker, a Watchmaker. Horologiarius. A Clock. a Watch. Horologiu,
horariu. Belonging to a Clock. Horologicus. A Sundyal. Solariu, solare
horologiu. An hour, during an hour. Hora, horarius. An hanging larum with
Minutes. Horologiu pendens cum momentis. A watch going seven days. Horologiu
moco^nem hens per 7 dies. A Watch with the days of the month, etc. Horologiu
monstrans dies mensis, etatem lune, ac fluxus and refluxus maris. A Movement
going four days. Horologiu movens per 4 dies.
Combmakers.
A Combmaker. Pectinarius. To Comb. Combed. Comere, pectere, pexus. Combs, of
Horn, Ivory, Wood. Pectines, cornei, eburnei, lignei. Great and small Teeth.
Rari and densi radii. A Comb-Case. Pectinariu.
Confectioners, Comfitmakers.
A Confectioner. Dulciarius pistor, cupediarius. A March-pane, a Spice Cake.
Panis dulciarius. Sweet meats. Cupedie, scriblite. Cracknels, Sugar-bread,
Marchpanes. Panis Saccharites. Cakes, Waifers. Placente, crustula.
Coocks.
A Cook. Coquus. A Kitchen. coquina. To dress Meat. Coquinari. A Kitchin-maid.
Focaria. A Sinkhole. Fusoriu. An Oven, a Furnace. Furnus. To heat an Oven.
Infurnare. To Bake. In furno coquere. A Chimny. Caminus, furnariu. The mouth of
an Oven. pfurniu. Belonging to an Oven, or made like an Oven. Furnaceus. A
Spit. Veru. Cobirons. Cratenteria. A Dripping-pan. Sartago. Grated on a Grater.
Tritus super radulam. To fry in a drying pan. Frigere in frixorio. To broil on
a Gridiron. Torrere super Craticulam. A pair of Bellows. Par folliu. flabellum.
A Scummer. Tudicula. A Slice, Rudicula. A dredging spoon. Cochleare, A Ladle.
Trulla. A Mortar. Mortarium. A Pestle. Pistillum. A Flesh-fork. Fuscinula. A
Cullender, a Strainer. Fiscella. A Pot. Olla. A Lid. Operculum. A Kettle.
Cacabus. A Posnet. Catillus. A Platter. Catinus. To pull out Bones. Exossuare.
To split the Backs. Exdorsuare. To draw Birds. Aves Exenterare. To pull Birds.
Aves deplumare. To scale Fish. Desquamare pisces. To roast, Roasted. Assare,
assatus, assus. Roasted meats, Rost-Beef. Assature, carnes assate, bubula assa.
To boil things to be boiled: Elixare elixanda. To be seething hot and boil.
Effervescere and bullire. To boil over. Ebullare. Boiled in Pottage, things sod
in broth. Jurulentis, jusculenta. Meats of all sorts. Esculenta, Pasties, Pies.
Artocree. Cakes. Placente. Pancakes. Lagana. Cheesecakes. Moreta. Flawns.
Obelie. Custards. Artogale. Tarts. Scribtile. Applepies. Crustula, Minced-meat.
Minutal. Gallimawfries. Tuceta. A tid bit, Meat well dressed. Pulpamentum.
Gruel, an hasty pudding. Pulmentum. Sance, sharp sauces. Condimentum,
embammata. Messes. Fercule. Courses. Missus. Grease. Fat. Adeps. Suet. melted
suet. Sebum, liquamen. Lard. Lardum.
Coopers.
A Cooper. Vietor. doliarius. Tubs. Cupe, vasa doliaria. A Runlet. Orcula. A
Barrel. Cadus, Barellus. Hogsheads. Dolia. A Bung or Stopple. Operculum,
obturamentum. A Spigot. Sipho. A Fawcet. Epistomiu. Staves for Pipes, Barrels,
etc. Lamina. Twig-hoops. Circuli viminei.
Cordwainers, Shomakers.
A Shomaker. Suitor calcearius. A Cobbler. Sarcinator. Veteramentarius, cerdo. A
Shoe. Calceus, Calceamentum. Boots, booted. Ocree. par ocrearum, ocreatus. An
high Shoe, one wearing a high Shoe. Pero, peronatus. A Slipper, or pantofle,
pertaining thereto. Crepida, crepidarius. One wearing Slippers or pantofles.
Crepidatus. Buskins, wearing buskins. Cothurni, cothurnatus. Startops. Socci,
socculi. Boot-tops. Cruralia. A Shoing-horn. Cornu calceariu, calcipedes,
inductoriu. A cutting-board. Tabula formaria. A Sole. Solea. Vpper-Leather.
Obstragulum. Quarters. Ansa. Latchets. Corrigia. To underlay Shoes, Resarcire
calceamenta. Shoemakers wax. cerotum sutoriu. A Shoemakers Knife. Smiliu
sutoriu. A Seam. Sutura. A Punch. Punctio A Bristle. to bristle. Seta,
insetare. A Thread, waxed thread. Filum, filum paratum. A Last. Mustriola. Rosin.
Resina. An Awle. Subula.
Curriers.
A Currier. Coriorum concinnator. A Leather dresser. Alutarius. A Shave.
Scalprum sutoriu. Black. Atramentum sutoriu. Grease. Adeps. To dress Leather.
Concinnare coria.
Cutlers.
A Cutler. Faber cultrarius, cultellarius. A Swordmaker, Faber gladiarius. A
Sithmaker. Faber falcarius. A Knife, a little Knife. Culter, cultellus. A
Penknife. Scalpellum. A Shomakers Knife. Smiliu sutoriu. A Sword. Ensis.
Hilts. Capule. Sheaths, Scabberds. Vagine.
Distillers.
A Distiller. Distillator. A Seller of things distilled. Distillarius, To
distill, a distilling. Distill^re, distillaco^. A Still, Distillatoriu. A
Lembick-still. Alembicus.
Drapers, v. Clothiers.
Dyers.
A Dyer, a Dyers Wife. Tinctor, tinctrix. To dye, a dying. Tingere, tinctura. A
Dye-house, a Dyers Vat. Officina tinctoria, cortina, ahenu tinctoriu. The
Science of Dying. Baphice. Double-dyed. Dibaphus, Russet russetum. 1 Mon. 119.
A Color, colored, dyed. Color, coloratus tinctus.
Falconers, Fowlers.
THe Art of Hawking. Ars ancupatoria, five aucupandi cum accipitre. Hauking.
Aucupiu, Lime to take Birds, Lime Twigs. Viscus. -- Calami viscosi. A Decoy.
Illex. A Birder, a Fowler. Auceps. A Lure. Illicitamentum quod accipitre. A
Falconer. Accipitrarius, Falconarius. Pry. 71. An Aerie of Hawks. Aeria
accipitrum. To Hawk, to take Birds. Ancupari. Fit or pertaining to take Birds.
Aucupatorius. An Hawk a reclaimed Hawk. Accipiter, accipiter Reclamatus. An
Hawks hood. capitiu. An Hawks-Bell. Tintinnabulum. A Cage. Cavea. A little
trough, a waterpot. Aqualiculum, potistris. Game. Preda. Gins, Traps, Snares.
Pedice, decipula, laquei. Pitfalls. Aucupule, tendicule Nonzes of Snares.
Transenne laqueorum. A Call or Whistle. Fistula aucupatoria. A Birding or
Fowling-Net. Rete Aucupatoriu^. A Lowbel, a Lowbeller. Campinola, campinalator.
Farriers, v. Smiths.
Fishers, Fishmongers.
A Fisher, to fish. Piscator, piscari. A Fishmonger. Piscenarius. An Angler.
Hamiota. A Fishers-boat. Lembus. A Fish-Call. Moles piscatoria. A Wear. Moles,
wera. 1 Mon. 590.983. Lex. 133. A Fish Pond. Piscina. A Store-pool. Seminariu.
Shuts. Seclusoria. A Weel, a little weel or Snare. Nassa, Scirpiculus. A
Net-maker. Retiarius. A Fishing net. Rete piscarium, piscatorium. A Bownet.
Sagena. A Casting-Net. Funda. A Draw net. Verriculum. A Pursnet. Excipulum. A
Tramel. Tragula. Wideness of Meshes. Laxitas macul. rum. An Eel-Spear. Fuscina.
An Angle-rod, to Angle. Lancia. Hamopiscari. A Fish-hook. a Fish-line. Hamus
piscatorius, linea piscatoria. Fishes swimming on the top. Supernatantes.
Fishes swimming thwart. Abnatantes. Salt-fish, Ling. Salsamenta. A Last of
Barrel-fish. Lasta piscis barellati. A Shellfish. Concha.
Fletchers.
A Fletcher, a Bowyer. Arcuarius. A Shooter. Sagittarius. A Bow, of a Bow.
Arcus, arcuarius. A Crossbow. Balista. To bend a Bow. Arcum tendere. A
Bow-string. Amentum, nervus arcus. A Bow-Case. Theca arcuaria, caritus. An
Arrow. Sagitta. The nock of an Arrow. Crena. The Feathers of an Arrow. Ale
sagitte. An Arrow-head. Spiculum. A Bolt. Verutum, spicula. A Quiver. Pharetra,
theca sagittaria. Buts, marks to shoot at. Mete, scopi. Rover-marks. Incerta.
Prick-marks. Destinata.
Furriers.
A Furrier. P^llio, pelliculator. Fur, of Fur. Pellitiu, pellice^s. To fur
Gowns, a furred Gown. pellic^l^re, toga pelliculata, pellita. Furred caps.
Pilei pellicei. A Furring. Pelliculatio.
Gardeners.
A Gardener. Hortulanus, olitor. A Garden. Gardinu^, hortus. A Kitchen-Garden,
Potherbs. Olitoriu^, olera. An Orchard. Pomariu. A Young Orchard. Plantariu^. A
Nursery of Trees. Seminariu^. An Arbor, a Bower. Topiariu^, umbraculum. A
Grass-plat. Viridariu^. Walks, Allies. Ambulacra, ambulatoria. Gardening.
Horticultura. A Fruiterer. Arborator. To Graft Cyons. Inserere surculos. To
prune young Shoots with a Pruning-Knife. Scalpro putare germina. Suckers.
Stolones. To rake with Rakes. Sarrire cum rastris. A setting-stick. a dibble.
Pastinu^. Belonging to a Garden. Hortensis. A Vineyard. Vinea.
Girdlers.
A Girdler. Cingularius. A Girdle, a little Girdle. Cingulus, Zonula. To Gird,
to gird about. Cingere, circumcingere. Girded, a girding. Cinctus, cinctura. A
Sword Girdle. Baltheus. A Belt. Lumbatoriu^. A Naples Belt fringed with Silk.
Baltheus Neapolitanus bisso fimbriatus. Anglice, etc.
Glasiers, Potters.
A Glasier. Fenestrarius, vitri conflator. To Glaze. Invitreare. Glass-works,
Vitreamina. Bay-windows. Fenestre cave. A Casement. Transenna. Sodder,
Soddered. Ferrumentum, ferrumentatus. Quarrels of Glass. Rhombi vitri. Joints.
Jugamenta. To lead over with Sodder of Pewter. Applumbare ferrumine stanneo. A
Glass Furnace, fornax vitraria. A maker or seller of Glasses. Vitriarius.
Glass, of Glasses. Vitrum, vitreus. A Glass-house. Officina vitraria.
Glass-bottles. Ampulle vitree. A little Glass. Vitriolum. Drinking-glasses.
Vitrea A looking-Glass, a Seeing-Glass. Speculum. A Prospective-Glass.
Telescopiu^. Spectacles. Conspicilia. Magnifying Glasses. Microscopia.
Burning-glasses. Specula urentia. A Potter, a Potters Craft. Figulus, figlina.
A Potters wheel. Rota figulina. Earthen Vessels. Figulina, vasa fictilia. A
Pot. Olla. Clay. Argilla. A Clay-pit. Argilletum. To bake in an Oven. Excoquere
in furno. To glase with lithargy. Incrustare Lithargyro. Belonging to a Potter.
Figlinus. Formed of Earth. Plasmatus, plasmatura.
Glovers, Tanners, Tawers, Leathersellers.
A Glover. Chirothecarius. A pair of Gloves. Par chirothecarum. A Glovers
trade. Chirothecaria. The Finger of a Glove. Digitale. Gloved. Manicatus. A
Pursemaker. Marsupiarius. A Purse. Bursa. A Pouch. Funda. A Snapsack.
Sacciperiu. Strings of a Purse. Astrigmenta burse. A Tanner, a Tawer.
Coriarius, alutarius. A Tanhouse. Frumitoriu. Tanned-Leather. Coriu Tannat.
Vtensils of Leacher. Utensilia e corio. A Hide or Skin. Pellis, tergus, cutis.
Made of Leather, covered with Leather. Coriaceus, pellitus. A Leatherseller, a
Skinner, their Trade. Pellio, pelliparius, pelliparia. Tawed or dressed
Leather. Aluta. Any thing of tawed Leather. Alutamen. A tawing. Alutaco^. A
Tanvate. Labrum coriariu. Lime-pits. Fovee calcarie. The Master-vat. Fovea
principalis. Backs, Pelts, and the like. Pecie corii voc, etc. psegmina corii.
A Thong of Leather. Lorum. A Knacker, a Collar-maker. Restio. Bark. Cortex.
Leather, of Leather. Coriu, coriaceum. A Skin, of a Skin. Pellis, pelliceus. A
little Skin. Pellicula. Of Buff-Leather. Bubulinus.
Goldsmiths, Coiners, Jewellers.
A Goldsmiths, a Silver-smith. Aurifaber, argentarius, argentifex. A
Touchstone. Lapis lidius. To Assay. quodbare. A Balance, a Weight. Bilanx,
simbella. The scale of a Balance. Lanx, librile. A Gilder, to gild. Inaurator,
inaurare. A Gilding. Auratura, deauratio. Silver, covered with Silver.
Argentum, argentatus. Golden threads. Stamina aurea. Plates. Lamine. Spangles.
Bractee. Oas. Bracteole. Dust-filings. Scobs, ramenta. Refuse, Wast.
Intertrimentum. A Gold-beater. Bracteator. Vessels of Gold, gilt. Vasa aurea,
aurata. Vessels of Silver, silvered. Vasa argentea, argentata. Silver Spoons.
Cochlearia argentea. A Bodkin. Calamistrum. Money, a Mint. Moneta, monetariu.
Coin, Coinage, a Coiner. Cuneus, cunagiu, cuneator. A Counterfeitor. a
false-Coiner. Falsarius. To Coin bad money. percutere nummos reprobos. To clip
money. Admutilare nummos. A Bancker, a Banckers Trade. Argentarius, Argentaria.
A Jeweller, Gemmarius. Jewels. Jocalia, Jocularia, gemme. A Jewel. For the
Breast, Monile. A Jewel. For the Neck. Torquis. A Jewel. For the Ear, Inauris.
A Jewel. For the Hands. Annulus. A Jewel. For the Arms-Bracelets. Armilla. A
Necklace of Pcarls. Monile margaritarum. A Ring with a Saphir. Annulus aureus
cum saphiro in eodem fixo.
Grasiers, Cattle.
A Grasier. Pecorarius. A Tender of Cattle. Pecuarius. A Neatheard. Bubulcus.
Cattle. Auia. pecudes. A Flock, an Heard. Grex, armentum. A Stalling.
Stabulaco^. Pasturing. Pabulaco^. A Hurdle. Crates, craticula. Fatting-meat, a
fatting place. Sagina, saginariu. A fatting, fatted. Saginaco^, Saginat.
Labouring-Beasts, Packhorses. Jumentum, jumenta clitellaria. Agistment.
Agistamentum. An Horse, a Mare. Equus, equa. A Gelding, a Nag. Spado, Mannus. A
Colt. Pullus equinus. An Ass. Asinus. A Sumpter-horse. Equus sarcinarius. An
Ambler, a Trotter. Equus gradarius, succussator. A Bull, an Ox. Taurus, bos. A
Bullock, a Steer. Boviculus, juvencus. A Cow, an Heifer. Vacca, juvenca. A
Calf. Vitlus. A Dairy. Vaccaria. A Boar, a Sow. Aper, sus. An Hog, a Pig.
Porcus. porcellus. A Ram, a Ewe. Aries, ovis matrix. A Sheep. Ovis, bidens. A
Weather. Vervex. A Lamb. Agnus.
Grocers.
A Grocer. Aromatarius. A Grocers-Shop. Aromatapoliu. Grocery Wares. Aromata.
Sugar. Saccharum. Pepper, a grain of Pepper. Piper granu piperis. A Clove.
Gariophilus. Mace. Macia. Cinnamon. Cinamomu. Ginger, Gingiber. Grains. Grana
aromatica. Nutmegs. Nuces muscate. Licoris. Radix dulcis. Sanders. Sandalus.
Saffron. Crocus. A Date. Dactilus. Figs. Ficus. Raisins. Uve pass. Currance.
Uve Corinthiace. A Prune. Prunu.
Haberdashers.
AN Haberdasher of Hats. Pileo. An Haberdasher of small Wares. Minutarius. An
Hat, having a Hat. Galerus, galerat. An Hatband. Spira. An Hat block. Globus
ligneus. An Hat and Hatcase. Galerus and theca eundem galerum continens. A
Capper, a Cap. Pilearius, pileus. A Bonnet. Tiara. A Beaver. Petasus. Points.
Ligule. Taggs. Capitella.
Hosiers.
AN Hosier. Caligarius. Hose, Stockins. Calige, tibialia. Ancle-hose. Calige
talares. Hose-tops. Su^mitates caligarum. Hosegarters. Fascie crurales.
Pertaining to Hose, hosed. Caligarius, caligatus.
Hunters, Keepers.
AN Hunter. Venator. To Hunt, to go a hunting. Venari, ire venatum. An
Hunting-staff. Venabulum. A Wood-Knife. Culter venatorius. A Dog-Collar.
Collare millus. A Leash. Retinaculum. A Line. Lorum Ductoriu. Couplings.
Copule. A Tramel. Tragum. Toils. Casses. A Snare, an Hare-pipe. Decipula,
leporicipula: An Hay. Cassiculus, indago, tendicula. An Hunting-horn. a Bugle.
Cornu venatoriu. A Dog or Bitch. Canis. cauis Masculus, canis femina. A
Greyhound. Leporarius. A Burcher, Lurcherius, Lurco. Anglice, etc. A
Setting-Dog, a Spaniel. Hispaniolus. A Blood-hound. Canis sagax, odorator. A
Tumbler. Vertagus. A Hound. Venaticus. A Forester. Forestarius. A Forest.
Foresta. A Game-keeper. Custos ferarum. A Chase. Chacea. A Park, a Keeper.
Parcus, Parcarius. A Waren, a Warenner. Warenna, warennarius. A Deer, Buck,
Do. Dama. A Heart, a Stag, Cervus. An Hind. Cerva, bissa. Spel. 99. A Goat, a
Kid. Hircus, hedus. A Fox. Vulpes. An Hare. Lepus, leporis. A Gray, Badger.
Castor. A Cony. Cuniculus. A Ferret. Viverra. A Polcat, Fitchew. Martes A Cat.
Catus. A Weasel. Mustela.
Jaylors.
A Jailer, or Jailer. Gaoliarius, custos prisone. Warden of the Fleet.
Gardianus prisone Dni^ Regis de le Fleet. A Gaol a prison. Gaola, prisona,
Carcer. A Prisoner. Prisonar. Fetters, fettered. Compedes. manice. compeditus.
A Jaylors Fee. Carcerativum.
Imbroiderers.
AN Imbroiderer. Acupictor. To imbroider, imbroidered. Acupinge, acupictus. An
imbroidered Garment, having edges imbroidered. Vestis acupicta, pretexta.
Golden Woofs, Tissue. aurea subtegmina.
Innholders.
AN Innholder, his Wife. Hospitator, hospita. To entertain a Guest, one
entertained. Hospitare, hospitatus, hospes. An Inn, a common Inn. Hospitiu,
come hospitiu. An Hostler, Stabularius. Horsebread. Panis equinus. Litter.
Stramen, stramentum, substramen. An Halter. Capistrum. A Victualler, a
Victualling-house. Victualarius, domus victualaria. An Alehousekeeper.
Cervisiarius, popinar. An Alehouse. Cervisiariu, taberna cervisiaria. A
Buttery. Cervisiaria. A Celler. Cellariu.
Ironmongers, Smiths.
AN Ironmonger. Ferramentarius. Iron-work. of Iron. Ferramentum, serreus. A Dog
of Iron. Catellus ferrcus. Iron wire. Filum ferreum, ferrum netum. Nails.
Clavi, 10 Millia clavorum assi^e sexte, Anglice Six-penny nails. A little nail,
a Horse-nail. Clavulus, clavus equinus. A Plate. Bractea la^mina, laminare.
Iron, Steel. Ferrum, chalybs. Of Iron, as hard as Iron, dressed with Iron.
Ferreus Ferratus. Old Iron. Ferramenta detrita, rupta. An Iron-Smith, a
Blacksmith. Faber serrarius. A Copper-Smith. Faber erarius. A Lock Smith.
Claustrarius. A Sith-Smith. Falcarius. A Cutler, a Sword-maker. Cultarius,
faber gladiarius. An Armorer. Malleator, A Needlemaker. Acicularius. An
Anchor-Smith. Faber Anchorarius. A Farrier. Flippiatrus. A Smiths Shop. Shop^
ferraria, officina serraria. A Smiths Forge. Fabrile. An Anvil: In^us incudis.
Bellows. Folles. Tongs. Forcipes. Pincers. Forcipule. An Hammer, a little
Hammer. Malleus, malleolus. A Marking-Iron. Tudicula. A Water-trough. Alveus
aquarius. Sparks. Stricture. A Tool of Iron, or a thing made of Iron.
Ferramentum, ferrumentum. Cramp-Irons. Anse ferree. Subscudes ferree. A File,
to file. Lima, limare. To point. Cuspidare. To Sodder. Ferruminare. A Grinder,
to grind. Acuarius, acuere. A Grindstone, a grinding. Cos, coticula,
exacuatio. A Scourer, to Scour. Polio, polire. A Horshoe. Solea equina. To sho
an Horse. to sho Wheels. Effigere soleas equo, ferrare rotas. A Lock, a
Spring-lock. Sera, sera laconica. The Key thereof. Clavis laconica. A Padlock.
Sera pensilis.
Masons, v. Bricklayers. Houses.
A Mason, a Stonecutter. Lapidarius, lapicida. Quar of Stones. Quarrera,
lapicidina, fodina. A Pick-ax. Rutum. A Mallet. Tudes. A Chisel. Celtis. A
Rule. Norma. A Level. Amussis. A Line with a Plummet. Perpendiculum. A Plummet.
Pila plumbea. A Trowel. Trulla. Lime, Chalk. Calx, creta. Lome. Lutum paleatum.
Mortar, Plaster. Cementum, intrita. Claying, to dawb. Delutamentum, delutare.
To square. Quadrare. Wrought-Stone. Saxa dedolata. Stone dust. Pulvis lapideus.
Rick-Staddles Saxa quod fenilibus. A Pigs trough. Lapista porcina. A Draught, a
Model. Idea, exemplar, modulus. A Coin of a Wall. Cuneus. A Corbel, a Bragget.
mutulus. Outmost, middle and partition Walls. Muri primarii, mediani, and
intergerini. To pave, to pave the floors. Pavire, ruderare pavimenta.
Chequer-work. Teffella. Walled, beamed, material'd. Muratus, trabeatus,
materiatus. Propped with Pillars. Columnis statuminatus. Vpheld with Props.
Fultus pilis. Sbarp cres. Imbrices lapidei. A Master Builder. Architectus.
Mercers, Silkmen.
A Mercer, Mercery. Mercerus, mcatura. A Silkman. Sericarius. Silk. Sericum,
byssus. Of Silk. Sericus, byssinus. A Silken Garment, clothed in Silk. Vestis
serica sericatus. Mercery Wares. Species exotice. A London-Mercer. Vestiu ex
lineo, Yylina, setacea, serica materia confectarum, venditor. A County-Mercer.
Pantapola. Velvet. Holosericum, velvettum. Co. Entr. 565. Satin. Tramosericum.
Taffety. Taffeta. Damask. Sericum dalmaticum. Chamlet. Sericum undulatum.
Silken Clothes, Tunica de Satin, tunicula de taffata, pileum de nigro velvet.
sarcenetto, etc. Co. Entr. 158.
Millers.
A Miller his Wife. Molitor, molendinaria molitrix A Mill. Molendinu. A Water
Griest-Mill. Molendinu aquaticum granaticum. A Windmill. Molendinu ventriticum.
A Fulling-Mill. Molendinu fullonicum. A Sider-Mill. Molendinu pomariu. A
Malt-Mill. Molendinu brasitoriu. An Oil-Mill. Trapetum. An Horse-mill, an
Ass-Mill. Molendinu equinu. mola asinaria. An Hand-Mill. Mola manuaria,
moletrina, manumola A Mill-house. Domus molendinaria. Perteyning to a Mill.
Molaris, molarius. Mill-beds. Seeds molendini, scitus molendini. Griest. Far.
Toll. Tolnetum, theoloniu. To grind. Molire. A Mill stone. Lapis molaris. An
Hopper. Insundibulum. A Trough. Aqualiculum. A Water-wheel. Rota aquatica,
tympanu. A Cogg-wheel. Rota denticulata. A Cogg. Scarioballum. A Mill door.
Janua molendinaria. Ground or running-work, Tackling or gear. Instrumenta
currentia. A Runner or upper Millstone. Catillus, catinus. A Nether Mill slone.
Meta. A Millstone. Mola quod molendino. Pry. 185. Saxum molare. A Trendle of a
Mill. Molucrum. Mill-dust. Pollen. A pair of Clappers. a Mill-clapper. Par
malleorum. Crepitaculum molare. A Mill-pool, or Pond. Stagnu. A Pond-head, a
Mill-dam. Caput stagni, castellum. A Wear, Floodgate, Dam. Cataracta, Moles,
Co^matum. Fenders, Locks, Sluices. Emissaria, Fluvialia, Excluse. A Watercourse
to a Mill. Gurges molaris. A Milleate, a shut. Emissariu, canalis. Qquid sunt,
Ringes, Sharp, spuringe boards, headwears. cosses of the spuring sheds.
Miners.
A Miner, a Grover, a Digger. Minerarius, metallarius, metallicus fossor. A
Mine, Minera, fodina A severer, Discretor. A Washer. Lotor. A Mine of Iron.
Ferrifodina. A Mine of Brass. Eraria. To mine, undermine, mined. Subruere,
subrutus. Lead-oar Ura plumbea. Mineral. Minerale, Fossile. A Smelting-Mill.
Molendinu plumbariu. Melting-houses. Ustrine. Wedges. Cunei. Pieces. Frusta.
Ingots. Tabelle. Bars. Bacilli. Dross. Scoria.
Painters, Picturedrawers.
A Painter, to paint. Pictor, pingere. Painted, half-painted. Pictus,
semipictus. A Painting. Pictio, depictura. Painted Colors, a maker or seller
of them. Pigmentum, pigmentarius. Size to lay colors withal. Gluten. Oker.
Ochra. A Pencil. Peniculus, penicillum. A Brush. Graphium. A Picture drawer,
Pictured. Delineator, delineatus. A Picture, to Picture. Pictura, depingere. A
Limner, a Limning. Miniator, miniatura.
Pavers.
A Paver, a Pavement. Pavitor Pavimentum. To pave, Paved. Pavimentare,
pavimentatus, Stratus. To pave all through, paved all through. persternere,
perstratus. A Paving-beetle. Pavicula.
Pewterers, Tinners.
A Pewterer, a Tinner. Stannarius. Pewter, Tinn. Plumbum cineriu, stannu.
Pewter Vessels, Vasa stannea. A Dish. Discus, catinus. A Potinger. Catillus. A
Platter. Patina. A Charger. Lanx. A Plate. Lamina. A Basin. Malluviu, pelvis.
An Ewer. Gutturiu, aqualis. A Salt-Seller. Salinu salsariu. A Sawcer, Scutella.
A Chamber Pot. Matula. A Candle-stick. Candelabrum. A Flagon. Uter. A Cup, a
standing Cup. Poculum, cr^^^^. A Laver. Lavacrum. A Standish. Atramentarium. A
Close-stool pan. Lasanu.
Plummers.
A Plummer. Plumbarius, Lead. Plumbum. Of Lead, full of Lead, or mixed with
Lead. Plumbeus Plumbosus. Lead-Oar. Ura Plumbea, plumbago. Leading, soddering
with Lead. Plumbaco^, plumbatura. A Plummers Shop. Shopa plumbaria. A Pipe of
Lead. Pipa plumbea. Sodder of Lead. Ferrumen. A Roof covered with Lead. Tectum
plumbo obductum. A Sow of Lead. Plumbi lamina.
Potters. v. Glasiers.
Poulterers.
A Poulterer. Aviarius. Poultry. Aves villatice.
Printers.
A Printer. a Printing. Typographus, typographia A Composer. Typotheca. A
Corrector. Corrector. The first Copy. Primum exemplar. A Press. Prelum.
Printers Ink. Atramentum impressoriu. Brazen tipes. Iron Chases. Typi enei.
Margines ferrei. A Box, Composing Boxes. Cellula, loculamenta. A Sheet. Scheda.
A Page. Pagina. To Print. Printed. Imprimere, impressus.
Ropers.
A Roper, a Knacker. Restio. A Rope, perteyning to Ropes. Funis, restis,
funalis. To make Ropes Funes torquere. A Cable-Rope. Rudens. A little Rope.
Funiculus, resticula. Halters. Capistra. The course part of hemp. Stupa. Tow.
Spartum.
Sadlers.
A Sadler. Ephippiarius, sellarius. An Harness-maker. Frenarius. To Saddle an
Horse. Equu sternere, equo ephippiu imponere. Sadled. Ephippiatus, instratus
ephippiis. Trappings. phalere equine. A Saddle. Sella equina, ephippiu. A
Woman's Saddle. a Side-Saddle. Sella muliebris. Pack-Saddles, Dorsers. Clitelle.
A Pillion. Dorsuale. An Horselitter. Lectica, gestatoriu. A Sedan. Sella
gestatoria. A Saddlecloth. Instratum. A Saddle-Tree. Selle forma lignea. The
Saddle-bow. Selle arcus. An Houlster. Theca quod sclopo. Stirrups. Scansilia,
stapedes. A Girth. Cingulum. A Petrel. Antilena. A Crupper. Postilena,
Candalia. To Spur. Extimulare cum calcaribus. A Bridle. Frenu. The Rein of a
Bridle. Frontale. A Bitt. Orea. A Barnacle. Fiscina. A Collar. Helciu, collare.
A Curricomb. Strigil. A Male. Bulga. A Cloak-bag. Vidulum. A Wallet. Bisaccum,
mantica. A thwart pole in a Stable. Longurius.
Salters.
A Salter. Salinarius, salarius. Salt, a grain of Salt. Sal, mica salis. To
Salt, Salted. Salire, Salsus. A Salting. Salt. Salsura, salitura, salsus. A
salt pit, Salt water. Salina, aqua salsa. Saltness, saltish. Salsilago,
salfuginosus. Salt making. Salsaria. Belonging to salt, any thing that is salt.
Salinarius, salsamentum. A Saltseller, a salting Tub. Salinu, vas
salfamentariu. Bay Salt, Salt Peter. Sal niger, sal Petre. A Garner, or room to
keep salt in. Salis repositoriu.
Seamsters, Laundresses.
A Seamster. Sutrix. A Seamsters shop. Sutrina. A Seam, a sewing. Sutura.
Sewed. Consutus. Seamed, or having Seams. Consutus, sutilis. Without seam.
Inconsutilis. Seam rent, ripped. Dissutus, resutus. To sew. Suere, consuere. A
Needle, a Pin. Acus, acicula. A Needles eye. Foramen acus. A Thimble.
Digitabulum. Thread. Filum. v. Tailors. A Laundress. Lotrix. To wash, to wash
clean. Lavare, diluere. A Washing. Lotio, lotura. A washing Beetle. Pala
lotoria. Soap, Starch. Sapo, turbasis. amylum. Lie. Lixiviu. To Starch,
Starched. Amylo contendere, amylo contentus. A Wash-house, a washing place.
Lavatrina, aquariu.
Sopeboilers.
A Sopeboiler. Saponarius. Soap. Sapo. Soap balls. Pile mattiace, smegmata. Of
or belonging to soap. Smegmaticus. To soap, washed with soap. Smegmate obluere,
Smegmate oblitus.
Stationers.
A Stationer, a Bookseller. Bibliopola, librarius. A Library, a Library keeper.
Bibliotheca, Bibliothecarius. A Bookbinder. Bibliopegus. A Book, a little b.ok.
Liber, libellus. A Tome. Tomus. Short Writing. Tachigraphia, stenographia.
Characters, Letters set for words. Sigle, characteres. To out the Margent of
Books. Demarginare. A Clasp. Clausura. A Parchment maker. Membranarius.
Parchment. pergamenu, membrana. Parchment making, or a place of sale thereof.
Membranaria. Of or belonging to Parchment. Membraneus. Paper. Charta, papyrus.
Fine Paper, Paper not written on. Charta augusta, Charta pura. Cap paper, or
brown paper. Charta emporetica. Sinking paper, not bearing Ink. Charta bibula.
charta perfluens. Wast paper. Schediasma. A Paper maker or seller. Chartopeus,
papyropola. A Sheet of paper, a leaf of paper. Scheda, schedula foliu. A Ream
or quire of paper. Scapus. Made of paper, belonging to paper. Chartaceus,
chartarius. Rags to make paper. Lintea vetusta. Ink. Atramentum. Galls of Oak.
Galla quernea. Allom. Alumen. Gum. Gu^mus. A Penn. Penna. A Cleft. incisura. A
Pencase. Calamariu,
Tailors.
A Tailor. Suitor vestiarius, sartor. Botcher. Interpolator. To sew, to rip, to
sew up again. Suere, dissuere, resuere. Sewed, sewed unto, or together. Sutus,
assutus. That may be sewed. Sutilis. A Seam. Sutura, sarcimen. Thread, thread
by thread. Filum, filatim. A guard or hem, a Skirt. Limbus, fimbria. Borders of
Garments. Extremitates vestiu. Lace. Instita, lacinia. Ribon. Lemniscus.
Pieces. Scissure. Stiffning. Firmatura. Canvas. Canabum. A Pocket. Saccellum. A
Busk. pectorigiu. Sheeres. Forfices. A Needle. Acus. A Thimble. digitale. A
Bodkin. Punctoriu pugiunculus. To pierce with a Bodkin, a hole made with a
Bodkin. Pungere, punctura. A Pressing-Iron. Ferramentum pressoriu.
Tinners. v. Pewterers.
A Tinner. Stannarius. Tin. of or belonging to Tin. Stannu, Stanneus. Tin-work.
Opus Stannariu. To Tin, or cover with Tin. Stannare. stanno obducere. A
Tinder-box, Tinder. Ignariu, fomes. Matches, a Steel. Sulphurata, chalybs. A
Flint. Silex.
Trunkmakers.
A Trunkmaker. Riscarius. a Trunk. Riscus. A little Trunk. Arcula. A
Close-stool. Sella familiaris. A Male. Bulga.
Turners.
A Turner. Tornator, tornio. A turn. Tornus. Turned works. Opera tornatilia,
toreumata. That is made by turning. Tornatilis.
Vintners.
A Vintner. Vinarius, tabernarius. A Tavern, Taberna vinaria. A Wine-Cellar.
Cella vinaria. Perteyning to wine. Vinaceus, vinarius. Claret Wine. Vinu
rubellum. White Wind. Vinum album. Red-wine. Vinu rubrum. Spanish wine, Sack.
Vinu Mispanicum. French-wine. Vinu Gallicum. Rhenish-wine. Vinu Rhenense. New
Wine. Mulsum. To allay wine, wine allayed. Vinu diluere, Vinu dilutum. Vinegar.
Acetum.
Upholsters.
AN Vpholster. Tapitiarius, plumarius. An Vpholsters Trade. Plumariu. A
Bedsted. Fulcrum, sponda. A Truckle-bed. Parabustum. A Couch, a Pallet.
Grabatus, statoriu. A Canopy, a Tester. Opertoriu lecti. A Bed, a little Bed.
Lectus, lectulus. Vallence of a Bed. Ornamenta quod lecto. A Feather-Bed,
Lectus pulvinarius, culcitra plumea. A Mattress or Flockbed. Culcitra lanea,
culcitra tomenticea. A Matt. Storea. A Bolster. Cervicale. A Pillow. Pulvinar.
Pulvinariu, pulvinariu de down Ra. Entr. 53. A Coverlid. Stragulum. A Pair of
Blanckets. Par lodicum lanearum. tegule. A Rug. Operimentum. A Quilt, quilted.
Tegimentum, culcitra, culcitratus. Cradle-Clothes. Stragula cunalia. A
Curtain-Rod. Virga ferrea. A Curtain. Velum, velariu, curtinus Co. Entr. 162.
Hangings, peristromata camerarum, plage. A Cushion. Pulvinus. A Chair.
Cathedra. Seats, backs for Chairs. Seeds cathedrarie, terga cathedraria. A
Carpet. Tapes. A Bed furnished. Lectus apparat.
Weavers.
A Weaver. Textor. A Silk-weaver. Sericarius. A Linnen-weaver. Linteo. A
Spinner of Wool. Lanifica. To Weave, a Weaving. Texere, textura. The Weavers
Craft, a weaving house or shop. Textrina. A Web, woven. Tela, textus. A Weavers
Loom. Machina textoria. A Weavers Beam. Iugum. The Warp. Stamen. The Woof.
Subtegmen. The Sley. Pecten. The Shuttle. Liciatoriu. The Tramme. Trama. The
Tredle. insile. Shuttle threads. Licia. A bottom of yarn. Glomus. Stuff fit for
Weaving. Linutum.
Woodmongers.
A Woodmonger. Lignator. Wood, of wood. Lignu, ligneu Hewing of Wood.
Lignisecatio. A Wood-house, Lignile. A Wood-pile, Strues lignorum. A faggot.
Fascis. A Billet. Tala. A Little Billet. Taleola. Blocks. Trunci.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 19. for ere read or. P. 13. l. 17. r. panni. P. 19. l. 7. r.
co^itas. l. 20. r. calculi. l. 28. r. imperpm. P. 20. l. 19. Estouiu to be
placed before edificando. P. 22. l. 18. r. o^es. P. 25. l. 3. r. sacrm. P. 28.
l. 27. r. Coparcinia. P. 31. l. 8. r. Plumbi. l. 11. r. Forisfcura. l. 16. r.
Fensure. l. ult. r. Gutta. p. 32. l. 16. r. Hundrm. p. 33. l. 7.
Incrochiamentum. l. 26. f. In tacks, etc. r. Jutacks, aialia Introcapta. p. 36.
l. 9. r. perlras. p. 37. two last lines, dele N. and for Redepmco^ r.
Redempco^. P. 39. l. 2. r. Sei^a. P. 44. l. 8. r. Vervices. P. 49. l. 2. f.
Coco r. Cow. l. ult. f. Lat. 373. r. Lit. 372. P. 52. l. 5. f. Coco r. Cow. P.
55. l. 13. r. Cuniculariu. P. 62. l. 4. r. Herciare. P. 66. l. 24. r. Miner. P.
69. l. 25. f. 160. r. 1 Co. P. 73. l. 25. f. Famelrum r. Stamellorum. P. 74. l.
8. f. cu r. ca. P. 83. l. 19. r been plitu^. P. 95. l. 5. r. Cedua. p. 105. l.
25. r. Barel. P. 106. l. 25. r. Hamorum. P. 115. l. 27. r. Stephi. l. 29. r.
portam. P. 128. l. 16. r. Baccalaurius. P. 132. l. 16. r. Officiu. P. 133. l.
18. r. Orlando. P. 134. l. 12. add in. l. 16. r. Hundim. P. 135. l. 20. r.
coi^e. P. 137. l. 2. r. Lilo. l. 7. r. Abiudicaco^. P. 138. l. 11. r.
Incipitur. l. 12. r. replic. P. 139. l. 3. r. cul. P. 140. l. 2. f. Scire r.
Venire. l. 6. r. dissei^re. P. 141. l. 5. r. molendini. l. 15. r. quodvi^s. l.
20. r. dissei^s. l. 23. after fco^rum r. et. l. 24. r. pturband. P. 144. l. 4.
r. eum. l. 14. r. quartodecimo. P. 149. l. 8. r. mcie. P. 151. l. 1. r. 1 Fo.
l. 2. r. gaugeto. P. 169. l. 23. r. Despumatorium. P. 174. l. 23. r. Mallcus.


