A New and true Relation FROM IRELAND, Sent in a Letter from Sir Robert
Traverse, to Lieutenant James Finch in London. Of a great Defeat given by the
Protestants Army, under the command of Sir Charles Vavasour, to twenty four
thousand of the Rebels, under the command of O Sulivan Bear, and Macharta Reh,
besieging Brandon-bridge: Where five hundred of ours with two thousand of the
Town routed them, killed two thousand of them, and took O Sulivan Bear,
prisoner: and a great booty.

London, Printed by A. N. for Edward Blackmore, dwelling at the Sign of the
Angel in Paul's Churchyard, 1642.

Worthy Sir,
I Know you cannot but much desire to hear from your Friends especially having
left them in this miserable distracted Kingdom, where nothing is frequent but
tumults and bloody massacres; yet in the midst of these it has pleased
Almighty God to bless your Friends with health: your bed fellow is in good
health, and your Father in law Master Freake, and your brother Master Arthur
Freake, I know you do expect some news from hence, and God be praised, I never
had more cause, nor better news to certify you of, which has conduced to the
glory of Almighty God, and the comfort of all us poor distressed Protestants,
against whom that devouring beast of Rome, has advanced all her Force. About
the beginning of this month O Sulivan Bear, came from the Western parts with
twelve thousand men, and came to Timoleague, where Sir Roger O Shahons dwells
and pillaged the town, and killed a great many of the English barbarously,
ravishing their Wives and Daughters, taking the prey of all the town, and
setting fire to the most part of the town, marched away, and came to Macha^^a
Reh. a great Rebel who had 12000 men, joining their Forces, marched to
Bandonbridge, and there besieged the town and us in it, threatening to put us
all to the sword if we did not presently render the town, but upon refusal,
they set the base town on fire, hoping by that means to fire the town of
Bandonbridge, but God be thanked, it took not that effect which they expected,
for the wind blowing pretty hard from the West, kept the fire from us, to our
no little joy, and their vexation, who were thus disappointed of their wicked
intentions only by the providence of Almighty God, to whom let all good
Christians render perpetual thanks for his great mercies showed to his
distressed people: these Rebels and their Forces continued before the town
strictly besieging us, and daily shooting into the Town, the space of four
days, in which time we had dispatched certain Messengers to my Lord President
of Munster to Cork, who hearing of our distress, sent Sir Charles Vavasour,
who came in the night with only 500. men, and some other English Commanders,
and two pieces of Ordnance, who made an assault upon them before it was light
(they not expecting any such thing) which being so suddenly performed, did so
distract and amaze the Rebels that they seemed to be men without life, and we
hearing this Alarm into the Town, having 2000. men in readiness under the
command of the Right Honourble the Lords of Kenelmech and Brahull, both my Lord
of Corkes sons (as having before had intelligence of the stratagem) did issue
out upon them, and valiantly assailed them, who at the coming of the Town
forces, they were absolutely rowted, and every man began to provide for his
safety by flight, nor could the threats nor persuasions of their Commanders
cause them to stay, but they all run away, and left their chief Commander O
Sulivan Bear, who was there shot and taken prisoner, and had not Macharta Reh
fled, he had been his companion in imprisonment, as he was before in Arms,
yet for all their have there was at this bickering slain and wounded on the
Rebels part to the number of 2000. men, we losing but twenty men beside some
prisoners that were presently conveyed to Cork to my Lord President, who
presently caused them all to be hanged, as for O Sulivan Bear we have him in
sure custody until he may be safely conveyed to Dublin. Thus we daily see by
experience how mightily God fights for us, to whom be praise and glory for
evermore: After the flight and massacre of these miserable people, the whole
spoil of their Camp was taken, which was great, and a great part of it was
divided amongst the the Soldiers to encourage them, the rest is kept for the
relief of our men, there was taken some 60. head of cattle, some provision of
bread and meat, three barrels, of powder 300. Muskets, 200. Pikes, with
certain Swords and Skeenes, seven Colors, and certain other things, not
worth expressing, to the great disheartning of them, and and encouragement of
us.

The Rebels have since assembled their scattered run-awayes, which our forces
hearing did march toward them, but could not cause them to stay, nor durst
they fight, the fear which the last skirmish had stricken them into being
still in them, and the want of Arms and powder (which if they had, they would
soon be with us) does cause them (when our men come near them) to shift away
through woods and other by ways, so that they will not by any means stand the
hazard of a fight: we want men and money extraordinarily (for had not God
blessed us with this little pillage to releeve our men, we had been in a
miserable condition, but we hope, and daily expect supplies of both from
England, which if a speedy course be not taken, it will much endanger the
loss of this Kingdom, and the lives of many thousands of poor distressed
Protestants, for there is scarce an Irish Gentleman, but is turned to the
Rebels, for they call themselves the holy Catholic Camp, and do expect
supplies from some foreign Enemy. And further to certify you, they have
burned your Father Freakes house at Rose and the Deanes house, and have taken
all the pillage in and about the Town, and have left a Garrison there: Your
friend hopes shortly to see you here again with a supply of men and money,
your wife, children, and friends are all well, and remember you daily in their
prayers to God: so till I see you (and ever) I shall remain,

Your assured loving friend, ROB. TRAVIRS.
Brandonbridge this 14th of May. 1642.

