Mercurii 9 die October. 1695.
Ordered,
THat Mr. Delaune and Mr. Weaver, give the Thanks of this House to Mr. Travers,
for his Sermon Preached yesterday before this House, and desire him to Print
the same.

Ex. per Tho. Tilson, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

A SERMON PREACHED IN St. ANDREW's-CHURCH, DUBLIN; Before the HONORABLE The
HOUSE of COMMONS The 8th Day of October, 1695.

The Day appointed by the Lord Deputy and Council for a Solemn Thanksgiving,
for the Preservation of our Gracious King WILLIAM, and the good Success of His,
and His Allies Forces this last Campagn.

By John Travers, A. M. Minister of St. Andrew's, and Chaplain to the House.

DUBLIN, Printed by J. Ray, and are to be Sold by William Norman, Eliphal
Dobson, and Patrick Campbel, Booksellers.

A SERMON PREACHED IN St, ANDREW's-CHURCH, etc.
Psalm 126. Verse iv. Yea, the Lord has don great things for us already,
whereof we rejoice.
THIS Psalm it is believed was compiled by Esdras, and 'twas sung by Israel as a
Thanksgiving unto God when he turned their Captivity; in which they devoutly
acknowledge his Mercy, and joyfully celebrate his Praise. The Lord has don
great things for us, whereof we rejoice.

I shall not confine my Meditations on the Text to this peculiar occasion of
it, but give it a larger extent, as considered abstractedly in its self: and in
the handling of it, I will do only Two things.

First, To enquire what matter of rejoicing our God has afforded us. And

2dly, To deduce some useful Inferences from the solution of this Enquiry,

Upon the holy Robe of Aaron's Ephod, there were Bells of Gold fixed between
the Pomegranates round about, Exodus 28. 33. the mystery whereof by
interpretation was, that for every single benefit we receive, we should
thankfully acknowledge God's goodness in giving it. And we find St. Paul
prescribing the duty of Thanksgiving in the same Latitude, Ephesians. 5. 20. Give
thanks unto God always for all things; and in the 1. Ep. These. 5. 18 In every
thing give thanks: The common Daily blessings bestowed upon us, transcend the
bounds of Numeration, and they justly Command a constant gratitude. But the
rare and remarkable occurrences of Providence, do present unto us a more
special season for the celebration of this Homage. Such extraordinary benefits
do frequently happen to particular Persons, nay, there are I believe few but
meet with them some time or other, and as often as they do, they should sound
forth the Divine beneficence, by particular acts of Praise. And the collation
of such Favors on a Nation or People, bespeaks and requires a general
Thanksgiving, and all that share in the Bounty, are obliged to join in the
Sacrifice. Of these public Mercies. We have a great many to commemorate, too
many to be crowded into one Sermon, and therefore I shall at present, only
Recommend unto you these Four, viz.

1st The Restoration of our Peace at Home. 2d The good Success of our Affairs
abroad. 3d The Preservation of our King from the manifold great Dangers
whereunto he has been exposed. 4th The happy Assembling of this August Senate.
1. Among worldly blessings, Peace has been always esteemed the most valuable,
partly because it comprizes many excellencies in its self, and partly because
it is the Parent that bears, or at least the Breast that gives Suck to all other
comforts and enjoyments, and so it is a kind of Epitome of good things. I shall
not now recount the advantages of it, you know them by the Fruition. But if we
recollect the grievous circumstances, wherewith we were lately encompassed; or
look back on those boisterous Seas, through which we have made our Port:
'twould justly heighten both our estimate of the Divine vouchsafements to us,
and our thankfulness to them.

I should sin against the design of the Day, should I entertain you with the
melancholy Scene of the miseries the War brought upon us. 'Twould be lamentable
to tell of the Ruins and Devastations, the Wrongs and Oppressions, the Rapine
and Violence, the Poverty and Complaining, the Blood and Slaughter that
attended it. It stamped much the same impression upon our Land, that the Army of
Locusts and Caterpillars did upon that of the Jews; it found it like a Garden
of Eden, but left it a desolate Wilderness. And tho its wastes be to a miracle
Repaired, yet there are some Footsteps of it still Remaining, and I wish all
its sorrows were always so fresh in memory as to influence us to vow and
perform perpetual gratitude to our Gracious Benefactor, to the Almighty God of
Peace, who has so mightily rescued us from that dismal State of thraldom and
distress. O how great has been his mercy toward us! O how Lovingly has He
dealt with us! the manifestation of His marvelous loving kindness, exceeded our
hopes as well as deserts, it fore-ran but crowned our expectations. He put down
our Enemies under our Feet, and pluct us from the jaws of Destruction; He
changed our Grief into Joy, our Slavery into Liberty, our Want into Plenty, our
distraction into Quiet, and our Confusion into Settlement. And all this when we
thought our selves Irrecoverably wrapped up in a mass of evil and misery for ever.

God has had a signal Favor unto these Nations, as at sundry other times, so
especially in their late Redemption, from the Oppression of a Popish, the worst
of Tyrannies, and us particularly from the worst Branch of that, an ignominious
hard bondage under our own Servants. Our deliverance came visibly attested with
the divine Power in the Atchievment; the Line of its mighty Progress was
chalk't out by the Finger of the most high, and the stupendous advances it made
against the greatest difficulties and disadvantages speak the whole to be one
great Miracle. 'Twas miraculous in our Eyes, and astonishing to our Thoughts,
in so much that our joyfulness resembled that of Israel at their unexpected
return from Captivity, out of a just Wonderment, We were like unto them that
Dream. We know O Lord that this is thy Hand, and that Thou Thy Self have done
it. No Hand but that of Omnipotence could have Rolled a Stone of that great
Weight up the Hill, against the strong Inclinations and joint Interests of a
People, who had so much Power in their Hands, and so great Advantages on their
side; and who were prompted to make the best use they could of both, by their
Pride and Malice, by ill Nature and prejudicate Education, by the Guilt of base
Ingratitude and barbarous Cruelties, by strict Commands and Powerful
Encouragements from abroad; and indeed so they did with the most inveterate
Obstinacy. Their Hands may be said to have been Mighty, if we consider their
great Numbers and strong Holds; But alas, they found nothing unless it be an
undoubted assurance of the Injustice of their Cause, and their insufficiency
for the support of it.

They have so often attempted our Ruin, and always failed in the Execution of
their imagined Mischief, that methinks they should at length be taught, even by
Providence to give it over, and to take up the obstinate Egyptians Argument,
Exodus 14. 25. Who by the unsuccessfulness of their frequent Attempts against
Israel were Discouraged, and said among themselves, Let us flee from the Face
of Israel, for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians; Though our
Egyptians show themselves too unteachable, or too self conceited, or too
Malicious, to be convinced by any such Experiments. Many a time have they
Fought against, and sore vexed us from our Youth up, may we now say ^ and if
the next Generation, not excepting the remains of this, does not play the same
Game, it is not for want of good will, but for want of what I hope they will for
ever want, Opportunity and Ability. How uppish are their Hearts? How cheerful
their Countenances? Nay, How Seditious their Words, upon the least Rumor of
ill T^uings to us?

If they could have been obliged by Kindnesses, Theirs and Ours had long agon
become one common Interest, and we had been united together by the bands of an
unshaken Amity and Alliance; but to expect this now adays from Men of their
disposition is to hope against hope, and to look for Grapes from Thorns. Where
the Seed is very bad, and the Soil much worse, it is easy to guess at the
harvest. They have been treated heretofore more like a free than a conquered
People; they were Indulged beyond the allowance of the Law, and it seems beyond
a consistency with our own safety. Ingratitude abuses Indulgence, and Vipers
sting those Bosoms in which they are cherished.

We may truly complain of them as holy David did of his deceitful Friends, they
have hated us without a cause and rewarded us evil for good. It Is observable
that their fairest pretentions of Friendship, and professions of Fidelity, have
proved alike perfidious, and consequently most dangerous, their malice has like
the Pestilence walked in darkness, and they are very conformable to Cardinal
Mazarines Maxim, (which his Master also does punctually practice) that no
honest Man ought to be a slave to his word.

In short, the Experience of their constant behavior ever since England first
subdued them, gives us plainly to understand, that there is no safe relying on
their candor and integrity, nor any great matters to be expected from their
generosity, and it should give us warning to walk more circumspectly among them
for the future, and to cast about for effectual means to suppress the factious
spirits below a capacity of putting us to the Expense of another Conquest.
Where People are sent forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, they are to be as
wise as Serpents. And indeed 'twould argue a stupidity equally Fatal and
Unpittiable, if neither the word of Exhortation should instill, nor the smart
of the Scourge inculcate wisdom.

If we be not wanting to our selves, we have good grounds of hope that our God
will establish the Work he has wrought among us; and that as he has already
delivered, so he will yet deliver us. That his Hand is not shortened, nor his
compassion toward us exhausted: We have a farther evidence in the Prosperity
of our Arms abroad. The Lord of Hosts has taught our hands to War, and fingers
victoriously to fight: He has enabled us to reduce the strongest Fastnesses of
the Enemy, even those they declared invincible; one whose Fortifications were
hardly Demolishable, and another defended with an Army rather than a Garrison,
and commanded by a mighty Marashal as well as a skillful Governor; to baffle
their greatest Armies, to Lord it over their Fleets and their Coasts, and not
only to assert, but extend our Sea dominion, even from Sea to Sea. And this is

2dly, A Second great Occasion of our general Rejoicing, because we are assured
the Battle is not ours but Gods, and that Victory is his gift. I dare not so
much as mention, express I cannot, the unparalleled Courage and Resolution of
our Men, lest it might tempt us with the Assyrian Conquerors to arrogate Praise
to our selves, or with the Scythian to sacrifice to our swords; it is certain we
exceed the magnanimity of both.

Tho the War be removed far from us, yet we are all concerned and interested in
the success of it; the cause is the same still, and the same terrible Evils
which we felt, or feared, would ensue upon its miscarriage. Alas the distance
would be no manner of security to us, the common ruin would soon cross the
Seas, and invade our Islands; it is principally levelled against us, and it is as
miserable as the most ingenuous Cruelty can contrive it. The disguised
Christian, and the Professed Infidel are friendly confederate against us, and
would agree as well in the overthrow of our Religion and Government; as Herod
and Pilate did in the Crucifixion of Christ. We lately set our selves to seek
the Lord and his help in a general humiliation, and seeing he was Graciously
pleased to accept of that Sacrifice, and to grant our requests, the return of
thankful acknowledgments is but the payment of a just Debt. We read in the 20th
Chap. of the 2d book of Chron. that the House of Judah proclaimed a solemn
Fast, and humbly Implored the Protection and Assistance of their God, when the
Children of Moab and Ammon came against them to Battle, and that as soon as
they prevailed over them, their next and immediate care was to Praise and
Magnify the divine Author of their Victory. To which purpose, they assembled
themselves in the Valley of Berachah near the place of Battle, and thence
returned to Jerusalem with Joy, and completed their gratulations in the House
of the Lord. And as we imitated their good Example in the observation of the
Fast, so let us in that of the Festival, offering up as they did a Religious
thankfulness, in regard that he has made us also to rejoice over our Enemies.

There is no custom more ancient and common than this; for as all Nations have
been wont to make their Addresses to Heaven for aid in time of War, so have
they made their Oblations for their Triumphs and Conquests; not only Jews and
Christians, but even barbarous ignorant Heathens, who so far ascribed victory
to the favor of the Gods, that they erected stately Temples, sung gratulatory
Hymns, and offered costly Sacrifices to such of them, as they fancied gave them
the upper hand. They were indeed out as to the object of their Praise, but were
right as to the Substance of the Duty; they rendered a due Tribute tho to wrong
owners, and their Piety was commendable notwithstanding their error, because it
corresponded with the nature of their Religion; Let our Devotion be as well
proportioned to our clear Knowledge, as theirs was to their blind Ignorance.
Let us disclaim the Idolatry, but retain the pious Practice of giving Thanks.
And as this is our bounden Duty, so is it our Advantage too, because God has
promised to recompense it with the Continuance and Increase of His Blessings,
whereas Ingratitude provokes him to suspend or withdraw them; and therefore if
we would be Favored with future success, let us not fail to be truly grateful
for what we have already had.

3dly, A Third great thing don for us, whereof we rejoice is the preservation
of our King, on whose safety under Gods own Providence depends ours. There are
sundry considerations, which render his Life a special blessing: He is a
Religious Worshipper of the true God, and a zealous Defender of the true Faith;
He is a nursing Father of our Church and Countries, laying out all his care and
pains, his time and strength, and exposing himself to all the dangers and
chances of Seas and Wars, for the security and honor of both. He has been the
happy Instrument of a most joyful Revolution to us, and in all probability, as
the posture of our Affairs now stands, his fall (which God avert) would shake,
if not subvert the Foundations of our Settlement. How sorely has the Church of
God been perplexed by the fury of the Heathen Persecutors of old, and of more
barbarous Romanists in later times? How near the brink of Ruin was the
Established pure Religion of the English Church, when our great Monarch
undertook its Redemption? How greedy are the Beasts of Prey after the same Game
still? And if Moses were removed out of the Gap, there is no appearance of any
great Opposition to their pursuit: If the sense of our Vineyard were broken
down, the wild Boar out of the Wood and the wild Beasts of the Field would
hasten to Root up and Devour it. He is the Soul and Union of the Alliance
against the common Enemy, and the very life of the War; the generous asserter
of Europ's Liberty, and the glorious Restorer of the English valor; the Terror
of his Enemies, and the Joy of his own People; the glory of Crowned heads, and
the wonder of the Age. The Eyes of all are upon him, some out of Love, others
out of Envy, and the rest out of Fear. How eminently conspicuous are the
seriousness of his Counsels, the wisdom of his Conduct, the unmatchableness of
his Bravery, the intrepidity of his Mind, and the indefatigableness of his
Diligence? These are most Eminent, even his Enemies being Judges.

But why should a mean Orator attempt the Character of a Prince, whose Merits
surmount the reach of Panegyric? And a short dificient Praise is reckoned a
dispraise. His Royal virtues are not hid under a Bushel, that they need hear be
displayed; they shine brightly from a visible Hill, and give light unto the
World. He is much more richly Adorned with this Apparel, than with that of his
Imperial Purple, and he adds Greatness and Majesty to the Throne, rather than
Receives from it. It Is indeed as needless to enlarge in his Commendation, as to
speak well of the Sun, whose influence all Know, and all Admire.

4thly, the Fourth great Occasion of our general Rejoicing is the happy
Assembling of this August Senate, whose Wise Counsels, and hearty endeavors
for the Service of the King and Country, promise a much fairer prospect, than
we ever yet had, of an Establishment of our Safety and Happiness. It Is a mighty
Privilege in the constitution of our Government, that the Laws whereby we are
Governed* cannot be made or repealed but with our own advice and consent, and
that we have freedom of Electing our Representatives, and they of consulting
the Common good. But the infrequency of Parliaments here, or the want of such a
one as this, has in great part deprived us of this benefit. This You, great
Patriots, are thoroughly sensible of, and thereupon Wisely strive to Redeem the
time, in providing with great dispatch for the Redress of past Grievances and
Inconveniences, and for the prevention of future Ones; in passing and
preparing such Sanctions, as if duly executed, will tie upon the hands of our
Native Enemies, and break all their Power of hurting us. And it is your great
Felicity, that the Administration of the Government is in the hands of a
Viceroy, who befriends Your weighty Proceedings, and delights to do Your
Country good.

I will not presume to give any instruction to this Conflux of wise
Counselors; You well know and pursue the Tenor of your Summons, to advise de
ardius Regni negotiis, and you are admonished every Morning before you enter
upon business, to what ends You are to direct Your Consultations, viz. the
advancement of Gods Glory, the good of his Church, the safety, honor, and
welfare of our Sovereign and his Kingdom. The promoting Piety and suppressing
Profaneness, the preserving the Worship and the House of God, and the advancing
the Dignity and Advantage of King and People, their Interest is one; these are
the Mark of your aim, and the Lord guide your Endeavors thither, and Prosper
you in the Progress.

And so you have heard the things God has don for us, whereof we Rejoice, and
they are Benefactions of so high a Nature, that it becomes us to be thankful
for them, not only this Day, but all the Days of our Lives. And farther the
Consideration of them ought to have upon us the Four following influences which
was

2dly, The Second particular, and shall with your Patience be dispatched very
briefly.

Frst, Then it is proper to engage us in a Godly Conversation. This Samuel
Taught the Israelites in the First Book 12. Chap. 24 verse. Fear the Lord and
serve Him in Truth, for consider how great things He has don for you. Without
this our Hearts cannot be right with God, and the most solemn Pompous
Thanksgivings are but an odious Hippocrisy. And surely we, who are so
infinitely indebted to his Bounty and Goodness, cannot find in our Hearts to
dishonor His holy Name, or contemn His reasonable Laws. One would think He has
don enough to deserve our utmost Obedience. Moses his Caution to Israel, in the
6th of Deuteronomy. 12 verse, is very applicable to us, to be ware of forgetting the
Lord their God, when they came to enjoy the Plenty of Canaan after their
tedious march through the hungry Wilderness. How strange and irrational is it,
that Men should let God then slip out of their Minds most when He is most kind
to them? And slight the Divine Indulgence for that very Reason which renders it
most Estimable? This is to act like Swine, which trample upon Pearls, and
devour all they get, without any acknowledgment of the Hand that feeds them:
And besides our great Obligation of Duty, it is really our Temporal Interest, as
well as Eternal, to give our selves up to the Service of our God. For Solomon
tells us in express Terms, That it is righteousness exalts a Nation, but that
Sin is a Reproach to any People. Prove. 14. 34.

2dly, The same Consideration is proper to enforce an entire unmovable
dependence on our God. It Is holy David's Affirmation in the 9 Pasl. 10 verse,
That they who know Gods Name will put their trust in Him. And by this Rule no
People perhaps in the World have greater Reason to confide in Him than our
selves, because none have had more knowledge of His help in all time of Need
and Trouble. And the natural consequent of this experience, is the flying to
Him for Refuge and Protection and Deliverance in all future Exigencies and
Distresses, nay, and for the continuance of our present Blessings, because He
is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for Ever, without any Variableness or shadow
of Turning.

3dly, The Consideration of the foregoing Blessings is proper to confirm us in
a Dutiful subjection to King William, who Reigns over us by the special
Deputation of the Almighty, and by whose Hands these great things are effected
for us. I confess I need not press this here, where I find the deepest sense of
the Obligations we owe him, and all possible forwardness for his Service. He
has no Rival in our Affections, we are quite out of Love with Romish Defenders
of the Protestant Faith; we are Taught by bought Wisdom, that if Popery were in
one scale of the balance a Coronation Oath in the other, would be higher than
Vanity it self. We have not those brangles that are hotly managed elsewhere
concerning our Alliance, and I am fully persuaded, if some would lay aside
their humorous prejudice, and others their groundless doubts and jealousies,
Non-Jurors to his present Majesty would be as rare to be found among
Protestants, as Self-haters. It Is a Ridiculous Paradox, that absolute Obedience
should be due to a limited Government. It cannot be imagined what they can
propose to themselves who wish for a return of the late Lawless Power, unless
it be to try what farther Improvements it has made in that most exact Foreign
School of Tyranny and Treachery.

It Is not my Province, nor am I willing, to undertake the showing how far the
Regal Authority reaches; for without more caution than I am Master of, it may
be stretched or clipped, there would be as much danger in the one, as
ungratefulness in the other; but the great Veracity and Moderation of our
Caesar will stablish it is just boundaries, these, we may well trust, he will
never Try to pass, knowing that to be the only means of making him the most
potent Prince, and his Subjects the most happy People. So that we are now in
the proper State of our Obedience; we need neither fear that we shall obey to
the violation of Conscience, or that we shall have any just occasion to disobey.

4thly, And Lastly. The consideration of the things whereof we Rejoice is
proper to Unite us in an affectionate Brotherhood among our selves. This would
be an acceptable demonstration of our true Love of God, who has been good to us
all. He that loves God will love his Brother also, 1 Ep. St. John, 4. 31, Let
it therefore work this effect upon us, even to heighten and perpetuat our
Friendship; Let it Teach us to join hand in hand in the Maintenance of our
Regained Liberty and Property; Let it Teach us to forget our little private
Interests, to mind and support this great one; Let it Teach us to bury all
uncharitable Animosities in eternal Oblivion, that neither Church nor
Government may hear more of them; Let it Teach us to Consider and Relish the
Things belonging to this our Peace, and to lead peaceable quiet Lives in all
Godliness and Honesty.

Si collidimur, frangimur, is an experimental Observation. Faction disunites
and weakens any Community. When People are divided in their Counsels, or
carried different ways of Design and Interest, they are neither able nor
willing to Assist one another against the Fraud and Force of an unanimous
Enemy. Greece of Old owed its Ruin not so much to the Sword of Philip, as the
Dissentions of Athens, Thebes, and Sparta; nor was it so much the Power of
Scipio* as the Factions of Hanno, and Hannibal that Subdued Carthage; and how
near Home have we an Instance of this kind in the Conquest of England by the
Romans, which was greatly facilitated by the intestine Broils, and separate
Parties of the Inhabitants, and 'twas truly said dum pugnant finguli, vincuntur
universi; whereas had they made a joint Defense, they might possibly have stood
their ground, or at least lost it at a dearer Rare. And he gave a True
character of England, who described it a great Animal that cannot be destroyed
by any other than its own strength. And therefore it is that the insinuating
restless Bigots of the advers Party, have all along from the first Reformation
so industrously labored by all imaginable Artifices and Tricks to sow the
seeds of Division, and to kindle Commotions among us, As the most effectual
method of weakening our Cause, and ruining our Selves, and yet as if they were
too unskilful in the Contrivance of their Stratagem, we have but too much
endeavored by a misguided Zeal to forward the Execution of it upon our selves.
And whilst we like over-hot Gamsters madly quarell'd about the trivials of the
Game, the designing lookers on had well nigh swept the Stake. But I hope we
shall ever hereafter be cautioned by St. Paul. in the 5 Chap. Gal. 15. verse.
If ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not Consumed one of
another.

Let it suffice that we have heretofore exposed our selves both to Reproach and
Danger by our domestic Feuds; Let us at length cast out from among us that
evil Spirit, which has been a long time exceeding fierce, prompting us, like
the possessed Herd, to run our selves violently into the depth of Destruction;
Let it be considered that we have a common Enemy to bend all our Force agai^^^
and (...) Kingdom, or House divided against it self, is (...); and if we have
any Regard to our own (...) Consideration alone will effectually pe^swade (...)
Friendship and mutual Assistance. Differen^^ (...) there will be whilst there
are Men (...) why should that run out into destructive Strife and Quarrel? it is
very possible that differing Judgments may be Reconciled in Love.

To Conclude, Seeing we are not Ignorant of Romes Devices, let us prudently
apply our selves to the disappointment of them and seeing (...) places her main
Confidence in our Heats and Differences, let us endeavor all we can to heal
our Wounds and close up our Breaches, and by an unviolable Union of Brotherly
affection and common Interest Oppose her black Designs. It Is not doubted but
our grand Council will continue of this mind answerably to their unanimous and
amicable beginnings, and it is highly probable the People will be a like minded
in conformity to their Representatives. Your good Agreement in the furtherance
of the Public Welfare, as 'twill Defeat the hopes of your Enemies, so it may
prove like the Ointment upon Aarons Beard, which ran down unto the skirts of
his Clothing, it is likely 'twill descend and influence all the lesser
Societies of our Land,

I might easily have lengthened a Discourse on this copious Theme, but I choose
rather to Omit many Things, than be guilty of Tediousness, and therefore
without any farther Additions, I shall commend what has been said to Your
retired Consideration, and the Lord give You a right understanding therein, and
in all Things, Amen.

FINIS.

