AN EXPLICATION OF THE DECALOGUE OR Ten Commandments. WITH REFERENCE TO THE
CATECHISM OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND. To which are premised by way of
Introduction Several GENERAL DISCOURSES concerning GOD'S both NATURAL and
POSITIVE LAWS.

By Gabriel Towerson, sometimes Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford, and now
Rector of Wellwyn in Hertfordshire.

Philo in Praefat. ad Librum de Decalogo. (...) DI' AYTOY ONOY (...) NOOYS
(...) N OON (...) KEPHALAIA, (...) DIA TOYPPOPHTO Y (...) EP' EKEINOYS (...).

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for John Martyn at the Bell in St Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXVI.

TO The Most Reverend FATHER in God GILBERT By Divine Providence LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, AND One of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please Your Grace,
I Have here attempted an Explication of that part of our Church-Catechism
which respects the Decalogue or Ten Commandments: Not out of any great opinion
of mine own Abilities for such an undertaking, of which they, who know me, know
me to be sufficiently diffident; but out of a due sense of the want of a just
Discourse upon this Argument, which by no Man that I know of has been handled
according to its worth.

It was once in my thoughts to have suppressed it, till I could have finished
an Explication of the whole Catechism, as conceiving that that would have been
more complete, and more acceptable to the World. But considering with my self
that it would require some time to revise what I have already done, and much
more to add to and perfect it; and since what is now offered to Your Grace,
and, with Your Graces Leave, to the Public view also, is entire enough, if I
have acquitted my self in it as I ought: I thought I should no way disoblige my
Readers, if I sent this part of it before the rest to try the Judgment of the
World. Especially since it is not impossible, but that I may entertain a better
opinion of my own Labors, than they shall be found by more competent Judges to
deserve.

If any thing may seem with Reason to make such a procedure improper, it is,
that I have referred my self to those Parts that are not yet published, for the
proof of some things asserted here. But as it is only for such things as have
been abundantly proved by others, and which therefore, especially in loco non
suo, I might the better wave the confirmation of; so they are for the most
part, if not only, such, as by the Laws of Discourse are to be supposed by all
that will entreat of this Argument. However, if what is now tendered find
acceptance, that blot shall not long lie upon it; and if not, the imperfectness
thereof will be the most pardonable quality of my Discourse, or at least will
be more excusable than my troubling the World with more.

In this Treatise I have endeavored, out of that heap which so copious a
subject presents, to select such matter as is most considerable and pertinent;
to deliver my sense concerning it in proper and intelligible expressions; and
lastly, to confirm that by solid Reasons. For other things I have not been much
sollicitous, and much less, as Solomon speaks, to find out acceptable words, as
conceiving such more proper to persuade than inform, which is or ought to be
the Design of an Explication.

If any taking occasion from this rude Discourse of mine shall oblige the World
with a more perfect one, he shall find me among the foremost to return him
thanks for it: Both because of the benefit I shall reap in common with others
from it, and also because I shall have the satisfaction of considering, that,
if I have not been my self so fortunate in Explaining the Ten Commandments, yet
I have stirred up those that are, and thereby have fulfilled a Commandment, the
observation whereof is of more advantage than the most accurate Explication of
them all.

In the mean time as I hope these my Labors will not be altogether unuseful,
so I lay them at Your Grace's feet, as a Recognition of those many favors You
have been pleased to confer upon me, and of that Duty I owe to the Church of
England; for the safeguard whereof, as Your Grace has with great prudence and
conduct happily presided, in an Age wherein You have met with more than
ordinary Discouragements; so that God will still preserve Your Grace for the
farther benefit thereof, is the hearty Prayer of

Your Grace's in all bounden Duty and Service GABRIEL TOWERSON.

THE DECALOGUE OR TEN COMMANDMENTS, As they are described and explained by the
Catechism of the Church of ENGLAND.
Quest. YOU said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, that
you should keep Gods Commandments. Tell me how many there be.

Answ. Ten.

Quest. Which be they.

Answ. The same which God spoke in the Twentieth Chapter of Exodus, saying, I
am the Lord thy God who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House
of Bondage.

I. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

II. Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under
the Earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children
unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy Son, and thy
Daughter, thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant, thy Cattle, and the Stranger
that is within thy Gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord
blessed seventh day and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall do no murder.

VII. Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Quest. What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandments?

Answ. I learn two things: my duty toward God, and my duty toward my
Neighbor.

Quest. What is thy duty toward God?

Answ. My duty toward God is to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him
with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my
strength; to worship him, to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to
call upon him, to honor his holy Name and his Word; and to serve him truly all
the days of my life.

Quest. What is thy duty toward thy Neighbor?

Answ. My duty toward my Neighbor, is to love him as my self, and to do to
all men, as I would they should do unto me. To love, honor and succor my
Father and Mother. To honor and obey the King, and all that are put in
authority under him. To submit my self to all my Governors, Teachers,
Spiritual Pastors and Masters. To order my self lowly and reverently to all my
betters. To hurt no body by word or deed. To be true and just in all my
dealings. To bear no malice nor hatred in my heart. To keep my hands from
picking and stealing, and my tongue from evil speaking, lying, and slandering.
To keep my body in temperance, soberness, and chastity. Not to covet nor desire
other men's goods; but to learn and labor truly to get mine own living, and to
do my duty in that state of life, unto which it shall please God to call me.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE EXPLICATION OF THE DECALOGUE.
DISCOURSE I. Of the Law of NATVRE.
How it does appear that there is such a Law, What the general Contents of that
Law are, And of what continuance its obligation is. A digression concerning
men's misapprehensions in the matter of Nature's Law, and from whence those
misapprehensions do proceed. Of what use the knowledge of Nature's Law is,
after the superinducing the Laws of Moses and of Christ.

PRoposing to my self to entreat of the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments,
according as the Catechism of the Church of England has understood them, I
foresee it necessary to premise somewhat concerning the Divine Laws in general,
and then of the Ten Commandments in particular. For as that Catechism, though
it restrains Gods holy will to the Ten Commandments, yet does it upon
supposition of their containing in them all other his Laws and Commandments; so
before we descend to the Explication of those Ten, it will be necessary to
enquire, By what Authority they stand, how they come to oblige us, and what
measures we are to proceed by in the Interpretation of them?

Now the Laws of God are of two sorts, to wit, either Natural or Positive; by
the former whereof I understand such a Law or Laws as are founded upon natural
principles, and investigable by them; by the latter, such as have no other
visible foundation, at least, than the mere good pleasure of God, and are
therefore to be known only by revelation from himself.

The Law of Nature again has these four things to be enquired into, which
accordingly shall be the boundaries of my discourse concerning it.

1. How it does appear that there is such a Law. 2. What the general Contents
of that Law are. 3. Of what continuance the obligation thereof is. 4. Of what
use the knowledge thereof is, after the superinducing the Laws of Moses and
Christ.
I. It is very well observed by the judicious Hooker, and will be evident to
any man that shall consult his own understanding, that all knowledge is at
length resolved into such things as are clear and evident of themselves; for
all knowledge of things obscure being made by such things as are more known
than the things we seek after, either it must terminate in such things as are
clear and evident of themselves, or we can have no certain knowledge of any
thing: That by which we endeavor to know any thing, requiring still something
to manifest it, and so on in infinitum. Now though a resolution into things
clear and evident of themselves be not always actually made, nor indeed
necessary to be so, the intermediate principles of any Science coming by
discourse to be as well known, as those things which are clear and evident of
themselves; yet being now to penetrate, as it were, into the very bottom of all
Moral Truths, it will be requisite for us to dig so much the deeper, and deduce
the being of the Law of Nature, if not from such principles as are the lowest
in their kind, yet from such as are nearest to them. I have Explic. of the
Apostles Creed.
elsewhere shown, and shall therefore now take it for granted, that there is
such a thing as an Alwise and good God, that that God is the Creator and
Sustainer of the world, and all things in it; which being granted, it will
follow, that there is a right in God to give Laws to his Creatures, in such
things as are in their power, and suitable to their nature to execute. For what
can be more rational, than that every one should have the disposal of those
things which he is the Author of, and consequently, if God be the Author of all
things, that he himself should have the command of them? All therefore that
will be requisite for us to enquire into, is, whether as God has the power of
giving Laws to his Creatures, and to man in particular, so he has actually
done it, and consigned him to the obedience of them? Now for this we shall need
no other proof, than that freedom of will, which God has given to humane
nature; for being man is not carried by any inevitable necessity as other
Creatures are, but left to the guidance of his own reason and will, either he
must have a Rule set him to proceed by, or it shall be in his power, even by
the consent of the Almighty, to disturb the order of Nature. Now forasmuch as
it can be no way suitable to the wisdom of any one to put Creatures into a
power, that I say not into a kind of necessity, to disturb his own orders and
designs, therefore God being Alwise must necessarily have prevented this
inconvenience, and given him a Rule to direct his will and operations. Again,
being it appears not, that man at the first had any other revealed Law of God
than that of not eating the forbidden Fruit, and many Nations of the World have
no opportunity to know those Revelations he has since made, it follows, that
God has implanted in the soul of each particular man a Law by which he is to
act, or at least such principles from which he may deduce it. Lastly, forasmuch
as there is in all men a conscience, excusing or commending them when they have
done any thing they apprehend to be good, but disapproving and condemning them
if they have done any thing which they believe to be evil; it follows
undeniably that there is a Rule, whereby our actions are to be guided. For if
mankind were left at large, what ground could there be of his either applauding
or condemning himself, for any supposed either virtuous or vicious actions?
Neither is it any prejudice to this inference, that men's consciences do
oftentimes condemn them for those things that are no parts of the Law of
Nature, or any other. For as we pretend not to infer the goodness or evil of
any action in it self, from the consciences either acquitting or condemning the
person that does it, but only, that there is such a thing as good or evil: so
cannot any reason be assigned of our consciences either accusing or condemning
us, if the notion of good and evil were not planted in the soul of man by that
God who formed it. For though tradition and education may persuade us to
believe many things to be evil, which are in themselves not so, and
consequently incline the conscience of him that commits them, to condemn or
disquiet him for so doing; yet could they not (unless they could build without
a foundation) incline the man to be troubled for it, but upon supposition that
there is such a thing as evil. Again, when the main trouble of conscience
proceeds from hence, even from the doing of those things which that assures us
to be evil, what reason can be assigned of that trouble, if it were not a truth
implanted in our hearts that we ought not to do those things which our
conscience assures us to be bad? For as it is evident, no man could be
troubled for acting against his conscience, but upon supposition of his being
bound to follow the dictates of it: so is it not to be imagined, that that
supposition could have any other root than Nature. For as for all frightful
stories of Hell, and the like (which men, who would be thought wise, would have
the ground of all Religion) even those themselves, if it be duly considered,
will be found to receive their force and efficacy from the conscience's
foreperswasion of good and evil, and particularly of its own obligation. For
setting aside the nature of good and evil as mere fancies, and my conscience
shall not so much be affrighted at the stories of vengeance, as at the shaking
of a reed, because conscious of nothing that may deserve it. I conclude
therefore with S. Paul in that excellent discourse of his upon this argument,
Romans 2.14. That though the Gentiles have not the Law, that is to say no
revealed one, yet they are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the
Law written in their hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and their
thoughts in the mean while accusing or else excusing one another.

II. The being of the Law of Nature being thus demonstrated, enquire we in the
second place, what the Precepts thereof are; I do not mean to give account of
every particular one (for that were both an infinite and needless task) but of
the more general ones, from which the other may be easily deduced. Now there
are two ways of investigating any truths, as the forementioned Hooker has well
observed; the one by the causes which constitute it, the other by the signs and
tokens which attend it. The latter of these is without doubt the most easy,
but withal the most fallible, and therefore quitting that at present, I shall
choose rather to pitch upon the former, and exemplify the Precepts of this Law
by it. Now there are three things wherein our duty is comprehended, according
to those several relations we stand in; our duty to God, our Neighbor, and our
selves. I begin with the last of these because nearest to us, and therefore in
all probability most easy to be discerned by us, where the first capital
Precept, that presents it self to us, is the preservation of our selves. Now
that this is a Precept of that Law, which we call the Law of Nature, beside our
own natural propension to it, will appear from God's giving us a being, and
means to support it. For as the destruction of our being is a direct
contradiction to that order which he has set in Nature; so our neglect to
preserve it, is, though not a direct, yet a consequential contradiction to that
provision which he has made for us in the world. For what design can we
suppose God to have had, principally and chiefly I mean, in those good things
he has given us, but the support of our being by them? If then it were the
design of the Almighty, in the good things of this world, that we should
receive support and comfort by them, if this design of his appear from the
nature of the things themselves; the preservation of our selves is a branch of
that Law, and we consequently transgressors of it if we neglect it. But from
hence we may collect, what we are to think of all self-murthers, excesses, or
neglects: for if the preservation of our selves be a duty incumbent on us by
the Law of our Creation, then must that be a sin which either destroys, or
impairs, or neglects it, and consequently, all laying violent hands upon our
selves, all intemperance, and sloth, and idleness. From the duty we owe to our
selves, ascend we to that which is terminated in God, and see whether there be
any footsteps of such a one in that Law whereof we are speaking. Now there are
two things wherein our duty to God may be comprehended, our honoring him and
obeying him. The former of these is evident from that excellency, which the
soul, assisted with the bare light of reason, may discern in God. For being it
is a clear dictate of the light of reason, that whatsoever is excellent is to
be honored; God as being the most excellent essence, yea the fountain of all
others excellencies, must be much more so, by how much he transcends all
others. But from hence it is evident what we are to think, not only of all
manifest contempts of him, but of adopting any thing else into equal honor
with him; for being God is not only to be honored, but to be honored also
above all other beings, because so far surpassing them; the adopting of any
other into the like honor, must be a diminution of his, and consequently a
breach of this fundamental Law, as well as of that which says, Thou shall have
no other Gods beside me. The same is no less evident concerning that other
branch of our duty to God, even our yielding obedience to all his commands; for
being (as was before shown) God is our maker and sustainer, he has a right to
our obedience, and consequently, we a necessity of obeying him. But from hence
will follow, not only our yielding obedience to all other the Laws of Nature,
but to all positive and revealed ones; for being the command of God is that
which challenges our obedience, and not the manner whereby it is made known to
us, whatsoever appears to be such must be equally our duty, whether engraven in
Tables of stone, as that of Moses was, or in the more noble Tables of our
heart, as this of Nature. The only thing now remaining to be proved, is what we
commonly call our duty to our Neighbor, and may be comprised in these two
generals, the giving to every man that which is his own, and where that is
requisite, the ministering to them of ours. The former whereof as it is so
plain, that it hardly admits of any proof, so both the one and the other
receive sufficient confirmation from our natural desire of receiving the like
charity and justice from others; for being (as the forementioned Hooker well
observes) those things which are equal, must needs all have one measure, if I
cannot but wish to receive all justice and requisite charity from the hands of
others, I cannot but think it reasonable to afford it; and I must either
condemn my own desires, and that nature from whence they flow, or think other
men's as necessary to be complied with.

III. From what has been said concerning the Law of Nature, it is evident,
thirdly, that this Law is unchangeable, or at least must continue of force so
long as our nature does; for being (as was before said) rooted in Nature, and
flowing from natural causes, it must consequently have the same continuance
with those causes from whence it flows. Thus, for example, to give every man
that which is his own, is so a duty that it can never cease to be so; as in
like manner, to offer violence to no man, not to take away any man's life or
substance. Indeed it sometimes happens, that there seems to be a change in this
Law, as in those known instances of the Israelites spoiling the Egyptians, and
Abraham's sacrificing his innocent Son. But if it be well considered, it will be
found that there is not so much a change made in the Law, as in the matter
about which it is conversant; for God having a paramount power over the
Creatures, and never so parting with it, as not to reserve to himself a liberty
to withdraw it at pleasure, whatsoever he commands to be taken away, does
thereby cease to be that persons whose it was before, and consequently it is no
violation of that Law, which commands the giving every man his own, to disrobe
such a person of it. The like is to be said concerning Abraham's sacrificing his
Son, or the Magistrates putting a Malefactor to death; for it being not simply
murder to take away a man's life, but to take it away either without commission
from God, or without any just motive; Abraham's sacrificing his Son, and the
Magistrates putting a man to death, is no breach of that Law which forbids
murder: Because the former did what he did by commission from God, who is
absolute Lord of the Creatures; and the Magistrate puts Malefactors to death,
by virtue of that general Commission, which impowers those that are in
Authority, to execute vengeance upon all that do evil. By which solution all
pretense is taken away, of drawing those actions into example, and particularly
that of spoiling the Egyptians. For it being evident from the Scripture, that
whatsoever any man, how wicked soever, acquires by the ordinary course of Gods
providence, is truly and properly his, and no diminution of that appearing but
by an express command from God, as the Israelites had to spoil the Egyptians;
to take any thing away from such a person, without that command, is truly and
properly to take away that which is another, and consequently eternally
sinful, because that Law, of which it is a transgression, is eternal.

But here a question may not impertinently be made, and I shall the rather
intend it, because the resolution thereof may confer somewhat to the clearing
of that which follows; to wit, how it comes to pass that this Law of Nature
has not only been so much disobeyed, but so much misunderstood by those who
were under the obligation of it; for flowing (as I have before said) from
natural principles, the truth whereof is evident to all, and being also (as was
now shown) eternally obligatory to all mankind, it may seem a wonder how this
Law should be so strangely misunderstood, as experience tells us it has been:
The Romans, a polite and civilized people, accounting it no injury to invade
the Territories of their Neighbors, as the whole Heathen world strangely
offending against that fundamental Law, which forbids the adopting of any
Creature into equal honor with the Almighty. In answer to which, we are first
to know, that though the first principles of natural knowledge carry sufficient
evidence in themselves, and accordingly have been with great consent
acknowledged by all (whence it is, that no Nation almost has been so barbarous
as not to own a God, and that God is to be worshipped) yet the deductions from
those principles, which are no less a part of that Law, require some care and
intention in those that make them; which the world, generally slothful, not
being over forward to use, it is no wonder if men have many times erred in
several particulars thereof; for let the truth, we are to know, be built upon
never so certain and evident principles, yea upon such as are no less evident,
than that the whole is greater than the part, yet, if we attend not to the
consequences of those principles, we may err in our apprehensions about them,
even as he who has a light to guide him, may either stumble or wander out of
his way, if he do not advert to those bright rays that stream from it. 2. But
there is yet a more weighty cause of men's misapprehensions in those things
which are the Precepts of this great Law; and that is the depravedness of their
wills and affections, and their earnest pursuit of such things as promise them
any present pleasure or advantage; for finding sin to minister to these, and
themselves strongly inclined to obtain them, the desire of so doing makes them
first willing to believe that, which leads to them, to be no impiety, and then
actually to believe it none; for as Minutius Felix speaks, facile credimus quae
volumus, we easily believe that which we desire to be, our passion for any
present enjoyment either wholly stifling or suppressing the dictates of right
reason, which should keep us from the pursuing of it. 3. Lastly, (which S. Paul
expressly affirms, Romans 1.28.
and is in truth the best account of this difficulty) the Heathen world liking
not to retain God in their knowledge, nor those Precepts of his which this
great Law contained, it is no wonder if he gave them over, not only to vile
affections, but also to a reprobate and brutish mind; for how can it be but
extremely just, to withdraw the light from those who shut their eyes against it
when they have it, and to make that their punishment, which was their own
choice?

IV. The fourth and last thing comes now to be discussed, to wit, What is the
usefulness of this Law? A question which may seem the more necessary to be
asked after the superinducing of the Law of Moses, and that of Christ. In
answer to which I say, 1. That though these later Laws should acquaint us with
every thing, that the Law of Nature contains, yet would not that Law be
unnecessary to be looked into; for being given by God, as the others were, and
continuing in full force and virtue, the same reason and piety, which obliges
us to the consideration of those, will put us upon the consideration of this.
2. Again, though the Laws of Moses and of Christ should contain all the same
Precepts, which the Law of Nature does, yet the reasonableness of those
Precepts appearing mostly, if not only, from this, the consideration thereof
cannot but be exceeding useful; as well for the commendation of the equity of
him that gave them, as for the more vigorous stirring up our selves to yield
obedience to them; for when Law comes assisted with reason, it does not only
convince but persuade, and makes us embrace as well as bear our Fetters. 3.
There is yet another reason, and a much more forcible one, of our study of
Natures Law; for beside that no reason obliges us to think all things set down
so clearly in the other, as not to stand in need of some assistance from this
light, in the explication of moral duties; the Law of Moses and Christ both
presuppose some things known from this great fundamental Law: for urging the
several Precepts therein contained, not so much from the reasonableness of the
things themselves, as the authority of God that gave them, and the mighty works
whereby he gave witness to those that published them; they must consequently
suppose it known from Natures Law, that there is a God and Providence, and that
that God is to be believed and obeyed. Whilst others therefore, with no less
danger to themselves, than with folly and unreasonableness, despise this Candle
of the Lord, let us on the contrary contemplate and adore it, as being assured,
that though it be not the Sun, yet it is the Phosphorus to it, and both
foretells and points at it.


DISC. II. Of the positive Laws of God, and particularly of the Law of Moses.
The positive Laws of God are either such as were given to man in the state of
Innocence, or such as were given to him since his fall. That the Law concerning
the not eating of the Tree of Knowledge, is of the former number, What the
reason of the giving of it was, and of what concernment it is to us. The like
enquired concerning the Law of Eve's becoming subject to her Husband, and of
his being obliged to labor; both which are shown to be of universal and
perpetual Obligation. Of the Laws given to Noah, and particularly concerning
that of not eating Blood, which is shown not to be of present Obligation. A
digression concerning the reason and use of Positive Laws, and particularly of
such, the matter whereof is moral. Of the Authority and Obligation of the Law
of Moses, and from whence our primary Obligation thereto arises. In what
instances, and in what measure the Law of Moses does now oblige.

I Said in the beginning of my last, that the Laws of God were of two sorts, to
wit, either Natural or Positive: By the former whereof I told you, you were to
understand such Laws as were founded upon natural principles, and knowable by
them; by the latter, such as are founded upon the mere good pleasure of God,
and consequently to be known only by revelation from himself; for though the
matter of some Positive Laws be the same with that of the Law of Nature, and
consequently those at least may seem to have the same foundation and deduction
with it; yet as that matter is a part of those Precepts which we call Positive,
so it is founded upon his mere good pleasure that gave them, and consequently
knowable to us, not by their own inward light, but by such outward means as he
shall be pleased to manifest them by. Thus for example, Though I may know from
the light of Nature, that I ought not to have any other gods besides the true,
nor adopt any other person into equal honor with him; yet, as this was part of
the Law given in Mount Sinai, so it depended upon his alone good will and
pleasure, and consequently could not be known, but by his own public
Declaration, and those Writings which have transmitted it unto us.

Now the Positive Laws of God, we are now in order to entreat of, may be
reduced to two heads, 1. The former whereof were given to man in the state of
innocence, 2. The latter, since his fall from it.


I. If we look upon man in the state of innocence, so we shall find he had a
Positive Law imposed upon him; the Scripture telling us of an express Command
of God, Not to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, which he had
placed in the midst of the Garden of Eden, Genesis 2.17. Now there are two things
which will be requisite to be enquired into concerning this Law, and which
therefore I shall endeavor the resolution of. 1. What necessity or expedience
there was of giving such a Law? And, 2. How this Law concerns us? The ground of
the former Query, is that perfection which seems to be in the Law of Nature
before given. For if (as I have before shown) this gives direction to us in all
cases relating either to God, our Neighbor, or our selves, if this Law was at
that time clear and manifest to him to whom it was given, what need was there
of adding to it another Law? and such as had nothing to commend it to our first
Parents, but the authority and pleasure of him that gave it? But to this the
answer is easy; and that is, That God therefore gave it, not as a supplement
of Natures Law, which needed it not, but that he might thereby have a firmer
proof of man's obedience to himself. For the Law of Nature containing such
things, as ought in reason to be done, though there were no Command of God
prescribing them, our Obedience thereto might proceed rather from compliance
with our own reason, than with his Command who gave it. But giving a Law, the
matter whereof had nothing to commend it, but the authority of him who gave it,
obedience thereto could proceed from no other consideration, and consequently
must be the surest proof of our obedience. The same is to be said, in some
measure, of Gods making Positive Laws concerning those things which were
prescribed by that of Nature; for Gods Positive or Revealed Laws exacting our
obedience, upon the score of his authority that gave them, we cannot satisfy
those Laws, but by having a principal regard to his Command who imposed them on
us. Having thus shown the expediency of Gods giving that Positive Law
concerning the not eating of the Tree of Knowledge, proceed we in the next
place to show how this Law concern us; which is a Query no less necessary than
the former; for if this Law concern not us, the consideration thereof in this
place must be very impertinent, because enquiring into our own obligation and
duty. In answer therefore to this I say, 1. That this Law being given to Adam,
not only in his personal capacity, but as he was the representative of all
mankind, (as appears from the Scriptures charging the guilt of it upon all that
descended from his loins) this Law must be consequently supposed to have been
obligatory to us, as well as to him to whom it was immediately given. 2. Again
being it is a dictate of Natures Law, not only that we should yield obedience
to his commands, but also, where we fail, repent of the breach of them; the Law
of abstaining from the Tree of Knowledge, as being a Law of Gods to us, must
consequently so far concern us, as to oblige us to repent of the breach of it.

II. From such Law, or Laws, as were given to man in the state of innocence,
pass we to those which were given to him after his fall. Where

1. The first that presents it self, is that command of God concerning the
Woman's being subject to her Husband, Genesis 3.16. Unto the Woman he said, I will
greatly multiply thy sorrows and conception. In sorrow shall thou bring forth
children, and thy desire shall be to thy Husband, and he shall rule over thee.
For though it be true, that this was spoken more particularly to Eve, upon
occasion of her transgressing Gods Command: yet as the Curse wherewith this
Command is accompanied, was manifestly intended for all of the Female Sex; so
it is no less evident, as for that reason, so for the capacity the Woman was
in, that the Command was likewise intended. For being Eve was the
representative of all Womankind, as well as the Wife of Adam, whatsoever
Command was given to her, must be supposed to belong to all of her Sex and
condition. And accordingly S. Paul does not only urge this obedience upon the
Corinthian Women in reference to the Law, 1 Cor. 14.34. but yet more
particularly, 1 Timothy 1.14. upon the account of this Command, that was given to
Eve; for having before said, that he suffered not a Woman to teach, nor to
usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence, he adds, as a reason of it,
because Adam was not deceived, but the Woman being deceived was in the
transgression. Which being the very reason why God gave the forementioned
Command to Eve, of being subject to her Husband, it is evident that, when in
the Epistle to the Corinthians he says, that they are commanded to be under
obedience, as also says the Law, his meaning was of that Law which was given
to Eve, and consequently that that Law is obligatory to all. The same is to be
said of the other positive Law.

2. The second is that which was given to Adam, upon the account of his
disobedience, Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy brow shall thou eat bread, until
thou return unto the ground; for that that was a Command, as well as a Curse,
is evident from the 23. verse, where we find God sending forth the man from the
Garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken. Now forasmuch as
Adam was the representative of mankind, as of whose blood all Nations were
made, forasmuch as he is here considered, not under the relation of a Husband,
but a man, nor is there any thing in the Precept to determine it to him,
whatsoever is given in command to him, must be supposed to be intended to all
persons according to their capacities and degrees. And indeed, as in the Laws
of men, such are presumed to oblige the Generations following, which have
nothing in them to restrain them to the present; so there is the same reason to
believe that Law of God, which was given to him from whom we are descended, to
oblige us also, if there be nothing in it to determine it to him alone; for it
being neither suitable to the majesty, nor agreeable to the custom of
Lawgivers, to renew their Laws, as often as the persons change that are under
them, that which is directed to one Generation, must be presumed to concern the
next, and so on to succeeding Ages. Lastly, for there is something particular
to the former Laws, which is not common to all others, the subjection of the
Woman, and the laboriousness of the Man, being founded upon the transgression
of our first Parents, which the Scripture affirms to be imputed unto us, those
duties themselves must consequently appertain to us, as well as those
transgressions do.

3. From these Precepts given to our first Parents, pass we to those which were
given to Noah and his Sons, who after the Flood were under the same capacity;
that is to say, the Representatives of all mankind, because all mankind was
then in them. Now there are two positive, or revealed Laws, which the Scripture
informs us to have been given to Noah, a prohibition of murder, with a command
to put him to death that should be guilty of it, and a like prohibition of
eating flesh with the life or blood, Genesis 9.4. and so on. Of the former of
these being obligatory to us, there can be no doubt, as because they to whom it
was given were the Representatives of mankind, so because the substance of that
Law is natural; the Precepts of the Law of Nature both forbidding murder, and
settling a Magistracy to punish it. The greatest question will be concerning the
latter, even that of not eating blood. For though the Precept be ceremonial,
yet it does not follow, because the ceremonial Law of Moses is abrogated, that
therefore that also must be: for (as S. Paul speaks concerning Circumcision)
this being not of Moses but of the Fathers, yea of those Fathers which were the
Representatives of all mankind, the abolishing of that does not necessarily
draw with it the abolishing of the other. Again it is manifest, that as many
Nations of the posterity of Noah did carefully abstain from blood, so the Jews
admitted none even to the privilege of being Proselytes of the Gates, (which
was the lowest form of their Religion) without an obligation from them to
observe it. Which is no more than what we find prescribed by God himself, Lev.
17.10. It is evident, 3. That though the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem eased
the Gentile Christians of Circumcision, yet they laid this Precept upon them of
abstaining from blood, Acts 15.20. And accordingly, the Latin Church for above
a thousand years, and the Greek Church unto this day do religiously abstain
from it. To return now an answer to this difficulty: Where first, I shall
readily confess, that this being a Law given to Noah and his Sons, the then
Representatives of mankind, it was consequently to oblige all mankind, till it
should be repealed. I shall make no difficulty, 2. To grant, that the abolition
of the Ceremonial Law of Moses, does not necessarily draw with it the
abolishing of the other, because in time before it. But then 3. I say, that it
is manifest enough that the Precept was repealed by Christ; and I allege for
my saying to that of S. Paul to the Romans c. 14.14. and a like passage 1 Timothy
4.4. In the former whereof, speaking of meats, it is said, that he both knows
and is persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self;
but to him that thinks any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean. In the
latter, That every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving. I know what has been said, and therefore I am
willing to obviate it, that, when it is affirmed by S. Paul that nothing is
unclean of it self, as in like manner, that every creature of God is good, we
are to understand both of things in their own nature, and abstracting from any
positive Law. But how weak this evasion is, it is no hard matter for him to
discern, who reads on but to the last clause of each of the forequoted Texts;
For when, in the former, the phrase unclean of it self is not opposed to that
which is so by positive prohibition, but to that only which becomes so by a
man's erroneous thinking it to be so; For I know (says he) and am persuaded by
the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean of it self, but (or rather (...).
unless) to him that thinks it to be unclean, to him it is unclean; And in
the other, after he had said that every creature of God is good, and nothing to
be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, what doubt can remain, but
that it is lawful to partake of any, as to any positive Precept of God to the
contrary? For if nothing be unclean, but by the erroneous conscience of him
that takes it, or some such accident; and again every creature of God is so
good as not to be refused, provided it be received with thanksgiving; either
there is no positive Law against the partaking of it, or it shall be lawful for
us to partake of it though there be. If it be farther remanded, Why, if this
Precept of Noah be abrogated, the Apostles should notwithstanding press the
observation of it upon the Gentile Christians? I answer, Not because the
Precept continued to oblige, but in respect to such of the Jews as had embraced
the Christian Religion, who, in those first times of Christianity, were so
addicted to the Rites in which they had been brought up, that unless the
Gentile Christians had complied with them in some things (those especially
which were contained in the Precepts of Noah, which they had all along thought
of absolute necessity) they would have gone near to have fallen off from the
Christian Faith. Neither is this said without proof, even from that Council it
self; S. James, whose advice the Council followed in their Decree, giving this
as the reason why he would have the Apostles write to the Gentile Christians to
abstain from things strangled and from blood, even because Moses has of old
time them that preach him, being read in the Synagogue every Sabbath day, Acts
15.21. that is to say, because such of the Jews, as had embraced Christianity,
knew by the weekly reading of the Books of Moses, that those things were there
forbidden even to Noah and his Sons, and could not therefore but be much
startled at the neglect of them. The result of the premises is this, that
whatsoever Laws were given either to our first Parents, or Noah, the
Representatives of mankind, do oblige all that descend from them, unless
peculiar to their persons, or abrogated by a latter Law.

4. Having considered the Precepts given to Adam and Noah, and shown their
obligatoriness to us, the order of the Scripture leads us to the Law of Moses,
and particularly to that part of it which is contained in the Ten Commandments.
But because it may be demanded (as before concerning that Law given to Adam in
the state of innocence) what expediency there was of giving these and other
revealed Laws? and no place can be so proper for the resolution of that
question as this, because lying as it were in the confines of those primitive
Laws, and that of Moses, to each of which it is to be applied; I will, before I
proceed to say any thing of the Law of Moses in particular, return an answer to
that demand. Two things I have before observed to be the matter of those Laws
which God has superadded to the Law of Nature; either 1. such as are Ritual
and Ceremonial, or 2. Moral and Natural. As to the former of these, there may
seem to be a double reason of Gods superadding them to the Law of Nature; 1.
The first whereof is, that they might be a memento to us of the more
substantial Precepts of God; for being, through the depravedness of Nature, not
only apt to forget our duty, but to immerse our selves in the things of sense,
it seemed but requisite, that even those sensible things should be so fitted,
as to bring the other to our remembrance. And hence no doubt the forbidding of
blood to Noah and his posterity, the many purifications and washings enjoined
the Jews; in which, as in so many Emblems or Pictures, the world that then was,
might plainly behold the abhorrency they were to have for the sin of murder,
and that purity of soul wherewith they ought to approach their Maker. 2. The
second reason of Gods superadding positive ceremonious Precepts to the Law of
Nature and Reason, was that they might be not only as a memento of, but as a
fence to those substantial Precepts which he had before given. A thing which
those ceremonial Precepts did no doubt serve most excellently for, among those
persons to whom they were given: For when men were taught to have blood in so
great an abhorrency, as to abstain even from the blood of Beasts, they could
not but be thereby kept in a greater apprehension of shedding the blood of man,
in whom the image of God resides. But because (as I have before said) this
ceremonial Precept cease to oblige us, as in like manner those of Moses;
Christ, as he has introduced a different dispensation as to the main, so he has
supplied the want of those helps, by the more liberal effusion of his Spirit. I
will therefore proceed to such positive Laws of the Old Testament, the matter
whereof is Moral and Natural. Now the reason of Gods superadding these Laws to
that of Nature, and forbidding those things by positive Laws, which were before
forbidden by the other, may appear from what has been heretofore said,
concerning the difficulty of discovering the Precepts of Natures Law, and the
depravedness of humane nature; for being the Precepts of the Law of Nature are
not easily to be discerned, and man, partly through evil principles, partly
through the corruptness of his will and affections, is become unable to discern
them, it seemed but necessary, that those Laws should be proposed anew to him,
and he taught that by revelation from Heaven, which his own reason either could
not at all, or not so easily discover. Thus when Moses had broken the two
Tables of stone, wherein God had written the Ten Commandments, and thereby
defaced the characters thereof, the same reason, which prompted him to write
them at the first, prompted him to write them a second time, and renew that
which Moses had defaced. Which as it was, no doubt, a just obligation to the
Jews, to be doubly thankful to the Almighty; so ought it to be no less to us
that God has written that Law in his Word, which he had before graven in the
Tables of our hearts; these Tables being defaced, not by an angry Moses, but by
our selves, and by our own either neglect or perverseness.

The reason of positive Laws being thus discovered, pass we now on in the
investigation of the Law of Moses, and particularly of the Ten Commandments;
concerning which you may remember I proposed to enquire into these three
things, 1. By what Authority that Law stands. 2. How it comes to oblige us; and
3. What measures we are to proced by in finding out the full importance of it.


1. To the first of these, or at least so far as the Decalogue is concerned,
the Preface to it is a direct answer, telling us that God spoke all these
words; and indeed, if any Law can pretend to be of divine Authority, this of
the Ten Commandments certainly may. For first of all, when Moses had by the
commandment of God assembled all the people of Israel near Mount Sinai, God by
a voice from Heaven published all these Commandments in their ears, and with
all the signs and demonstrations of his Majesty. Again, when the same people,
terrified by the dreadful appearance of his Majesty, desired to have this Law
delivered to them by Moses, God, in compliance with their desires, wrote the
same words in two Tables of stone, and transmitted them by him unto the people,
Exodus 31.8. Lastly, when Moses had broken those two Tables, and thereby put God
upon a necessity of transcribing them anew, he wrote upon other two Tables the
same Ten Commandments, as you may see Deuteronomy. 10.4. So that if the publishing of
Commandments from Heaven, or writing them with his own finger, can entitle them
to a divine Authority, the Law of the Ten Commandments certainly may, as being
notified by both.

2. But because it is not enough to make a Law obligatory to us, that it has
God for its Author and Promulger, unless it do also appear to have been
intended for our direction and obedience; therefore before we proceed to infer
our own obligation by it, we must enquire how it comes to do so, and what
appearance there is of Gods intending it for our direction and obedience. And
here in the first place, it is manifest enough, that what was before said
concerning the Laws given to Adam and Noah, cannot have place in those given to
Moses and the Israelites; those being not Representatives of mankind, as Adam
and Noah were, but only of the Jewish state. Now being the Gentiles were no
part of that body, nor descended from the Authors of it, therefore what was
given to them cannot be supposed to oblige us for that reason, and consequently
some other ground must be looked out for our obligation to it. It is manifest,
secondly, that as there is nothing in the persons, to whom this Law was given,
to persuade our obligation to it, so is there much in the Law it self to
persuade Gods designing it for the Jews alone; for pressing, as he does,
obedience to this Law, upon the account of his delivering them out of Egypt,
he does consequently restrain the Law it self to those who were benefited by
it, which none but the Israelites were. And indeed, beside the Preface of the
Almighty, and that of Moses before the same Commandments, Deuteronomy. 5.1. Hear (O
Israel) the statutes and judgments, which I speak in your ears this day; it is
the known exultation of that People, and of the most holy persons of it, that
these Constitutions were peculiarly theirs; for What Nation is there so great,
(says Moses) which has statutes and judgments so righteous, as all this Law
which I set before you this day, Deuteronomy. 4.8? And He shows (says the Psalmist)
his word unto Jacob, and his statutes and judgments unto Israel, he has not
dealt so with any Nation, and as for his judgments they have not known them,
Psalm. 147.19, 20. And truly thus much must be yielded to the fore-quoted Texts,
that the Law was intended for the Jews alone, whilst the Church was confined to
Palestine; but as there was to be a time, even by the Predictions of their own
Prophets, when all Nations should flow unto it, Isa. 2.2. So it is apparent,
thirdly, from the same Prophet, That the Law was then proportionably to extend
its dominion, and comprehend those new comers, as well as its ancient subjects;
the design of their thus flowing into the House of the God of Jacob being, that
he might teach them of his ways, and they walk in his paths, as you may see v.
3. of that Chapter. And accordingly, as before this Law was thus to take
effect, it was in reason to have a new promulgation suitable to the extent of
its dominion; so, if we consult the stories of those times, we shall find God
was not wanting in making it known to the Gentile world; partly by the
dispersing of the Jews among them, but more especially by that signal act of
his Providence in causing it to be translated by the Septuagint into Greek,
which was then the most known Language of the Gentile World. By which means
that Law, which was before shown only unto Jacob, came unto the knowledge of
the Heathen, from whom it had been so long concealed. Now though what has been
alleged from the Prophet Isay, and this universal Promulgation, be enough to
establish what we have deduced from it: yet because it may conduce much to our
satisfaction, to evidence it from the New Testament, which is the immediate
rule of our belief and practice; I will therefore, to remove all scruples,
endeavor to show from thence, that (whatever it was, whilst the Church was
confined to Jewry) yet, after the coming in of the Gentiles, the Law was
intended to take in them also, and oblige them to the several Precepts of it.
To begin with the Ceremonial Law, because the most unlikely to concern us, and
therefore, if well proved, of more force to conclude the like of others:
Concerning which it may suffice to represent the use S. Paul makes of it, 1
Cor. 9.8. Say I these things as a man, or says not the Law the same also? For
it is written in the Law of Moses, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the Corn. Does God take care for Oxen? Or says he it
altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is written: that he that
ploweth should plow in hope, and that he that thresheth in hope should be
partaker of his hope. For not only arguing (as S. Paul there does) from a
Ceremonial Precept to a Christian duty, but affirming expressly concerning that
Precept, that it was written for the times of the Gospel, he thereby plainly
shows, that though the force thereof were evacuated as to the Ceremony, yet it
is obligatory as to the Moral, which it was chiefly designed to consign, and
intended by God so to do. And therefore, if I were to prove in like manner the
necessity of purifying our souls, before we betake our selves to the solemn
Worship of God, as it is evident from this of S. Paul, that it were enough to
allege a Precept out of the Law, because written for us as well as for the
Jews, so particularly from Gods frequent enjoining the Jews to wash themselves
and their clothes, before they appeared before him; for does God take care of
clean attire, or a smooth skin, any more than he does of Oxen? and if not, may
not I as well conclude, that for our sakes no doubt this was written, that he
that presents himself before the Lord should appear with a clean heart, with a
soul no way stained by any unrepented sin? Now if even Ceremonial Precepts were
some way intended for us, much more those of a higher rank, the second thing to
be demonstrated. For the further evidencing whereof, the first thing that I
shall allege is that of the same S. Paul, Ephesians. 6.1. and so on. Children obey
your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. Honor thy Father and thy Mother
(which is the first Commandment with promise) that it may be well with thee,
and thou may live long on the earth. For pressing upon the Ephesians not
only the duty of honoring Parents, but also upon the account of the fifth
Commandment, he thereby plainly shows, that it was intended to oblige them
also, and in them, because they were Gentiles, all other Christians. In like
manner, the same Apostle dehorting the Romans from the avenging of themselves,
inforceth that dehortation from the Law of Moses Deuteronomy. 32.35. for it is written
(says he) Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. And not contented
with that, he backs it with another out of the Proverbs, c. 25.21. where it is
written in like manner, If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him
drink; for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and the
Lord shall reward thee. To all which if we add the same Apostles affirming,
that whatsoever was written aforetime by way of comfort, was written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope, Romans 15.4. as in like manner, that what is storied of Gods judgments upon
the Israelites was written for our admonition, to the intent we should not
offend as they also did; so we shall not need to doubt but that the Precepts of
their Law were intended for our direction and obedience: For if Gods mercies
and judgments upon them were written for our learning, no doubt but his
Precepts were, as which the other were designed to enforce. Fourthly and
lastly, though the Law of Moses did not oblige us by being given to the
Israelites; though in the primary intention thereof it were designed for the
Israelites only, and consequently could not so induce an obligation upon any
other: yet, as it was secondarily intended for the Gentile world, so soon as
God should bring it into the Church, so (which excludes all doubt of our
obligation to it) it was adopted by our Savior into his Law, and by him both
confirmed and fulfilled. But because that is too copious as well as too
important an argument to find a room here, I will respite the handling thereof
to the following Discourses, where I will fully and distinctly consider it.

These two things only would be added here, to prevent all mistakes, concerning
our obligation to the Law of Moses, 1. That when I say it was intended to
oblige us, and accordingly adopted by our Savior into his Law, we understand
it so far as it had no peculiar reference to Gods dispensation under the Law,
or the Polity of the Jewish state: For as, upon the account of the former, I
have discarded all ceremonial Rites, as which were intended only to serve to
the administration of the Law, so I must also, upon the account of the latter,
discard all those Precepts, which concerned the regulation of their State. 2.
Again, when I say the Law of Moses was, though secondarily, intended to oblige
us, and as such adopted by our Savior; my meaning is not to affirm an
obligation to a perfect obedience, but to a sincere and earnest endeavor, and,
where we fail, a due repentance and amendment. For though the first Covenant
left no place for repentance and pardon, yet the Gospel does, and has
accordingly (as has been elsewhere Explication of the Apostles Creed.
shown) made forgiveness of sins one of the capital Articles of our Belief.

DISC. III. That Christ came not to destroy, but to confirm the Law of Moses.
This evidenced in part in the Ceremonial Law, from Christ's confirming of that
which was the main intendment of it, and from his retaining some of its
usances, and transferring them into his own Religion. The like in the Moral
Law, from Christ's Sermon upon the Mount, and from the evidence there is both
there and elsewhere of Christ's establishing and inculcating the great Precepts
of Piety, Sobriety, and Justice.

WHat may seem to have been our Saviors fear concerning himself and Doctrine,
where he so studiously averts Mat. 5.17.
any design of destroying the Law and the Prophets, in process of time came to
be fulfilled: The Jews representing the Author of it as a friend of Publicans
and Sinners, as the Heathen did the Religion it self, as a Sanctuary of all
impious persons. For whereas (says Celsus Vid. Orig. contr. Celsum. l. 3. p.
147.
, that great Enemy of Christianity) all other Religions were wont to use such
addresses as these, when they invited men to initiate themselves in their
respective Rites, Whosoever is pure in hands, and wise in tongue; and again,
Whosoever is pure from all impiety, that has a soul conscious to it self of no
evil, and has lived well and justly, let him come and initiate himself in
these mysteries; but -- procul o procul este profani: Christianity on the
contrary bespeaks the world after this manner, Whosoever is a sinner or a fool,
childish or any way unhappy, let him come, for the Kingdom of God stands open
to receive him; the unjust and the thief, the breaker up of Houses and the
Wizzard, the sacrilegious and the defacer of the monuments of the dead. Indeed
these are the men, whom our Savior came chiefly to call, For I came not (says
he) to call the righteous, but sinners, Mat. 9.13. But it was, as he himself
there tells us, because those had more need of a Physician, and to invite
them, not to continue in their impieties, but to repent; to become as righteous
as those others were, whom he there styles so, to make their righteousness
exceed those others as he does elsewhere See the Sermon on the Mount.
insinuate; to be chaste above their measure, to abstain from anger as well as
murder; lastly, to suffer injuries as well as do none, and be contented not
only with that which was their own, but with the parting with it: It being not
his intention to destroy the Law and the Prophets, those great measures of
piety and justice, but rather to confirm and add to them.

But not to stay any longer in the entrance to this discourse, when there are
so many weighty things which call for our regard and proof, I shall without
more ado proceed to show, I. That our Savior came not to destroy, but to
confirm the Law of Moses, and particularly that of the Decalogue or Ten
Commandments. II. That he came not to destroy that Law, but to fulfill and add
to it.


I. For the evidencing the former whereof, I will begin with such precepts of
it as were ceremonial, and which, because such, have the least appearance of
having been confirmed by him.

And here not to insist upon the agreeableness of our Saviors life to them,
because the question is not, concerning his life, but doctrine; nor yet to
stand to show, that that law did rather die of it self than was destroyed by
him, because the question is, whether or no, and in what measure he confirmed
it; I shall observe first of all, that that which was mainly designed in the
several precepts of that law, even the pure and pious veneration of God, was
confirmed and established by our Savior. As will appear past all
contradiction, from the Sermon on the Mount and other our Saviors discourses.
I say, that which was mainly designed in them; for that the pure and pious
veneration of God was principally intended in them, is acknowledged by one of
the greatest Authority among the Jews, even Maimonides, Maim. Mer. Nev. part 3.
c. 32. page 435.
and is evident from the words of the Prophet Jeremy c. 7.21, 22, 23. For thus
says the Lord of Hosts the God Israel, Put your burnt offerings unto your
sacrifices and eat flesh, for I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor commanded
them, in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt
offerings and sacrifices. But this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my
voice, and I will be your God and ye shall be my people. The meaning of which
words is not that God gave the Jews no commandment at all concerning burnt
offerings and sacrifices (for he enjoined that of the Paschal Lamb the very
night they went out of Egypt, and many other such like afterward) but that the
principal thing required by him was their piety and obedience, and that he
enjoined sacrifices and such like, only as instances of obedience, and figures
of substantial and real piety. And hence Gods insisting so much upon the
circumcision of the heart, even where the circumcision of the flesh was not
wanting 3 upon the purity of the Soul as well as the cleanness of the body; his
preferring a broken heart before all burnt offerings and sacrifices, his
accounting of it as the only acceptable one, for thou desire not sacrifice,
else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering. The sacrifices of
God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not
despise, Psa. 51.16, 17 I observe secondly, that as our Savior did confirm
that which was principally designed by God, even in the law of a carnal
commandment; so he did also retain many of its ceremonies and usances, and
accommodated them to his own purpose. I instance in both the Sacraments, and
Imposition of hands: The latter whereof, as it was used by the Apostles in
their Ordinations, who, no doubt, did what they did, by commission or
approbation from Christ; so was it borrowed from the Jews, whose Leader Moses
consecrated to succeed him by this ceremony of Laying on of hands. For thus we
are told Number. 27.23. that, after God had given Moses order for the consecrating
of his successor, he laid his hands on Joshua, and gave him a charge, as the
Lord commanded by the hands of Moses. The case is the same in both the
Sacraments, as we learn from the Jewish writers; the Jewish women and their
proselytes of both sexes being entered into covenant with God by the same rite
of Baptism with us, Seldom. de Jure Not. and Gent. etc. li. 2. c. 2.
and having also a ceremony of distributing bread and wine upon their solemn
feasts, Paulus Fagius comment. in Deuteronomy. 8.
agreeably to that of ours in the Lords Supper. For thus, (says Paulus Fagius)
the father of the family among the Jews taking a cup of wine in his right hand,
and praying over it this prayer, Blessed be thou O Lord our God, King of the
world, who createst the fruit of the vine, tastes of it himself, and then gives
it to all the guests. And in like manner afterward bread, over which when he
has used this prayer, Blessed be thou O Lord our God, who bring bread out
of the earth, he first eats a little of it himself, and then gives a piece of
it to each of the guests. Indeed the foresaid Author relates this latter as the
custom of the modern Jews; but that it was also of the more Ancient, is
probable from our Saviors blessing and distributing a cup of wine among his
disciples, before that of the holy Sacrament; adding thereto, that he would not
drink of the fruit of the vine (which is the phrase that is used in the
forementioned prayer of the Jews) till the Kingdom of God should come, Luke
22.17, 18. I have one thing more to add in confirmation of the former ceremony,
which we learn from Iren. adv. haeres. li. 4. c. 32. sect. 4. Justin Mart. in
Dial. cum Tryph. p. 260. edit. Paris.
Irenaeus and other the ancient Fathers; To wit, that the bread and wine, which
was consecrated into the Sacrament of our Saviors passion, was also offered to
God, agreeably to our Saviors precept and example, by way of thanksgiving for
those creatures themselves. Which makes it more than probable, that the
forementioned custom was both of ancient date among the Jews, and transcribed
by our Savior in the institution of his holy Supper. If then he did not only
confirm that which was principally designed, but retained many of the usances
of the Jewish law, he ought in reason not to be looked upon as an enemy to it,
but rather (as he himself says of himself) as one who came not to destroy but
to fulfill it.

From the Ceremonial Law pass we to the Moral, the principal thing intended by
our Savior, as will appear if we consider what he both premiseth and
subjoineth to his assurance of confirming the Law, and the several precepts he
chooses to insist on. Look upon the words he immediately premiseth, and you
will easily acknowledge he meant the Moral Law when he said he came not to
destroy, but to fulfill it, the purport of those being to recommend good works
to them, even the works of piety and charity. For let your light (says he) so
shine before men that they may see your good works, and glorify your father
which is in heaven, that is to say, the works of humility and meekness, the
works of purity and peace, these and such like being the only things
recommended to them in the beginning of that Sermon of his upon the mount. The
same is no less evident, from the words immediately following this declaration
of his intention, concerning the Law and the Prophets; for, Verily I say unto
you till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass
from the law, till all be fulfilled: This being not to be affirmed of the
Ceremonial Law, which was to receive its period at our Saviors death. Lastly,
the precepts he chooses afterward to insist on show manifestly, that he meant
principally the Moral law; those being precepts against murder and adultery,
against perjury and revenging of injuries, and not against plowing with an ox
and ass, or wearing linsey-woolsey garments. Whatsoever else therefore may be
thought to be included under the name of the Law or the Prophets, the principal
thing intended was no doubt the Moral law, or the law of the Ten Commandments.
But not to content my self with this only proof, when both the nature of this
Law, and the particular precepts of Christianity, give a farther attestation to
it, I shall in the next place remind you of what has been before at large
confirmed, that this law is unalterable; for being so, it is unreasonable to
think our Savior would go about to destroy it, or free us from the obligation
of it. And indeed so far was he from going about to do it, whatsoever some weak
or evil disposed minds may fancy, that we shall find him expressly to confirm
it, in the matters of piety, sobriety, justice and charity, into which it is
usually divided. Though it were a strange Religion which should not teach men
to worship God, which is the thing here meant by piety, God being both the
Author of religion, and the principal object of it; yet, because we have
undertaken to show, that Christ came not to destroy the Moral law in any part
of it, I shall begin with that, and show how far our Savior was from
abrogating it. And here not to insist (because that would be endless) upon the
several precepts in the new Testament to fear and love God, to believe in him
and to obey him, I shall content my self with that, which he returned to a
certain Lawyer, that demanded of him what he should do to inherit eternal life,
Luke 10.26. etc. For what (says he) is written in the law, how read thou?
To which when the other had made answer, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all
thy mind; and thy neighbor as thy self; Our Savior subjoined immediately,
This do and thou shall live: thereby plainly showing, that he taught no other
way to eternal happiness than by a strict piety, and veneration of the Divine
majesty. Neither will it suffice to say, as I think it is said by some, that
our Savior in that answer of his does rather show what the Law prescribes us
toward the attaining eternal life, than what he himself did; for beside that
that would make our Saviors answer impertinent, the question being not what
the Law, but what he himself prescribed, besides this I say, it is manifest
from S. Matthew c. 19.16. that our Savior gave the like answer, where he
cannot but be thought to speak his own sense, and the conditions upon which he
came to offer it: for when a certain young man there demanded of him, What good
thing he should do to inherit eternal life? his answer was, that if he would
enter into life he should keep the commandments: And again, after he had told
him, that he had kept all these from his youth, and was importunate to know
whether he lacked any thing yet; that if he would be perfect he should go and
sell all that he had, and give to the poor, and then come and follow him. From
which words it is evident, that he, as well as Moses, did require the
observation of Gods Commandments in order to the attainment of everlasting
life, and that the young man could not be his follower without it. But it may
be, piety would not be so much stood upon amongst the present professors of
Christianity; there being not a few of those (who yet are none of the greatest
ornaments of it) that can make long prayers, and listen to those that do. That
which galls them most is, that they must renounce their lusts and animosities,
that they must be sober and just and charitable, which is to them a yoke far
more grievous than the Ceremonial law, and from which therefore they are
willing to believe, that Christ came to set them free. But how little ground
there is for such a surmise, we may soon inform our selves, if we reflect upon
the doctrine of our Savior in these particulars. For has not he in the Sermon
so often referred to forbidden the adultery, even of the heart and eye? Has he
not told us that the not plucking out of such an offending eye, will endanger
the casting the whole body into eternal fire? Has not one of his Apostles
said, that without holiness or purity no man shall see the Lord? and another,
that pure religion and undefiled before God and the father, is to keep our
selves unspotted from the world? Again, has our Savior delivered ought in
prejudice of what is spoken by the Law and the Prophets concerning Intemperance
or the promoters of it? any thing in prejudice of that woe, which is denounced
against those that rise up early in the morning that they may follow strong
drink, that continue until night till wine inflame them, Isa. 5.11? Or of that
other, which is levelled at those that are mighty to drink wine, and men of
strength to mingle strong drink, v. 22. of that chapter? Nay has not one of
his Apostles told us that the grace, which brings salvation, teaches to deny
all ungodly and worldly lusts, and to live godlily, righteously, and soberly in
it, Tit. 2.12? That neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, shall inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10? Lastly (for it
shall suffice rather to hint at these things, than to give you a just discourse
concerning them) has our blessed Savior delivered ought in favor of that
covetousness, which the Law and the Prophets do so vehemently decry? Nay has
not he himself forewarned us to take heed of it, Luke 12.15. and his Apostle to
content our selves with food and raiment, 1 Timothy 6.8? So that in this
particular it is evident, Christ had no design to thwart the dictates of Nature
or Moses, the precepts of the Law or the wholesome advices of the Prophets. The
only thing remaining to be inquired into is, whether he came to destroy the
precepts of justice and charity, the two last branches of the Moral Law.
Concerning the latter hereof I shall say nothing at present, both because I may
have occasion to resume it, when I come to entreat of our Saviors fulfilling
the Law, and because the Evangelists and Apostles, as well as the Law and the
Prophets, are full fraught with Precepts concerning it. That which I shall
bestow the remainder of my discourse upon, is the Precepts of justice, even
that justice which commands us to give Caesar and all other our Superiors
their due. Which I shall the rather do, because this has been too often
accounted a part of that bondage from which our Savior came to set us free. I
begin with Fathers, because their authority as it was the first, so the
foundation even of Regal power. Concerning whom if the Law be express that we
should give them honor and obedience, the Gospel of our Savior is no less;
Witness his faulting the Scribes and Pharisees for evacuating that Royal Law by
a foolish tradition of their own, Mat. 15.4. His Apostle S. Paul's pressing the
Ephesians with the letter of it, Ephesians. 6.2. His calling upon children in the
verse before to be obedient to their parents, his commanding the children of
the Colossians to be obedient to them in all things, Col. 3.20. His instructing
the children of widows to requite their parents, 1 Timothy 5.4. His reckoning
disobedience to parents amongst the foulest crimes of the Gentiles, Romans 1.30.
Than which what more could be said, to show our Savior's detestation of that
crime, and his concurrence with the Law and the Prophets in the contrary
virtue? From the Authority of a Father proceed we to that of a Master, and
compare the doctrine of the Gospel with the Law of Nature and that of Moses.
And here indeed is a manifest difference, but which is to the advantage of the
Gospel; for whereas the Law of Moses does rather suppose obedience to Masters,
than go about to enjoin it, the Gospel is full of precepts to this purpose.
Servants be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh; so
S. Paul, Ephesians. 6.5. Servants obey in all things your masters according, to the
flesh; so the same Apostle, Col. 3.22. Let as many servants, as are under the
yoke, count their own masters worthy of all honor, 1 Timothy 6.1. And exhort
servants (says the same person to Titus) to be obedient unto their own
masters, and to please them well in all things, Tit. 2.9. To the froward as
well as the gentle, to the believing master and the infidel, with all
cheerfulness, with all simplicity, out of a regard to Christ, whose will it was
they should obey, to his Gospel, which would be otherwise blasphemed. Lastly,
if the Law and the Prophets called upon the Jews to honor the Fathers of their
Country, as well as the Fathers of Families, to fear the Lord and the King, to
speak no evil of the Ruler of the people, to curse him no not in their heart;
the holy Jesus on the other hand reminds his of giving unto Caesar that which
is Caesar's, Mat. 22.21. His Apostle S. Peter, of fearing God, and honoring
the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. Submitting themselves to every ordinance of man, or as
the Greek reads it, to every humane creature, whether supreme or subordinate,
and not making use of that liberty, which Christ has purchased, for a cloak of
disobedience. Thus in every particular does our blessed Savior rather confirm
than destroy those Moral Precepts, which are delivered by Moses and the
Prophets. And therefore, let men pretend what they will upon the account of
their faith and Baptism, He is no Christian, who is not a devout adorer of the
Divine Majesty, chaste, and temperate in his converse, a dutiful child, an
obedient servant, and a faithful subject to his Prince.

DISC. IV. That Christ came not to destroy, but to fulfill and add to the Law of
Moses.
General proofs hereof from the Sermon upon the Mount; where moreover is shown
that the opposition there made by Christ is between his Law and that of Moses.
The Law of Moses considered as the Common Law of their Nation, and in what
respects Christ added to it. A discourse concerning the same Law as intended
for a rule of life; where is shown wherein Christ either did not, or did add
unto it. That the additions Christ made to the Law in that latter notion of it
do not entrench upon the esteem either of it or of its Author. The allegation
of the imperfection of Moses's Law both answered and disproved.

LET the Libertine and the Antinomian be from henceforth for ever silent; they
whose Life, or Doctrine, or both proclaim the ever blessed Jesus to have
abrogated the Law and Prophets: for beside that, instead of justifying that
wisdom whose children they pretend to be, they show themselves as forward as
any in condemning her, giving countenance to that calumny which was sometime
fastend on our Savior by the Jews, behold a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber,
a friend of Publicans and sinners; they do directly oppose his own vehement
asseveration, and doctrine, as well as the Law of Moses, unless to destroy, and
not to destroy be one and the same thing, or to abrogate the Law and the
Prophets, and to fulfill. But so Hercules in the Fable added to the Serpent
Hydra's monstrous heads, by going about to take them off; each wound he gave it
becoming strangely prolifical, and two heads starting up, where there was one
lopt off. For setting aside the Ceremonial, that shadow of good things to come,
and which therefore was to vanish at the appearance of the Son of
Righteousness; all the Law and the Prophets beside have rather received an
increase, than any diminution by his Doctrine. Can any one pretend that he has
abrogated the Law concerning adultery, who has substituted two in its room,
which are no less dreadful than the former? The one forbidding all outward
uncleanness, the other the adultery of the heart. If the Law concerning murder
be alleged as destroyed by him, he has forbidden calumnies as well as that,
the wounds of a malicious Tongue, as well as the piercing of a Spear.

II. Having shown in the foregoing discourse, that our Savior came not to
destroy the Law and the Prophets but on the contrary to confirm and establish
them, it remains that we show it to have been his design to fulfill, or add to
them, according as the word (...) in the place so often referred to is
generally understood by the Ancient Fathers; the Law, in their opinion, being
like a picture rudely drawn, which our Savior afterward finished, and gave
life and color to. Wherein how far they were from erring, and much more from
speaking impiously, I come now to show, and that both in the lump and the
retail.

1. My general proof shall be taken from the opposition that our Savior makes
in the fifth Chapter of S. Matthew between his own Doctrine and the Precepts of
Moses. For if the opposition be between Moses Precepts and Christ's, then can
there be no doubt at all of Christ's adding to them; because it is certain, he
requires something more, than those Precepts to which he does oppose them. As
will appear by considering either the Precepts themselves, or the opposition
that is made. I instance for the former in that which we meet with v. 43. of
that Chapter. For ye have heard (says he) that it has been said, Thou shall
love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy; But I say unto you, Love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, etc. For is it not more to love an enemy as
well as a neighbor, than to love our neighbor only? nay is it not a point of
greater perfection? And if it be, does not Christ add to the former Precept, by
enjoining us so to do, when the other requires only the love of a neighbor?
Again, what opposition can there be between what was said to them of old, and
that which Christ says, if Christ did not add unto thefor mer? especially,
when in his intrance upon this argument, he disclaims the publishing of any
thing, that might tend to the destruction of it. If therefore there be any
opposition, it must be, that the one enjoins somewhat more than the other will
be found to do. The only thing therefore remaining to show is, that Christ
makes the opposition between his own Doctrine and that of Moses, which
accordingly I come now to prove. To begin with that which is first in order, Ye
have heard (says our Savior) that it has been said to them of old time, (for
so indeed it should be rendered, and not as we by them of old, the Syriack and
other versions so rendering it; secondly, the verb (...) with a dative case
annexed to it being Vid. Romans 9.12. (...). v. 26. (...), Gal. 3.16. (...).
Apoc. 6.11. (...), 9.4. (...).
ever used in this sense in the New Testament; and thirdly and lastly, the word
(...), which we render them of old time, signifying as much Vid. Luc. 9.8.19.
Act. 15.21. 2 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 12.9.20.2.
and referring usually to the times of Moses and the Prophets; but no where in
the New Testament set to signify Elders, Scribes and Pharisees, whom some are
willing to understand here.) Ye have heard, I say, says our Savior, that it
has been said to them of old time, Thou shall not kill, and whosoever shall
kill shall be in danger of the judgment: But I say unto you, etc. For is not
the former part of these words, Thou shall not kill, the very letter of the
sixth Commandment, and the latter, though not the same in terminis, yet in
sense with that of Moses Lev. 24.21. where, instead of what we read here, he
that kills shall be in danger of the judgment, it is there, he that kills a
man shall be put to death. Again, whose words are those which our Savior
ushers in with the former preface v. 27. of the forequoted Chapter, Thou shall
not commit adultery, are they not the very letter of the seventh Commandment,
as the words before recited of the sixth? If therefore the opposition here made
be between Moses's Law and Christ's, if that opposition consists in this that
Christ requires more than Moses, it is certain that Christ added to the Law of
Moses, which I shall now prove more particularly.

2. In order to which, I will first premise a distinction Vid. Grot. de Jure
bell. etc. lib. 1. c. 2. sect. 6.
concerning the Law of Moses, which I have borrowed from the Most Excellent
Grotius. For it may be either considered,

1. As to that part of it, which was the Common Law of their Nation (if you
will give me leave so to express it) and by which their Judges were to proceed;
or 2. As a Rule of Manners, and a measure of Religion.
I. In the former of these senses the word Law is taken Heb. 2.2. where it is
said that every transgression and disobedience to it received a just recompense
of reward; that is to say, was punished by the Judge, as the Law it self
prescribed. For in as much as many offenses against the Law, particularly the
hating our Brother in our heart, and the like, were not cognoscible by the
Judge, and consequently could not receive a just recompense from him; it
follows, that by the Law there spoken of must be meant that part of it which
was their Common Law, and that by which their Judges were to proceed. In like
manner, when our Savior says, Ye have heard that it was said to them of old
time, Thou shall not kill, and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the
judgment; it is manifest from these last words, that by the Law, of which this
is made a part, was meant their Common Law, and that by which their Judges were
to be directed. Now in this sense there is nothing more manifest, than that
Christ added to it, and required a greater piety than the Law of Moses did. For

1. First, whereas the Law of Moses, that part I mean by which their Judges
were to proceed, looked only at the outward action, commanding, or forbidding
it as it did agree with, or swerve from it; the Law of Christ, that much more
Noble one, required the obedience of the heart and forbad all impiety there.
Ths to keep close to the former instances, It was said to, or by them of old
time, even by one who was as old as Moses, Thou shall not kill, and whosoever
shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment, that is to say, he shall be
liable to be brought before the Judge, and by his sentence to receive a just
recompense of reward: But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his
brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment, even that
wherewith I shall one day judge the world. If there be any boiling of malice in
the heart, if there be a murtherous thought in it, or disposition to it, at my
Tribunal it shall be taken notice of and punished, as the act of killing is at
yours. Again, ye have heard that it has been said by the same Ancient and the
Giver of your Law, Thou shall not commit adultery, and the man that commits
adultery with another man's wife, even he that commits adultery with his
neighbors wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death,
Lev. 20.10. But I say unto you, That whosoever looks upon a woman to lust
after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart; and that my
Law forbids as well as the outward act, and shall be both tried and sentenced
at my Tribunal. If your Law judges no man before it hears him and knows from
sufficient witnesses what he has done, which shows that it has respect to the
outward action only; if it be made not for the righteous, but for the lawless
and disobedient, for murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers, for
manslayers, for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for
men-stealers, liars and perjured persons, that is to say, for manifest and open
sinners; my Law, as being a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart,
reaches to the impieties thereof, and censures those seeds of murder and
adultery which are there. But by this means we may easily avoid the imputation
of charging the Law of Moses with imperfection, as forbidding only sinful
actions and not sinful purposes; it being no imperfection at all in the Common
Law of the Jewish Nation whereof we now speak, to forbid sinful actions only,
because those who were to give sentence by it could not take cognizance of any
other. Again

2. Whereas that part of the Law, which was the Common Law of the Jewish
Nation, took notice only of grosser offenses, such as that of adultery, and
murder, in the mean time permitting others of a lower rank, lest too severe a
restraint upon them should make them throw the yoke from off their neck; the
Gospel of our Savior, the Christian Law, forbids all deviations whatsoever,
the smaller as well as the greater offenses. They are Christ's own words in the
19. verse of the forequoted Chapter. For whosoever (says he) shall break one
of the least of these Commandments, he shall be called least in the kingdom of
heaven; They are his sense and meaning, in what he opposes to the forementioned
instances. Our Savior to that crime of Murder opposing the calling of our
Brother Raka or Fool; as to that other of Adultery, a wanton look or an
immodest dalliance, which are certainly far inferior to the other.

II. I have considered the Law of Moses as to that part of it which was the
Common Law of the Jewish Nation, and shown you how our Savior added to it; I
come now to speak of the same Law, as intended for a rule of manners, and as a
guide to the Jews in walking with God. In which sense it is taken, when it is
styled a Law converting the Soul, or represented as a means to inherit eternal
life. Now in this sense it is chiefly that question is made concerning it,
whether Christ added thereto, and wherein that addition consists. And first of
all,

1. Negatively, we are not to think that Christ added to it by exacting the
obedience of the heart, as well as the outward man; for, that this Law of Moses
did, no less than the Precepts of our Blessed Savior. And hence (as was before
intimated) it is by the Psalmist said to be a law converting the Soul, Psalm.
19.7. and by S. Paul affirmed to be spiritual, Romans 7.14. yea that if there had
been a Law, which could have given life, the Law of Moses had been it, Gal.
3.21. Neither do the Precepts of this Law enforce any thing less, than those
Elogies which are given of it by David and S. Paul, Not the Precepts of Piety,
or those which taught the Jews their duty toward God; For hear O Israel (says
the Law) the Lord our God is one Lord, and thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart and with all thy soul and with all thy might, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
As in like manner, Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now Israel, what does the Lord require of
thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to love and serve
him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? Not the Precepts of Charity; for
as our Savior does here forbid the malice of the heart as well as killing, so
did this Law also, for thou shall not (says the Law) hate thy brother in thy
heart, nor bear a grudge against the children of thy people, Lev. 19.17, 18.
Lastly, not the Precepts of Chastity, and Justice, as they are couched in the
Law and the Prophets. For as our Savior forbids here the adultery of the
heart, as elsewhere the desire of that which is another; so do also the Law
and the Prophets. The words of the Proverbs of Solomon being, Thou shall not
lust after the beauty of a strange woman in thy heart, Pro. 6.25. Of the Law,
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, servant, cattle or any thing that is
his, Exodus 20.17. But as our Savior added nothing to this Law by calling for
the piety of the heart, because that did so as well as he; so neither,
Secondly, by forbidding lesser as well as greater sins, because this Law did no
less. For thus, as our Savior forbad a wanton look as well as the act of
Adultery, a slanderous tongue as well as a killing hand, so did also the Law
and the Prophets. For what man is he (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 34.12.) that
desires life and loves many days, that he may see good? let him keep his
tongue from evil. And yet more particularly, Psalm. 15.1.3. Lord who shall abide
in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that backbiteth not
with his tongue, as well as he that does no evil to his neighbor, he that
takes not up a reproach against him. The like severity we may observe in the
Proverbs of Solomon, against that lustful eye of which our Savior forewarns
us, Prove. 6.25. Where to the former caution of not lusting after the strange
woman's beauty in the heart, he adds, neither let her take thee with her
eyelids, which implies a watchfulness over our own. But neither, Thirdly, does
our Savior require any new virtue of us, which the Law and the Prophets did
not before him, for the kind. I instance in the love of enemies, because that
seems of all others most peculiar to the Gospel, and most opposite to the
Precepts of Moses. Concerning which, for the kind I mean, the Law is as
express, as the Gospel can be supposed to be. Thus Exodus 23.4, 5. If (says
Moses) thou meet thine enemies ox or ass going astray, thou shall surely bring
it back to him again. And if thou see the ass of him that hates thee lying
under his burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with
him. For as the Apostle spoke in another case, Does God take care for Oxen or
Asses? or said he it not rather for this, even to enjoin them to lay aside
their animosities and show their enemies all acts of benevolence? And
accordingly Vatablus renders those words in the 5. verse, Thou shall surely
help with him, by exonerabis asinum cum eo qui te odio habet; and the Chaldee
Paraphrast in like manner, When thou shall see the ass of him that hates thee
lying under his burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall let go the
hatred which is in thy heart against him, and shall lend him thy assistance in
the raising him up; referring not so much to the kindness which he was to show
to the poor beast (though that also was a duty) as to that which he was to show
to the owner of it, and his own enemy. But that of Solomon will put this
business out of question, because so fully expressive of the love of an enemy,
that S. Paul himself thought fit to represent it to the Christian Romans, when
he was entreating of the same argument. It Is in the 25. of the Proverbs, verses
21, and 22. If thine enemy hunger give him bread to eat, and if he be thirsty
give him water to drink. For thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and
the Lord shall reward thee.

2. Having thus shown wherein the Gospel and the Law agree, and consequently
wherein we are not to look for any additions; let us in the next place enquire
what the Gospel has added to the Law and Prophets, wherein it has fulfilled
the Law and them. And here

1. I observe first, that though our Savior has required no new virtues,
which the Law and the Prophets did not before enjoin; yet he has enjoined us
some new instances which under the Law were left free. We have one in that
Sermon of our Savior to which I have so often referred, and therefore I shall
begin with that. It Is in the 5. Chapter of S. Matthew, and the 31. verse; where
he tells us, that it has been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him
give her a writing of divorcement: But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put
away his wife saving for the cause of fornication causes her to commit
adultery, and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced commits adultery.
Wherewith agrees that of the same Jesus, Mat. 19.8, 9. where when the
Pharisees demanded of him, why, if God had made the bond so close between man
and wife at the first, as he had then affirmed, Moses did command to give a
writing of divorcement and to put her away, his answer was, that Moses for the
hardness of their hearts suffered them to put away their wives, but from the
beginning it was not so, neither should be from that time forward, for
whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall
marry another commits Adultery, and whosoever marries her which is put away
commits Adultery. From which passages compared together it is manifest, that
Moses permitted divorces for lesser causes than fornication; but that Christ
would not allow of any upon a lower cause. But not to insist upon this, because
there is some ground to believe that Moses his permission of divorce was rather
such as freed them from punishment in this world than from guilt before God,
inasmuch as it is only said that Moses suffered them so to do because of the
hardness of their hearts (though on the other side it may seem strange that God
should give so uncontrouled a permission to that which he himself then held as
sinful, and treasured up against them against the day of wrath) But not (I say)
however to insist upon that, I shall proceed to the matter of Polygamy, or the
having of more wives than one, which it is certain the Jews were not only
permitted, but so far dispensed withal also, that they might do it without the
imputation of a sin, the Scripture reckoning multitude of wives to David as a
blessing and a gift of God, even to that David, who was a man after Gods own
heart, 2 Samuel 12.8. Thus you see it was under the Law, even with the allowance
of God himself; but Christ has now determined otherwise, as is manifest (to go
no farther) from that forequoted text of S. Matthew c. 19.9. where our Savior
tells us, that whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication,
and shall marry another, commits Adultery. For if it were lawful to have
more wives than one, his marrying another could not be imputed to him for a
sin, and much less for Adultery as it is in the text now quoted. Let it remain
therefore for an undoubted truth, That though our Savior has required no now
virtues, yet he has enjoined us some new instances, and consequently so far
added to the Law.

2. But beside the enjoining of new instances (which yet alone would have
justified our Saviors assertion) he has also exacted those virtues in a
greater latitude, than they will be found to have been under the Law. For the
evidencing whereof I will instance in the love of enemies, as being one of the
most eminent virtues of the Gospel. And here not to content my self with that
of our Savior Mat. 5.43, 44. where, having premised after his manner, that
they had heard it had been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine
enemy, he adds by way of opposition, But I say unto you, Love your enemies;
not, I say, to content my self with that, I shall set before you the extent of
this Precept under the Gospel, and then show how much the Law falls short of it
in its injunctions. I begin with the former of these, even the extent of this
Precept under the Gospel; Which I shall not doubt to affirm, first, to
comprehend such enemies as are of a different Religion from us, as well as
those who are of the same Religion with our selves, that is to say, the Infidel
as well as the Believer, the Schismatic as well as the Orthodox professor.
That the Schismatic is not to be excluded from this Love, we have a clear
evidence from our Savior, in his behavior toward the Samaritans, and in his
explication of that question, which was put to him by a Lawyer, concerning the
importance of the word Neighbor. For first, when his Disciples would have had
him call for fire from Heaven, to consume the Samaritans for refusing to give
entertainment to them, Luke 9.54. he both sharply reproved them for that their
suggestion, and told them that the son of man was not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them, even of those that were Separatists from the true
Church, the Samaritans as well as the Jews; for otherwise those words of his
had not touched them at all, whose present zeal was against such persons only.
Now if Christ came not to destroy even such men's lives but to save them, we
cannot deem it any way acceptable to him for us to pray against them, and make
them the objects of our hatred. The same is much more evident from our Saviors
answer to that question, who is the neighbor we are to love as our selves,
Luke 10.29. For there he does both insinuate a Samaritan to be a neighbor, and
enjoin the Jew to imitate him by showing mercy to those of a different
profession; the scope of our Saviors answer (as appears from the question
proposed) being not to declare the necessity of showing mercy, but the persons
to whom we are to do it. But as Schismatics and Samaritans, by the Discipline
of our Savior, are to have a share of that love, which we are to show to
enemies, so also Pagans and Infidels, men who are not only Separatists from,
but perfect strangers to, the Commonwealth of Israel; Witness one for all, that
known place of S. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.1. where he exhorts that first of all
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men, for Kings and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a peaceable
and quiet life in all godliness and honesty. For as it is evident from the
stories of those times, as well as from the words that follow, that the Powers
that then were, had not attained the knowledge of the truth; so it is no less,
that they were the Christians enemies, and made use of that authority, which
God put into their hands for the repressing of evil doers, to discountenance
and extirpate them. In the love therefore of enemies it is manifest that Christ
includes the Heathen and the Samaritan, as well as the Christian and the
Orthodox professor. But though such as these are to be loved, whatsoever their
enmity may be to us, yet certainly, not when enemies to us upon the account of
Christianity, and thereby to the Author of it? Indeed, the present practice of
Christians would so persuade a man, that were not studied in the doctrine of
our Savior, there being generally no hatred accounted too great to show to
those that are the enemies of our Religion. But what the will of our Savior
was, his behavior toward the Samaritans, when they denied him entertainment,
snews plainly enough, and his own words in his Sermon upon the Mount; for it
was not upon any particular grudge to his person that they denied him
entertainment, that they refused him that civility which seems due to all
strangers; the text it self tells us, Luke 9.53. that the reason of their not
receiving him was, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem,
thereby professing that he looked upon that City as the place appointed for
Gods public worship, which was the chief controversy between the Jews and the
Samaritans. And yet notwithstanding this their rudeness to our Savior upon the
account of the true Religion, our Savior would by no means hear of calling for
fire from Heaven upon them, and checked his Disciples for the motion,
intimating withal that they were to be of a different temper from him whose
fiery zeal they commended to him. But let us view our Savior's own words in
his Sermon upon the Mount, and see whether our love be not to take in such
persons, as are enemies to us for his name sake. But I say unto you, Love your
enemies, bless them that curse your, do good to them that hate you, and pray
for them that despitefully use you and persecute you; even to those especially
which persecute you for righteousness sake, which speak all manner of evil
against you for mine. For beside that these are the persecutors and revilers
spoken of in the former verses, and therefore in all probability to be
understood here; S. Luke has subjoined the Precept of loving enemies,
immediately after that beatitude, which pronounces a blessing upon those that
are persecuted for Christ's sake, and the woe that is opposed to it, thereby
plainly showing that they who persecute us for Christ's sake are in the number
of those enemies whom he obliges us to love and pray for. For after he had
said, c. 6.22. Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you and cast out your name
as evil for the son of man's sake; as on the other side, Woe unto you when all
men shall speak well of you, for so did their fathers to the false prophets,
verse. 26. he adds in the very next verse, to wit the 27. But I say unto you,
Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, by which enemies what other can be meant than those who
were so because they were Christians, and hated them not for their own sake but
the Son of man's? We have seen the intent of this Precept under the Gospel, let
us now look upon it as prescribed by the Law and the Prophets; which if we do,
we shall soon discern that the Precepts thereof fall short of those of our
blessed Savior. For first of all whereas Christianity makes no difference
between a sound Christian and a Schismatic, or an Infidel, the Law though
enjoining the same love of enemies, yet restrains it to such as were of the
Jewish Nation or Religion. If he who opposes thee be of thy own blood or
profession, if he be a natural son of Abraham, or one adopted into his family,
then thou ought to look upon him as thy neighbor, and show thy self
benevolent to him. Say I this of my self, or says not the Law the same? For is
not neighbor and children of thy people made synonymous, even where this very
argument is entreated of? for thou shall not (says Moses, Lev. 19.18.) avenge
or bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Nay does not our Savior intimate this to have been the
meaning of the Law, when in pursuance of this most excellent Precept he adds,
Mat. 5.47. If ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? Again
(to resume that place which we before made use of, to show the Jews obligation
to this Precept at all) does not the book of Deuteronomy sufficiently declare
the enemy whom they were there obliged to assist, to be one of their own Nation
or profession? If you take the pains to compare them together, you will easily
discern that that is the due meaning of it. If (says Moses) in the book of
Exodus) thou meet thine enemies ox or ass going astray, thou shall surely
bring it back to him again. If thou see the ass of him that hates thee lying
under his burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with
him, Exodus 23.4, 5. But in Deuteronomy. c. 22.1. Thou shall not see thy brothers ox
or his sheep going astray, and hide thy self from them, thou shall in any case
bring them again unto thy brother; and v. 4. Thou shall not see thy brothers
ass or his ox fall down by the way, and hide thy self from them, thou shall
surely help with him to lift them up; plainly showing that the enemy they were
forbidden to hide themselves from, was such an one as was also a brother, which
in the Hebrew phrase was an Israelite by Nation or Religion. I observe,
secondly, that as the love the Jews were obliged to have for Enemies was
restrained to those of their own Nation or Religion, so there were some whole
Nations whom they were obliged to hate, nor have any commiseration of. For thus
says God concerning the Amorite and the Canaanite, the Hittite and the
Perizzite, the Hivite and the Jebusite, Take heed to thy self, lest thou make a
covenant with the inhabitants of the land, whither thou go, Exodus 34.12. As
in like manner of the same Nations and the Girgashites, that when the Lord
their God should deliver them before Israel, that he should smite them, and
utterly destroy them, that he should make no covenant with them, nor show mercy
unto them, Deuteronomy. 7.1. and so on. Which what is it less, than to hate those
Nations, to account of them, and deal with them as enemies? Indeed (as in both
those places is insinuated) the reason of Gods commanding them so to do was for
fear the people of Israel should be ensnated by them, and enticed to the
worship of their Gods. For we are not to think there is any imperfection in
Gods commands, or that hatred and enmity is acceptable of it self. But in the
mean time here is an enemy which the Israelites were obliged to hate, and such
a command for it as the new Testament affords not any. Add hereunto the
aversation which the Jews generally did think themselves obliged to have for
the Samaritans and the Heathen, a thing taken notice of both by sacred and
profane Authors. For the Scriptures first, they observe to us that the Jews
had no dealing with the Samaritans, Joh. 4.9. That thereupon a woman of Samaria
wondered extremely at our Saviors asking water of her; that S. Peter himself
had taken up so hard an opinion concerning the Heathen, that, even after our
Saviors Ascension, he looked upon them as unclean persons, and such as it was
not lawful for him to converse with; that our Savior, when he would represent
to the Jews the aversation they ought to have for those who would not hear the
Church, bad them to account of them as Heathens and Publicans; lastly, that the
same Holy Jesus, when a woman of Canaan came and sued to him in the behalf of
her sick daughter, would not at first vouchsafe her an answer, and when her
importunity and the Disciples together had extorted one from him, called her
and all her Nation by the name of Dogs; For it is not meet, says he, Mat.
15.26. to take the childrens bread and cast it unto dogs. And yet (as that
wittily believing Canaanite replied upon him) it was but some crumbs she begged
of him, and such a mercy as the meanest are allowed to partake of. If you
consult the Heathen you will find them to have had the same opinion of the
Jews, to have experimented the same averseness in them. For thus Juvenal
concerning them, Non monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti,
Quaesitum ad fontem solos deducere verpos;
That is to say, that a Jew would not tell a Heathen the way to any place he
should ask after, nor lead any but such as were circumcised to what fountain he
should enquire for. As in like manner Tacitus, Apud ipsos sides of stinata,
misericordia in promptu, adversus omnes alios hostile odium.
that among themselves they were strict in keeping of their faith, and
extremely inclinable to pity, but had a perfect hatred for all others. For
though it may be those Authors might something over-lash, or (which is as
probable) the Jews go farther in this particular than they were either obliged
or allowed; yet manifest enough it is from their general practice, and our
Saviors severe language to the Canaanitish woman, that they were not permitted
to have any great commerce with them, and much less commanded to show any great
kindness to them. Lastly, they were allowed, even by God himself, to take usury
of a stranger, though he did most severely forbid it among those of their own
Nation. If therefore the Law of Moses restrained the title of Neighbor to
those of the Jewish Nation or Religion; if that Love, which they were required
to show to an enemy, were, even in the sense of Moses, to be understood of such
an enemy as was also a Brother; If they were commanded to show no mercy at all
to some whole Nations, and to avoid the converse of all in general but
themselves; Lastly, if they might lend upon usury to a stranger, when God had
so severely forbidden it among themselves; then certainly that better Lawgiver
Christ Jesus has added to their Law, because requiring us to hold all men
whatsoever as Neighbors, yea though they are as far removed from us in the
profession of Religion, as many of them are in their habitation.

3. Having thus shown that our Savior has not only added new instances to the
Law, but exacted the old virtues in a greater latitude, I come in the third
place to show that he has required them in a higher degree, which I shall
evidence first of all in the forementioned instance, and then in the whole
Encyclopedie of Christian virtues. For, to begin with the forementioned
instance, What more frequent even with Gods Servants than the breathing out of
curses against their own enemies, or those of God? nay what more frequent with
David in the book of Psalms it self, which is of all others the most perfect
rule of Life and Manners? The whole 109. Psalm is upon the matter nothing else;
and hardly shall you meet with any mention of his enemies, without very severe
prayers against them. Thus Psalm. 59.11. where he speaks of seeing his desire
upon his enemies, his words are, Slay them not lest my people forget, scatter
them by thy power and bring them down, O Lord our shield, for the sin of their
mouth, and for the words of their lips; let them be taken in their pride.
Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be -- and at evening let
them return, and let them make a noise like a dog, and run about thorough the
City. As in like manner, Psalm. 35.4. Let them be confounded and put to shame
that seek after my soul, let them be turned back and brought to confusion that
devise my hurt. Let them be as chaff before the wind, and let the Angel of the
Lord chase them. Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the Angel of the
Lord persecute them. Again says the same Psalmist, after he had mentioned the
reproaches and injuries he sustained by them, Let their table become a snare
before them, and that which should have been for their welfare, let it become a
trap. Let their eyes be darkened that they see not, and make their loins
continually to shake, Psalm. 69.22, 23. And a little after, Let their habitation
be desolate, and none to dwell in their tents, for they persecute him whom thou
have smitten, and they talk to the grief of those whom thou have wounded.
Neither will it suffice to say, as perhaps it may be, that many of those
execrations relate to the enemies of Christ, particularly those last mentioned;
For beside that it is evident enough from the Psalms themselves, that they were
also designed against David's enemies; the story of the Gospel shows, that our
blessed Savior, who ought rather to be our pattern, prayed even for those very
enemies, for those that gave him gall to eat and vinegar to drink; His own
words, as S. Luke tells us, being, Father forgive them for they know not what
they do, Luke 23.34. In conformity to which example as no doubt we ought to
proceed, who are so often required to set it before our eyes; so if we take a
view of his Precepts, we shall find them to injoin us the same tenderness,
wherein he went before us by his example. Thus Mat. 5.44. we have his own
express command to bless those that curse us; his Apostle S. Paul's, Romans
12.14. that we should bless and curse not. Lastly, thus we find him himself
checking his Disciples, for having a desire to imitate Elias his zeal in
calling for fire from Heaven upon the Samaritans, and moreover insinuating to
them that the Spirit of a Disciple ought to be far different from that of
Elias, Luke 9.55. And accordingly, saving that Prayer of S. Paul concerning
Alexander the Coppersmith, The Lord reward him according to his works, 2 Timothy
4.14. and that other of S. Peter's concerning Simon Magus, That his money might
perish with him, Act. 8.20. which yet he seems afterward to recall, when he
admonishes him to repent, and pray to God, if perhaps that thought of his heart
might be forgiven him; saving I say those prayers, the former whereof was
against one who had greatly withstood S. Paul's preaching, the later against
him who offered the Apostles money for the Holy Ghost, I think we shall hardly
meet with any of that nature throughout the whole New Testament. Which is to me
an evident argument, that the loving of enemies, and praying for them that
curse, is at least required of us, in a greater degree, than it was under the
Law. But not to confine my self to this single virtue, when there is appearance
enough that the like is required in all, I shall desire any man that doubts of
it, to consider with me these 3. things. 1. That the Precepts of Christ are
much more clear and explicit than those of Moses. 2. That the promises are more
clearly proposed, and 3. and lastly, That God has eased us of the yoke of the
Ceremonial Law. Of the first of these as there cannot well be made a doubt by
any that shall compare the Law and the Gospel together, so neither has it I
think been actually done by any; and therefore instead of insisting upon the
proof of it, I shall make this inference from it, that God exacts of us a more
perfect conformity, than he required of those under the Old Testament. For as
the publication of a Law makes it obligatory to those to whom that publication
is made; so consequently the more clear the publication is, the greater the
obligation must be. Of the second particular there can yet less doubt be made,
even of the promises of the Gospel being more clearly proposed by it; it being
harder to find that there were any such then, than any so clear and express.
And therefore as the Socinians do now generally deny it, so we find the like to
have been done by the Sadducees of old, wherein though it is true they have
erred and that grossly, yet some of the texts they allege do sufficiently prove
that there is a clearer manifestation of them than before; Witness that known
affirmation of S. Paul, 2 Timothy 1.10. where speaking of the Gospel he tells us
that it is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who
has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light by it. In fine,
the same S. Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 3. that there was a veil upon Moses writings,
as well as there sometime was upon his face, but that that veil is done away in
Christ, and we may now with open face behold the Glory of the Lord and that
Glory which he has laid up for us. Now if the promises of the Gospel, as well
as the Precepts thereof, were more clear than those of Moses, the motives to
obedience as well as the rule of it, our conformity thereto is in reason to be
proportionably greater, than that to which the Jews were tied. To all which if
we add, that God has now eased us of the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, which the
Jews, though they were not able to bear, yet were forced to stand under, so no
doubt can remain of a stricter obligation upon us to those most excellent
Precepts of the Moral; gratitude it self requiring, that we, who are eased of a
heavy yoke, should the more quietly submit our necks to a light and gracious
one.

Now though what has been said does sufficiently evidence that Christ came not
to destroy but fulfill the Law and the Prophets in the most proper notion of the
word; yet because it has been thought by some that the granting of that would
infer the Law of Moses to have been imperfect, before I put a period to this
discourse, I will free my doctrine from that imputation, and so much the rather
because the charge of imperfection would in fine fall upon the Author of it. In
order whereunto the first thing that I shall offer is, that it is no crime at
all to affirm it to have been imperfect if compared with the doctrine of our
Savior; that which is less perfect being sometimes as seasonable, as at other
times a more perfect one. But 2. I say, that Law is not presently ^o be thought
imperfect, which does not enjoin the highest pitch of virtue. It is enough, if
it be suited to the ability and temper of those, for the regulation of whom it
was devised. And therefore as one made answer, when it was demanded of him
whether he had given such Laws as were absolutely the best, that he had given
the best Laws he could find out for those who were to be governed by them; so
shall I say concerning the Laws of God by Moses, If they were the very best
that people was capable of to whom they were given, if they were the best for
that time and State, they were as perfect as any Law need to be, because
wanting nothing that was required. But does any thing that I have said charge
the Law of Moses with not being the best that people was capable of? nay have I
not already shown, that in regard to the hardness of their hearts, God was fain
to remit something in the matter of divorce? For whereas at the first God tied
man and wife by a bond, which nothing but Adultery could dissolve, for the
hardness of the Jews hearts (as our Savior tells us) he was forced to remit of
that severity, and suffer them to put away their wives for a lesser cause, Mat.
19.8 In fine, the Jews were then but in the state of children, as S. Paul tells
us, Gal. 4.2. they had the weakness and peevishness of children, and being such
God (as was but requisite) dealt with them as with children; keeping them, as
that Apostle goes on, under the elements of the world, and permitting them to
think, and speak, and act as such. But now that the world is grown man, now
that our Blessed Savior has brought abundance of Grace and Truth into it,
giving men more wise and understanding heads, more pliant hearts, or at least
more grace to make them so; as it was but reasonable he should raise the
standards of obedience, and fulfill both the Law and the Prophets, so it will be
but necessary for us to make our piety answer them, and fulfill that Law and the
Prophets over again in our conversation.

DISC. V. Of the measures by which we are to proceed in the interpretation of
the Decalogue or Ten Commandments.
That the Ten Commandments comprehend more in them than is expressed, and how
we may come to investigate the full importance of them. Several rules laid down
to direct us in that affair. What ties we have upon us to yield obedience to
them, above what the Jews, to whom they were first given, had. A comparison
between the Israelites deliverance out of Egypt, by which their obedience is
enforced, and our far better deliverance from the bondage of the Ceremonial
Law, and Sin, and Death.

HAving, by way of preparation to our main design, entreated of the nature, and
obligations of the Laws of God, and particularly of that Law which we are now
about to explain, showing the authority by which it stands, the means whereby
it comes to oblige us, and the pitch to which our Savior has raised it; it
remains only that we enquire what measures we are to proceed by in giving the
full importance of the several precepts of it. For as when Solomon's Temple was
to be built, all things were so fitted, and prepared beforehand, that there was
neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the building of it; so,
in every methodical discourse, care ought to be taken that the materials be
first squared and fitted, before we proceed to the rearing of it, lest the
deferring it till then do not only prove a retarding of it, but the noises of
axes and hammers disturb and confound us in it.

Now there are two things, within the explication of which, the resolution of
this question will be comprehended.

1. Whether the Ten Commandments comprehend no more in them, than is expressed.
And 2. If they do, what those things are which they comprehend.
I. It is commonly supposed both by Jewish and Christian writers that the
Decalogue or Ten Commandments is a summary or abstract of the whole Duty of
Man. I will not at the first either take so much for granted, or attempt the
probation of it; whatsoever is to be said concerning this particular, being
best to be learned by a leisurely and gradual procedure. It shall suffice now
in the entrance of my discourse to affirm, that more is comprehended in the
Decalogue or Ten Commandments, than is expressed in the letter of it. For,
first, all that must be supposed to be comprehended in it, which is either
employed in it, or necessarily deducible from it. Thus though the letter of the
first Commandment does directly import no more than the rejecting of false
Gods, yet inasmuch as God prefaces this prohibition with I am the Lord thy God,
and the prohibition it self manifestly implies the having of him for our God,
it is evident that when God saves, Thou shall have no other Gods before me, his
meaning is as well that we should have him for our God, as that we should not
have any other God besides. Again, when the having of any one for our God
implies the fearing and loving and honoring him that is so, according to his
several attributes, at the same time he commands us to have him and no other
for our God, he must be supposed to command also, that we should fear, and
love, and honor him and him alone, though neither of these be expressed in it.
But then if the Law be considered not only as proposed by Moses, but as
illustrated and enlarged by our Savior in the Sermon on the Mount, in which
capacity there is no doubt we ought to look upon it, because as such a part of
the Christian Law; so there is no doubt but many things are comprehended in it,
which are not expressed in the letter of it. But because when I show what
things are comprehended in the Ten Commandments, beside what is expressed in
the letter, I shall at the same time show that something else is, therefore
superseding any farther proof of that as altogether unnecessary, I will proceed
to the resolution of the other.

II. It is commonly supposed, and not without reason, though that reason be not
often made appear, that when our Savior reduces the Law to those two great
Commandments, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, he means that principally of the Law of
Moses contained in the Ten Commandments. Which if true, it will follow,

1. That the negative in every Commandment does include the affirmative, and
that when God says Thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, and the like,
his meaning is not only that we should do no injury to our neighbors person or
estate, but that we should love and do him good in both. Now that our Savior
intended those great Commandments, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart and Thy neighbor as thy self, as an abstract of the Ten
Commandments, and consequently that what is contained in them is also comprised
in the Ten Commandments, will appear from Romans 13.8, 9. where S. Paul does not
only affirm love to be the fulfilling of the Law, according as his Master had
done, but particularly of the Ten Commandments. For this (says he) Thou shall
not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, thou shall not
bear false witness, thou shall not covet, and if there be any other
Commandment, it is Verba sunt (...)
briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. Now forasmuch as Love is the fulfilling of this Law, forasmuch as the
several Precepts of it are comprehended in it, as in a recapitulation (...).
Significat proprie variarum sum marum in unam collectionem, per translationem,
ante dictorum repetitionem per capita. Hammond in Ephesians. 1.10.
or summary; that Law, of which it is a summary, must comprehend love in it,
and consequently, not only forbid the doing of any injury to our neighbor, but
the doing him all good offices and services. There is but one thing of moment
to be opposed to this arguing, and that is what follows in the 10. verse, Love
works no ill to his neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law;
for if love be the fulfilling of the Law, in that it works no ill, then may the
whole tenor of the Law seem to be comprehended in the not doing of any harm to
our neighbor. But to this I answer first, that when the Apostle says, Love
works no ill to his neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law,
his meaning may be, not that love is the fulfilling of the Law merely because
it does no harm, but because of its opposition to all those evils and harms,
such as Adultery, Theft and the like, whereby our neighbor is incommodated.
Love is a stranger to Murder, Adultery, and Theft, and to whatsoever else
whereby our neighbor is incommodated; and being a stranger to all such
practices, it does not only extend it self to this or that Commandment, but to
all the Commandments of the second Table. I say, secondly, with Esthius, that
though the Apostle say less, yet it was his intention to have more understood,
even not only that love works no ill, but that it works all good to its
neighbor. Which (beside the usual forms of Speech in Scripture, and other
books, where under negative expressions, such as I am not ashamed, great
boasting is often signified) is evident from the verse before. For being it is
there said, not only that the Precepts, Thou shall not kill, and the like, but
if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in that saying,
namely, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, and consequently, that the
command of honoring our Parents is, because that is a Precept of the same
Decalogue; the Law cannot be fulfilled by abstaining merely from evil, because
that of Honoring our Parents is more than so. When therefore it is here said,
that love works no ill to his Neighbor and therefore is the fulfilling of
the Law, we are not only to understand that it works no ill, but that it
procures all the good that can be. In the mean time, if any deem the positive
love of our Neighbor to be the fulfilling of the Law, in the same sense in
which I have shown the word fulfill is to be understood in the 5. Chapter of S.
Matthew, that is to say, as an addition made by Christ to it, to make up its
former wants, it will come all to one as to our present purpose. For being the
subjects of that Christ, who has fulfilled it, we are necessarily to look upon
the Law in that latitude wherein it is proposed by him, and consequently to
believe the Commandments of the Decalogue, not only to require us to abstain
from doing evil, but to pursue the contrary good. The argument is much more
strong from the affirmative to the negative, that is to say, from the command
of any positive duty to the forbidding of the contrary vice. For though, for
instance, I may abstain from dishonouring my Parents, and yet never give them
honor; yet I cannot honor and dishonor them at once: and therefore that
Commandment, which enjoins me honor, must consequently be thought to forbid
all dishonor and contempt. Thus far therefore we have already attained toward
the importance of the Ten Commandments, that, though some of them, and those
the most, seem satisfied with abstaining from evil, and others with the sole
pursuing of good; yet both the one and the other are to be understood as
obliging to both, to eschew that which is evil, and to follow after that which
is good and virtuous.

2. The second thing observable concerning the Ten Commandments, is, that
though the grosser sort of sins only be there expressly forbidden, such as
Adultery, Murder, and the like, yet under them are contained also all the
lesser ones of the same species. Thus for example, Though the Decalogue take
notice only of Murder, and Adultery in the sins of Malice and Unchastity, yet
considering those Precepts as proposed by Christ, in which capacity there is no
doubt all Christians are to look upon them, so we are to understand all sins of
the same kind to be included, how much soever inferior to the other. For I say
unto you (says our Savior) that whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after
her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart, Mat. 5.28. And
again, not only that he who kills his Brother, but that whosoever is angry
without a cause, especially if he proceed to reproachful language, shall be in
danger of the same judgment, to which the murderer is obnoxious, v. 22. of the
same Chapter. And indeed, though there appear not any clear indications in the
Commandments themselves of their descending to those lesser sins, yet forasmuch
as we find the Tenth Commandment descending so low as to forbid the very
roveting that which is another man's, and again the other parts of the Law and
the Prophets forbidding the lower degrees of unchastity and malice, as has
been before shown; there is reason enough to believe, those lower degrees were
intended to be forbidden by it, as well as the higher ones. For the other parts
of the Law and the Prophets being but as Comments upon the Decalogue, as
appears by Gods laying that as the foundation of all the rest, and its own
containing in it the general heads of our obedience; whatsoever is forbidden by
the other parts of the Law and the Prophets, must be supposed to be included in
those grosser fins of the same kind, which the Decalogue takes notice of.

3. The third thing observable concerning the Ten Commandments, is, that though
all of them, except the last, take no notice of any other than the outward
actions; yet the actions of the inward man, or the heart are no less comprised
in the several Precepts and Prohibitions of it. For beside that (as was before
said) the Law of God is by the Psalmist said to be a law converting the soul,
Psalm. 17.9. and by S. Paul termed spiritual, Romans 7.14. That first and great
Commandment, in which all our duty to God is comprehended, is expressed by our
loving God with all our heart and soul, as well as with all our might and
strength, Mat. 22.38. And though the second be not expressed in like manner, to
wit, that of loving our Neighbors as our selves, yet as the affection of the
heart is manifestly included in the word love, which is the proper act of it,
so the Law is express, that we should not hate our brother in our heart, nor
bear a grudge against the children of our people. But because this argument
has been sufficiently exemplified in the several Precepts of the Decalogue, I
will proceed to my

4. Rule which is, That not only the sins here mentioned are forbidden, but all
those things that lead to them; as on the other side, not only that the duties
there expressed are under command, but all those means that naturally tend to
them: for being the end does depend upon the means, and either follows, or
follows not, according as they are made use of, or omitted; he that commands
any end must necessarily be thought to command the means, as on the other side
he that forbids the end to forbid the other. Thus forasmuch as drunkenness
leads to lust, and immoderate anger to murder, were there no other Precepts to
make them unlawful, those of Murder and Adultery would, because intemperance
and immoderate anger naturally lead to them.

5. (For to enumerate more particulars, would perhaps serve rather to forestall
the ensuing discourse, than to clear our way to it) Whatsoever either the Old,
or New Testament, proposes concerning piety and virtue, as it may fairly
enough be reduced to some Precept or other of the Decalogue, as will appear
when we come to discuss them; so considering it, as our Catechism does, as an
abstract of all moral duties, it will be necessary to take that course in the
explication of it.

6. Lastly, for though matter of duty be the principal thing here intended, yet
that duty has promises annexed to it; Whatsoever is here annexed by way of
promise, though more peculiarly concerning the Jews, does yet appertain to us
also. For being whatsoever was written aforetime was written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans
15.4. being the Author to the Hebrews applies that promise to all Christians,
which was spoken particularly to Joshua, and upon a particular occasion, Heb.
13.5. it is much more reasonable to believe those promises to belong to us,
which are annexed to the Ten Commandments, because they are no less our duty,
than those to whom they were first given. And therefore, as S. Paul, when to
show the equity of Christian children's obedience to parents, alleged the
words of the fifth Commandment, Ephe. 6.2. so he forgot not to add the promise
annexed of its being well with us, and living long upon the earth; all which
had been very impertinent, if the promise as well as duty had not been our
concernment as well as the Jews. Allowance only would be made for the
difference there is between the Law and the Gospel as to temporal promises, but
what that difference is, and what allowance ought to be made for it, will fall
in more seasonably, when I come to entreat of the fifth Commandment, to which
therefore I shall reserve the distinct handling of it.

Having thus prepared my way to the explication of the Ten Commandments, by
showing the nature and obligation of the divine Laws, and particularly of this,
with the measure whereby we are to proceed in the explication of them; it
remains that we descend to the Commandments themselves, and consider the
several duties that are wrapped up in them. But because the Lawgiver himself,
before he proceeds to the several Precepts of the Decalogue, labors to stir up
the Israelites to yield obedience to them by the consideration of that great
mercy of Gods toward them in bringing them out of the Land of Egypt, I will,
for a conclusion of this discourse, show what like ties he has upon us to the
performance of the same duties. And here in the first place, it is not to be
forgotten, because that is the first root and foundation of all our obligation
to him, that he, who exacts our obedience, is he that made us, he from whom we
receive our life, and breath, and all things conducing to the support of it.
For as it is but reasonable in it self, that God should exact the obedience of
those, who are made and sustained by him, so it is no less reasonable, that we
should pay him that obedience, who receive so great a favor from him. But not
to insist upon so remote an obligation, who have so many that are much more
near and pressing to us Christians, consider we in the second place, that he,
who immediately bound this Law upon us, has bought us with his most precious
blood. An argument I the rather insist upon, because it carries with it, an
exact correspondency to that mercy, which God made use of to persuade his own
people to obedience. For as the deliverance of the Jews out of Egypt was a
deliverance from a cruel bondage, and such as neither before nor since any
Nation groaned under, so our redemption by Christ was a deliverance from a more
cruel bondage, because from a spiritual one. We were in bondage to our own
hearts lusts, we were in bondage to Satan and his instruments, a Master, who
after all our toil would have paid us no other wages than death, and an eternal
separation from God. Again, whereas the Jewish Lawgiver delivered them from
their bondage, by the blood of the Paschal Lamb, and of their enemies, he who
bound the same Law upon us purchased us, not indeed by the blood of Lambs, or
of other men, but (which is much more considerable) by his own. Now if a
deliverance out of Egypt were so strong an obligation to obedience, that God
himself should lay the stress of the whole Law of Moses on it, how great a one
may we suppose it to be to be delivered from sin, and Satan, and death, and
that too by the blood of him by whom that Law was imposed on us? Certainly if
any redemption be a just incentive to obedience, a redemption from such a
servitude, and in such a manner must be, and we who are so bought, obliged to
glorisie God both in our bodies, and in our spirits which are his. We are not
as yet at an end of the obligations the divine goodness has laid upon us to
yield obedience to these his Laws. For whereas God, though he delivered the
Jess from their Egyptian bondage, yet brought them into another, from a
servitude in making bricks to a servitude in observing many unprofitable Rites
and Ceremonies, our Lawgiver on the contrary has delivered us from the
bondage of corruption to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; that is to
say (for what Son is there, that is not under obedience?) to the obedience of
Sons, to a service which is both easy and ingenuous. We are not now, as they,
under a yoke of ceremonial rites and ordinances, we are not treated as slaves,
nor indeed as servants; what becomes a Son to do and a Father to exact, what is
just, and equitable, and ingenuous, that and that alone is the rule of our
obedience. Which yet neither does he so exact, as to cast us off for every
transgression of it, for every weak or indeed wilful deviation from it; but,
after the manner of tender Fathers, passes by our lesser errors, and upon our
repentance, and amendment, receives us into favor after grosser ones. Lastly,
as our Lawgiver admits us to an ingenuous and easy service, as he is moreover
gracious and merciful in the exacting of it; so he furnishes us with ability
to perform all those things which he does so mercifully exact. For of his
fullness (says S. John) have we all received, and grace for grace, Joh. 1.16.
Now as the assistance of the divine grace removes all pretexts of our inability
to perform what he requires, and consequently leaves those inexcusable who come
short in the doing of it; so can it not but be a powerful inducement to yield
obedience to his Laws from whom that assistance is derived. For when he who is
the giver of the Law is also assisting to the doing of it, when he does (as the
Apostle speaks) (...), and bear a part of that burden which he has laid upon
us, what ingratitude must it be to withdraw our shoulders from it, and refuse
to obey him, who does not only impose a light burden upon us, but contributes
also to the sustaining of it? Thus though the deliverance from Egypt cannot be
pressed upon us, as an inducement to yield obedience to this Royal Law, yet
there want not others of the like nature, but of far greater force, to endear
its obedience to us; and then I hope it will be no diminution to it, if instead
of I am the Lord thy God who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage, we substitute, I am the Lord thy God who, beside the common
benefit of thy creation, have delivered thee from sin and hell, and both given
thee a more ingenuous and easy service, and ability to undergo it.

THE FIRST COMMANDMENT.
THE FIRST COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall have no other Gods or before me.
but me.

PART I.
The Contents.
The Commandment divided into three Capital Precepts. I. That we have the one
true God for our God. II. That we look upon the God of Israel as such. III.
That we have no other Gods beside him. Of the first Capital Precept, and what
is meant by the having the One true God for our God, which is shown in the
General to be no other, than our owning him as such. An address to a more
Particular Explication of it, where is premised a brief account of the Nature
and Attributes of God, how the knowledge thereof is to be attained, and of what
necessity such a knowledge is.

IT is easy to observe, upon a Superficial view of this first Commandment, that
the whole of it may be comprised in these three Capital Precepts. 1. That we
have the one true God for our God, 2. That we look upon the God of Israel as
such, and 3. and lastly that we have no other Gods besides him. For as the last
of these is the very letter of the Commandment, and therefore not at all to be
doubted of; so the two former, though not expressed, yet are manifestly
implied, in the Commandment, and the preamble to it. For inasmuch as The God of
Israel prefaceth it with the declaration of his being the Lord our God, and in
the body thereof forbids the having of any other before, or besides himself, he
manifestly supposes the having of himself, and the true, as well as the not
having any other. In the mean time, if that alone be not sufficient to
persuade, the rule before laid down, and the abstract which Christ has given
of the duties of the first Table will. For if every negative in the Decalogue
do include the affirmative, if the loving the Lord our God, which is no other
than the God of Israel, with all our heart, and mind, and strength, be the
abstract or summary of the Commandments of the first Table; either that, which
is an abstract, or summary, must contain more in it, than that of which it is
one, or we must be supposed to be obliged to the having the one true God, and
the God of Israel, as well as to the not having of any other.

I. I begin with the first of these, even the having the one true God for our
God, prescinding from the consideration of the God of Israel's being he. Where
not to insist upon the difference that seems to be between the Hebrew and our
English, because the difference is merely verbal, it being all one in sense,
There shall not be to thee any other Gods, and Thou shall not have any other
Gods before me, I will proceed to enquire both in the general and in
particular, what is meant by the having of a God.

1. Now the force of that expression (which will furnish us with a general
explication) will soon appear, if these two things be considered, 1. That that
which is required of us, must be somewhat, that depends upon our will, and 2.
That the authority of God depends no farther upon that, than as to our owning
or acknowledging it. Forasmuch as nothing can be the matter of a command, but
what is in the power of our will, either to embrace or refuse, and the
authority of God depends no farther upon our will, than as to our owning or
acknowledging it; it follows that when we are commanded to have the one true
God for our God, according as the affirmative part of this Precept imports, the
meaning thereof can be no other, than that we own him as such: as, on the other
side, that when we are required not to have any other Gods beside, that we own
no other in that relation. Neither is the expression here made use of any whit
disagreeing from what we have said to be intended by it. For as in the language
of S. Paul men are said to be the servants of him to whom they yield obedience,
so by the same proportion of speech to have him for their God, whom they own
and revere as such. And indeed, though in a sense we may be all said to have
one and the same God, because we are all subject to the same, yet in strictness
of speech no man can be said to have any one for his God, whom he does not some
way revere as such. For the word have supposing our admittance of that which we
are said to have, if we do not admit of him and his authority, neither can we
be said to have him, and consequently neither to perform that which this
Precept requires of us. Add hereunto, which will farther confirm this notion,
what our Savior has affirmed to be the sum and substance of the first table
of the Decalogue; for if the duties of the first table be comprised in that
Precept, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and soul, and
strength, according as our Savior has affirmed, then must the having him for
our God, which is the first and chiefest Precept of it, be our owning him as
such, our having that affection and esteem for him which is due unto a God.

2. Having thus shown in the general what it is to have the Lord for our God,
even to own and revere him as such, we are in the next place to enquire more
particularly, how that is to be done; and what respect is due unto him as a
God. But because that is not to be known, and much less to be performed without
the knowledge of the nature and attributes of God, and I have before said, that
what is prerequired to any thing enjoined, is to be supposed to be enjoined by
the same Commandment; therefore before I proceed to show what respect is due
unto him, I must show,

1. What the nature and attributes of God are. 2. How the knowledge thereof is
to be attained, and 3. And lastly the necessity thereof.
1. I begin with the last of these, because the first in order to be known,
even the necessity of our knowledge of God, which will appear from what was
before intimated concerning the impossibility of our giving him that honor
which is due, without it. For all honor being founded in the apprehension of
those excellencies which we behold in another, if the excellencies of the
divine nature be either not at all, or but superficially known, our honor of
it must be accordingly, and consequently no way suitable to the Divine Majesty.
And hence Joh. 17.3. the knowledge of God and Christ is set to denote all that
which is necessary to eternal life. For this (says that Evangelist) is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
Not that this alone is sufficient to qualify us for Heaven (for Faith, and
Love, and all other Graces of the Spirit are necessary to the attaining of it)
but that this is the basis and foundation of all the rest, neither can we
either love, or trust in him, or adore him, if we have not a due knowledge of
him.

2. The necessity of the knowledge of God being thus evinced, pass we in the
second place to the means whereby that knowledge is to be attained; which is
either, 1. the light of Reason and Nature, or 2. of Revelation and Scripture.
That God may be known by the former of these ways S. Paul evidently declares,
Romans 1.19, 20. For that (says he) which may be known of God is manifest in
them, for God has showed it unto them; for the invisible things of him from
the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his eternal power and Godhead. It is true indeed, what through
the present weakness of humane nature, and Gods just desertion of it, because
of our many provocations, we cannot so easily, or so perfectly attain to the
knowledge of him by the light of reason and nature: But as this hinders not,
but that God may be knowable by it, because the eyes of our understandings are
become less apt to discern it; so he, that shall seriously set himself to
contemplate the works of nature, will find no contemptible footsteps of the
Deity upon them. But because I have Explication of the Apostles Creed.
elsewhere given a specimen of what is knowable by this light, in my discourse
upon that Article of the Creed concerning God the Father, and because it is
most certain that whatever may be knowable by it, the best of us find it
difficult enough to deduce the nature of God from it; therefore consider we in
the second place that more certain one, even the light of Revelation and
Scripture. For as no one can be supposed to give us a more perfect account of
the nature of God than he himself can, and consequently, that which comes
immediately from him must be preferred before all other ways of knowing him, so
cannot that account but be thought the most easy and intelligible, because
added in consideration of our inability to discern it by the help of our own
reason. For after that 1 Cor. 1.21.
in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. Besides, when that which
may be known of God from the works of the Creation cannot be deduced but by a
long train of consequences, the Scriptures give us direct and manifest notices
of it, they present him to us, not as in a glass, that is to say, by reflection
and obscurely, but, as I may so speak, face to face. And therefore, being now
to set before you the nature and attributes of God, so far forth as shall be
necessary to let us know what regard we ought to have for him, I will borrow my
description of it from the Scripture, which is more exact and intelligible,
rather than from the light of nature, which is both more imperfect and obscure.
This only would be premised as well to set bounds to our own enquiries, as to
enhance that respect which we ought to have for the Divine Majesty, that being
infinite in his nature and attributes, according as has been elsewhere
Explication of the Apostles Creed.
shown, and shall be farther in the conclusion of this discourse, whatsoever
knowledge we or any other creature may have of him, yet we cannot hope to
comprehend him; in which sense some have with great probability understood that
of S. Paul, that he dwells in that light to which no man can approach, and
that no man either has seen him or can, 1 Timothy 6.16. Now if it should be
demanded (which ought to be the end of all our enquiries in this matter) what
this incomprehensibility of God exacts of us, and by what means we may own him
as such; I answer, by an humble and silent admiration of this his
unintelligible perfection. For as that Painter, who drew a veil over the face
of a sad Mother, did thereby better express the passion he was to represent,
than he could have done by the saddest aspect he could have delineated, because
that veil, which he drew over it, did tacitly insinuate, that the grief was not
capable of being expressed; so cannot we give a greater evidence of our owning
the immensity of the Divine Nature than by our silent admiration of it. For
this shows the Divine Nature to be such as we can never hope to conceive, and
much less be able to express.

3. Having premised thus much as a limit to our own enquiries, and as a
supplement to those imperfect discoveries we shall be able to make of the
Divine Majesty, proceed we according to our proposed method to the observation
of so much as is knowable from the Scriptures concerning the Nature and
Attributes of God. And

1. First of all for the Nature of God the Scripture is express, that it is
spiritual, for so our Savior, Joh. 4.24. God is a spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth; that is to say, (for this
is the best description we can give of a spirutal nature) he is such a
substance as is exempt from the Laws and affections of bodies, he is not
capable of being divided or circumscribed. Neither does it make ought against
this assertion, that we find God frequently described with Eyes, and Ears, and
Hands, and other the parts of a body. For as he, who would explain any thing to
a child or other weak person, must suit his discourse to the capacity of him,
whom he has taken upon him to instruct; so God being to instruct mankind, and
particularly the common sort of it who understand nothing beyond what they see
and feel, was necessarily to make known his own Nature and Attributes, not by
such discoveries as were most proper to declare it, but by such things as the
capacity of them, whom he was to instruct, was best able to apprehend. Now as
no man would infer from the explication that is made of any thing to a child,
that the thing it self is altogether such as it is described to him, because
such a one is rather to be instructed by such things as are most obvious to
him, than by the proper notices thereof; so neither can any from the bodily
representation that is made of God, that God has indeed such parts and
members, as he is there described withal; because the weakness of the common
sort requires that the nature of God be represented by the things of sense,
which alone they have any knowledge of. Besides, as there was a necessity of
Gods describing his power and providence by Hands and Eyes, as in like manner,
other Attributes of his by such parts of humane bodies, which hold most
correspondence with them, and consequently nothing of corporeity to be
attributed to him because of it; so God himself has given us sufficiently to
understand that he would have those descriptions interpreted rather as Emblems
and Pictures, than as rigid definitions of his nature. For beside the express
affirmation of his being a spirit, with which the affections of bodies are not
consistent, he frequently asks the makers of Images, To whom they will liken
God, or what likeness they will compare unto him; and this too, as you may see,
Isa. 40.17. upon the account of that vast distance, that is between him and all
the Nations of the World. Which kind of questions being tantamount to a
negation, it follows that however God be sometime described as a humane body,
yet he has no affinity with them, nor with any other how glorious soever.

2. From the nature of God, pass we to his Attributes, which for our more
orderly proceeding, may be reduced to these two heads, to wit, 1. Either such
as are radicated in his nature, or 2. As result from his operations.


1. The former of these are again double, commonly called Incommunicable or
Communicable, that is to say, such of which there is no resemblance in the
creatures, or such of which there is. Of the former of these sorts are these
four, his independency, his unchangeableness, his omnipresence, and eternity,
each of which has the astipulation of the Scripture, and therefore to be
considered by us. That God is independent of any other, either as to his being
or subsistence, S. Paul evidently declares, Act. 17.25. for inasmuch as he
gives to all life and breath and all things, he himself cannot depend upon
them for his own, and consequently is independent of any other. There is the
same evidence from Scripture concerning Gods unchangeableness, either in his
nature, or resolutions. For they (says the Psalmist) shall perish, but thou
shall endure, yea all of them shall wax old as does a garment, but thou art the
same and thy years shall have no end. Psalm. 102.26, 27. And again, with him is
no variableness, neither shadow of turning, says S. James, c. 1.17. Lastly, as
God is independent and unchangeable, so is he omnipresent and eternal; witness
for the former that known place of the Psalmist, Psalm. 139.7. and so on;
Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there. If I make my bed in hell, behold
thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost
part of the sea, Even there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand
shall hold me. For the latter, the same Psalmist, Plal. 90.2. For from
everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

Next to his incommunicable Attributes, consider we his Communicable ones, that
is to say, such of which there is some image in the creatures; in each of which
we shall find the same consent of Scripture, as we found before in his
incommunicable ones. To begin with his Mercy and Goodness, because the
Scripture itself tells us that that is above all his works; how did he himself
triumph in it when he proclaimed his own Glory? For thus, Exodus 34.6. when he
passed before Moses, he proclaimed himself to be the Lord, even the Lord
merciful and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth;
Keeping mercy for thou sands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. Next
to his mercy consider we his Justice, because proclaimed in the same breath, he
himself there adding, that he was one that would by no means clear the guilty,
but visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens
children, v. 7. of that chapter. As in like manner, though more fully
elsewhere; for all his ways are judgment, a God of truth, and without iniquity,
just and right is he, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Where we have not only a declaration of his
Justice in the largest acception of the word, but a declaration also of his
Truth, another Attribute of his, and therefore to be considered by us. But
because this as others of them are so frequently mentioned in Scripture, that
no man can be supposed to be ignorant of it, I will add only for a confirmation
of it, that he is so much a God of truth, that he is by S. Paul said to be, The
God that cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. Lastly (for these things are so notorious from
the Scripture, that it will be but lost labor to go about to prove them) as he
is a God of Mercy, and Justice, and Truth, so he is a God of Glory, and Power,
and Wisdom. And more than this I shall not need to add concerning such
Attributes, as are radicated in the Divine Nature, unless it be, that whereas
in created beings they are finite and limited, in God they are infinite and
unlimited. But so that they are, the Scripture gives us to understand, either
in express terms, or such as do necessarily infer it; that affirming in one
place Psalm. 147.5.
that his understanding is infinite, as in another Isai. 40.17.
that all nations and their several excellencies are before him as nothing, yea
less than nothing and vanity, which is in effect to say, that God himself is
infinite: They being not to be said to be as nothing yea less than nothing in
comparison of him, who hold any proportion to him, as they must be said to do,
if God himself were finite.

2. One only Attribute remains, even that which we have said to flow from his
operations, I mean his Sovereignty and Dominion. Concerning which, to omit
others, that of S. Paul may suffice, Act. 17.24. where we have not only the
world, and all things therein, affirmed to be made by him, but he himself for
that reason styled the Lord of heaven and earth, that is to say (for so both
the term of heaven and earth, and the procedure of that argument show) the Lord
of all the world, and of all things therein contained.

PART II.
That to have the One true God for our God is to own him as such both in Soul
and Body, and in all the faculties and powers of each. An account of what
acknowledgment is due to God from the Soul, and particularly from that great
faculty thereof the Understanding: Which is shown to consist, first in a right
apprehension of his Nature and Attributes, secondly in a serious and frequent
reflection on them, and thirdly in a firm belief of what he affirms. An
enquiry thereupon into the just object of Faith, the Congruity or rather
essentiality thereof to the Economy of the Gospel, and how we own God for our
God by it.

HAving given you an account in the foregoing discourse of the Nature and
Attributes of God, together with the infiniteness thereof, as also shown that
to have him for our God is no other than to own him as such, it remains only
that we enquire, how that is to be done, and what respect is due unto him as a
God. For the resolution whereof 1. The first thing I shall return is, that we
are to own him both in the inward and outward man. For beside that Soul and
Body are equally his, by right of creation, preservation and redemption, and
consequently, an acknowledgement to be made by each, we are expressly required
by S. Paul to glorify God in our body, and in our spirit, which are his, 1
Cor. 6.20. But from hence it will follow, 2. That we are to own him for our
God in all the faculties and powers both of the one and the other. Which is
farther confirmed, as to the Soul especially, by Gods requiring us to love him
with all our heart, and soul and might, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Neither let any man say,
that this concerns only the passion of love, and therefore not to be extended
to other expresses of it. For as we are elsewhere required to fear and trust in
the same God, which shows that the other are not excluded; our Savior assuring
us (as he does Mat. 22.27, etc.
) that upon that great Commandment hangs all the Law and the Prophets as to our
duty to our Maker, it is evident it was intended to comprehend all other ways
and means, whereby we are in a capacity to honor him. The only remaining
difficulty is, what acknowledgment each faculty is to make, which accordingly I
come now to consider.


1. To begin with the Soul, because the chief seat of piety and all other
virtues, and because God professes especially to require it. Where following
the usual division of its faculties I will enquire, 1. What is due to God from
our understanding? 2. What is due unto him from our wills, and 3. And lastly,
what is due unto him from our affections.


1. Now to own God in our Understandings, which is the first of the faculties
before remembered, implies in it these three thing. 1. A right apprehension of
his Nature and Attributes. 2. A serious and frequent reflection on them, and 3.
And lastly a firm belief of what he affirms.

1. Of the first of these there cannot be the least doubt, that it is required
of us toward the owning him for our God. For beside that that is one of the
prime acts of our Understanding, and therefore to pay God its acknowledgment,
the neglect thereof casts us unavoidably upon that error, against which this
first Commandment was principally intended; to fail in our apprehension of God
being not to own the nature of God, but a fancy and imagination of our own. And
accordingly, as S. Paul stuck not to tell the Athenians, that they ought not to
think the Godhead was like unto Gold, or Silver, or stone graven by art, and
man's device, Act. 17.29. So he charges upon the heathen in general the vanity
of their imaginations concerning him, and which is more, makes that the ground
of Gods giving them over to those abominable crimes into which they fell, Romans
1.29. Taking it therefore for granted, as we very well may, that we ought to
have a right apprehension of Gods nature and Attributes, nothing remains to be
enquired into, but what that apprehension is, from what measures it is to be
taken, and what is to be done by us toward the attaining and preserving of it.
Of the two former of these I have discoursed already in the foregoing
discourse, and must therefore remand you thither for your satisfaction; it
shall content me, and may you, to insist upon the last, and show what is to be
done by us toward the attaining or preserving it. And here very opportunely
comes in that which is generally recommended by the Pythagoreans toward the
attaining of Philosophical knowledge, even the purifying our minds from all
those earthly and sensual affections, to which we are so fatally inclined. For
our understandings being apt to judge of things, not according as they are in
themselves, but as they best suit with our corrupt affections, till the mind be
well purged from these, it is impossible we should entertain any apprehensions
of God, which are not some way or other vitiated by them. And accordingly as
some of the Heathen (because led thereto by their own necessities and
appetites) have been so stupid as to think the immortal Gods did eat and drink
like us, so others so depraved in their conceptions, as to believe them tainted
with the lusts of humane nature, to have the same sinful passions and
affections with themselves. Witness their reporting them to descend from heaven
to enjoy female beauties, to maintain animosities among themselves, and espouse
those of men, their making some of them the Patrons of fraud and cousenage, and
others again of intemperance and debauchery, their appointing a third sort to
preside over the Amors of men, and both to kindle and maintain their loose and
sometimes unnatural flames. Of all which misapprehensions the great, if not
only cause was, the passion they themselves had for them, and that esteem and
value they were wont to set upon them; the Heathen no less fondly, than
impiously, conceiting, because these things gratifyed their own corrupt
inclinations, that they afforded the same gusto to the powers above, and were
the object of their affections and desires. Forasmuch therefore as the minds of
men are so apt to be debauched by their corrupt affections, it is but necessary
toward a right apprehension of God that our hearts should be first purged from
them, and we become if not wholly spiritual, yet less sensual in our desires.
Now though that may seem a hard task to effect (as I doubt not it may prove so
at the first, to those who have been accustomed to indulge them) yet the
difficulty will be much diminished, and in fine wholly removed, by considering
both how unworthy they are of rational creatures, and with what evil
consequences they are usually attended. For as the pleasures before spoken of
are more the pleasures of beasts than men, and by them more fully and
exquisitely enjoyed; so the effect of them is no other than to produce in us
low and abject minds, crazy, diseased, and at length putrid bodies. The heart
being thus purged from all earthly and sensual affections, toward which I have
over and above represented the most effectual expedients, we are in the next
place, to lift up our minds or thoughts from the contemplation of corporeal
beings to the consideration of spiritual ones. For as it is not to be expected,
that they who accustom themselves to look no farther than their senses, should
ever conceive rightly of a spiritual object; it being impossible for men's
apprehensions to rise higher than the fountain from which they proceed: so that
depraved custom was no doubt the first original of the Heathens believing God
to have a body like themselves, with the infirmities and accidents thereof.
They inured themselves to consider of nothing, but what they saw and felt, they
chained their thoughts to the things and occurrences of the world, and, having
no knowledge of God, but from the Traditions of their fathers, they were
thereby tempted to conceive of him as corporeal also, and that he was only a
more glorious one. After the same manner, as one has happily compared it, that
people always bred in Country Towns and Villages, judge of those Cities they
never saw, by proportion to the Market Town to which they resort, or of the
Palaces of Princes by the houses of their Landlords. Now as to undeceive such
people, the only way would be to lead them from their own homes, and show them
some more glorious Town or House, than any they had formerly been acquainted
with; so I know not a more proper expedient to regulate men's apprehensions
concerning God, than by inuring them to the consideration of spiritual things:
such as are for example, the nature of our own Understanding and Will, the
Sciences which perfect the one, and the Moral excellencies of the other. For as
these are the things by which we most resemble him whom we are commanded to own
for our God, so by the serious consideration thereof we should at length
disentangle our selves from the things of sense, by which we are fastened to the
earth, and make both a more free and prosperous flight to Heaven. Lastly, as it
is necessary to have our thoughts lifted up from the contemplation of corporeal
beings to the consideration of more refined ones; so also, if we would attain a
right apprehension of God, to apply our selves to a serious and deliberate
consideration of his immense nature and perfections. For as few things are
rightly apprehended, when either superficially considered, or looked upon with
a transient eye; so much less may we think the nature of God will, which cannot
be comprehended by us, though we should employ our whole life in the
consideration of it.

2. Having thus dispatched what we have said to be first implied in the owning
of God in our Understandings, even a right apprehension of his nature and
perfections, I proceed unto a second, which is the recalling of those
perfections to our mind, and both seriously and frequently contemplating them.
Which duty I do the rather inculcate, as because it is a tribute which God has
expressly exacted, Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator, etc.
and concerning which therefore there cannot be the least doubt but that we are
thus to own him in our Understandings; so because the neglect of it seems to me
to be the great cause of that irreligion, which is in the Christian world. For
as what through the translation of the Scripture into our own tongue, and the
constant explication of it, it is hardly possible for us to avoid a competent
knowledge of our duty; so we cannot but in our own thoughts assent to the
practice of it, and adjudge it both reasonable and profitable to be performed.
But to what then can we attribute our neglect of what we are so persuaded of,
but to our own want of consideration? For the will naturally and almost
necessarily following the dictates of our understanding, what should hinder men
from doing that which they know to be both reasonable and useful, if they kept
their eye upon it, and contemplated what they could not choose but know? And
accordingly S. Peter in the first Chapter of his second Epistle does not only
affirm, that he would not be negligent to put those he wrote to in remembrance
of some things though they knew them, and were established in the present
truth, v. 12. of that chapter, but in the 13. verse again, that he thought it
meet as long as he was in this tabernacle to stir them up by putting them in
remembrance, and yet a third time v. 15. that he would endeavor that they
might be able after his decease to have the same things always in remembrance;
plainly implying by his so frequent inculcating of the duty of remembrance,
that it was through the want of that, that men apostatized from their duty, and
neglected those things they were not only persuaded to be just, but necessary
to their own eternal welfare. And indeed, as men may learn many things from
their own practice, no less than from the proper rule of truth, the Scriptures,
wherefore do the profane ones of the world so carefully avoid the conversing
with their own thoughts, or listening to the advices of religious persons, but
that they find the revolving them in their minds would even constrain them to
their duty, and make them abandon those lusts that are inconsistent with it?
Thus whether we do reflect upon our own practice, or Scripture, or reason, we
shall find the great cause of men's irreligion to be the want of such a
consideration, and consequently that it is no more than necessary to call the
things of Religion to our mind, and particularly him who is both the object and
the Author of it. These two things only seem necessary to be added, for our
more advantageous performing of it. 1. That though all the Attributes of God
call for our remembrance, and accordingly are to have it in their turn, yet we
are especially to call those to our mind by which our affections are most
likely to be influenced, and our hearts incited to embrace him. For though God
do also require to be owned by us in our Understandings, yet more especially in
our hearts, and consequently those Attributes to have the greatest share in our
thoughts, by which our hearts and affections are most apt to be inflamed. 2.
Again, though all the Attributes of God are to have a share in our remembrance,
and particularly those which are most operative upon our affections, so such of
them especially, as are most suitable to our present necessities and temper,
because those are the most likely to advantage us. Thus though the honest but
desponding person suffer his thoughts to be taken up especially with the
consideration of Gods infinite Love and Mercy to sinful man, yet it will be
more proper for the presumptuous and disobedient to reflect upon the Majesty
and Justice of the Almighty, as by which he may be most effectually drawn to
the owning him for his God.

3. The third act of the Understanding follows, even the believing what God
affirms, concerning which I will show these three things.

1. First of all, its just extent and latitude. 2. The congruity of this virtue
of Faith to our present state, and, 3. And lastly how we own God for our God by
it.
1. To begin with the first of these, even the extent of Faith, concerning
which I shall first of all observe, that it is to reach to every thing which
shall be found to be affirmed by the Almighty: Whether it be delivered by way
of narration, or prediction, as a thing that either is or was, or shall
hereafter come to pass. Thus for example, if God declare to me that he is
merciful and just, and that it is his pleasure we should be so also, that he
has in ancient times given instances of both those Attributes in the
redemption of mankind and the rejection of the Angels, and that he will give
more signal ones hereafter at the great judgment day; I am equally to receive
each of these into my assent, and believe that they are, and have, and shall
be, according as he himself has declared. For being alike the subject of Gods
affirmation, I am in reason to give up my assent to each of them in what manner
soever they be delivered. Which observation I do the rather set before you,
because, how trivial soever it may seem to be in its self, yet the weakness
shall I say, or rather impiety of the present age has made it necessary to be
represented; men commonly conceiving of faith, as an assent only to those
gracious promises, which it has pleased God to make to sinful man. By which
means as they have been induced to have little regard to the other Articles of
our belief, so much less to the Commandments of the Almighty, which yet, as
they are equally the object of our faith, so the practice thereof is the means
whereby those promises are to be attained, upon which that Faith of theirs is
founded. I observe secondly, that our Faith is not only to extend it self to
all Gods affirmations, in what manner soever delivered, but also to all of
them, whatsoever the subject matter thereof be, and how contrary soever in
appearance to the dictates of our own reason. For if Gods affirmation be the
ground of our belief, wheresoever that ground is, it is equally to be afforded,
whatsoever be the subject matter of it. Thus for example, if the doctrine of
the Trinity how unintelligible soever to us, do appear to be a revelation of
God's, it may and ought to challenge our assent no less than his affirmation of
those things, which we have not only no prejudice against, but the dictates of
our own reason to confirm us in. Lastly (for this is no less necessary to be
observed than the former, because we have now no immediate revelations from
God) we are to yield up our assent, not only to what God affirms to us with his
own mouth, but also to what he declares by men inspired by him, and witnessed
to by miracles from himself; that is to say, by his servants the Prophets and
Apostles, and particularly that great Prophet and Apostle the ever Blessed
Jesus: What any one affirms by another, being equally his affirmation, with
that which he affirms by himself. But from hence it will follow, that we are to
give up our belief to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and to all
things therein contained. For these having been Explication of the Apostles
Creed.
elsewhere shown to have been written by men divinely inspired, and witnessed
to by God himself, they are equally the word of God with that which he himself
delivers, and consequently claim an equal share in our belief.

2. Of the extent of our belief I have spoken hitherto, and shown what is the
just object of it; proceed we therefore in the second place to evince its
congruity, or essentiality rather to the economy of the Gospel, and our
present state under it. For the evidencing whereof not to tell you, which yet I
very well might, that the doctrine of the Gospel is every where styled the
Faith of Christ, nor yet that the Heathens Vid. Orig. contra Celsum lib. 6.
page 282.
objected nothing more against Christianity, than its calling upon men simply
to believe it, I will remit you to that most full and pertinent saying of S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 1.21. Where he tells us, that after that in the wisdom of God the
world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to
save them that believe; plainly intimating, that whereas before God led men to
Salvation by wisdom and knowledge, now his intention was they should go to it
by Faith, that is to say, by believing what was preached to them, by those whom
he commissionated, and witnessed to by miracles. But from hence it will follow,
1. That they do in effect renounce Christianity, who receive not the doctrines
of it upon the Authority of him that revealed them, as well as upon the grounds
of reason. For that is in truth to disown that Faith we are to walk by, and to
yield up our assent, not to Christ whose the doctrines are, but to our own only
reason and judgment: Which though it do in fine terminate in God, whose candle
that reason of ours is, and consequently does so far glorify him, yet has not
the least aspect upon the veracity of God in Christ, upon which they are
proposed to the world. The same is much more to be said 2. Of those who will
walk no farther with their Faith, than the light of their own reason will
accompany them. For this is manifestly to subject the Faith to it, and to walk
rather by sight than by faith. And hence, when any thing is proposed to them
which carries any seeming opposition to it, we find it presently discarded, as
is notorious in the instances of the Trinity and of the Incarnation of the
second Person in it, doctrines which yet have as clear a foundation in the
Scripture, as any other doctrines of it. Hence also (which yet, if duly
considered, is not so dissonant to our apprehensions) the resurrection of the
dead has lately run the same fate; men having been taught to believe, that to
salve that it is reason enough that some body or other shall be united to the
Soul, which how it agrees with the nature of a resurrection and the doctrine of
the Gospel concerning it, I shall leave all sober men to judge. But who sees
not, that by this means the faith of Christ is manifestly discarded, and they
deny that in their opinions and assertions, which in words they profess to
believe? For if my faith shall not carry me any farther than my own judgment
does, it is a sign that is the thing that moves me, and that I walk rather by
sight, or, to speak more properly, by an overweening conceit, than by the
conduct of a solid faith. Either therefore let men bid defiance to
Christianity, as that honest Heathen did, because they would believe nothing
but what they could understand, or let them give up their belief to the
doctrines of it, I do not say irrationally, but without any immediate assent of
their reason to the doctrines themselves. For though the forementioned
doctrines have not sufficient evidence to make them known, yet they have reason
enough to make them be believed, it being the highest reason in the world to
believe God, especially concerning his own nature, as who neither can deceive
nor be deceived.

3. Having thus given you an account of the extent of faith in God, and
moreover shown how congruous or rather how essential it is to the economy of
the Gospel, it remains only that I explain how we own God for ours by it. For
the evidencing whereof the first thing I shall allege, is our owning the truth
of God by it. For inasmuch as we neither do nor can give up our belief, but
where we are in some measure assured of the veracity of him whom we believe, by
believing whatsoever God affirms, we apparently acknowledge him to be true, and
as it were set our seal to it. But this is especially visible, when we give up
our assent to things unlikely, and such which it may be have a greater
appearance of falsehood than truth, because then there is nothing in the thing
it self to engage our assent, but on the contrary very much to stagger or
supplant it. Which notwithstanding therefore, if our belief be firm and
unshaken, it is a sign that it has a just apprehension of the veracity of the
Almighty, and receives it with an assent commensurate to its greatness, so far
as humane nature is able to proportion it. Now though this be the only direct
acknowledgment of the divine Majesty, which the believing what he affirms
presents him withal, yet because what he affirms does sometime require other
Attributes to establish it, hence it comes to pass that indirectly and by
consequence we acknowledge those Attributes also. For thus we acknowledge Gods
power, when like Abraham and the Virgin Mary, we believe God in such things as
are above the power of nature to produce; such as are the making a barren woman
to conceive by one who was equally unapt, or a Virgin to conceive and bring
forth a Son. In like manner, when we believe God assuring us, that,
notwithstanding our many errors, he will for the sake of his Son both pardon
and accept us, because that cannot have place without an excess of mercy in him
that promises it, we do by our belief give a testimony to that mercy of his,
upon which our pardon and acceptance does depend. Such are the ways whereby
our Understanding gives proof of our owning the Lord for our God, and therefore
if we would have ours thought to do so, we our selves must take the same
course, and not only endeavor to have a right apprehension of God, but have
him often in our thoughts, and steadfastly believe whatsoever he affirms.

PART III.
What it is to own God in our Wills, and in the proper or Elicite acts
thereof. This performed either by making Gods Glory the ultimate end of all our
actions, and acquiescing in it when obtained; or making his will ours both in
our Actions and Sufferings: The former whereof imports our choosing to act
agreeably to his will, our making that will of his the ground of our choice,
and our delighting in it; The latter, our submitting to, and embracing
whatsoever he is pleased to lay upon us. All the other powers of Soul and Body
in some measure under the Empire of the Will, for which cause it cannot be
thought to discharge its own duty, unless it incline them to own God for their
God. A discourse in the close concerning Trust in God, wherein is shown, in
what faculties it is seated, what the nature thereof is, and how we own God for
our God by it.

BY what ways, and after what manner we are to own God in our Understandings,
you have seen already, let us in the next place enquire,

2. What is due unto him from our Wills, and how they ought to be constituted
to own him as our God. For the resolution whereof we are to consider of the
diverse acts of the Will, which are either, 1. Elicite, or, 2. Imperate, that
is to say, such as proceed immediately from the Will, or such as proceed
immediately from some other power, but are excited by the command of it.


The Elicite acts of the Will are again double, according to the different
objects, about which they are employed. For, 1. Either they respect the end and
are called volition or fruition, or, 2. The means, as election and consent. Now
concerning each of these I shall enquire, how they ought to be constituted, so
as that we may thereby own the Lord for our God. This only would be premised
in the general, that to own God in our Wills, is to conform them unto his,
that is to say, to that which he Wills in himself, or is the result of his Will
concerning us. For as the greatest testimony we can give of our subjection to
another, is the conforming our Wills to his, the Will being of all the
faculties the most free from the command of others, and the most difficult to
be brought to a compliance with them; so nothing less than the greatest
testimony of our subjection can be supposed to be due to God, to whom we have
so many reasons to submit our selves, and particularly, because our Wills are
no less his than any other faculty. All therefore that will be requisite for us
to do, will be to resume each of the acts before remembered, and to show both
what Gods own volitions are, and what he wills concerning us.

1. I begin with the first of these, even that of Volition, whereby we will
that which is the end, which in the present case can be no other than the Glory
of God, and accordingly is the first thing we are taught to ask of God in the
prayer of our Savior. For as God who is the supremest good, cannot be thought
to have any higher end than that of showing forth his own glory, whence it is
that the Wise man affirms he has made all things for himself, Pro. 16.4. So
being (as was before observed) to conform our Wills to that of God, we are
accordingly to make that glory of his the ultimate end of all our actions, and
be carried toward it with the utmost of our desires. But so that it was Gods
Will also concerning us, the Apostle does more than intimate, Romans 11.36. For
not contented to say that as of him, so to him are all things, he subjoyns in
the close of it, to him be glory for ever and ever, Amen. The same is to be
said of that other act of the Will, fruition, or a complacency in the end when
it is obtained. For the glory of God being, by the former argumentation, to be
the ultimate object of our desires, it is in reason, when obtained, to become
the great object of our delight, and we not only to acquiesce, but to please
our selves chiefly in it. But so we find the will of the Psalmist to have been
disposed, Psalm. 73.25. Witness that most passionate expostulation of his, Whom
have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides,
or in comparison of thee. The only thing remaining to be enquired into on this
head is what the consequences of, such a desire, and delight are, which are in
short these two, 1. To prefer the glory of God before all desirable objects,
when they come in competition with it; and, 2. and chiefly, to subordinate all
other our desires and delights to those of the Glory of God. Thus for example,
though it be lawful for us to desire health and strength, with other the
conveniences of life, and the means of obtaining them; yet the last and chief
reason of our desiring them ought to be, not that we our selves may be thereby
made happy, but that we may thereby be enabled to glorify our maker, which is
the Supreme end of our creation. Otherwise we make not God, but our own
interests, and lusts, the ultimate object of our desires, and consequently make
them our God, and not him whom we profess to own.

From the willing of the end, pass we to the willing of the means the second
thing required of us toward the owning the Lord for our God; which as I have
already told you, we shall then effectually do, when we make his will ours; so
I intend now to show, what it is to make his will ours, and that both in our
Actions and Sufferings.

1. To begin with our Actions, as which are most apparently conducing to the
great end of our creation, the Glory of God, concerning which I shall first of
all observe, that we are to choose to regulate them, agreeably to the prescript
of Gods will. For otherwise we make not his will ours at all, but follow wholly
the inclinations of our own. But beside that we are to choose to order our
actions agreeably to the prescript of Gods will, we are also, if we will make
Gods will ours, to choose so to order them, because it is his will to have it
so. The reasonableness of which observation will appear if we look into the
world, and consider by what motives men are often guided in their several
choices. There is a sort of men who weighing the reasonableness of virtue, and
the necessity there is of it toward the procuring their both private and
public welfare, do upon that score alone apply themselves to it, and give many
notable proofs of their proficiency in it. Now though this be by all means to
be cherished and encouraged, as being a good step to that perfection which
Religion requires, yet if it rise no higher, it is in truth but a more splendid
sin, or as a learned Hieroc. in (...). v. 49. p. 234.
Heathen spoke in another case, an Atheistical virtue. For so long as the
things that are done, how agreeable soever to Gods will, yet are not performed
in obedience thereto, but out of the sense we have of the comeliness thereof,
or its necessity to humane life, so long we cannot be said to regulate our own
Wills by Gods; but by our own conveniences, as by which alone we are induced
to practice them. Thus for example, if, as it often happens, men should choose
to abstain from intemperance, not so much out of compliance with the divine
will, as because of its prejudicialness to their health, or other such
collateral considerations; in this case I say, they should not only not serve
the will of God, to which they are required to conform, but substitute
themselves in the place of God, which is the thing here expressly forbidden;
because regulating their wills by their own conveniences, and sacrificing not
to God, but to their own appetites and desires. Whence it was that Socrates
speaking of such kind of temperances, calls it the being temperate with a kind
of intemperance, because abstaining from some pleasures out of a desire of
enjoying others, by which they were no less mastered than intemperate men by
theirs. [ Vid. Plat. Phaed. Sect. 12. edit. Cantab.] Lastly, as if we would
make Gods will ours, we must not only choose to act according to it, but make
that the chief motive of our choice; so we are (as the Apostle speaks) to
delight in it after the inward man, and not only to choose it but do it with
complacency. Which caution I the rather add, because there is oftentimes a
failure there; it not seldom happening that men content themselves with a bare
submission of their wills to God, and rather bear than embrace their yoke, as
those persons do who choose the lesser of two evils proposed, and prefer the
throwing their goods overboard before the hazarding of their lives. The which
as it is an imperfect choice, and by the Philosopher therefore reckoned among
such actions, as are mixed of voluntary and involuntary, so can much less be
supposed to discharge that debt, which is owing from our Wills to that of God;
that man making Gods will but imperfectly his, who consents to it with some
kind of reluctance, or at least does not afford it the utmost of his delight.
And accordingly, as the man after Gods own heart professes to have a more than
ordinary desire for God, yea to pant after him, as the heart does after the
waterbrooks, Psalm. 42.1. So elsewhere, to have the same passion for his Will,
and not only to submit to it but embrace it: Witness his affirming the statutes
of the Lord to be his delight, Psalm. 119.24. that his soul even broke for the
longing it had unto them, v. 21. of the same, that they were better unto him
than thousands of gold and silver, and sweeter than the honey to his mouth,
verses 72, and 103. All which expressions make it manifest, what ought to be
the temper of our Wills in relation to that of God, and that we are not only to
consent to it, but with the utmost delight and satisfaction.

2. From the actions of men pass we to their sufferings, which is another
means, especially under Christianity, of Glorifying our Maker. Concerning which
I shall observe, first, that we are to submit our Wills to them, and receive
them without any regret or discontent. For as otherwise there can be nothing at
all of virtue in them, as being bound upon us by an inevitable necessity; so
being the will of God, no less than his precepts, they are at least to have the
sufferance of ours, and be consented to as well as undergone. But so we find
that old Eli, how blameworthy soever as to the doing of Gods will, yet thought
himself obliged to submit to the sufferance of it, 1 Samuel 3.18. For though the
message that was brought him was no other than the utter extirpation of his
house, and, which is more, delivered in the most heartbreaking terms, yet he
made no other reply, than It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Now
though this, to some persons at least, may seem a harder task, than flesh and
blood can readily undergo, yet it is not all which the making Gods Will ours
imports, and consequently neither all that is required of us toward the
owning of God in them. For (as Seneca words it) if we will do that, we must non
tantum deo parere, sed and assentiri; embracing, as well as submitting to,
whatsoever it lays upon us, and receiving it, how sad soever, with alacrity
and cheerfulness. For otherwise (as was before observed) we give God but a part
of our Wills, and choose it, not because we will it, but because we cannot
avoid it. Neither let any man say, that this is above the proportion of humane
strength, and therefore not to be thought to be any part of our duty to the
Almighty. For as I readily grant it to be above the proportion of humane
strength, when considered without the assistance of the Divine Grace, so that
it is not so, when accompanied with it, is manifest enough from the practice of
Job, c. 1.21. That holy man, notwithstanding all the sad tidings that were
brought him, blessing God for the loss of his Cattle, Servants, and Children,
as well as for his former bestowing of them. In the mean time, as it is not to
be denied to be a very hard task, and such to which we had need have some other
incentive beside that of our own duty, so I shall not be unmindful of supplying
you when I come to entreat of that petition of the Lords prayer, Thy will be
done in earth, as it is in heaven.

2. Having thus entreated of the elicite acts of the Will, that is to say, of
such as proceed immediately from it, and withal shown what tribute is due from
each of them to him, whom we are commanded to own for our God, it remains we
descend to those which are called imperate ones, or rather to the Empire of the
Will over them. For though the acts before remembered are the only immediate
acts of the Will, yet all the acts of the body and mind are under its control,
and move by the guidance of it. Thus for instance, it is from our Wills that
our understandings apply themselves to the consideration of Heaven, and
Heavenly things, from the same Wills that our affections are stirred up to tend
to their proper objects. Lastly, from the same Wills it is that we perform all
outward actions, whether of Religion or Civility. In consideration whereof, as
it is but necessary they themselves should be rightly disposed, and pay the
Almighty that tribute which is due from each act of them; so to the completely
owning of God for their God, that they make use of that Empire of theirs, to
bring our other faculties to pay God that Homage and Obedience which he
requires. For the Will being, as it were, the Vicegerent of God over this
little world of man, how can it discharge that trust which is reposed in it, if
it do not lay its commands upon those subjects of its own, and Gods to give him
that Honor and Obedience that he requires? But from hence it will follow, that
the Will is to incite the understanding to meditate upon God, and the
affections to embrace and revere him, that it is to lay its commands upon the
tongue to chaunt forth his praises, and upon the knee to bow down to him and
adore him. In fine (as its Empire extends to the whole man) to see that each of
them perform their several duties, and particularly those of Piety and
Devotion. In the mean time you may see, how much they are deceived, who, upon a
surmise of their hearts being right with God, take occasion either wholly to
neglect, or but perfunctorily perform the outward actions of Religion. For if
the Heart or Will be Gods Vicegerent over all our other faculties and powers,
it cannot be right with him, if it do not stir them up, to pay God that service
which he requires of each of them. I have but one thing more to add concerning
this Empire of the Will, but it is such, as (if attended to) may be of
excellent use in the conduct of our lives; and that is, that as this Empire of
the Will is very great, so it will prove very effectual, if it be resolute in
what it does propose: Nothing almost being too hard for a mind so resolved,
especially when accompanied with the divine assistance. By virtue of this
resolution it is that men overcome many and great difficulties, by the same
that they put themselves upon matters of the greatest hazard; by this that they
encounter with enemies that are superior to them, both in number and strength,
by the same that they oftentimes get the victory of them; that resolution of
theirs not only making them to exert their own strength to the uttermost, but
damping the courage of their opponents. But so that it fares with our
Spiritual enemies, the Scripture has given us plainly enough to understand,
because assuring us that, however the Devil may press upon the weak and
irresolute, yet he will fly from us, if we have the courage to resist him.

Being now to pass from the Understanding and Will to the Affections, and to
show what tribute each of them is to pay to the Almighty, I have been somewhat
retarded by the consideration of a duty, which the Scriptures often call for, I
mean, Trust in God. For beside that it is generally expressed in Metaphorical
terms (such as depending, resting, or staying our selves upon God) which though
they may sometime illustrate that, to which they are applied, yet do no less
often serve to obscure it, it may seem somewhat difficult, to those who do more
intimately consider it, to what power of the Soul to referr it, or rather,
whether it do not some way appertain to each of them. And indeed, upon a
serious consideration of the whole matter, I am apt to believe it does, which
is the reason I have chosen this place for it. That the Understanding has a
share in it, is evident to me from that belief which it manifestly implies, and
by which it is oftentimes expressed; he that trusts to, or upon any person,
doing it upon the account of that credit, which he gives to the affirmation of
him upon whom he does so rely. But neither can the Will be debarred its share
in it, if yet it have not the principal one. For what else mean those
expressions of staying, leaning, or resting upon God, but that the heart or
Will, though it do not presently attain what it trusts upon God for, yet,
having Gods promise for its warrant, acquiesceth in it, and has thereby a kind
of antepast of it. Lastly, forasmuch as this trust of ours does imply a desire
of that which we trust upon another for, hence it comes to pass, that it may
not unfitly be referred to the affections, and particularly to that of hope,
which is commonly and truly enough defined to be a passion of the Soul, by
which it is disposed to believe that shall happen to it which it desires. From
all which put together we may give this account of it, that it is an
acquiescence of the Soul upon the promise of God for the obtaining of what it
does desire. If there be any thing wanting toward the explication of it, it
will be what the nature of those promises are, upon which that trust of ours is
built. Forasmuch as the foundation of our trust is no other than the promise of
the Almighty, that trust, or acquiescence, is in reason to bear a proportion to
that promise upon which it is built. Laying aside therefore all other
considerations, I will make it my business to show what the nature of Gods
promises are, I mean as to the generality of mankind, which I shall not doubt
to affirm to be upon condition of their cooperating with God toward the
attaining of them.

For the evidencing whereof, I shall first consider the promises of God that
relate to the Soul, and then those which relate to the outward man or body. I
begin with those which relate to the Soul, which are of two sorts, to wit, such
as tend to secure it from sin, or such as propose to it an eternal happiness in
the other world. Of the former sort we have an illustrious one, 1 Cor. 10.13.
where the Apostle tells us that God will not suffer us to be tempted above what
we are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that we
may be able to bear it. Now though it be true that this promise of the Almighty
have no clear and explicit condition annexed to it, yet it manifestly enough
implies somewhat on our part toward the obtaining the effect of it. For
affirming, as the Apostle does, not that God will not suffer us to be tempted
at all, nor yet, when he does, that he will take the whole work upon himself;
but that he will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, and that
he will with the temptation make a way to escape that we may be able to bear
it, he plainly implies, that, in order to our deliverance from the taint of
them, we are to exert the uttermost of our ability, and take that way which God
shall lay open for our escape. And indeed, wherefore else should God furnish us
with natural and spiritual strength, wherefore should he supply us with the
whole armature of his graces, and call upon us so earnestly to put it on? For
if the whole of our deliverance were to be accomplished by God, all those would
be useless, and we might as well be without them as put them on. The same is to
be said of those promises of God, which enstate both Soul and Body in eternal
happiness. For as the business of our Salvation is generally proposed upon the
condition of faith, and repentance, and turning unto God, so the Author to the
Hebrews * has removed all suspicion of the contrary, c. 12.14.
by affirming in express terms that without holiness no man shall see the Lord.
From those promises which relate to the Soul, or rather to the eternal welfare
both of Soul and Body, pass we to such as concern its temporal one, concerning
which if we consult the Psalmist, we shall find they all pertain to those that
fear and adore the Lord. For as Psalm. 34.7. he restrains the watchfulness of
the Angels to them that fear him, and thereupon calls upon Gods Saints to do
so, adding, that there is no want to them that fear him, v. 9. of that Psalm;
as in like manner, v. 15. that the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and
v. 17.19. that they are the persons whom he delivers out of all their
troubles and afflictions: So he tells us, v. 21. that evil shall slay the
wicked, and that they that hate the righteous shall be desolate. Which shows,
that even temporal promises are upon condition of our fearing God, and yielding
him that obedience which he requires. Now forasmuch as the promises of God are
not absolute but conditional, that is to say, upon the condition of our
Repentance and Piety, our Trust in him does consequently imply not only the
embracing of the blessing promised, but also of the conditions upon which it
is. Which said, I will now proceed to show, how we own the Lord for our God by
it, accordingly as this Commandment does require.

Now this we do, first, by bearing witness to his truth, as was observed in the
matter of our belief. For the promises of God being the ground of our Trust,
and his truth the strength of his promises, by trusting in him we must
consequently bear witness to his truth, and so far therefore own him for our
God. But it is not Gods truth alone which we thus acknowledge, by placing our
Trust and confidence in him. For though that be the immediate ground of our
Trust, yet it presupposes sufficient wisdom in him to project for our welfare,
and power enough to put those promises in execution. Lastly, it presupposes
goodness enough in him to apply himself to the doing of it, and perform those
gracious promises he has made. If therefore we Trust in God, these Attributes
also will have their due acknowledgment, and in so much the greater measure, by
how much the more improbable, or difficult, it may seem to bring about our
deliverance, or we our selves unworthy to obtain it. And though I make no
question, men will be very unwilling to acknowledge their suspicion of the want
of any of these Attributes in God, which are the proper grounds of our belief,
yet, if they examine their own hearts more narrowly they will find it no
difficult matter to discern a suspicion concerning some one or other of them.
For wherefore should any man in a strait seek to deliver himself by a sin, but
that he thinks God has not kindness enough to deliver him without? Or suffer
his doubts, in any great exigency, to rise up to a despair, but that the case
seems to be such, as that God cannot deliver him out of it? It is true
indeed, this is not often spoken out, yea it may perhaps be so softly
whispered, as not to be understood by that heart that forms it. But as we do
rightly collect that to be the cause of a thing, from other than which it may
be evidenced not to proceed, so there are some kind of distrusts, which cannot
be thought to proceed from any thing else, than a suspicion of some defect in
the Almighty. But such in particular are those fears of ours which put us upon
the commission of a sin to free us from them. For if we supposed God to be
infinite in power, why should we not be as much afraid of the sad effects of it
that are denounced against evil men, as we are of that danger which hangs
over our heads. This however is evident, that he, who trusts not in the
Almighty, pays not those acknowledgments which are due to the former
Attributes, and consequently, offends against this First Commandment, which
requires the owning of God in them all. Lastly, forasmuch as our Trust in God
implies the embracing of those conditions which are required on our part
toward the obtaining of the promises, by trusting in him we declare our
acknowledgment of the Justice of them, and our readiness to put them in
execution.

PART IV.
Concerning the owning of God in our Affections, and how that is to be done:
Which is either by conforming them to those of God, or suiting them to those
Divine perfections which are the proper objects of them. This last exemplified
in the Passions of Fear and Love. Touching the former whereof is shown, what it
is, how God is the object of it, the consistency thereof with the dispensation
of the Gospel, and its usefulness to the purposes of Religion. A digression
concerning superstition, and Carnal Security.

3. HOW we are to own God in our Understandings and Wills, has been already
declared, it remains only that we enquire how we are to own him in our
Affections, which is, 1. First by placing them on the same objects, which we
find those of God to be set upon; there being no greater testimony of our
Subjection than the conforming to the inclinations of those, for whom we
pretend that deference. And accordingly as there is nothing more usual with
flatterers, (who are the most exquisite patterns of obsequiousness) than to
imitate the passions and inclinations of their several Patrons, laughing (as --
Rides? majore cachinno Concutitur; flet, si lachrymas adspexit amici. Sat. 3.
Juvenal speaks) when they are disposed to be merry, and weeping if they behold
them in a melancholy humor; so God himself, who certainly best knows how we
ought to own him, calls upon us often to imitate him, and to be holy, and
merciful, and benign as he also is. As if, in order to the ends of Religion, we
had nothing else to do, than to write after his Copy, and frame our selves
after his most blessed example. And indeed as he is the great Exemplar of
Virtue, so we should need no other to contemplate, were it not that the
perfection of his nature admits not of some virtues, which in us are both
laudable and necessary. (For what is there in God (upon whom all things depend)
analogous to those fears which we are commanded to entertain?) But as setting
aside that, and other such instances of imperfection, we shall find somewhat in
God to answer our own passions and affections, with the virtues that are
conversant about them; so we cannot give a greater testimony of their and our
subjection to him, than by loving what he loves and hating what he hates, by
rejoicing in that wherewith he shows himself well pleased, and mourning for
those things by which he professes himself to be grieved, lastly, than by
showing the same compassion and tenderness toward the objects of his pity,
as, on the other side, the same zeal and indignation against the implacable
enemies of his Religion. But because, beside the conforming of our Affections
unto his, there may be something in God which may prove a fit object of them,
we are also, toward the owning of God in them, to excite those Affections,
according as their respective objects shall invite us. For the exemplifying
whereof I shall instance in the passions of Fear, and Love, as by which the
other may be guessed at.

To begin with Fear, because the first (says the Atheist) that gave being to
the powers above, but to be sure both the first and most potent incentives to
the worship of them, concerning which I shall show, 1. What it is. 2. How God
is the object of it. 3. The consistency thereof with the dispensation of the
Gospel, and 4. And lastly, the usefulness of that passion.


1. Now though the nature of Fear be more evident to each man's inward sense,
than is likely to be made out by discourse, yet to show how God becomes the
object of it, it will at least be expedient to give some definition of it. And
accordingly, I shall define it to be a passion of the Soul, whereby it is
disposed to fly from that which may be hurtful to it, and such as is not
easily avoided. For though we find it usually added, that it is from such an
evil as is also near; yet is that rather a motive to the greatness of men's fear
than necessary to the exciting of it. Experience showing us, that men do
sometimes fear a great way off, and particularly those evils which are not to
commence till the other world. This only may be said in its defense, that, when
things so far off are feared, they are made near to us by our own apprehension,
and (as our life hangs upon a slender thread) represented to our fancies, under
a possibility of falling upon us every moment.

2. From the general nature of fear pass we to show God to be the object of it,
the second thing proposed to be discoursed of; a thing in appearance of more
than ordinary difficulty, especially when considered as a duty: Because it may
seem hard to look upon God as hurtful, but much more to conceive of it as a
duty to fly from him. But as it is no way prejudicial to the goodness of God
to be hurtful to the evil, but on the contrary a commendation of it, as being
not able to endure them; so to fly from, or draw back, is sometimes so far
from a crime, that it may be looked upon as a testimony of our respect. For
thus to draw back from a more powerful adversary is a confession of his
greatness, and of our own inability to withstand him. The only thing therefore
remaining to be enquired into is, what there is in God to oblige us thus to
draw back, which are in short the power and justice of the Almighty. For how
can we choose but tremble at him, who is not only able to destroy Soul and Body
in Hell, but has moreover declared himself to be just, and consequently one,
that without a satisfaction and repentance at least, will by no means clear the
guilty; To all which if we add his many and severe threats against those that
disbelieve or disobey him, so we shall think it not only no crime at all to
fear him, but on the contrary an acknowledgment of his Divinity: Our fear,
because arising from the consideration of them, being a confession not only of
his great power and justice, but also, that what he has so threatened he will
certainly perform, and consequently of the truth and unchangeableness of his
decrees. Then and then only does our fear become criminal, when it looks upon
God as no other than a Tyrant, or as one that will call us to an account for
every trifle. For that instead of acknowledging him for our God, attributes to
him peevishness, or cruelty, and makes us not so much adorers as dishonourers
of him. And accordingly, as wherever Religion has had any place, this fear
has been branded under the name of Superstition, so it has betrayed its own
rottenness by the pitiful shifts it has put the timourous man upon; the
devotion of such persons usually spending it self in Rites, and Ceremonies, and
presenting the Deity not with a rational and sober worship, but a crazy and
trifling one. I will conclude this particular with that excellent distinction
which Maximus Tyrius Dissert. 4.
makes between a truly Religious man and a Superstitious one. The pious man
(says he) is Gods friend, the superstitious is a flatterer of God: and indeed
happy and blessed is the condition of the pious man Gods friend, but right
miserable and sad is the state of the superstitious. The pious man, emboldned
by a good conscience and encouraged by the sense of his integrity, comes to God
without fear and dread; but the superstitious, being sunk and depressed through
the sense of his own wickedness, comes not without much fear, being void of
all hope and confidence, and dreading the Gods as so many Tyrants. From which
as it is evident what the true nature of Superstition is, even the fearing of
God as a tyrant, or peevish Lord, so also that it may have place as well in the
rejection of religious rites, as in an overcurious intention of them. For as
the observation of these becomes Superstitious, by our looking upon God as a
rigid exacter of them, so the rejection of them may become equally such, when
we think him as much concerned to forbid them, as we are to avoid the use of
them. But other fear than this, as it is so far from being criminal that it is
on the contrary an acknowledgement of Gods power, and justice, and truth; so
though it make us draw back from him as a judge, yet it puts us upon seeking to
him as a father, and endeavoring by all means to obtain his favor. Which
said, I will now descend to show

3. The consistency of this fear with the dispensation of the Gospel, the third
thing proposed to be discoursed of. For though it may seem but congruous to the
law (which was a state of darkness and horrors) to be attended with that fear
which is the usual product or concomitant of them; yet it may seem no less
congruous on the other hand, that, when the bright sunshine of the Gospel
appeared, that gloominess should disappear, and together with it, its congenial
fears. For the solution of which difficulty, the first thing that I shall offer
is those clear and express words of our Savior, Luke 12.5. Where having before
dehorted his Disciples from being afraid of them that kill the body, but after
that have no more that they can do, lest any should think that passion to be
useless, he adds, But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear. Fear him which
after he has killed has power to cast into hell, yea I say unto you fear him.
Which testimony is so much the more considerable, not only because he does
twice repeat it, but (which shows yet farther the importance of his
exhortation) whom he does so exhort, call also by the name of friends. For I
say unto you my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, but fear him
which has power to cast into hell. Which appellation shows evidently, that
this precept of fear is not only for servants or aliens, but for those who are
most intimately united unto himself. But so, that I may not dwell too long upon
a thing so evident, do the Apostles of that Lord advise, as well as the Lord
himself; S. Paul, Phil. 2.12. exhorting men to work out their Salvation with
fear and trembling, and the Author to the Hebrews, c. 12.28. to have grace
whereby to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, because God is a
consuming fire: In which latter place, we have it over and above represented as
an effect of grace, and a requisite to make our service acceptable. Now though
from what has been said it be sufficiently evident what we are to think in
this particular, and consequently rather to believe, that something else must
be meant by those sayings which seem to contradict it, than that this fear is
inconsistent with the temper of the Gospel; yet for the better explication of
this fear, as well as for the solution of those difficulties, I will now
propose them, or at least that which is most considerable.

If you please to peruse the first Epistle of S. John, the fourth chapter, and
the eighteenth verse, you will there find that Apostle affirming that there is
no fear in love, but that perfect love casts out fear, because fear has
torment; as moreover, that he that fears is not made perfect in love. For the
answering of which difficulty, not to say (as some have done) that by fear in
that place we are to understand the fear of men, and of the evils which they
may bring upon us; because the perfect love, to which fear is here opposed, is
referred to our having boldness to stand in the day of judgment, to which
therefore in all reason the opposite fear ought to relate: I answer first, that
it is true perfect love casts out fear: but I say withal that in this world
there is no such thing as perfect love, and therefore fear not to be ejected
till there is. A thing which this very Apostle may seem to referr to, when, in
the words before these, he affirms, that herein is our love made perfect that
we may have boldness in the day of judgment, making that perfect love to
appertain not to the present times, but to the day of judgment, wherein indeed,
those that love God shall neither fear, nor have any cause for it. But let us
suppose, as there is some presumption for it, that the perfect love here spoken
of is not that love, which is the peculiar portion of the next world, but which
is attainable in this; yet even so it may well be said that there is no
necessity of casting out that fear for which we are now pleading. For (as was
before observed) there is a fear of God as of a tyrant, or at least a very hard
master, and another of a father, and a king, but withal a good and gracious
one. If we take the word fear in the former sense, that is to say, for the fear
of God as of a tyrant, or a hard master, so there is no doubt that love casts
it out, especially an Evangelical one; it being impossible that any man should
love God, or willingly keep his Commandments, who has such an opinion of him.
But there is no such thing to be affirmed of him who looks upon God, as a Lord
and a father, but withal a good and gracious one. For beside that such a fear
is enjoined us by him, who does also lay upon us the command of love, and
therefore not to be thought (unless we will make the spirit of God contradict
it self) to be cast out by that love which he requires; there is nothing of
torment, which is the reason here assigned, if in our fear we look upon God,
but as a good and gracious one. For though that may make us careful and wary,
yet not distressed and desperate; the consideration of his goodness buoying us
up, when we are surrounded with his judgments, and making us, at the same time
we have an apprehension of them, to look up to his mercies, and to love and
trust in him for them. The same answer, with a very little variation, may be
applied to that difference, which is objected between the dispensation of the
Gospel and the Law. For though the Gospel reckons us not in the place of
servants and vassals, and consequently exacts not their fear of us; yet it
reckons us in the place of sons, who are not only to have a love, but a fear
also for him that is their parent. Which answer is the more reasonable, because
the Scripture it self represents those that were under the first covenant, as
the children of the Bondwoman, and such as were therefore slaves themselves;
but those under the second as the children of the free. To whom therefore
though it do no way appertain to entertain a spirit of bondage, and those fears
wherewith it is accompanied, yet to preserve such a reverential regard for the
Almighty, as is due unto every father, and much more to their heavenly one.

4. The fourth particular follows, even the usefulness of that fear of which we
are now entreating, which I shall endeavor to evince, 1. First as to the
bringing us to God and Christ, and 2. As to our continuance in that state.


1. Now that the fear of God and of his judgments are of very great use to
bring us unto God and unto Christ, may appear from that great contrariety that
is between the state of Nature and the purity and holiness of God. For that
being supposed, as it must, it is not easy to conceive men should be drawn with
the cords of love, and affect him who is so contrary to their inclinations. And
though it be true that the promises of God may be of more force to draw us to
his love, those having not all of them so manifest a contrariety to our corrupt
nature, as the Purity and Holiness of God has; yet as many of them are of a
spiritual nature, and so not very likely to be acceptable, so (which is more)
they are not to be bestowed, or at least not with any certainty or perfection,
till we come to the other world. And who then, naturally speaking, would quit
present and sensual enjoyments for them, and leave a love, which he is sure of,
for so uncertain and remote a mistress? To induce men therefore to quit their
so much beloved transgressions it is necessary to stir up their fears, and make
them see that what they pursue will rob them of what they love, and make them
miserable as well in their bodies as their souls. And indeed, as it rarely
happens that men are reclaimed from their evil courses but by some such
disgustful means, so (which is of much more force) we find the Apostles taking
this course in converting the unbelieving world; representing to them first,
the guilt of their own sins, and the wrath they had incurred, and then the
tenders of Gods goodness: By that means not only abating of their heat toward
their former extravagancies, but even constraining them to take a view of the
beauties of Religion, which otherwise they would never have considered.

2. But beside that the fear of God is of singular use in bringing men to
Christ and to God, it is also such after our conversion to him, yea throughout
the whole course of our lives. And here not to insist upon the Apostles
persuading even such by the terrors of the Lord, their exhorting them to work
out their salvation with fear and trembling, and to serve God acceptably with
reverence and godly fear; I shall content my self to propose to your
consideration the remains of that evil nature, which is in the very best of us,
and how much more then in the generality of believers? For these will show it
to be as necessary to keep us in the way, as it was to bring us into it. It is
true indeed if grace did at once purify the heart from all extravagancies, if
it took away both our sins and our affections to them, lastly, if it put us
into the condition we were in, when we were created, and made us entirely and
perfectly new creatures, so it is not impossible, but we might follow the
conduct of our leader, when only drawn by the cords of love. And yet I cannot
but observe by the way, that God thought not that enough to preserve Adam in
his innocence, but added moreover the terror of dying the death if he
persisted not in it. But when it is certain, that, though sin be wounded, yet
it is not perfectly mortified, when there are remains of corruption in the very
best of us, who can think even the regenerate man to be so good natured, as not
to stand in need of terrors to nip those buds, and hinder them from bringing
forth fruit unto unrighteousness? For beside that, under such circumstances,
all the methods of God are little enough to restrain us, experience shows
that of fear to be often needful; carelessness, and wantonness, being apt to
make us forget the obligations of goodness, and not only to forget but to
despise them. But when beside the obligations of Gods goodness, men have always
before their eyes the strictness of his justice; when they consider as well
what vengeance will pursue them if they go astray, as how great encouragements
they have to walk in that way which God has marked out to them; then, I say,
even flesh and blood will startle at the evil that presents it self, and avoid
it lest it become miserable by it.

Having thus shown both what the passion of fear is, and how God is the object
of it; together with the consistency of that fear with the dispensation of the
Gospel, and the usefulness thereof both in our conversion to, and walking with
God; I may seem to have said enough not only to excite that passion in you, but
to discover to you the malignity of the contrary vices. But because men are not
overforward to apply the rule of truth to their own obliquities, and by that
means oftentimes miss of the knowledge of them; and because too I have already
given you a character of Superstition which is one of the extremes of a
religious fear; I will for a conclusion of my discourse set before you the
malignity of carnal security, which is the extreme in defect. For so far are
some men from trembling at the Almighty, that they go on in their sins without
the least regret, and neither concern themselves for the judgments they behold
on others, nor for those which are denounced against themselves. As if,
according to the Prophet Isay, 28.15.
they had made a covenant with death, and were at an agreement with hell; so
that, though the overflowing scourge should pass thorough the Land, it should
not come nigh them, nor disturb their peace and prosperity. And here not to
tell you, because that is sufficiently evident, that this is in effect to deny
Gods Power, and Justice, and Truth, because having himself threatened to arm his
Power and Justice against them; I shall propose to your consideration the great
danger it betrays you to, as to your spiritual or temporal estate. For, to
begin with the former of these, he that is thus fearless of Gods displeasure is
not only at present in a reprobate estate, but likely to be so for ever. For
what should move him to return, who is not moved with the threats of the
Almighty, nor regards in the least the power of his displeasure? Should the
expresses of Gods love constrain him? Those indeed are very forcible motives.
But how should they prevail with such a one, when even those, who have a
veneration for the Almighty, find it so hard to yield to them, without having
an eye to the terrors of the Almighty? Add hereunto what the Scripture so
often affirms, that The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. For what
other interpretation can we make of that, than that heavenly wisdom must enter
by that passion, and men be brought to a sense of Gods Justice and Severity,
before they be affected with his love? But it may be such men's estate in
spirituals will not much move them, and therefore I shall proceed to the
consideration of their temporal one. Concerning which I shall not doubt to
affirm, that he who is thus regardless of Gods displeasure, is the most likely
to fall under the stroke of it. For not to tell such persons, what the Psalmist
has told us, that according to our fear so is Gods displeasure, that is to
say, more or less according to our awe of him; I shall desire them to consider
the affront they offer to the Divine Majesty by this their disregard of him.
For what is it but even to dare him to exert that Power and Justice, by which
he would commend himself to the world. He does indeed speak gloriously of his
own power and Majesty, he looks big and threatens severely all those that shall
but dare to oppose; but as such big looks and bugbear words do not much startle
the carnally secure, so he will put it to the trial, whether the effects will
answer them, and God be as tremendous in his punishments, as he seems to be in
the denunciations of them. Than which as there cannot be a greater affront to
the Almighty, who is by this means neglected and contemned, so I shall leave
you to judge, what effect it is likely to have upon him, who, besides his own
natural aversation of all impiety, is moreover extremely jealous of his Honor.

PART V.
Of the Passion of Love, its nature and objects, what the immediate expresses
thereof are, and what its opposite extremes; all which are applied to the Love
of God. Among other things is censured the being over familiar with God, the
pretenses for it detected and removed. A necessary admonition concerning the
proportioning of our affections to the infiniteness of those perfections upon
which they are set, and how that is to be done.

IF the passion of fear can find something in God to excite it, even under the
dispensation of the Gospel, to be sure that of Love cannot want matter to
provoke it, and entertain it with complacency and delight; there being in God,
either formally, or eminently, whatsoever is the object of our love. For the
evidencing whereof I will enquire, 1. First of all, into the nature of it. 2.
Show what are the objects of that passion: from thence proceed, 3. To consider
the immediate expresses of it, and 4. And lastly, mark out the extremes on
either hand. Applying all as I go to the Love of God, which is that we are
especially to consider.


1. Now though (as was observed concerning fear) the nature of Love be more
evident to our inward sense, than can be made out by discourse, yet I think it
not amiss for the better explication of the present argument, to give you some
definition of it: Which is, that love is a passion, whereby the Soul is
disposed to join it self to those objects, which appear to it to be grateful
and pleasant. Which definition I do the rather give you, to take away that
usual distinction of love into that of Benevolence and Concupiscency;
Benevolence, in proper speech, being rather an effect of our love to that which
is the object of it, than any real part of it.

2. The nature of love being thus explained in the general, proceed we in the
next place to the objects of it, which in general are such, as are either good
in themselves, or such as are good to us. Of the former sort is that love,
which we have for all virtuous and excellent persons, how little soever we our
selves may be profited by them: Such as are perhaps those that live in remote
parts, and with whom we our selves have no commerce. For though we are not
likely to be benefited by them in our own persons, yet because of the
excellencies we hear of in them we conceive a love for them, and never think of
them without complacency and delight. The same love we have for all beautiful
objects of natures make, and for all such like products of art, these to
whomsoever they appertain yet drawing our Soul after them, and obliging it to
receive them into her embraces. Now concerning this love there can be no doubt
but that God is the just object of it, yea that he may challenge it in the
highest degree imaginable; as will appear, if we consider, either the
excellencies of the divine nature, or the measure wherein he is possessed of
them. Look upon the former, and you will find them to be such, as are the
excellencies of the most sublime essence; such as are freedom, from the
feculencies of matter, and much more from the infirmities thereof, a discerning
understanding, and a rightly ordered will; a being which does nothing that is
not becoming its own greatness, which descends not to any lower abject
thoughts; which hates nothing without either cause or measure, which loves
things lovely, and according to the proportion of it; in fine, which makes
things lovely that they may become the object of it, and be worthy to be
received into its embraces. And though it be true, that there are some
excellencies in the creature (such as beauty and the like) which are not to be
found in God, yet as the reason thereof is, because they are much below him,
and argue something of imperfection where they are, so he is the Fountain even
of those inferior excellencies, and must therefore be much more excellent in
himself. From the excellencies of the divine nature, pass we to the measure
wherein they are possessed, which will show it yet more to be the object of our
Love. For beside that they are all in him without any thing of imperfection,
which hardly falls upon any created beings; they are also infinite, as that
nature is, to which they have the honor to belong. If God be wise, he is so
without measure, and knows whatsoever is to be known; if good, he is so
without bounds, and proportionably to his own infinite essence. In fine,
whatsoever he is, he is so after the rate of a God, and knows no other bounds
than what he prescribes unto himself. If therefore that which is excellent be a
just ground of love, God is much more so, as not only comprehending all
excellencies whatsoever, but also in the utmost perfection and degree. How
great reason we have to love God, when considered only as he is in himself, I
have discoursed hitherto, proceed we in the next place to consider him as good
to us. Under which notion if we look upon him, so we shall not only find that,
which may attract our loves, but even constrain us to affect him. For not to
tell you, that by him the Authors of mankind were first created, that we our
selves were conceived in the womb, maintained there, and brought forth into the
world through his benign influence, that we depended upon him when we hung upon
our Mothers Breasts, that we did so no less when we might seem much more able
to have made provision for our selves, that we are indebted to him for all the
good things we enjoy, that we are so for the ability of enjoying them, that we
are not less nourished by the word of his providence than by the bread we eat,
that we owe the very nourishment of that to his blessing on us and it, that by
him we are delivered from those evils we escape, that by him we are born up, or
carried thorough those evils that do at any time befall us; To say nothing at
all (I say) of these, how considerable soever, and how just incentives to our
love, I shall desire you only to consider his benevolence to our better part,
and the ways he has taken to express it. For not contented to say Isa. 33.11.
he delights not in the death of a sinner, but that he should repent and live,
which may seem to be rather a negative than a positive kindness, or if the
latter, an imperfect velleity only; he has been from all eternity contriving
the Redemption of sinful man, he has from the beginning of time been declaring
his gracious purposes concerning it; he sent his Son in the fullness of time to
accomplish that most excellent work for us, he has laid upon him the
iniquities and punishments of us all; he has sent his ever blessed Spirit to
fit us for pardon by it, he has sent his Servants the Prophets to publish the
tidings of it, and the means whereby it is to be obtained; he has called us
out of darkness into the glorious light of it, he has moreover given us eyes
to behold the brightness of it; he has given us grace to abandon our natural
corruptions, he has furnished us with grace to serve him acceptably, and with
godly fear and love; he has reclaimed us by his Spirit when we have been
wandering out of the way, he has upholden us by the same Spirit, when we have
been ready to faint or fall down in it; in fine he continues to do so till we
turn our backs upon him, and loves us till we do in a manner refuse to be
beloved. All which whosoever shall duly consider, will not only conclude him
worthy of our Love, but of the utmost degree and the most immediate expressions
of it, the third thing proposed to be discoursed of.

3. And here in the first place, I shall not doubt to reckon the desire of
enjoying his presence whom we love; this being the most natural and immediate
expression of our Love, that I say not of the very essence of it. For as Love
is nothing else than a passion of the Soul by which it is disposed to unite it
self to what it loves; so there is no one thing that is more impatient of the
absence, or more passionately desirous of its proper object's presence. It sets
the understanding upon contriving how it may attain it, it puts the Will upon a
resolution of putting those contrivances in execution; it vigorously
endeavors the removing of all obstacles to the enjoyment of it, it greedily
lays hold of all opportunities for the compassing of it; in fine, it neither
gives it self nor us any rest, till it attain what it so pants after, and
becomes rather more eager, than any way discouraged by the opposition it
receives. But such ought to be, nay such are the effects of our love to God,
where that love is implanted in the Soul; witness the Prophet David's
impatience when driven from the house of God, his longing desire to appear
before him in it. And certainly, if we had the same love for God, that the
Prophet had, or it may be think our selves possessed of, there is no doubt we
should be as willing to be found, where he promises to present himself, and
both desire to hear him speaking to us as he does by his servants the Prophets,
and present our own supplications before him; these being the most natural
expresses of our love, and such which I had almost said we can no more be
without, than we can hate him whom we cordially affect. The same is to be said,
2. Of our enjoying of God in Heaven, where he does not only most gloriously,
but most intimately present himself. For as it is impossible for a Soul duly
affected with the love of God, not to desire the most immediate enjoyment of
his presence, so we find S. Paul not to have been without this desire, though
he knew he could not attain it, without putting off his earthly Tabernacle; he
affirming of himself that he was desirous to be dissolved, that so he might be
admitted into the presence of God and of his Son. Which by the way may show,
how cold our love generally is, even when it carries us only to the enjoyment
of what we love. For how hardly are we brought to pant after that presence of
his, though we find little on earth to make us desirous of continuance in it,
and it may be a long and irksome sickness? As if this life, with all the
misfortunes that attend it, were preferrable to his presence where there is
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Of
the first and most immediate expression of our love I have discoursed hitherto,
and shown withal how far we are from having that testimony of our own; proceed
we now to another, which though not so immediate, yet is as certain a
consequent thereof, and that is a desire, so far as in us lies, to procure the
content of him we love. For so far is this from being separable from love, that
it is oftentimes defined by it; Aristotle, in that most excellent piece of his
Rhetoricks li. 2. c. 4.
defining Love to be a passion whereby we wish to any one those things which we
think good for him. Now though it be true that in strict speaking this
expression can have no place here because God is infinitely happy, yet inasmuch
as God declares himself to be well pleased with the glorifying of his name,
which he has put in our power either to do or not, therefore, to express our
love to him, it is requisite we desire that so it may be, by all those to whom
his glorious name shall be made known. And accordingly our Savior makes it the
first request we are to ask when we address our selves to the Divine Majesty,
placing Hallowed be thy name with other such like petitions, before the begging
of our daily bread, or what is more, the forgiveness of our sins. 2. Again,
though God be infinitely happy in himself, and accordingly leaves no place for
our wishing well to him, or putting those desires in execution; yet is there
place for such desires, and more, toward those who are his Friends, and whose
Good, God some way tenders as his own: he who has told us that our goodness
extends not to God, yet forgetting not to add, that it reaches to the Saints
that are in the Earth, and to the excellent, in whom is God's delight, as well
as ours. To whom therefore if we wish all prosperity imaginable, and, so far as
in us lies, endeavor to procure, we do in a manner lay the same Obligations
upon the Almighty; every Friend (as Aristotle Rhet. l. 2. c. 4.
observes) reckoning what is done to his Friend, as a kindness extended to
himself. Lastly, As Love prompts Men to wish well to those they love; or, where
they themselves stand in no need of them, to their Friends and Relations: so it
prompts them to endeavor to walk well-pleasing to them, especially where they
have over and above an Authority to command it; no Slave being more obsequious
than a Lover is, where his Love is hearty and intense. And accordingly, As our
Savior has not stuck to affirm, That he who has and keeps his
Commandments, he it is that loves him, Joh. 14.21. so that Disciple of his, 1
Ep. 5.3. That this is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and
perform whatsoever he requires. As if this were not only a certain, but the
only Consequent of our Love; or rather, as if it had been all one with it. And
indeed, as no Lover finds any difficulty in obeying those Commands which are
laid upon him by the Party he affects; so the neglect of that Obedience toward
God, must argue a greater coldness in us than it could do in any other
pretended Lover: because whilst they have nothing but the Tie of Love to engage
their Obedience, we have moreover the Obligation of Service, and have God's
Authority, as well as Love, to constrain us to it.

4. Having thus marked out the Love we ought to have for the Almighty, together
with the most immediate Expresses of it, I have said enough to caution Men
against the opposite Extremes, whether in the excess, or defect. But because
the Rule of Right signifies nothing, where it is not applied; and we do not
find those, who are most concerned, in any great forwardness to do it; I think
it not amiss, as I did before in the Passion of Fear, to point out the Rocks on
either Hand.

To begin with that which is the Extreme in defect, or the want of Love to him
who has so much in him to deserve it; the unreasonableness whereof will
appear, if we resume those things which we have said to the Object of Love: For
is not Good, that is to say, that which is so in it self, the Object of our
Love? nay, are we not in a manner constrained to affect it? And can we then be
cold in our Love to him, in whom all Goodness is contained; to him who is
infinitely good in himself, and the Fountain of whatsoever is so? Neither will
it suffice to say, That no other can be expected, when there is so great an
opposition between us and God: For beside that such is the luster of God's
Goodness, that whosoever shall duly consider it, cannot but be some way
affected with it; we cannot but know, that it is our own Viciousness which
makes the opposition, and which consequently occasions the alienations of our
Hearts from him. Which therefore, as it is but reason we should deposite; so
there is no doubt, but if we do, we shall find our selves as much enamored of
him, as we are of those Pleasures which are at present most connatural to us.
But then if we consider not only the Excellencies of the Divine Nature in it
self, but also its communicativeness of those Excellencies to us, how much he
has obliged us with Temporal Favors, how much more he has done for us to
promote our Spiritual and Eternal Welfare; so certainly we cannot choose but
censure our own want of Love to him, by whom we have been so much obliged; he
that does so much to gain our Love, as it were laying down a Price for it, and
making it Injustice, as well as Ingratitude, not to return it. Such is the
unreasonableness even of our want of love to so good and gracious an Object;
how much more unreasonable must it then be, when this want of Love or Coldness
passes into an Antipathy, and we do not only not affect, but hate and abhor
so lovely an Object? Which notwithstanding, we find even such in that black
Catalogue of Sinners which St. Paul gives, Romans 1.30. And indeed, it is not
much to be wondered that there should, when there are so many in the World, who
have so much reason to apprehend his displeasure. But as there is much more
reason for them to turn their hatred upon their own Vices, which is that that
exposes them to God's displeasure; so, if they would entertain a less love for
them, they would find nothing in God which should give any just occasion to
their hatred: For though he be an Avenger of those that do evil, yet it is of
such only as continue in it; and as he delights not in their death, so he
invites them to live, and makes a tender both of his own Grace, and the Merits
of his Son, to instate them in it.

From the extreme in defect, pass we to the extreme in excess, which is an
over-familiarity with our Maker: For as Love among Men does either find the
Parties equal, or make them such, according to that known Saying of Minutius
Foelix, Amicitia pares semper aut accipit aut facit; so unwary Men, not
considering the distance that is between them and God, have copied out this
mode of Love in themselves, and made it pass into an indecent familiarity;
being thereto farther tempted, by God's giving his Children the name of
Friends, and by his speaking with Abraham as a Man speaks with his friend.
But, as it follows not from God's speaking to us as Friends, that therefore
we are to use the same Modes of Speech; so we shall find those to whom God has
shown the greatest condescension, to have proceeded always with the greatest
reverence and respect: for thus that Friend and Favorite of God, Abraham,
still observed his distance toward him, and addressed himself to God as his
Superior and Maker; in the 23d Verse of the 18th Chapter of Genesis, where he
seems most to expostulate with him, stiling him the Judge of all the earth; and
himself, verse. 27. but dust and ashes in comparison of him: and in the 30th
Verse of the same Chapter, beseeching God not to be angry with him, though he
spoke; and in Verse 31. confessing it a kind of presumption that he had taken
upon him to speak unto God; in the 32d again, begging of him not to be angry,
and he would speak but once more for the sinful Sodomites. Which demeanor of
his shows evidently, that our Friendship must be mixed with Reverence, and we
look upon God as our Superior, as well as our Friend. In like manner, though
it be said of Moses, That God spoke to him face to face, as a man speaks to
his friend; yet even then we find Moses demeaning himself as a Subject, and
speaking to him in the Language of one: for what else means his so often
inserting, If I have found grace in thy sight; as you may see in the sequel of
that Chapter? It is true indeed (for I am willing to obviate any thing that can
with any show of reason be objected) it is true, I say, there is some
difference between their case and ours; I mean in respect of God, as well as
us; that God who spoke to Abraham and Moses in his own likeness, or at least in
that of an Angel, having since assumed our Nature, to become more equal to us,
and dispensing all his Graces through it. But as he who assumed our Nature,
does not therefore cease to be God, and consequently neither our Lord and
Master; so by becoming Man, he became our Lord after a more peculiar manner,
and thereby gained a new Title to our Obedience; which, as there is therefore
just cause for us to own, so our Savior himself inculcates it, as the only
means to attain his Friendship, telling us, Joh. 15.14. That we are his
friends, if we do whatsoever he commands us. This only would be added, for the
preservation of this Friendship on our part, That we look upon the Commands God
lays upon us, as the Commands of a Friend, as well as of our Lord and Master;
of one who loves us, as well as of one that has Authority to command us: So
shall we at the same time preserve both our Friendship and Obedience; be
Confidents, and yet Servants of the Almighty. For it is not our yielding
Obedience to God, which makes our Works servile; but our looking upon him as a
Tyrant, or at least as one who is not our Friend, as well as our Lord. For, as
the Text before-quoted insinuates, that we cannot be Friends, without having
respect to our Superiors Commands; so if we have respect to them, for the
kindness of the Party that enjoins them, we do rather the part of Friends, than
of such as are either Servants or Vassals. But neither is this all which our
Friendship with God privilegeth; yea, though an over-familiarity be discarded:
For it also licenceth us to come with assurance before the Throne of Grace, and
both lay open our wants before him, and beg a proportionable supply; God
himself having not only permitted, but called upon us to do it, and that too
with earnestness and importunity, giving us farther to understand, that this
violence is grateful to him, and that the more importunate we are, provided it
be mixed with Reverence, the more ready he will be to receive us. In fine, such
as is the behavior of a Favorite toward his Prince, such ought to be the
behavior of a Friend of God, toward the Monarch of the World; so tempering our
Respect and Confidence, as neither to forget our distance, on the one hand;
nor, on the other, that Interest which he has given us in his Love. But if our
Love be so qualified, the more intense it is, the more acceptable, and the more
likely to advance us to a more intimate Communion with himself.

Being now to put a period to my Discourse concerning the Passions of the Soul,
and that Acknowledgment which is due from each of them to him whom we are to
own for our God; it remains only, that I admonish you, That to own him for
your God in them, is not only to have your Affections suited to his several
Attributes, but also to the infiniteness thereof; this being in truth to own
him for a God, and pay him that Acknowledgment which is due unto him, as such.
But from hence it will follow, 1. That we are to fear and love him with all our
might; that we are to separate all coldness from the one, all security and
presumption from the other: For beside that the Almighty requires so to be
loved, even where that Love (as was before observed) is set to denote the whole
Adoration of the Soul, it is no more than his own immense Nature, as well as
our Obligations to him, call for; the greatest Loveliness and Majesty (such as
those of God's undoubtedly are) requiring the greatest Fear and Love. It is no
less evident, 2. That we are to fear and love him above all things, how much
soever in themselves the just Objects of them both; because God, whom we are
required to own in them, transcends all other Beings in Majesty and Goodness,
or whatsoever else is the proper Object of our several Affections. Whence it
is, that our Blessed Savior, speaking of the Passion of Fear, does not only
forbid the exerting of it toward those that can kill the Body, but in a manner
confine it to him who after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell. 3.
Lastly, Forasmuch as God does not only transcend all other Beings, but is the
Fountain of whatsoever is either dreadful or lovely in them; hence it comes to
pass, that, to own him for our God, we are consequently to fear and love all
other things with respect to the Divine Majesty, from whom they derive their
several Excellencies; at the same time we fear or love them, looking up to the
Almighty; and regarding them not so much for themselves, as for that Majesty
and Goodness which it pleased the Almighty to imprint upon them.


PART VI.
How we may and ought to own God in our Bodies. This done, first, by yielding
Obedience to his Commands, and particularly to such as have a more immediate
aspect upon him; Of which number are those concerning Invocation, Praise,
Swearing by, or Vowing to him. The like effected by presenting God with
external Notes of our Submission, whether they be such as are performed within
the Body, as Bowing, Kneeling, and the like; or such as though the Body be
instrumental to, yet pass from thence to other things: Such as are the Building
or Adorning of Temples, and the setting apart certain Times for God's Worship
and Service; the Consecrating of certain Persons to preside in it, and
respecting them when they are so.

HAving shown in the foregoing Discourses, what Tribute is due to God from our
Souls, and particularly from our Understandings, Wills, and Affections, which
are the several Faculties thereof; it remains that we inquire,

2. What Tribute is due to him from our Bodies, and how we are to own him for
our God in them: Which is either, 1. By yielding Obedience to his Commands, and
particularly to such as have a more immediate aspect upon him; or, 2. By
presenting him with some external Note or Sign of our Submission. The former
whereof is by some called the Honor of the Deed; the latter, the Honor of the
Sign.


I. Of the former of these, there cannot be the least doubt that it is required
of us toward the owning him for our God: For beside that the Name of God is a
Name of Authority, as well as Eminency, and consequently implies a necessity
of Obedience in those to whom he has that Relation; God himself does here make
use of it, as an Obligation to all those Commandments which we are now upon the
consideration of; he requiring our having no other Gods besides himself, with
other the Duties that follow, upon the score of his being the Lord our God,
according as was before observed, in his Preface to the Imposition of them. But
so (that I may not stand upon a thing so plain) does that Lord of ours expressly
require us to own him; our Savior putting by the Temptations of Satan to fall
down before himself, by saying, It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him, yea him only shall thou serve, Matthew. 4.10. Now though what has
been said, extend to all God's Commands, because they all bear the stamp of his
Authority; yet is it especially to be understood of yielding Obedience to such
Commands as have a more immediate aspect upon God, these more immediately
implying the owning of that Authority he has over the Sons of Men. For the
fuller declaration therefore of our own Duty in this behalf, I will now set
those Commands before you, and show how we own him for our God, by yielding
Obedience to them.

1. To begin with Invocation, or Praeyer, one of the prime Acts of God's
Worship, and which therefore is of all others the most frequently and earnestly
inculcated; concerning which, it is easy to show, how necessary it is to pay
him the acknowledgment of a God: For, inasmuch as all Men desire the
Preservation of their own Being; inasmuch as that desire necessarily prompts
them to look abroad for it, if they think not themselves able to procure it; in
case any Man do not thus seek it of God, it must be because he does not believe
it to come from him, but either from himself, or from mere Natural Causes. But
what other is this, than to deny that God from whom every good and perfect gift
comes, and to make a God either of ones self, or Nature? There being nothing
more essential to the Divine Nature, than the being the Author of all those
Blessings, by which the whole Creation is either maintained or adorned. The
same is to be said of that which is sometime reckoned as a part of Prayer,
because a necessary attendant of it; that is to say, of giving Thanks to him
for those Blessings by which we are at any time made happy: He who refuses
thus to honor God, in effect denying the coming of them from him; because
Nature it self has taught us to make this return, wheresoever we have been
obliged. If there be any thing farther to be observed concerning these two
Acknowledgments, it will fall in more pertinently when we come to entreat of
The Prayer of our Lord, to which therefore I shall reserve the consideration of
it.

2. From Prayer and Thanksgiving therefore, pass we to Praise, another Act of
Adoration, and no less frequently enjoined: And no wonder, if we consider
either the end for which the Tongue was given, or its aptness to set forth the
Excellencies of the Almighty: For as, if we consider the practice of Holy Men,
it may seem to have been given for nothing more, than for commemorating the
Excellencies of the Divine Nature; so, by the variety of its Expressions, it is
fitted to set forth all those Excellencies of which the Divine Nature is
composed; as neither wanting Words to express his Justice, and Mercy, and the
like; nor yet that which makes them more Divine, the Infiniteness thereof.

3. To Praising the Divine Majesty, subjoyn we Swearing by him, another Act of
Adoration, and no less expressly required; for so we find the Prophet Moses
distinctly commanding, and that too in the same Period where he prescribes his
Fear and Service: for, thou shall fear the Lord thy God (says he) and serve
him, and swear by his Name, Deuteronomy. 6.13. And indeed, if we consider the nature
of an Oath, we shall not in the least doubt of the manner of our owning him for
our God by it. For an Oath being nothing else than the calling God to witness
to the Truth of what we affirm, he that swears by him, does not only
acknowledge God to be superior to himself, but also to be a Witness of
infallible Truth, a Searcher of our Hearts, and a most just and powerful
Avenger of all Perjury and Falsehood; no one appealing to a Witness that is not
of greater Authority than himself; and with much less reason, for the sincerity
of his own Affirmations, but where that sincerity may be known, or any
deviation from it be punished, if he transgress it. For, what satisfaction
could an Oath be to any Man, if Men did not presume God to be an Avenger of
Perjury and Falsehood, as well as a Discerner of the Truth? And accordingly, as
for the most part such Clauses as this are generally subjoined, as So help me
God, according as what I affirm is true; so where it is not expressed, it is
always understood to be meant, and God called upon not only as a Witness, but
an Avenger. By swearing therefore by the Name of God, we give an evident
Testimony of our acknowledging him for such, and particularly, that he is True,
and Wise, and Powerful. This only would be added, what is evident from the
nature of the thing it self, That though an Oath be an Acknowledgment of those
glorious Attributes beforementioned, yet it is not to be made, but where the
thing in controversy is not otherwise to be made out, and the Knot is worthy
of his untying. And more than this I shall not need to say concerning Swearing
by the Name of God, because I must afterward resume it, when I come to entreat
of the Third Commandment.

4. Lastly, As we acknowledge the Divine Majesty by Swearing by his Name; so
also by Vowing to him, in whatsoever may be the proper Matter of it; such as is
the yielding Obedience to all his Commands in general, or the performing of any
particular one: For as by so doing we acknowledge God to be conscious to our
Resolutions, and (because Vows are always made upon condition of God's giving
us some Boon) that he is conscious also to our Wants; so, for the same Reason,
that he is able to supply them, and deliver us either from our Fears, or from
our Dangers. Which acknowledgment is so much the more valuable, because Vows
are seldom made, but when Men are encompassed with the greatest Dangers, and
there is little hopes of escaping, but by some signal Providence: for he that
in such cases vows any thing to God for his deliverance, shows he looks upon
him to be of an Almighty Power, and that he can act not only in concurrence
with Natural Causes, but without and against them. But because the nature of
Vows will also fall in more fitly afterward, when I come to entreat of the
Third Commandment, it shall suffice me to have observed, That this is one way
of acknowledging him, whom we are required to own for our God.

II. Of acknowledging God by yielding Obedience to his Commands, I have spoken
hitherto; and particularly, by yielding Obedience to such Commands as have a
more immediate aspect upon himself: It remains that we entreat of our
presenting him with some outward Note or Sign of our Submission, which is the
second way of owning him with our Bodies. For inasmuch as God has commanded us
to glorify him with our Bodies, as well as with our Souls; inasmuch as
external Reverence is the most immediate expression of it; it follows, that to
own him for our God, we are to add external Reverence to our Obedience, and
present him with our Respects, as well as Submission to his Commands. Now there
are two sorts of Notes or Signs, whereby we are to express our Reverence to the
Divine Majesty.

1. The former whereof are performed within the Body. 2. The latter reaches to
things without it.
1. Of the former sort are all those humble postures of Body wherewith we find
devout Men to have honored their Maker; such as are, in particular, Kneeling,
or Falling down before him, Bowing down the Head, or uncovering it; in fine,
the standing at a distance from the Place of his more especial Presence, as we
read the penitent Publican did; or casting our pensive Eyes upon the ground:
All which, as we find to have been used by Holy Men, so, if we consult the
Scriptures, not to have been without the Command of God, for the use of some or
other of them: For thus, when the Devil would have wooed our Savior, by the
proffer of the Kingdoms of the World, so to fall down and worship him, our
Savior not only rejected the Motion, but made him answer out of the
Scriptures, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. In which place we do not only find God claiming the Homage of our
Service and Obedience, but the paying also of our Respects, in falling down and
worshipping our Creator. Neither let any Man say (as there are those who are
like enough to do it, how little ground soever there be for such an Answer) let
not any Man, I say, make answer, That by Worship in that place, we are to
understand an inward one: For as that was not it the Devil asked, but the
falling down before him, and consequently no way agreeable to such an
Interpretation; so the Greek word (...) signifies External Adoration, and is
accordingly, by Hesychius, explained by (...), or falling at ones Feet. And
though it be true, that in the Original of the Old Testament, from whence this
Text is borrowed, it be not Thou shall worship, but Thou shall fear the Lord
thy God, which is an Act of inward Adoration; yet inasmuch as what the Devil
asked was the outward one, and our Savior himself, in his citation of it,
applied it to that kind of Worship, it is manifest we are to understand both
the one and other Adoration, our inward Fear, and the outward Expressions of
it. But so that I may put this past all doubt, God has given us yet more
clearly to understand, in the Words of the next Commandment: For, forbidding in
that the bowing down before an Image, because he is a jealous God, he thereby
plainly shows, that he challenged that Honor to himself, the Worship of the
outward, as well as of the inward Man. And indeed, provided that this Reverence
do not degenerate into a Theatrical one, nor swallow up that inward regard
which we ought especially to intend, I know not how we can more approve our
selves to him, whom we pretend to adore, than by making every Member some way
contribute thereto. For how grateful must our Service needs be, when all that
is within and without conspires to it; and, whilst the Tongue is doing its
Devotions, the Knee is bowing to the Divine Majesty, or (which was the Custom
of the Jews, and is still of all the Eastern Nations) the whole Body, in token
of its and the Souls subjection, lies prostrate upon the Ground? Again, What is
there which may be thought to engage the Soul's Obedience, that does not in
like manner concur to the Adoration of the other? Is the Soul of God's
creation? So is the Body, as being not only formed by him in its Protoplast
Adam, but curiously wrought by God in that Womb that immediately conceived it.
Is the Soul redeemed by the Holy Jesus? So also is the Body, and shall be
hereafter to much better purposes: For ye are bought with a price (says the
Apostle) therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are so
his. Lastly, Has the Soul a share in the Graces of the Spirit? So also has
the Body; as is evident from the Prayer of the fore-nam'd Apostle, where he not
only beseeches God to sanctify them wholly, but prays more particularly,
that their whole spirit, and soul, and body, might be preserved blameless unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. I conclude therefore (and I think too with
much greater force than the Psalmist does) O come let us worship and bow down,
let us kneel before the Lord our Maker: For not only is he our Maker, as that
holy Man suggests; but our Redeemer and Sanctifier; and that too of those very
Bodies whose Reverence he requires.

2. Of such outward Notes or Signs of Respect as terminate in the Body, I have
spoken hitherto, and shown our Obligation to them: It remains only, that we
consider those to which though the Body is instrumental, yet pass from thence
to other things. Such as is,

1. The Building of Temples, or Places of Worship, to him whom we own for our
God. For though (as St. Paul speaks) God that made the world, and all things
therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples
made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any
thing: yet, as the Custom of the World, with the Approbation of God himself,
has in all times led Men to erect such public Places to him; so it was no
more than decency, and a respect to the Divine Majesty, prompted them to the
doing of. For though (under the Gospel especially) any Place be proper for
Divine Worship, because by the Tenor of it we are obliged to have a greater
regard to the Thing it self, than to the Circumstances thereof; yet inasmuch as
a Set place was requisite to the performance of it, that so all the Worshippers
of the Divine Majesty might know whither to resort; inasmuch as it was but
suitable to the Greatness of God, that that Place which was appointed for his
Public Worship, should be set apart from all common Uses; lastly, inasmuch as
the appropriating of that Place to it, was apt to imprint a Reverence of the
Divine Majesty in those that resorted thither: for these Reasons, I say, it
seemed but requisite that he should have a Temple erected to him, apart from
the Places of more Common Uses. And accordingly, as before the Law they had
their Altars; and under the Law, the Tabernacle, that famous Temple at
Jerusalem, with Synagogues in their several Towns and Villages: so it will be
no hard matter to discern the like Places of Divine Worship in the first
beginnings of Christianity. As is evident from that known Passage of St. Paul
to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.22. What have you not houses to eat and to drink
in? or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not? For not
only speaking before of their coming together into one place; but opposing the
Church of God, not to other Assemblies, but to their own Houses and Places of
abode, he plainly shows his meaning to be, not of the Assemblies themselves,
but of the Places wherein they convened. And accordingly, as Mr. Mede has
shown Churches, that is, Appropriate Places for Christian Worship.
that there were such Places in the following Ages, and before the Emperors
were Christians; so he has returned a very satisfactory Answer to what is
objected out of some ancient Writers, concerning the Christians not having any
Temples, to wit, That they meant Temples in the Heathen sense, that is to say,
wherein the Deity was enclosed; as the Heathens, to whom they thus answered,
supposed their own to be. However it be, there is reason enough in Nature for
setting apart a certain Place for the Solemn Worship of God. And accordingly,
when the Church had rest from Persecutions, such Places were every where
erected to him, and the Christians declared their owning of the Lord for their
God by it. All that I shall add concerning this Head, is that of Sir Edwin
Sandys, in his most excellent Piece, entitled, Europae Speculum; That though
the Ornaments of such places ought to be rather grave than pompous, yet it
could never sink into his heart that the Allowance for furnishing them out
should be measured by the scant Rule of mere Necessity (a proportion so low,
that Nature it self has gone beyond it, even in the most ignoble Creatures) or
that God had enriched this lower World with such wonderful variety of things,
beautiful and glorious, that they might serve only to the pampering of mortal
Man in his Pride; and that to the Service of the High Creator, Lord, and Giver
(the outward Glory of whose higher Palace may appear by the very Lamps which we
see so far off burning so gloriously in it) only the simpler, baser, cheaper,
less noble, less beautiful, and less glorious things, should be employed;
especially seeing, even as in Princes Courts, so in the Service of God also,
this outward State and Glory being well disposed, does engender, quicken,
increase, and nourish the inward Reverence and respectful Devotion, which is
due unto so Sovereign a Majesty; which those whom the use thereof cannot
persuade, would easily by the want of it be forced to confess. Neither will it
suffice to say (as perhaps it may be by some Persons) That that Cost might with
much more advantage be employed upon the Poor, those Living Temples of the Holy
Ghost: for though it be not to be denied, that those ought more especially to
be considered; yet, as it would be inquired, Whether, for the purposes of
Charity, a deduction might not be made from the Ornaments of our own Houses, if
our Estates cannot reach to the supplying of them both; so also, Whether the
House of God ought not in this case to have the precedence of our own;
especially when God himself did sometime ask, Whether it were time for the
Israelites to dwell in cieled houses, when his lay waste, Hag. 1.4.

2. But beside the Dedicating of Temples to his Honor, whom we are commanded
to own for our God; it is no less requisite to that purpose, that Solemn Times
be set apart for the Public Worship of God; and that, when they are so, they
should be as Religiously observed: For, as it may seem but a just Tribute, to
allot him a Portion of our Time, from whom we have the Grant of the Whole; so
being so set apart, it is but reasonable it should be appropriated to his
Service, and not, as it too often is, profaned by our own: he that honors
any Person, naturally paying a Regard to whatsoever has a relation to him. But
because this will fall in more seasonably when we come to entreat of the Fourth
Commandment, I will quit the prosecution of it at present, and descend to a

3. Third Note of Respect, which is, the setting apart a sort of Men to wait at
his Altar, and perform the Public Exercises of Religion; nothing making any
Person or Thing more cheap and vile, than laying open the Offices that relate
to it, to the will of every Man that shall have the hardiness to invade them.
And accordingly, as before the Law, the Elder of the Family was Priest, as well
as Prince; as under the Law, the Tribe of Levi was in their stead set apart for
that Office; so our Savior, to observe the same Method, chose the Twelve out
of his Disciples, and Commissioned them, and them only, to go and teach all
Nations, and baptize them into his most excellent Religion; adding, in the
close of it, That he would be with them to the end of the world: Which being
not to be understood of them in their own Persons, because they are long since
fallen asleep, it remains we understand it of Persons Commissionated by them,
and so on to the present Age: For all power (as our Savior affirms) being
given unto him, and he Delegating the Ministerial one to those his Apostles;
whatsoever Power of that nature can be pretended to, must derive it self from
them, unless in case of extreme necessity, or an immediate Commission from
Heaven. And accordingly, as the Apostles ordained Elders in every City, and
transferred that their Power upon others; so the Chain of Succession has been
maintained by the same means, without any considerable interruption, till of
late some have dared to invade it: Which is so much the more to be wondered at,
because, as no man among the Jews took that honor to himself, but he that was
called of God, as was Aaron; so the Author to the Hebrews (who tells us so
much) adds, Cap. 5.4, 5.
That even Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest; but he that
said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Again,

4. Fourthly, As to own the Lord for our God, it is requisite to set apart some
Men to Minister before the Lord in the Congregation; so is it much more, when
set apart, to respect them highly for their Work sake, and minister to them of
the good things we enjoy. For, as next to the immediate dishonor of the Divine
Majesty, there cannot be a greater affront to him, than to throw contempt upon
those Persons whom he has taken so nearly to himself; so God-himself calls the
defrauding them of their Maintenance, the robbing of himself; and, moreover,
represents it as a Crime, which even the Heathen did abhor; as you may see Mal.
3.8. Neither let any Man say, That this is to be understood only of the Jewish
Priests, whose Maintenance, as well as Function, was immediately appointed by
himself: For, as there is no doubt the Evangelical Priesthood is much dearer to
him than the Legal, and therefore what was said concerning the former, to be a
fortiori applicable to the latter; so St. Paul tells us, in his first Epistle
to the Corinthians, That like as they which waited at the Altar were by the
command of God to be partakers with the Altar; 1 Cor. 9.14.
even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14.

5. Lastly, (which may comprehend many of the former Acknowledgments, and has
therefore this place assigned it) Toward the owning the Lord for our God, it is
requisite we should own him by the Liberality of our Hand, or, as the Book of
Proverbs expresses it, Honor him with our Substance, in token of having
received it from him. For, this being grounded upon a natural Reason, and
beside that, not only an usual Testimony of Respect to Kings, but a Respect
that was sometime paid our Savior, by the Wisemen that came to worship him;
it may seem but reasonable to think, that we are under the same Obligation:
especially when we find also the Bread and Wine of the Sacrament to have been
tendered as an Acknowledgment of God's Sovereignty over the World, as well as
of the Redemption of it by his Son. The only Question that can be made, is, To
whom these Offerings do belong, now Sacrifices are banished out of the Church.
But as that will not be difficult for him to resolve, who shall reflect upon
the foregoing Discourse; so, if we cannot find any other, we have the Poor
always at hand, to whom, whatsoever is this way done, our Savior tells us, is
as done unto himself; and therefore also, in some measure, to the Divine
Majesty. Such is the having the Lord for our God, as is here enjoined; such the
Tribute that is due to him from our Souls, and Bodies, and Substance: And happy
they that shall so own him, because they are assured of a reciprocal
Acknowledgment; and they shall be owned as his People, who have this Sovereign
Lord for their God.

PART VII.
That we ought to own the God of Israel both as the True God, and ours; which
is the Second Capital Precept: and how that is to be performed. The like
inquired concerning the Third, even The having no other Gods beside him: Which
is shown to exclude, first, the substituting of any other in his room; where
the Heathens worshipping of the Host of Heaven, Dead Men, Beasts, or Inanimate
Creatures, is noted, and censured: Secondly, The receiving other Gods into
Copartnership with him; where the Papists Practice, in Worshipping Saints and
Angels, is considered, and reproved.

THAT we ought to have the One True God for our God, has been the Design of
several Discourses to show; together with the Ways and Means by which we are to
acknowledge him. My proposed Method now leads me to evince,

II. That we are to look upon the God of Israel as such, and to pay him the
Acknowledgments before remembered. But so that we are (to go no further for a
proof) the Preamble to the Ten Commandments shows; he who requires us to have
no other gods before him, declaring himself, in that Preamble, to be that Lord
which brought them out of the Land of Egypt. The only thing whereof there can
be any doubt, is, What Grounds there are so to own the God of the Israelites;
and how those Acknowledgments ought to be circumstantiated, to refer them unto
him: Neither the one nor the other whereof, will be hard for him to resolve,
who does but attentively consider them. For as the Scriptures of the Old
Testament furnish us with Arguments enough to believe the God of Israel to be
the True; witness those stupendous Miracles it declares him to have effected,
and those holy and equitable Laws which he promulg'd: so it is easy to see we
shall then refer all our Acknowledgments to him, when we pay them in obedience
to those Scriptures by which he has declared himself to the World: For this
will show us not to worship an unknown and uncertain Deity, as we find the
Athenians, and many other Heathens did; but him, who manifested himself to the
Israelites in Egypt, by many Signs and Wonders, as afterward by bringing them
out with an high hand, and by those Wonders which he showed upon Mount Sinai.
And having said thus much concerning the owning the One True God, and the God
of Israel, I shall now proceed to,

III. The not having any other gods but him.

Now there are three things which are either implied, or expressly contained in
the not having any other gods beside the True.

1. That we should not substitute any other in his room. 2. That we should not
receive any other gods into copartnership with him: And, 3. Thirdly and lastly,
That we should not attribute to any thing else, any part of that Honor which
is due unto him.
1. The first of these is rather implied, than expressed; but so strongly
implied, that there cannot be any the least doubt of it: For, beside that the
One True God does here declare himself to be so, and not only so, but call
upon us to yield Obedience to all those Commands which we are now upon the
consideration of; the very Words wherein this Commandment is expressed, do a
fortiori imply the not substituting any other in his room. For, if we may not
have any other before or beside him, much less may we admit of any to the utter
exclusion of him, and build their Honor upon the Ruins of the other's. But
such Transgressors were the Heathen, or at least a great part of them, after
God had for their sins given them over to vain imaginations; as worshipping, in
stead of him, all the Host of Heaven, such Men by whom their several Nations
had received any great advantage, particularly, Kings and Princes; and in fine,
the brute Beasts, yea Inanimate Creatures. But how much they acted against the
light of their own Reason, as well as the Precepts of this great Lawgiver, will
easily appear, if we survey the several Objects of their Worship.

To begin with the Host of Heaven, even the Sun, Moon, and Stars, because
thought by Learned Men Vid. Grot. Explic. Decal. and Job 31.26.
to be the first Instances of Idolatry in the World: Concerning which, it is
easy to show, how unreasonable it was to substitute them in the place of God.
For though it be not to be doubted, but that great Benefits come from thence,
particularly, from the Sun, by whose Influence this lower World is actuated;
yet is there nothing in that glorious Body, which can tempt a considering Man
to pay Divine Honors to it; it being evident to our sense, that it moves and
acts necessarily, neither can do any other than it does. Which one thing, duly
weighed, will, to all impartial Understandings, evince it not to have the
Nature, or deserve the Honor of a God. For, beside that the Nature of God
implies the most Perfect One, and consequently such as is not tied up to
Rules, but is free in its Motions and Operations; all the Honor of God (as the
Author to the Hebrews observes) is built upon this great Principle, That he is
a rewarder of such as diligently seek him: Which Principle can have no place,
where there is no freedom in acting; and the supposed Deity is obliged not
only to shine alike upon the evil and the good, but either to afford or
withhold its shining, as the Laws of its Creation admonish, yea, as it pleases
those Clouds that are below it.

From the Host of Heaven, pass we to Men, such as many of those were whom the
Heathen worshipped: Where again we shall see how little reason there was to
substitute them in the place of God. For as even these could not save
themselves from death, but were fain to pass through that, to their supposed
Divinity; so, many of them were such as may be supposed rather to have fallen
into the state of Devils, to whose nature they bear so great a resemblance,
than to be advanced to the Honor of Gods. To say nothing at all, that it
appears not they had any knowledge of things below, and much less any Power
either to reward or punish.

As little, yea, far less reason was there for the Worship of Beasts, and
Inanimate Creatures, which was the particular Error of the Egyptians, and the
lowest to which Humane Nature could fall; these having not so much as the
Reason of a Man, and much less the Understanding to know the Necessities of
those that prayed to them, or the Power to relieve and redress them.

2. But because the not substituting False Gods in the place of the True, is
rather supposed by, than directly contained in the present Prohibition; proceed
we to that which the Words do clearly and plainly import, even the not
receiving any other into Copartnership with him. Which, as it probably was the
Error of the wiser Heathen, so to be sure is that which this Commandment does
more immediately strike at; he that requires the not having any other gods
before or beside himself, both supposing the having of himself, and forbidding
the superinducing any other. And in this notion it was that the Samaritans
became Offenders against it, as you may see 2 Kings 17.33. it being there
remarked concerning them, That they feared the Lord, and served their own Gods,
after the manner of the Nations whom God carried away from thence. From which
Passage, compared with the present Prohibition, it is manifest, That to admit
any Being into a Copartnership with the True God, is enough to make a Man a
Transgressor; the Law, at the same time it forbids the having of other Gods,
supposing, in some measure, the having of the True. Which said, I shall now
inquire, Whether those of the Church of Rome are not justly chargeable with the
breach of it, in that Honor which they give both to Saints and Angels.

To begin with the Honor of Saints departed, because most stood upon by them,
and which indeed makes up a great part of their Religion: Concerning which, I
shall propose to consideration, Whether the Prayers they make to them, be not,
in effect, to set up other Gods? For, is not Prayer a great part of Religious
Worship? nay, is it not so considerable, as to give a denomination to the Place
of God's Worship; yea, to be an Ingredient in his Titles? He himself calling
his House the House of Prayer; and the Psalmist, him that inhabiteth it, the
God that hears it. And is it then any other than the setting up other Gods,
to make Saints departed the Objects of it? But it will be said, it may be, That
they do not pray to them, or at least not in that manner they do to God; only
imploring their Intercession with our Maker, and theirs; but begging no
Blessing from themselves. But first of all, Quid verba audio, facta cum videam?
What will Words avail, when their Practice is oftentimes so contrary? Neither
is there any real difference between their Prayers to them, and those to God. I
instance in that which the Rosary of the Virgin Mary presents us with, where we
have this very Prayer to the Mother of our Lord: Virgo singularis, Vid. Jacks
of the Original of Unbelief, etc. cap. 28.

Intrae omnes mitis,
Nos culpis solutos,
Mites fac and castos;
Vitam praesta puram,
Iter para tutum.
That is to say, O thou who art the chief of Virgins, and the meekest of all,
after thou have freed us from our guilt, make us meek and chaste; make our Life
pure, and our Journey safe. Which, what is it, but a Prayer to her, to grant us
those Blessings her self, and not to intercede with God for the granting of
them? Neither will it suffice to say, That their meaning is only that she
should procure it to them by their Prayers, and that accordingly they do
oftentimes so express it: For, as it were easy for them to do it always, if
they meant not to abuse the World with their Distinctions; so I cannot forbear
to say, that they ought to make use of more fit Terms, to express their
meaning, if they would free themselves from the imputation of Idolatry. For,
inasmuch as God requires to be honored by the outward as well as the inward
Man, how does that Man satisfy his Duty, who makes not some distinction
between the outward Worship he gives to God, and that which he presents to the
Saints departed? Our inward Worship being confessedly to be above that we have
for others; and our outward Worship, but an Expression of our inward. And
indeed, however they may satisfy themselves with such Mental Reservations, in
a thing that stands in need of them, I doubt the humblest of them all would not
be well pleased, if a Man should beg those things of their Servants, which are
wholly theirs; and when he had done so, pretend he meant only they should
procure them by their Intercession: Such an Allegation (as the Lawyers speak)
being Protestatio contra factum, and such as agrees not at all with that which
they would defend. The Case would be yet more convincing, if we should instance
in a Malefactor, that should petition a Romish Princes Servant for his Pardon:
For if they are jealous of their Honor, as well as other Princes, there is no
doubt they would ill resent it, both from the Petitioner, and the Party that
should receive him; yea, though it should be alleged in his excuse, That his
meaning was only that he should intercede with his Master for it, and that
meaning of his were some way knowable to the Prince. For if Words were intended
to express Men's Conceits, they ought in reason to hold some resemblance with
them, especially in a matter of so great importance.

But let us suppose, secondly, That they who pray to Saints, neither intended,
nor expressed any other, than the begging of their Intercession with the Common
Father of us all; yet even so, they cannot escape the imputation of taking them
into a Copartnership with the Almighty, because thereby ascribing to them a
kind of Omniscience, in supposing them able at that distance to hear the
several Prayers that are put up to them in several Places; especially when it
appears not, that God makes any Revelations to them of the several things
that are transacted here below: For as for that speculum Trinitatis which they
so much speak of, and their seeing all things in God, it is a groundless and
ridiculous Fancy; because it is certain they cannot see the time of the Day of
Judgment in it, and therefore neither any thing else, any farther than it shall
please God to discover it.

But be it, thirdly, not only that their Intercession was all that were
desired, and that God revealed to them both their Prayers, and other
Transactions here below; yet will there lie a just Exception against their
addressing their Petitions as often, if not oftener, to the Saints, than to God
himself; especially when that is done in Places dedicated to God's Worship, and
in the Times set apart for his Worship and Service. For, as this is a Practice
too apparent to be denied; so it is, in that respect, not only the having of
other Gods, but (which is much worse) the preferring them before the True: a
greater Honor being thereby done to them to whom they do so often address
themselves, than to him whose Altars are so little frequented. The only thing
that can with any show of reason be replied, is, That it is in reverence to the
Divine Majesty, that they address themselves rather to his Servants, than to
him: For, observing that it is not the manner of Princes to admit every Man to
present his Petitions himself, partly for avoiding of Trouble, which would
otherwise be infinite; and partly for the preserving of their State; they
conclude from thence, That the like or a greater Reverence to God must needs
prompt us to take the same course, and present our Petitions rather by the
Saints, than by our selves. But beside that we are not destitute of such a
Mediator, if we will acknowledge our Savior to be so, God himself has both
allowed and enjoined us to come unto him, and promised to accept us if we do.
And then certainly it is rather a contempt of him (because against his express
Command) to take another course, than any true Reverence to the Divine Majesty.

From Invocation or Prayer to Saints, pass we to Swearing by them; which is
another thing both practiced and defended by the Church of Rome. Where, who is
there beside themselves, that sees not how it intrenches upon the Divine
Honor, yea adopts them into the place of God? For Swearing, as was before
observed, being a calling one to witness to the sincerity of our Affirmations,
and to punish us if we prevaricate in what we affirm; he that Swears by any
Person, makes him the Knower of our Hearts, and an Avenger of those that do
prevaricate. Which, what is it but to rob God of two of the fairest Flowers of
his Diadem, and to place them in that of the Saints departed? What should I
tell you of their consecrating Temples and Altars to them; of their burning
Incense before them, and dedicating Festivals to them; of using the same lowly
Prostrations before their Images, and of making Vows to them in their distress?
For inasmuch as these, and other such like, are the only ways Men have to
express their inward Regard to the Divine Majesty, what is it, but (as far as
the outward Man is capable of doing it) to admit him into a Copartnership; or,
as the Commandment expresses it, to have other Gods beside the True? It being
enough to ground that Charge, to make them Sharers of those Honors, which are
the only ones we have to express our Reverence to the Almighty. And though I
know this also is not without its Excuse, they pretending not so much to honor
the Saints departed, as God, in and through them; yet as there ought in reason
to be a difference between the Honor of a Supreme, and of those who are but
his Servants and Dependents; so (as De decalog. in explicat. praec. 1.
Philo well observes) to give equal Things to unequal Persons, is not so much
for the honor of the Inferior, as it is to the dishonor of him that is above
them. To all which, if we add, That God is a jealous God, and has declared
himself to be so, especially in the matter of his Worship; so we shall not need
to doubt of the importance of that Prohibition, Thou shall have no other Gods
before me: Jealousy naturally arising not from manifest espousing of other
Loves, but from warping toward them, and entertaining them with the same show
of kindness and familiarity, wherewith they are wont to receive the legitimate
Object of it.

From Saints departed, pass we to Angels; concerning whom, the same may be said
that was of the other; with this only difference, that there is a greater
reason to presume some of them to be acquainted with our Prayers, because they
are sent forth by God to minister to us, and appointed to be our Watch and
Defense. But as it follows not from thence, that we may pray to them as we do
to God, nor entertain them with the same Honors and Adorations; so the
Scripture has particularly cautioned us against making them our Mediators, or
giving them the outward Worship of God. For thus, Col. 2.18, 19. we are bidden
to take heed lest any man beguile us of our reward, in a voluntary humility,
and worshipping of angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind: And not holding the head, from which all
the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together,
increases with the increase of God. For, as it is manifest, from the voluntary
humility upon which it is grounded, that the Apostles meaning is not to decry
the making them equal with God, (that having not any the least shadow of
Humility) but the making use of them as Mediators to him; so it is much more,
because he affirms those that do so, not to hold the head, even Christ Jesus,
Vid. Grot. in explicat. Decalog. ubi hunc locum ad Colossenses egregie explicat.
from whom all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered and
knit together, increases with the increase of God. He thereby plainly
destroying the making use of any other Mediator between us and God, to procure
that spiritual Nourishment which we want. There is the same or a greater
evidence against entertaining them with such Honors as either the Consent of
some Nations has appropriated unto God, or some particular Age or Place has
devoted to his Service: For thus, for the former; When Manoah would have
detained the Angel of the Lord, whilst he made ready a Kid; supposing there
might be some design of Sacrificing in it, he made answer, That if he should
detain him, he would not eat of it; and, if his meaning was to offer a
burnt-offering, he must offer it to the Lord: thereby plainly removing all
Attempts of that nature toward himself, and confining such kind of Services
unto God, Judge. 13.16. In like manner, when St. John would have fallen down at
the feet of an Angel, to worship him (which I am apt to think, both from this
place, and St. Peter's refusing the like Gesture from Cornelius, to have been
more particularly devoted by that Age or Place to the Worship of God) when, I
say, St. John would have thus fallen down at the feet of the Angel, to worship
him, the Angel made answer, See thou do it not; for I am thy fellow servants,
and of thy brethren which have the testimony of Jesus: worship God. Which
Passage does not only destroy the giving of such Worship to Angels, but also
remove that Answer which is given by Grotius and others to it; to wit, That the
Angel forbad it, not because of any unlawfulness in it, but only for its
unsuitableness from an Apostle to an Angel, who was but his Brother and
Fellow Servants: For, as he there affirms himself to be a Brother and
Fellow Servants also of those that had the Testimony of Jesus, which more beside
the Apostles had; so adding in the close of it, Worship God, he plainly shows
he had a further reason in forbidding it, even because of its propriety to the
Divine Majesty. For though such a Gesture was indifferent in it self, and
accordingly had been frequently used even by good Men, toward those of the same
make with themselves; yet either that Age had in a manner appropriated it to
the Worship of God, or the Angel thought that Reverence might have been liable
to misconstruction, in those who should afterward hear of it: Either of which
will tie us up from giving them such outward Adoration, as may but seem to
entrench upon the Divine: For, if the fear of the latter, made an Angel refuse
it, yea, lay a strict charge upon St. John not to do it; we may be sure God is
extremely jealous in this particular, and forbids the very semblances thereof.
For, as for those who would have St. John faulted here, for bowing down to the
Angel, as to God; it is absurd, yea, impious, to conceive of so great an
Apostle, especially after he had been once admonished of it: but much more
absurd to believe so of Cornelius (who yet was in like manner chid for falling
down at Peter's Feet) because he had no reason to take him for other than a
Man, See Jackson of the Original of Unbelief, etc. chap. 26.
though designed by God for his Instructor. From all which, put together, it is
manifest, That to give either Saints or Angels the same outward Worship with
their Maker, is a thing which he abhors, and looks upon as the taking other
Gods into a Copartnership with him.

But leaving the Papists, against whose Errors yet it was but necessary to
caution you, especially in a matter of so great importance; let us inquire a
little whether some of us are not as guilty of having other Gods before the
True: For, do not some Men (as the Apostle speaks) make their Belly their
God, and devote the main of their Endeavors to the satisfaction of it? Do not
other Men make a God of their Palate, and make it their chief Business to
gratify it? Do not a third sort (as the Prophet Habakkuk 1.15.
speaks) sacrifice to their net, and burn incense to their drag? that is to
say, to their own either Parts, or Endeavors, whilst they ascribe their
Success and Wealth to them? Again, Do we not fear some Men equally with, yea,
more than God? Do not those Fears oftentimes put us upon transgressing his
Commands? Do we not love other Persons, or Things, as much or more than our
Maker? Do we not love them, as God wills us to do himself, with all our heart,
and mind, and strength? In fine, Do we not often trust in the Arm of Flesh, and
say unto it, Thou art our confidence? But what is this less than the having
other Gods before, that I say not to the exclusion of the True? For, if to
Fear, and Love, and Trust, be Acts of inward Devotion, especially when raised
above the pitch of Created Excellencies; he that so either loves, or fears, or
trusts, turns the Monarchy of Heaven into a Commonwealth, and makes as many
Gods, as there are Persons or Things which he does so adore.

PART VIII.
Concerning the attributing to a Creature any part of the Honor that is due to
God; which is the last thing excluded by the Third Capital Precept of this
Commandment. That done either directly and expressly, as by giving to it the
Name of God, without any diminishing Explication; or indirectly, and by
consequence: Of which sort is the attributing to Natural Agents the Success
even of Natural Force, or ascribing to them Supernatural one. Upon occasion of
which last, inquiry is made into the Lawfulness of Astrological Predictions; of
attempting to discover Secrets, whether past or present, by Means equally
unapt; or remove Evils by Charms and Amulets. A Conclusion of the whole, with
a brief Account of Men's transacting with the Devil; where is shown, That we
have little reason to question the truth of such Transactions, and far less to
allow them.

3. THAT we ought not to substitute any other Gods in the room of the True, or
receive any other into Copartnership with him, enough has been said to show,
where I had those for the Subject of my Discourse. Nothing remains toward a
full Explication of the Commandment, but to show in like manner, that we ought
not to attribute to any thing else any part of that Honor which is due unto
him. A thing which the Words of the Prophet Isaiah 42.8.
(And my glory will I not give unto another) as well as the importance of this
Commandment, will warrant us to affirm: He who attributes to any thing else,
any part of that Honor which is due unto him, so far as he does so, both
making that his God, and giving the Glory of God to it. The only thing
therefore that it will concern us to inquire into, is, By what ways that is, or
may be done; which accordingly I come now to investigate.

Now there are two ways whereby that may be done, and which therefore are to be
supposed to be alike forbidden by this Commandment; the giving of God's Glory
directly and expressly, or indirectly and by consequence. In the former of these
I place, first, the giving to any Created Being the Name of God, without any
diminishing Explication. A thing which has not been unusual with fawning
Persons, in their Addresses to Princes, and other such Great Personages: For
thus, when Herod, arrayed in his Royal Apparel, made an Oration to those of his
Jurisdiction, the Text tells us, that, at the conclusion of it, they gave a
shout, saying, It is the voice of a God, and not of a Man, Act. 12.22. By which
means, as they did directly and expressly give the Honor of God to a mortal
Man, and consequently became Transgressors of this Commandment; so God showed
so much displeasure at the thing, that he avenged himself upon Herod, for not
averting that Blasphemous Appellation from himself. And though the like cannot
lightly be thought to happen under the Gospel, especially after so plain a
declaration of the displeasure of God against it; yet it is sufficiently known,
that some of the Church of Rome have proceeded to so great a degree of Flattery
and Blasphemy, as to style the Pope of Rome, Our Lord God the Pope. I place in
the same rank, what was no less usual an Extravagancy in former days, the
Building of Temples, or offering Sacrifices to mortal Men: Of which kind of
Honors the Apostles of our Lord were so apprehensive, that when the Priest of
Lystra brought Oxen and Garlands to their Gates, and would have done Sacrifice
to Paul and Barnabas, for recovering an impotent Cripple; both the one and the
other of them rent their clothes at the mention of it, and labored by all
means possible to divert them from their purpose. But because such kind of
Extravagancies are not so usual in our days, unless it be to Departed Saints,
for which I have sufficiently accounted already; I will leave both that, and
the present Head, when I have advertised you, That it is alike offensive to
bear a Man's self as a God, whether by commanding such kind of Honors from
other Men, or receiving them when offered by them; he that does so, making a
Deity of himself, and consequently bringing himself within the compass of the
Commandment.

How the Glory of God may be given to another directly and expressly, you have
seen already, and might, with a little advertency, have discovered without my
help, because it sufficiently betrayeth it self: Proceed we therefore to
inquire, how it may be done indirectly, and by consequence; because that is not
so obvious and apparent. Where, first, I shall reckon as an instance of it, the
attributing the Success of any Enterprise whatsoever, to those Natural Agents
which are made use of to compass it: For, it appearing both from the
Scriptures, and our own Experience, that whatsoever aptitude there is in the
Force we make use of, yet the Success of it depends upon the Blessing of the
Divine Providence (it being equally true in other Cases, what St. Paul spoke in
a particular one, That Paul may plant, and Apollo may water; but it is God that
must give the increase) whosoever shall go about to attribute the Success of
any Enterprise to his own or others Endeavors, must consequently be thought to
give the Glory of God to another, and therefore so far also makes a God of it.
But from hence it will follow, That he gives the Glory of God unto another,
who either before the Event, depends upon Natural Causes for the producing of
it; or ascribes it to their Force and Virtue, after it is accomplished. Which
latter is so plain and obvious, that when the Prophet Habakkuk Chap. 1.16.
would represent the criminalness thereof unto the Jews, he expresses it by
sacrificing to their nets, and burning incense to their drags; Ceremonies which
are sufficiently known to have been made use of by all Nations, to express
their Reverence to their Gods.

From the attributing the Success of any thing to Natural Agents, pass we to
the attributing to them Supernatural Force, and such as is proper to God only.
In the number of which, I reckon, Foreknowledge of contingent Events; the
Discovery of other Secrets, whether past or present, by Means which have no
natural aptitude to disclose them; and the making use of the like unapt Means,
to prevent or remove Evils. For, though it be not to be doubted, that these may
belong to Men, yea, did actually concur in the Prophets and Apostles; for which
cause it may seem no immediate intrenchment upon God's Glory, to attribute them
to mortal Men: yet as those who were Partakers of them, became so by the Grace
of God, to whom alone they do primarily belong; so he who attributes them to
any Creature, as such, and without consideration of the Divine Majesty's
imparting them, must consequently be thought to give the Honor of God to them,
because implying those Qualities to be inherent in their Nature, which are so
only in the Divine, and by whom alone they can be imparted. For the more
particular evidencing whereof, I will resume each of the Particulars
before-remembred; and first, the Foreknowledge of contingent Events.

Now there are two things manifestly implied in that Foreknowledge whereof we
speak; and which therefore are to be carefully heeded, when we affirm it to be
peculiar to the Divine Majesty: First, that it be certain, and not conjectural
only; and secondly, That it be of such Events as are purely contingent, that
is to say, of those that are altogether uncertain, and particularly such as
depend upon the variable Will of Man, or the mere Will and Pleasure of the
Almighty. Thus to instance in the former of these, though it cannot certainly
be known beforehand, by Natural Force, what shall be the Event of any Battle,
because the Event of that, and other such like weighty Actions, depend upon an
infinity of Circumstances, which it is impossible for the Wit of Man to
foresee; yet may it oftentimes be conjectured, by those who have considered of
the Preparations of the one and the other Party, their usual manner of, or
Courage in Fighting, and the Advantages or Disadvantages of either: For though
the Victory be not always to the strongest and the wisest, God Almighty, in his
Providence, sometime casting it upon the weakest, by the interposition of some
unlook'd-for Accident; yet inasmuch as God for the most part works by ordinary
Means, and gives Success to those Agents which are most apt to produce it, it
may not improbably be conjectured, by him who has considered the Advantages or
Disadvantages on either hand, on which Side the Victory shall fall, though he
pretend to no other Skill than what Humane Reason furnishes. In like manner,
because those great Lights the Stars have an unquestionable Influence upon
Humane Bodies, as the Temperament of the Body upon that Soul which is joined
with it; possibly a Conjecture may be made, by those who are well versed in
either, what Courses Men shall take who are born under such or such
Constellations; because Men do, for the most part, or at least where they are
not overruled by the Divine Providence, follow the conduct of their natural
Temperament, as that does the sway of the Celestial Influences. But, as it is
one thing to say, That those things may be conjectured; and another, That they
may be certainly foreknown, by the Position of the Heavenly Bodies, or other
Means: so, that they cannot be so foreknown, needs no other proof, than that
Liberty of Will which God has given a Man, as to his own Actions, and the
alterations that are made in Men by Education and Grace, and infinite external
Impediments; by means of which, Men naturally ill disposed may become good, or
better, as the Divine Goodness shall minister opportunity. Again, As that
Foreknowledge, which we affirm to be peculiar to the Divine Majesty, must be
supposed to be certain, and such as may deserve the Name of Knowledge, and not
only of Conjecture, or Guess; so a Foreknowledge of such things as are purely
contingent and uncertain: For of such Effects as are necessary, no doubt there
may be a Foreknowledge, yea, such a Foreknowledge, as, the ordinary course of
Things considered, is as certain in it self, as the knowledge of those things
that are present to us. Thus, for instance, though there be no Foreknowledge of
Men's Actions, and the Events of them, because the Dispositions of Men are
alterable by Custom and Education, and much more by the Divine Providence; yet
there may be a Foreknowledge of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and other
such the Affections of Heavenly Bodies; because the Courses and the Causes of
them are constant and uniform, and may therefore, where those Causes and
Courses are considered and understood, be not only preconjectur'd by us, but
certainly and infallibly foreknown. But, as it is one thing to say, That
necessary Effects may be foreknown; and another, That purely contingent ones
may: so, that the latter cannot be foreknown by Humane Understandings, is
evident from the manner of their procedure. For Humane Knowledge proceeding by
the consideration of the Causes; where those Causes are uncertain, our
Knowledge also must be, and either none at all, or conjectural. And indeed,
however the Wit of Man has arrogated to it self the Foreknowledge of Future
Contingents, yet is that not only above the reach of Humane Understandings,
but the peculiar Prerogative of the Divine; as is evident from Isa. 41.21. and
Isa. 42.8. For arguing, in the former place, the nothingness of the Heathen
Deities, from their utter inability to declare the things that shall be
hereafter; as, in the latter, asserting the Truth of his own Godhead, from his
ability to declare them: he thereby plainly shows, that the Foreknowledge of
future Things is the Prerogative of the Divine Nature, and of those to whom he
shall be pleased to impart it. Where therefore that Foreknowledge is pretended
to, without a peculiar Revelation from God, he who does so, must consequently
arrogate to himself the Glory of the Divine Majesty; and he who attributes it
to him, so far forth make a God of him. Neither will it avail to say, That that
Foreknowledge which we appropriate unto God, has evidenced it self in Men, by
the falling out of several of those Events which they have foretold: For, as it
is not at all to be wondered, that they should sometime hit the Mark, who throw
so many Darts at it; so they whose both Religion and Education disposed them to
an approbation of such kind of Arts, saw the vanity of them, and stuck not to
discover it to the World: Tully De Divinat. lib. 2.
in particular affirming, That the far greater part of those things which the
Soothsayers foretold, fell out otherwise than they were predicted; and so
often, that (as the same Tully informs us) Cato was wont to say, That he
wondered very much how such kind of Persons could forbear laughing when they saw
one another: That even the Responses of their Oracles were partly false, and
partly casually true; That they were many times modeled by the Humor and
Bribes of those who did consult them; That they were expressed at some times in
such Terms as were not easy to be understood; and at other times, in such
equivocal ones as might be adapted to contrary Events: In fine, That the whole
Art of Divination was but Conjecture, and subject to more uncertainty than
those Events it pretended to foretell. All which things whosoever shall
seriously consider, will find the Foreknowledge of Men, not inspired by the
Almighty, to be rather overthrown than confirmed by their Predictions; there
being little fear of its receiving any countenance from those Divinations,
which they, who were highly concerned to propugn as true, did not yet stick to
affirm to be fallacious and vain.

Having thus shown Foreknowledge of Things contingent to be the Prerogative of
the Divine Nature, and consequently not to be attributed to any Creature, to
which he has not been pleased to impart it, without giving the Glory of God to
another; it remains that we also show the same of the discovery of other
Secrets, whether past, or present, by Means which have no natural aptitude to
disclose them. Who they are that arrogate such a Power unto themselves, or
others, need not be told you, when the generality of the Common sort, to
discover any thing lost, or stolen, make use of Magical Arts, or resort to
those that do; things which have no natural tendency to the discovery of that
which they are made use of to disclose. The only thing worth our while to
show, is, That so to do, is to entrench upon the Divine Prerogative, and give
the Glory of God unto another. A Charge which it will be impossible for those
whom they call Cunning-men to avoid, though we should absolve them from any
express or tacit Stipulation with the Devil. For that which has no natural
aptitude for that purpose for which it is made use of, requiring the creating
of one; as that again, the Work of an Almighty Power; he who pretends an
Ability in himself, or others, to make it successful to that purpose for which
it has no natural aptitude, must consequently suppose himself, or those
others, to have a Power to give it one; which is a manifest Usurpation upon the
Almighty. But then, if we consider such Arts as are either tacit or express
Applications to the Devil, under which Notion it is reasonable enough to look
upon them (for as the Things such Persons make use of, have no natural aptitude
for such a Discovery; so they have no reason at all to expect it from God,
especially after the prohibition See Lev. 19.31. Deuteronomy. 18.9, 10, etc.
of such Courses, and must therefore expect it from the Devil) so, I say, we
shall be less to seek for a proof of their giving the Glory of God unto
another, who make use of such unlawful Arts to compass their Designs: He who
applies himself to the Devil for the discovery of any Secret, both supposing
him not to be without an ability to do it, and depending and trusting in him
for it. Which, what is it, but to exalt the Devil into the place of God, and
make him, whom the Scripture styles The God of this World, to be no less our
own? For though many things which are secret to us, may yet be known to him, as
having possibly tempted the Party inquired after to the committing of them; yet
we cannot well suppose, that this or that particular one is, unless we suppose
that all Secrets of Men are: Which, though it do not amount to an Omniscience,
yet seems too great a Knowledge for any Created Being to be Master of; partly,
because we find God, Deuteronomy. 29.29. challenging the knowledge of secret things to
himself: but more especially, because in one of the Places before-quoted out of
the Prophet Isaiah, he argues the nothingness of the Heathen Deities, as well
as the reality of his own, from their being unable to declare the former things
what they be, as well as to declare things that are to come, both which he
challenges to himself. Which way of Reasoning would have been fallacious, if
to declare the former things what they be, were not the Privilege of the Divine
Nature, as well as the declaring of things to come. The Case will be yet more
clear, concerning Men's exalting the Devil into the place of God, if those
Applications which they make to him, be attended with a Compact of giving up
themselves unto his Service: for, so doing, they shall not only renounce their
allegiance to their Maker, with which the Service of the Devil is inconsistent;
but manifestly seat him in God's Throne, and give him that Honor which belongs
to him.

To the discovery of Things secret by such Means as are no way apt to disclose
them, subjoyn we, as of near affinity with it, the making use of Means equally
unapt to procure freedom from those Evils which we either fear or feel. In
which number I reckon, not only those Charms, or Spells, or Amulets, which
are made use of by the Ordinary sort, to avert any Evils from themselves, or
Cattle; but such as are made use of, with more show of Devotion, by the
Papists, to avert any Evils either from themselves, or Fruit, or other
Substance. That such things as these have no natural aptitude for those Effects
which they are designed to produce, is too apparent to be denied; and will, I
suppose, not be affirmed by those who make use of them, if it were but for the
credit of their own Art or Superstition. It remains therefore, if we suppose
them to have any Force, (as surely those who make use of them, would not
otherwise employ them) that they receive that Force either from God, or the
User, or the Devil. To suppose they receive it from God, is highly
unreasonable, unless we had the Authority of some immediate Revelation for it:
Because those miraculous Effects which the Apostles themselves produced, were
the Results of their Faith, which supposes a Divine Revelation to found it
self upon. If therefore the Means before-spoken of receive that Force which we
expect from them, it must be either from our selves, or the Devil: Both the one
and the other of which, will involve the Party that uses them, in giving the
Glory of God unto another. For inasmuch as the Means we make use of, has no
natural aptitude for that Effect which is designed to be produced by it, it
remains, that if it receive any from us, it must be created therein by us;
which is to attribute to our selves, or those we apply our selves to, one of
the principal Prerogatives of the Almighty. All therefore that remains to be
said, in excuse of such Practices, is, That we expect it from the Devil; which
yet is (God knows) one of the greatest aggravations of their Guilt: For,
beside that God has declared himself an irreconcilable Enemy to the Devil,
and cannot therefore but look upon any Application to him, as an Act of
Opposition to himself; he who applies himself to the Devil, for the prevention
or removal of any Evil, must consequently be supposed to desire it, both
against the Will, and without the help of the Almighty. The former, because
there is no Evil which does or can befall us, but by his Providence: The latter,
because God, from whom every good and perfect gift comes, cannot be supposed
to communicate it by his hands, to whom he professes himself an Enemy;
especially when the Boon we expect is asked not of God, to whom we are required
to address our selves, but of him who is no less God's Enemy than ours. Now,
who sees not, that such Applications as these, involve those that make them,
in giving the Glory of God to another, if not in setting him far above Him? He
who desires any Boon of another, without the help of God, supposing that other
to be self-sufficient; as he who desires and expects it against the will of
God, that he is able to control Him. Neither will it avail to say, which yet
is commonly pretended, That all who make use of such Arts, have not any
intention or suspicion of making any Application to the Devil: For though I am
willing enough to believe, that many of them have not; and cannot therefore but
acquit them from the purpose of it: yet it is past either my skill, or theirs,
to acquit them from the thing it self, or from being looked upon as chargeable
with it: Men being justly chargeable with making Applications to the Devil, who
make use of such Means for the attaining of their Purpose, the Success whereof
cannot rationally be expected from any other; especially when God himself has
cautioned Men against the use of them, and represented them as detestable and
abominable, yea, to such a Degree, as to occasion the casting out those Nations
who possessed the Land of Canaan before the Israelites. Which how they should
be thought to do, if they were rather vain Curiosities, than secret or open
Transactions with the Devil, will, I think, be very difficult to determine. And
indeed, as some of those Persons have the Title of Dealers with Familiar
Spirits, and all of them are represented under the same Guilt, and obnoxious to
the same Penalties; so it is strange to observe, that some Men should be so
highly unreasonable, as to question that Diabolical Commerce, after so many
Authentic Stories which have been published to the World concerning it, the
free Confession of the accused Parties, and the Sentences of grave and sober
Judges; but especially after what the Scriptures of the New Testament have
declared concerning the Devil and his Angels: They representing the Devil and
his Ministers as encompassing the earth to procure mischief, as the God of this
world, and ruling in the children of disobedience, as entering, through the
Divine Permission, into men, and speaking in and by them; in fine (for so we
read, Acts 16.16.) divining, as well as using other Speeches by them, and
suggesting those Soothsayings for which such kind of Persons are resorted to.
After all which, to question either the possibility or truth of a Diabolical
Commerce, is not only to be unreasonably scrupulous, but to be impudently
unbelieving; because contradicting the general Sense and Experience of the
World, and the clear Declarations of the Scriptures. I will conclude this
Affair with a Passage in Leviticus Chap. 20.6.
because both expressing God's detestation of all Magical Practices, and his
accounting of them as Idolatry, or the giving of his Glory unto another: And
the Soul that turns after such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards,
to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face against that man, and will
cut him off from among his people. For representing such Addresses under the
term of going a whoring, which, in the Language of the Old Testament, is no
other than the espousing of other Deities; he thereby gives us to understand,
that they are in effect an Abrenunciation of himself, and an espousing of other
Deities in stead of him.

THE SECOND COMMANDMENT.
THE SECOND COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor Worship or serve.
them: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins or iniquity.
of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them
that hate me, and show mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

PART I.
The Contents.
That what we reckon as the Second Commandment, is really such, and not an
Appendix of the First. This evidenced by several Reasons; as also that it
respects the Manner, and not the Object of our Worship. The Commandment divided
into a Precept, and a Sanction; as that again into an Affirmative, and Negative
one. The Affirmative, That we worship God after a due manner; which also is
there specified: and particularly, That we worship God in Spirit and Truth, the
purport whereof is at large declared. Among other things, the Questions
concerning Will Worship, and worshipping God with Ceremonies, discussed and
stated.

I Am now arrived at the Second Commandment; for so I hope I may have leave to
call it, after the Travels of our Divines upon that Argument: For though the
Papists represent it as an Appendix only to the First, and, which is much
worse, have, upon that pretense, razed it quite out of their Catechisms; yet is
there so little reason for their way of Reckoning, and so much for ours, that I
doubt not all impartial Men will cast it on their sides who look upon it as
distinct from the former Precept. For beside that all Antiquity Joseph. Antiqu.
Judaic. lib. 3. cap. 4: (...). Sulpit. Sever. Sacrae hist. li. 1. Non erunt
tibi dei alieni praeter me. Non facies tibi Idolum. Non sumes nomen Dei tui in
vanum, etc. See more upon this Head in D. Tailor 's Duct, Dubit. Book 2. Chap.
2. Rule 6.
generally have so accounted of it, or at least have united it to the First
upon different grounds; beside, that it seemed but requisite that provision
should be made for the manner of our Worship, as well as for the Object of it;
beside, lastly, that the worshipping of the True God by an Image, is elsewhere
as expressly forbidden, as the substituting of False Gods in his room: beside
all these things, I say, which yet are very material Considerations; the very
words of the Commandment, to a diligent Observer, show the Manner of our
Worship to be the thing aimed at in them: For, forbidding to make or worship
the likeness of any thing, either in the upper or lower World, he thereby
plainly declared his meaning to be, not to caution them against an undue
Object, but against that kind of Adoration; he who worshippeth the likeness of
any thing, making not that his God before which he so falls down, but that
which it was designed to represent. Which is so true, that the Papists
themselves are forced to allege it in behalf of their own Idololatrical
Worship. Neither will it suffice to say (as I find it is by them) That what we
call the Second Commandment did therefore descend to instance in Images,
because those were the chief Gods among the Heathen: For as the generality of
the Heathen were undoubtedly too wise to terminate their Worship there, the
very Name of an Image directing Men to that of which it is so an Image; so it
is not easy to conceive, save of the very Beasts of the People, that they
should believe a Stone, or a piece of Wood, to be a God. From our own Account,
pass we to that of our Adversaries, which we shall find to be more groundless
than the former: For, as without any cogent Reason, or indeed only probable
one, they annex this Second Commandment to the First; so, against all Sense and
Reason, they divide that into two, which says, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house, wife, etc. making the Ninth to be, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife; as the Tenth, Thou shall not covet other the possessions of
thy neighbor. But beside that our Savior himself referred the looking upon a
Woman to lust after her, to that of, Thou shall not commit adultery; it is to
be observed, That in the Twentieth Chapter of Exodus, which was the Copy of the
Decalogue as it was given, Moses reckons the coveting of the house first, and
then that of our neighbors wife: So that, by their Account, the Ninth
Commandment should lie in the Body of the Tenth, and the Tenth lie part of it
before the Ninth, and part of it after; which (as a Learned Man has well
observed D. Tailor Duct. Dubit. ubi supr.
) is a Prejudice against it, far greater than can be out-weigh'd by any or all
the Pretenses that can be made for it: Especially when the last Clause of the
Commandment, nor any thing that is his, shows the Coveting there forbidden to
refer, in every Article of it, to the coveting of another Man's Possessions,
which is not the Sin of Intemperance, but Injustice. But because, when I come
to entreat of the Matter of the Tenth Commandment, I may have occasion to speak
farther of it, I will quit the prosecution of that Particular, to apply my self
to the Commandment now before me; wherein you may observe with me these two
Parts.

1. The Precept it self, Thou shall not make or worship a graven image. 2. The
Sanction of that Precept; God will avenge the Transgression of it upon the
children of the transgressors, to the third and fourth generation; as, on the
other side, reward the Observance of it to a far greater tract of time and
number, in the Posterity of those that shall observe it.
I. Among the several Rules before laid down, for the Explication of the Ten
Commandments, you may remember I assigned this for one, That in every Negative
Precept, we were to look out for an Affirmative one, answerable thereto: By
which Rule if we proceed here, so

1. The Affirmative Precept will be, That we worship God after a due manner,
and particularly (because the present Prohibition strikes especially at that
gross way of Worship, by a Bodily Representation) That we worship him in spirit
and in truth. The only difficulty is, what that due manner is; which
accordingly I come now to explain. For the resolution whereof, not to descend
to Particulars, both because I have in part prevented my self in the foregoing
Discourse, and because the labor would be infinite, I shall observe,

1. First, That to worship God after a due manner, is to square it by his
Nature and Attributes. For Worship being nothing else than an Acknowledgment of
his Excellencies whom we pretend to worship, it is in reason to be suited to
those several Excellencies which are discernable in the Divine Majesty. But
from hence it will follow, That to worship God after a due manner, is to fear,
and love, and trust in him; because those Affections are suitable to that
Majesty, and Goodness, and Fidelity, which are eminent in the Divine Nature. I
observe,

2. That to worship God after a due manner, is to worship him according to his
own direction and appointment; that is to say, That we worship him as he has
commanded us to do, and that we worship him after no other manner. Of the
former of these, there cannot be the least doubt, to wit, That we are to
worship God according as he himself has enjoined; he that omits so to do, or
acts contrary to his will and pleasure, denying that Authority which is
inherent in the Divine Nature. The only difficulty is, Whether, provided we
worship him according as he himself has appointed, we may not also worship him
according as we our selves shall judge farther expedient? For the resolution
whereof, we must distinguish of the Substantials of Religious Worship, and of
those things which are but Circumstances thereof. If the Question be concerning
the former, there is no doubt but the Will of God ought not only to be our
Rule, but the only Rule whereby we are to proceed. For God having not only
given us the Light of Nature to direct us in his Worship, but the more clear
Declarations of his Word; to add any thing to his Worship, as a Substantial
Part thereof, would be a blemish to those Declarations, because supposing God
to have made imperfect ones. The Case is far otherwise as to the Circumstances
of Time, or Place, or the Gestures by which it is to be performed: For, it
being necessary on the one hand, that some Time, and Place, and Gesture be made
use of, for the performance of his Worship; and it being evident, on the other
hand, that God either has not prescribed at all concerning them, or at least
not done it with that fullness that is requisite; either the Worship of God must
be wholly omitted, or it must be left to the Reason of Private Men, to order
their own private Worship, as to the Circumstances thereof; and to the Reason
of the Governors of the Church, to order the Public ones. Care only would be
taken, 1. That what is ordered by Private or Public Persons, be agreeable to
those General Rules which the Light of Nature teaches, or the Doctrine of the
Scriptures present us withal. Otherwise we do not only set up our own
Inventions, but oppose them to the Commands of God. Care would be taken, 2.
That what is so ordered, be not either represented, or enjoined, as the Command
of God: For that is literally to teach for doctrines the commandments of men,
which our Savior has expressly forbidden us. 3. Lastly, Care would be taken,
That what is so ordered in the Worship of God, be not represented as things
pleasing to God in themselves; but only as they serve for Order and Decency,
and as they are Instances of our Obedience to those whom God has placed in
Authority over us. For, by inculcating them as things pleasing to God in
themselves, we fall under the Charge of Will Worship, because not only adding
our own Inventions to the Worship of God, but placing them in the same rank
with it.


But these Cautions being observed, there is not any the least doubt to be
made, either of the necessity of our Obedience to them, or of our freedom from
that Will Worship which the Apostle condemns. For, as the Commandment is
express for our yielding obedience to those that have the rule over us, and
particularly to such as watch for our souls (which cannot but be supposed to
take in all those things which require a determination, in order to the more
decent performance of God's Public Worship;) so there is not any just fear of
falling into that Will Worship which St. Paul cautioneth his Colossians
against. For, beside that he cannot in any Propriety of Speech be said to add
to the Worship of God, who represents not what he so adds, in the same
condition with it, but only as subservient to it; so (which shows it yet
farther to be no Will Worship) he does what he does by virtue of the Divine
Command, even of that, and other such like, which prescribe, That in the
Worship of God all things be done decently and in order. If therefore what is
so added, be grounded upon a Divine Command, it is no longer the result of the
Wills of Men, at least as distinct from that of God; but a just compliance with
his: which is a Will Worship which I hope none of us but will think our selves
obliged to perform.

Having thus shown at large, not only that our Worship ought to be suited to
the Nature of God, but also agreeable to his Commands; it remains only, for
the completing of our Design, that we instance in one or two Commandments, by
which our Worship is especially to be regulated: Whereof the first that I shall
assign, and let that pass for

3. My third Rule, is, The Worshipping of God in Christ: For, that so we are to
do, God has expressly declared by that Son of his, in whom he has commanded us
to adore him. Is Faith or Trust a part of Divine Worship? Our Savior's Merits
are to be the ground of it, there being no other Name (as the Apostle speaks)
whereby we can be saved. Is Hope a part of Divine Worship? The same Jesus is to
be the ground of that also, as by whom alone we are obliged to expect the
Object of it. Is Prayer a part of Divine Worship? That also is to pass by him,
as being to ask what we do in his name, and for his sake. Is Thanksgiving a
part of Divine Worship? We are to give thanks unto God and the Father by him,
Col. 3.17. In fine, Whatsoever we do in relation to God, or even our selves, is
to be done with reference to him, as God's Instrument both in Governing and
Redeeming us: For, wherefore else should God no less than twice declare from
Heaven, That he was the Person in whom he was well pleased; and once of that
twice, moreover, oblige his Disciples upon that account to hear him? but to let
us know (as St. Paul speaks) that whatsoever we do in word or deed, we should
do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus? That we should do what we do in obedience
to his Commands, and with respect to that Authority which God vested in him;
That we should do what we do with respect to his Example, and have an eye to
his most holy Life, as well as most excellent Precepts; That we should do what
we do with respect to the great Obligations he has laid upon us, by humbling
himself to the death, even the death of the cross, for us; That we should do
what we do in confidence of his Assistance, and not rely upon the strength of
Nature, or any Moral Acquisitions; lastly, That we should do what we do in
confidence of Acceptance in and through the Merits of his Passion? For, as each
of these is sometime or other the meaning of acting in his Name, and therefore
not lightly to be excluded; so we have great reason to believe them all
included in that forementioned Text, because all tending to his Honor, and
elsewhere expressly required of us, to make our Worship acceptable.

4. That to Worship after a due manner, we are to worship him in Christ, has
been already declared; together with the full Importance of such a Worship. The
next, and indeed only thing that I shall need to subjoyn, is, That we worship
him in Spirit and in Truth, according as was before insinuated. For the
evidencing whereof, though it might suffice to tell you, That this, if any, is
the Affirmative part of the Precept, because the Negative strikes at the
worshipping of him by a corporeal and sensible Representation; yet because it
is a matter of importance, and indeed one of the great Duties of the Gospel, I
shall allot it a more full Probation. In order whereunto, I shall lay for my
Groundwork that known Saying of our Savior, which establishes such a
Worship, with the proper Ground of it: God is a Spirit, and they that worship
him must worship him in spirit and truth, Joh. 4.24.

Now there are two Senses wherein those Words are to be considered, and which
therefore are to be distinctly handled: 1. A Natural or Moral Sense: And, 2. An
Evangelical one. The former, because grounded upon a Natural and Eternal
Reason: The latter, because (as I shall afterward show) the Precept of
Worshipping God in Spirit, is opposed to that Worship which was in use under
the Law.


1. To begin with the former Sense, even that which I call the Natural, because
grounded upon a Natural Reason; where again I shall consider the Reason upon
which it stands, and then the due Importance of it.

For the Reason upon which it stands, it will cost us little pains to evidence
it to be a just Foundation of such a Worship. For, inasmuch as all things
naturally are most affected with such Things and Operations as come nearest to
their own Nature, it must needs be, that if God be a Spirit, they who would
serve him acceptably, must present him with such a Worship as approaches
nearest to his own spiritual Nature. The only thing worthy our inquiry, is,
What the Importance of such a Worship is; which therefore I come now to resolve.

In order whereunto, the first thing that I shall offer, is, That it is not
meant to exclude wholly the Service of the Body: For, beside that That is God's
by right of Creation, and Preservation, yea, by all other ways by which the
Soul is, and consequently to pay God an Acknowledgment of its own Subjection
and Obedience; it is the distinct Affirmation of St. Paul, That we are to
glorify God with our Bodies, and with our Spirits that are his. I observe,
secondly, That as the Worshipping God in Spirit is not to be understood to
exclude wholly the Worshipping him with our Bodies; so neither to exclude all
Worshipping him by Rites and Ceremonies. For, as the Christian Religion it self
is not without such Rites, even of God's own appointment (witness the Sacrament
of our Initiation into it, and that other of our Continuance in it) so it is
much more evident, that under the Law a great part of the Worship of God
consisted in such Rites and Ceremonies: But so it could not have done, had a
spiritual Worship excluded all worshipping him by Rites and Ceremonies; because
God was no less a Spirit under the Law, than under the Gospel; and therefore no
less so to be adored. It remains therefore, That by worshipping God in
Spirit, we understand, first of all, the worshipping him with our Spirits; and
that too in an especial manner. For as it is but requisite, that he who is a
Spirit, should have the worship of ours, because most agreeable to his own
Nature; so also, that we should for that reason intend that Worship especially,
and make it the chief of our Study and Design. And accordingly, though under
the Law, for the grosness of the Jews, God appointed them a Worship which
consisted much in Rites and Ceremonies; yet he gave them sufficiently to
understand, that the spiritual Worship, or the Worship of the Soul, was that
which he principally required. Witness one for all, that of the Prophet David,
Psalm. 51.16, 17. For thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it thee:
thou delightest not in burnt-offering. The Sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou shall not despise. The
result of the Premises is this, That to worship God in Spirit, and consequently
to worship him after a due manner, is especially to intend the worshipping him
with ours; that is to say, by entertaining honorable thoughts of him, by
endeavoring to conform our Wills to his most holy one, and lastly, by suiting
our Affections to his several Attributes, by fearing, and loving, and trusting
in him. But, beside the Worshipping of God with our Spirits, and that too in a
more especial manner; to worship God in Spirit does also imply the worshipping
him without an Image, or any Corporeal Representation: For, beside that this is
the very thing here forbidden, and therefore in reason to be supposed to be
excluded, by worshipping God in spirit and in truth; to worship God by an
Image, is so far from being consistent with a spiritual Worship, that it is but
a dishonouring of him, because resembling him to things to which he is no way
like, and which indeed are infinitely below the Excellencies of his Nature.

2. Of the Natural or Moral Sense of Worshipping God in Spirit, I have spoken
hitherto, and shown both the Ground and Importance of it: Let us now consider
the Evangelical one, according as was before insinuated. For, that such a one
was also intended, is evident from that Story to which this Passage is
subjoined. If you please to consult the Verse preceding that which I have
chosen for the Groundwork of this Argument, you will there find a Woman of
Samaria demanding of our Savior, whether Mount Gerizim, by Sichem, where the
Samaritans sacrificed, or Jerusalem, were the true Place of Worship. In answer
to which, after our Savior had told her, That that Question was not now of
much moment, because ere long they should neither worship in the one or the
other; for a farther proof of that his Assertion, he adds, that the time was
coming, and even then was, Mr. Mede on Joh. 4.23.
that the true worshippers should worship the Father in spirit and in truth.
Which being compared with the foregoing Words, and the State of the
Controversy to which they do relate, will show, that by worshipping in spirit
and in truth, is meant no other, than the worshipping of God with a spiritual
Worship, as that is opposed to the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Law. For,
the Question being not, whether Mount Gerizim or Jerusalem were the place of
Public Prayer (because both Jews and Samaritans had particular Places for
them) but, which of the two was the proper Place to send their Sacrifices to;
and our Savior making answer, That in a little time neither of them should be,
because the Father sought such to worship him, as should worship him in spirit
and in truth; he thereby plainly shows his meaning to be, That to worship God
in spirit and in truth, was not to worship him with Sacrifices, and other such
Figures; but in spiritual and substantial Worship, such as are the Sacrifices
of Prayer and Praise, with other the like Natural Expressions of our Devotion.
But, from hence it will follow, not only that we are to worship God without
those Legal Rites wherewith it was before sufficiently clogged; but also, that
we are not to clog it with other Rites than Decency and Order shall require.
For our Savior not only excluding the Rites and Sacrifices of the Law, but
affirming the Worship which his Father sought, to be a spiritual one; he does
thereby cut off the affixing of all other Rites (as being alike contrary
thereto) save what Decency and Order shall require. But so the Church of
England has declared it self to understand the Worshipping of God in spirit
and in truth; telling us, in one of its Prefaces to our Liturgy, That Christ's
Gospel is not a Ceremonial Law, as much of Moses Law was; but it is a Religion
to serve God, not in bondage of the Figure or Shadow, but in the freedom of the
Spirit; contenting it self only with those Ceremonies which do serve to a
decent Order and comely Discipline, and such as be apt to stir up the dull mind
of Man to the remembrance of his Duty to God, by some notable and special
signification whereby he might be edified. In conformity whereto, as she her
self has proceeded, injoyning neither many nor trifling ones; so, what she
has done, is sufficiently warranted, not only by that Solemnity which
Experience shows Things of that nature to add to all Matters of Importance, but
(which is of more avail) from the Institution of our Savior, and the Practice
of the Church in the Apostles days. For, if all Rites are to be excluded, what
shall become of the Sacraments themselves? But how shall we any way excuse the
Apostolical Church, for that holy Kiss wherewith they were wont to conclude
their Prayers, the laying on of hands in admitting Ministers to the Church, or
shaking off the dust of their feet against those that should not receive them,
in testimony of their rejection of them? For that all those things were then in
use, even with the allowance of the Apostles themselves, the Scripture is our
Witness; to which therefore, if Men will exclude all things of that nature,
they must first oppose themselves. Such is the Practice of that Church to which
we relate; such the Grounds upon which she proceeds: but, as farther than that,
she neither goes, nor pretends to do; so, if she did, there is no doubt she
would offend against that Precept which requires the worshipping of God in
spirit and in truth. For, how can they be said to do so, whose Devotion spends
it self in outward Ceremonies? Which, as they are of no value in themselves, so
have this ill property of the Ivy, that where they are suffered to grow too
luxuriant, they eat out the Heart of that Religion about which they twine.

PART II.
A Transition to the Negative part of the Precept; and therein, first, to that
part of it which forbids the making any Graven Image, or other Corporeal
Representation. That all Images are not forbidden; but such only as are made
with a design to represent the Divine Majesty, or to bow down to and worship.
The unlawfulness of making an Image of God, evidenced from the disproportion
that is between an Image and the Divine Nature. The Objections against that way
of Reasoning, proposed, and answered. The same unlawfulness manifested from St.
Paul's charging the Heathen with the making of them, and from the Opinions of
the wiser Heathen. An Answer to certain Distinctions which are offered by the
Papists, and others, to clude the Force of the Commandment in this Affair.

WHAT the Affirmative part of this Precept is, you have seen already: Pass we
now to the consideration of,

2. The Negative; wherein there are these two things forbidden.

1. The making of a Graven Image, or any other Corporeal Representation: And,
2. The bowing down and worshipping them.
1. I begin with the former of these, the Prohibition of making a graven Image,
or any other Corporeal Representation: Thou shall not make unto thee any graven
Image, etc. Where, 1. I shall show what is not to be accounted the Sense of it;
and then, what really is.

It was the Opinion of Tertullian, and has since been taken up by some Modern
Writers, That God in this Commandment forbade all Images whatsoever;
particularly, all protuberant ones. The ground of that Opinion was, partly the
Letter of the Commandment, and partly the Jews abhorrency of all. But as the
latter of these ought not to have any great stress laid upon it, if we consider
the nature of Superstitious Minds, which being once thoroughly touched with the
sense of any Error, do not seldom run into the contrary Extreme; so the
former, even the Letter of the Commandment, will as little affect those who
consider its Position in the Decalogue. For, being placed as it is, among such
Precepts as respect the Almighty, and that Honor and Esteem which we ought to
have for him; and being moreover immediately followed with the Prohibition of
bowing down to them, and serving them; as that is with the jealousy of God
concerning his own Honor: it is in reason to be extended no farther, than the
forbidding of such Images as are made with a design to represent the Divine
Nature, or to bestow upon them that Honor which is due unto it. And indeed,
beside that Nature teaches, there is no unlawfulness in making an Image, yea,
that that Art, as well as others, is one of the Gifts of God; which is farther
confirmed by Moses, where he attributes the Skill of Bezaleel, in working the
Work of the Engraver, to his being filled with the Spirit of God, in wisdom and
understanding, Exodus 35.31. Beside that, secondly, they who teach all Images to
be forbidden the Jews, are forced to confess their admitting of some, and
particularly, of Images in their Coins; what shall we say (that may be
satisfactory, I mean) to God's giving order for the Cherubims over the
Mercy-seat, and for the making of the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness? for his
admitting into the Ark the Five Golden Mice, and Five Golden Hemorrhoides of
the Philistines? for the Pomegranates, and twelve Brazen Bulls upon which the
Laver in the Temple was placed? For though it be true, that God might dispense
with his own Command, especially a positive one; yet as there is no evidence of
those Orders of his being a Dispensation, so it is not easy to believe, that,
having made so strict a Law against Image-making, he would not only dispense
so soon with it, as we see he did in the Cherubims and Brazen Serpent; but
dispense with it in a manner for ever, by placing those Cherubims and Bulls for
perpetuity. For what were this, but to tempt Men to think he had abrogated the
Command, and not only dispensed with it, but taken it away? Neither will it
suffice to say, That the Words of the Commandment do only forbid the making
them to our selves, that is to say, of our own heads, and not when commanded
thereto by God: For, as it is not unusual, either in the Hebrew, or other
Languages, to express that in more words, which might have been expressed in
fewer (which, by the way, may serve to show the triflingness of those
Observations, that have no other Foundation than the outside of an Expression)
so, granting that Addition of to thy self, to have any peculiar force, the
meaning thereof would be no other, than thou shall not make them for thy use;
which will afford no ground at all to the former Interpretation. Let it remain
therefore for an undoubted Truth, That the making of Images is not universally
forbidden; but either, 1. As was before insinuated, The making of Images with a
design to represent the Divine Majesty: or, 2. To fall down and serve them.


1. For the evidencing the former whereof, within which I intend to confine the
present Discourse, I shall first of all show this to have been the Design of
this Commandment: In order whereunto, I shall first produce the Words of the
Prophet Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16, and so on: Take heed therefore unto your selves;
for ye saw no manner of similitude in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in
Horeb, out of the midst of the fire; lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you
a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female.
For, establishing the Prohibition of Images, upon their not beholding any
similitude, that is to say, of God, but only the hearing of a voice; he
thereby plainly shows the Design of that Commandment to be the forbidding of
such Images as were made with a design to represent the Divine Majesty. To
which, if we add that of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 40. 18. To whom then will ye
liken God, or what likeness will ye compare to him? so the Proof will be
complete and perfect. For, the Writings of the Prophets being but Comments upon
the Law of Moses, it is but reasonable to believe what we find there expressly
forbidden, as the making an Image of God is, to be also forbidden by the Law.
But because it may be said, That this Prohibition is only positive, and
consequently not to be extended beyond the Jews (though how impertinent that
Distinction is, I have before shown, where I evidenced it to be the Design of
our Savior to confirm the Law and the Prophets) yet to take away all Cavils in
this particular, I will evidence, in the second place, the Prohibition of
making Images, to be a part of the Law of Reason and Nature. Now this I shall
endeavor, 1. From the disproportion that is between an Image, and the Divine
Nature. 2. From St. Paul's charging the Heathen with the making of them. And,
3. And lastly, From the Opinions of the wiser Heathen.


1. For the first of these, we shall not need to stand long to prove it, or
indeed to be a just Ground of the unlawfulness of making them. For, as it
cannot but be confessed, that there is a great disproportion between God, who
is not only a Spirit, but an Infinite and Incorruptible one, and an Image,
which is both Corporeal and Corruptible; so that disproportion cannot but be
thought to make it utterly unlawful to make such a Representation of him;
because, in effect, denying the Spirituality and Incorruptibility of his
Nature, which we so take upon us to represent. For, an Image, or other such
Corporeal Representation, being Representations only of Corporeal and
Corruptible Beings, he that makes such a one of God, must consequently suppose
him to be such, and therefore also in effect destroy the Spirituality and
Incorruptibility of his Nature.

Three things only there are which may be objected against this way of
Reasoning; to which therefore, before I go on, I will shape an Answer.

1. That this way of Reasoning would conclude against the making an Image of an
Angel, and consequently against the Cherubims, which are looked upon as such.

2. That it would conclude alike against the Representation of God to our
Understandings, under the shape of a Man; which yet we find in Scripture
commonly done, and cannot well be avoided, because of the dullness of Men's
Apprehensions, especially those of the Common sort.

3. Thirdly and lastly, That God himself has sometime assumed those Shapes
which we affirm to be so disproportionate to the Divine Nature.

In answer to the former whereof, I say, 1. That as the Angels, though they are
Spirits, yet are Created and Finite ones, and consequently both vastly distant
from the Nature of God, and more near to other Finite Beings; as they are
moreover Fellow Servants to us, and no other Honor therefore due from us, than
what is proper unto such: so, by the Command of God, they have oftentimes
assumed Corporeal Shapes, and appeared in them both to Men's Fancies and Eyes.
In which respect, nothing hinders, but they may be represented in those Shapes,
especially when the Command of God is added to it. But, as it follows not from
thence, that God may, because God has carefully avoided the appearing in any
such; so neither does it destroy the Inference we have made, from the
disproportion there is between the Infinite Nature of God, and a Corporeal
Image. For, though there be a great disproportion between the Spiritual Nature
of Angels, and a Bodily Representation; yet they agree in this with them, that
they are equally Creatures, and Finite, and consequently more allowable to make
a Representation of them. The Case is not the same, as to that disproportion we
have said to be between the Nature of God, and a Corporeal Representation;
because God, by reason of the Eminency of his Nature, has nothing common with
them, as being Infinite in all his Attributes. Which Answer is the more to be
stood upon, because the Prophet Isaiah, in the place before-quoted, lays the
ground of his Reasoning against the making an Image of God, upon the
Infiniteness of the Divine Nature: For as his asking, To whom then will ye
liken God? is manifestly drawn from the former Verse, where it is said of God,
that all nations are before him as nothing, and that they are counted to him
less than nothing, and vanity; so he pursues that Argument, by saying further
of him, that he sits upon the circle of the earth, and that the inhabitants
thereof are as grasshoppers; which, with those that follow, are popular
Descriptions of his Infinite Greatness, and of that infinite distance that is
between him and us. However it be, To whom will ye liken God? is the Argument
of God himself against Images, as well as the Argument of Reason and Nature:
and if so, we may be sure it is of force to conclude what he affirms, though we
should not be able to answer all that may be objected against it.

As little do I find my self incommoded by those Representations the Scripture
makes of God under the shape of a Man; its comparing his Providence to Eyes,
his Power to Arms, with other such like Representations of his Perfections.
For, as it is confessed on all hands, that what the Scripture does in this
particular, is merely out of compliance with our Infirmities, or rather out of
the consideration of our utter inability to understand him, without the help of
such Resemblances; so, that alone is enough to show, that the Argument we have
alleged, from the disproportion between God and an Image, does not fight
equally against the other. For as, though we cannot apprehend God without the
help of the foregoing Resemblances, yet we may without making an Image of him;
so, that inability of ours excuses those Apprehensions from any way offending
against the Divine Nature: Because, though it be a Sin to entertain any
Apprehensions of God which are not proportionable to his Divine Nature, yet
must it be understood with this limitation, so far as it is possible for us to
avoid them: For otherwise, all our Conceptions of God must needs be sinful,
because it is impossible we should conceive of him as the Excellency of his
Nature does require. The Case is not the same as to the matter of Images,
because we may conceive God without them; which is so true, that (as a Varro,
quoted afterward more at large.
Learned Heathen has observed) the bringing them into use has made Men think
the Deity less tremendous than either his Authority over the World does, or his
future Judgment will show him to be. There is yet more to be said, upon the
account of God's Condescension to us, in thus representing himself to our
Understandings, with the Parts and Affections of Humane Bodies; because that is
so far from being an Argument for Images, that it is, on the contrary, a great
Argument against them: For, by how much the more God is pleased to humble
himself, so much the less reason is there for us to humble him; and we may well
forbear to set up an Image of him in our Temples, because he has allowed us to
serve our selves of such in our Understandings, when even that could not be
done without derogating from the Divine Nature, but that we cannot apprehend
him without. Lastly, Whereas Images are apt to lead Men to believe God to be of
a Corporeal Nature, and attended with the Imperfections of it; those
Representations which the Scripture makes of God to our Understandings, as they
are generally borrowed from the chiefest Excellencies, and therefore so much
the less likely to debase him in our Imaginations; so being mixed with more
spiritual Conceptions, they serve only to lead us to a more just apprehension
of his Nature and Perfections.

There remains one Objection more, against our arguing from the disproportion
that is between God and a Corporeal Representation; and that is, That sometimes
God himself has assumed those Likenesses which we affirm to be so derogatory
to him, and appeared in them to the Sons of Men. And if so, what should hinder
us from following his Example, and depicting at least those Corporeal Shapes in
which he appeared? Especially when it is elsewhere alleged, as a Reason of
God's forbidding Images, That they saw no similitude to make them by: For that
may seem to import, That if God should vouchsafe any such, it might be lawful
to copy it out in an Image. For answer to which, I say, 1. That if that were
the only or principal Reason of forbidding Images, the taking thereof away,
would take away the Prohibition it self. But that so it is not, is evident from
the Prophet Isaiah, who grounds it upon the unlikeness that is between God's
Nature, and Corporeal ones: Which Reason continuing still, and always likely to
do so, the Prohibition must be still of force, notwithstanding any such
Appearances of the Divine Nature. I answer, 2. That though it should be
granted, that God assumed those Corporeal Shapes, which it is pretended that he
did; yet will not that invalidate our arguing from the disproportion there is
between the Divine Nature, and an Image. For, though those Shapes were equally
disproportionate to his Divine Nature, yet being of his own assuming, they
neither imply any Irregularity in God, nor liberty to us to follow him; there
being no doubt but God may humble himself, and as little, that it becomes not
us to do so. I answer, 3. That what is alleged concerning God's assuming
Corporeal Shapes, is either not true, or impertinent to the present Business.
For, though we read in St. Luke, chap. 3. and 22. That the Holy Ghost descended
in a Bodily Shape, like a Dove, upon our Savior; and in St. Matthew, That John
Baptist saw him so descending on him: yet are we not to understand that of the
Person of the Holy Ghost, but of his Gifts and Graces, of which those
Representations were intended as Symbols. For, as the Gifts of the Holy Ghost
are frequently described by that name; so, that the Gifts of the Holy Ghost are
to be understood there, is to me abundantly evident, from that Prophecy that
went before concerning it, Isa. 11.2. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. In which place, as
we have several distinct Spirits reckoned up, and each of them made a part of
the Spirit of the Lord, which shows them to be the Gifts, and not the Person of
the Holy Ghost, who is but One: so one of those Spirits, entitled the spirit of
wisdom, and of the fear of the Lord; which latter Epithet, though it may well
suit a Gift of the Holy Ghost, yet agrees not in the least with his Person. If
there remain any doubt, it must be concerning this of Isaiah's being a
Prophecy of that Descent whereof we are now entreating: But that doubt will
soon vanish, if we compare it with that of St. John, chap. 1. 32. For who can
choose but look upon this Descent as the impletion of that Prophecy, when it is
not only certain from the Prophecy it self, that it was intended of the
Messiah; but John Baptist had it given to him, for a Mark to know the Messiah
by, That he should see the spirit of God descending and remaining on him, which
is the same in sense with the spirit of the Lords resting on him. And though
the same is not to be said of God's appearing to Daniel in the Habit of an
Ancient Person, with the hair of his head like pure wool; yet as that was
only in a Vision, and therefore rather to his Fancy, than his Eye; so it had
not that effect upon the Jews, or Primitive Christians, as to encourage them to
make such an Image of the Almighty.


2. Having thus shown at large the disproportion there is between God and an
Image, and thereupon established the unlawfulness of making any such; we shall
the less need to add any thing thereto, to evince it to be a breach of Natures
Law. But because I have before promised to add, by way of confirmation, St.
Paul's charging the Heathen with it, who had no other Law to guide them, and
the Opinions of the Wisest of them; I will, for a conclusion of this
Particular, descend to each of them: and first of all, to St. Paul's charging
it upon the Heathen. But so that he does, we have a Proof past all
contradiction, Romans 1.23. where having premised, that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, but became vain in their imaginations; as an instance
both of the one and the other, he subjoyns their changing the glory of the
incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and
four-footed beasts, and creeping things; adding moreover, which shows the
greatness of their Crime, That for this cause also God gave them up to
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own
bodies between themselves: And, lest that should not be enough, repeats the
same Charge again, and the same dreadful delivering them over to vile
affections for it, verse. 25, 26. The same is no less evident from that Speech
of his to the Athenians, Acts 17.29. and so on; where having premised, that
forasmuch as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the
Godhead is like unto gold or silver, or stone graven by art and man's device; to
show this to have been both the Practice and Crime of the Heathen, he subjoyns,
And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every
where to repent. Now, forasmuch as repentance supposes a preceding Sin,
forasmuch as the making of Images is one of the things the Heathen are
commanded to repent of; it follows, That the making an Image of God was a Sin
in the Heathen, and consequently, because they had no other Law to guide them,
a Sin against the Law of Nature. And indeed, though this Law of Nature was
strangely clouded by the contrary Practice amongst them, and the Traditions of
their Fathers; yet, if we descend, in the

3. Third place, to take a view of the Opinions of the wiser Heathen, we shall
find them, in their lucid Intervals, to assert the same Prohibition with this
Commandment. For thus Seneca, in his Eighth Book, and Thirtieth Natural
Question, tells us of God, Effugit oculos, cogitatione visendus est.
That he falls not under our Eyes, but is to be seen by our Thought. And
elsewhere exhorting Lucilius to make himself worthy of God Finges autem non
auro, non argento: Non potest ex hac materia imago Dei fingi similis. Ep. 31.
, But thou shall make thy self such (says he) not with Gold or Silver; for
such Materials cannot be made an Image like unto God. But of all other
Testimonies in this matter, that of Varro is certainly the most full, as it is
remembered by St. Augustine, in his Fourth Book De Civitate Dei, chap. 31. Where
having premised out of him, Dicit etiam antiquos Romanos plusquam annos centum
and septuaginta deos sine simulachro coluisse.
That the Ancient Romans did more than an hundred and seventy years worship
their Gods without Images; he adds, as from the same Varro, Quod si adhuc,
inquit, mansisset, castius dii observarentur. Cujus sententiae suae testem
adhibet inter caetera etiam gentem Judaeam: nec dubitat eum locum ita
concludere ut dicat, qui primi simulachra deorum populis Posuerunt, eos
civitatibus suis and metum dempsisse and errorem addidisse: prudenter
existimans deos facile posse in simulachrorum stoliditate contemni.
That if it had so continued, the Gods would have been more chastely observed:
They who first set up Images of their Gods, for the Peoples use, having taken
away from their Cities that fear which they ought to have of them, and involved
them in erroneous Conceits concerning the Divine Nature: Prudently judging (as
St. Augustine there tells us) that the Gods might easily come to be despised in
the foolishness of Images. Forasmuch therefore as the Light of Reason
furnishes us with Arguments against the making an Image of God; forasmuch as
the Scripture charge it upon the Heathen as a Sin, and the wiser Heathen
consent with them in the disallowance of it; we may very well look upon the
Prohibition now before us, as a part of the Law of Nature; and therefore also,
because the Law of Nature is such, of eternal obligation.

Now, though what has been said, might, to Minds not prepossessed,
sufficiently evidence the unlawfulness of such Images; yet because those
Prejudices have taught Men to frame certain nice Distinctions, to evade the
force of the former Arguments, I will, for a conclusion of this Discourse,
oppose to them some more particular Assertions, answerable to their several
Distinctions: Whereof the first shall be,

1. That painted Images, and such as are described upon a Plane, are unlawful,
as well as engraven and protuberant ones: Contrary to the Opinions of the Greek
and Moscovitish Church, and some of our own Western Writers. For the evidencing
whereof, I shall allege, first, the Words of that Commandment we are now upon.
For, forbidding, as it does, not only any graven Image, but any likeness of
any thing that is in heaven or earth, it thereby makes other Representations
alike unlawful with carved or protuberant ones. The same is no less evident
from the Reason of the Prohibition in Deuteronomy, even because they saw no
similitude: For a Picture being no less a similitude, than a Carved Image, that
must be supposed to be equally unlawful, when it is designed to represent the
Divine Nature. Lastly, Forasmuch as there is the same or a greater
disproportion between the Divine Nature, and a Picture; if Carved Images be
unlawful, these also must be supposed to be so, when they are intended to
represent the Deity. This only would be added, That the making of Graven
Images, or other such protuberant ones, are most frequently forbidden in the
Scripture: Not that others were not unlawful, as well as they (for the general
Reason of the Prohibition, even the likening him to any thing, does equally
strike at all other ways of Representation) but because those Images were most
in use among the Heathen, and because by their Figure they were most apt to
make the Simple believe that they were those very things they were designed to
represent, or at least that they were impregnated with a Divine Spirit.

2. I observe, secondly, That as Pictures, as well as graven Images, were
forbidden; so the Pictures or Images of any Being whatsoever. For what other
can we rationally deem to be the sense of those Words, or the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under
the earth? Which caution I the rather add, to confront an Opinion of Grotius,
and the Jews, who would have the Figures of Living Creatures only forbidden:
For though the Images of Living Creatures were mostly in use, and most
dangerous, and therefore probably no other enumerated in the Fourth of
Deuteronomy, where this matter of Images is entreated of; yet, as the
Expression in the Commandment is too general to admit of such a limitation, so,
if we admit of it, we must exclude the Images of the Stars, which are certainly
no Living Creatures, but are notwithstanding faulted by God, Amos 5.26. But I
have yet another Reason of making the present Observation, and without which
indeed I should not have troubled you or my self with it: And that is, the
asserting further, against the Greeks, and those that follow them in this
Particular, the unlawfulness of Painted, as well as Graven Images. For whereas
it had been urged (as it has been before by us) That not only all Graven
Images, but all other Likenesses were forbidden, according as the Letter of the
Commandment imports; it is answered by Explic. Decal. praec. 2.
Grotius, That though the Particle we render [or] be in the Hebrew Text of this
place, yet it is not in the parallel place in Deuteronomy, nor in the Chaldee
Paraphrase here: Whence says he) it has happened, that the Hebrews generally
thought that of any likeness to be no new Prohibition, but to be added by way
of explication, that we should understand, not all graven images to be
forbidden, such as was that of the Golden Vine in the Temple, but such as
resembled Living Creatures. But to this I have many things to say, and such as
I think will make it appear to be very vain. For, first, It is not true,
however Grotius came to say so, that the Particle we render [or] is not in the
Chald. Paraphras. verba 1. in Bibl. Polygl. (...)
Chaldee Paraphrase upon this place, as may appear to any that shall consult
it. That which I suppose occasioned his mistake, was, that it is not there in
Deuteronomy, as neither in the Hebrew Text. I say, secondly, That the Reading
in this place ought in reason to be looked upon as more entire than that of
Deuteronomy, and consequently, where there is occasion, to give Law to it:
Because the Twentieth Chapter of Exodus is an Account of the Law, as delivered
by God; whereas that in the Book of Deuteronomy is only a Repetition of it,
which therefore needed not to be exact, as having been before set down. I say,
thirdly, That if after the Word likeness, there had been only an enumeration
of the Living Creatures of Heaven and Earth, and the Waters under the Earth, so
there might have been some pretense to make the Temunah or likeness not
comprehensive of all Similitudes, but only a determination of the general Word
of Carved Images, to such as represented Living Creatures. But the Words are
general, of all things in heaven and earth, etc. and so no doubt ought to be
understood. I observe, fourthly, that as it is not unusual for such a Particle
as the Hebrew 1 to be understood, even where it is not expressed; so the Sept.
Deuteronomy. 5.8. (...).
Septuagint have represented the force of it in that place of Deuteronomy, as
well as Exodus. All which put together, will make the Observation of Grotius to
be a mere Nicety, and consequently, that all kind of Images, as well as of all
sorts of Things, are forbidden by this Commandment.

3. From that first and second Assertion therefore, pass we to a third,
answerable to a nice distinction devised by the Papists; to wit, That we are to
understand such Images forbidden as pretend to represent the Essence or Person,
not the Properties of the Divine Nature. But beside that the Essence of any
thing cannot be depicted, because it cannot be seen but by some proper
Representment, which makes that Distinction perfectly groundless; beside that,
secondly, it cannot be thought they intend any other than the Representation of
the Persons of the Godhead, who describe the Father in the shape of an Old Man,
and have a peculiar Picture to represent the Trinity: there is as great a
disproportion between the Properties of God, and an Image, as there is between
that and the Divine Nature: For, as the Properties of God are not different at
all from his Essence, but only in our manner of conception; so all those
Properties of his are Spiritual and Infinite, and therefore not to be debased
by Material and Finite Representations.

4. Lastly, Whereas it is said by the Papists, That they intend not those
Images they make of God, as perfect, immediate, and proper Representations of
the Divine Nature; but imperfect, mediate, and metaphorical ones; upon which
account they hope to avoid the Charge of offending against this Commandment: I
shall oppose, in the fourth place, That such imperfect Images are as well
forbidden, as any other. For, beside that the Law makes no such Distinction,
but forbids all Images, and all Similitudes, and must therefore be thought to
proscribe those imperfect ones, unless the Law had otherwise provided; its
descending to forbid not only the making the Images of any thing in heaven or
earth, but particularly, in Deuteronomy, the making the Images of beasts, and
fowls, and creeping things, shows the former Distinction to be perfectly vain
and groundless. For, though it may be thought, that some of the Heathen deemed
a Humane Shape to be no improper Representation of the Divine Majesty; yet who
can think them so vain, as to conceive a Beast, or a Creeping thing, to be a
perfect Resemblance of their Gods? However it be, most certain it is, the Jews
could not be so foolish as to think the God that brought them out of the Land
of Egypt, to be like unto a calf that eats hay; which notwithstanding, we
find they not only represented God under such an Image, but were charged by
the Psalmist with changing the Glory of God into such a Similitude; and by St.
Paul, with Idolatry, for holding a Feast to it. So vain are the Imaginations of
the Defenders of Images, as well as of the Makers of them; and will prove alike
deceitful, when the Judge of all the World shall call both the one and the
other to an account.

I have done with that part of the Prohibition which concerns the making an
Image of God, and asserted the unlawfulness thereof: It remains only (to make
it so much the more advantageous) that I address this following Exhortation to
the Protestant, wherein he will find himself more immediately concerned; That
inasmuch as the Prohibition of Images is grounded upon the disproportion that
is between God and all Corporeal Beings, he who pretends for that reason to
disapprove of all Corporeal Representations, would in like manner remove from
his thoughts all Corporeal Conceptions of him; That he would not think God like
Bodies, to be confined to a certain Place, and neither to know nor act any
thing beyond his own Heaven; That he would not think his arm like that of ours,
to be shortened that it cannot save, nor his ear so dull of hearing, that he
cannot hear the softest whispers; That he would not think his Eyes like those
of ours, to be blinded by the darkness of the Night, or imposed upon by those
specious Outsides by which his own are apt to be deceived; in fine, That when,
for the help of his dull Apprehensions, he conceives of Him under Bodily
Representations, he remember, that He is above them, and separate those
Corporeal Phantasms again, by thinking him to be a Spirit of infinite Purity
and Perfection: Otherwise, though in another way, he falls into that Crime
which he condemns, and sets up the same Images of God in his Imagination,
which the Heathen heretofore, and the Idolatrous Christians now, set up to him
in their Temples.

PART III.
Of the unlawfulness of making an Image, with a design to worship it; where,
moreover, is shown out of Tertullian, the unlawfulness of making any such, to
be worshipped by others. The second Part of the Negative Precept proposed,
wherein is shown the unlawfulness of worshipping an Image, whether of God, or
of Christ, or of his Saints. The Allegation of the Romanists, That they worship
not the Image of God, but God in and by it, shown to be both untrue and
insufficient: The former, because there are not a few who defend the
Worshipping of the Image it self, yea, with a Divine Worship; and because the
Common sort terminate their Worship there: The latter, because, first, the
Heathen themselves generally were not guilty of any other Idolatry; where
another Objection of the Papists is proposed and answered. The like evidenced,
secondly, from the Idolatry of the Israelites in Aaron's and Jeroboam's Calves;
which is shown to have been no other than the Worshipping of the True God in
and by them. The Objections against the foregoing Argument, considered and
Answered. A farther Argument against the Worshipping of God by an Image, drawn
from Natures Law; where again some Objections are proposed and answered. Of the
Images of Christ, and his Saints: Whether or no, and in what cases they may be
tolerated, as also what Honor may be given to them. That all Divine Adoration
of them is unlawful; yea, that all such is so, which only bordereth on it.

HAVING shown, in the foregoing Discourse, that we are not to make an Image
with a design to represent the Divine Majesty; proceed we now to show,

2. That neither are we to make any Image at all, with a design to bow down to
it, or serve it; which I have said to be the second Part of the first
Prohibition in this Commandment. Now, that so we are not, is competently
evident from the Commandment it self, but much more abundantly from an
Explication of it in Leviticus: For, as after the Prohibition of making any
graven Image, etc. it is immediately added, Thou shall not bow down to them,
nor serve them; so the Prophet Moses, who was certainly the best Interpreter of
his own Law, does more plainly and expressly declare it, Lev. 26.1. For ye shall
not (says he) make you any idol, or graven image, neither rear you up a
standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your land, to bow
down unto it: for I am the Lord your God. And indeed, if the Worshipping of
Images be a Sin, according as the second Prohibition imports, it will be no
less to make them for that end, because in effect a Worshipping of them.
Excellent to this purpose is that of Tertullian, where he addresseth himself to
some Christians, who thought to excuse themselves from Idolatry, in that they
only made those Images which were worshipped by others. It Is in the sixth
Chapter of his Book de Idololatria. Imo tu colis qui facis ut coli possint.
Colis autem non spiritu vilissimi nidoris alicujus, sed tuo proprio: nec anima
pecudis impensa, sed anima tua. Illis ingenium tuum immolas, illis sudorem tuum
libas, illis prudentiam tuam accendis. Plus es illis quam sacerdos, cum per te
habeant sacerdotem. Thou pretendest that thou do not worship them; but thou
do worship them, who make them that they may be worshipped: And thou
worshippest them not with the breath of some most vile Steam, but with thy own;
neither with a Soul of a Beast, but thine. To them thou sacrificest thy Wit and
Parts; to them thou offerest up thy Sweat, as a kind of Drink Offering; to them
thou lightest thy Prudence as a Taper. Thou art more to them than a Priest,
because it is by thy means they have one. But because at the same time I show
it unlawful to worship an Image, I shall also show it to be unlawful to make an
Image for that end; therefore proceed we to evince,

2. The unlawfulness of worshipping any image; which is the second general
Prohibition in this Commandment.

When we charge the Papists with the Breach of this Commandment, and
particularly of that part of it we are now upon, their usual defense is, That,
as they worship not the Image of God, but God in and through it; so they
worship not the Image of Saints with a Divine Worship, but with such as is
suitable only to the Images of glorified Creatures. My Design is at present to
show both the untruth and insufficiency of each of these Answers; and first, of
their alleging their not worshipping the Image of God, but, on the other side,
worshipping God in and by them.

And first of all, though some of the Church of Rome are so wary, as not to
undertake the Defense of Worshipping the Image it self, or at least not with
that Worship that is proper unto God; yet there are a considerable number of
them, and those too of the most eminent, who roundly assert the giving the same
Honor to the Image, which is due to him it represents. Of this sort are
Aquinas, Azorius, Cajetan, Lactantius, and Andradius, as Dr. Crackenthorp
Defens. Eccl. Anglic. contra Archiep. Spalat. cap. 63.
has evidenced out of their own Writings. But be it, that what they suggest
were really true, as to the wiser and better sort of them, and neither defended
nor practiced by them; yet (as the same Learned Man has observed Ibid.
) many of the Common sort terminate their Worship in the very Images
themselves; which whilst those in Authority go not about either to censure or
remove, they must not take it ill if we charge them with the imputation of so
downright and stupid an Idolatry; Men being justly chargeable with those foul
Abominations which, though they see, they endeavor not to amend. But be it,
thirdly, that what they allege were true, both in the better and worser sort;
and that they worship not the Images themselves, but God in and by them: yet
even so they will not escape the imputation of Idolatry, according as I come
now to show.

For the evidencing whereof, the first thing I shall allege, is, That the
Heathen were not guilty of any other Idolatry, than that of worshipping their
Gods in and by them. For thus Celsus (as I find him quoted by Origin, in the
seventh of those Books he wrote against him.) Now they (says he (...);
, speaking of the Christians) do openly show their contempt of Images: If for
this reason, because a Stone, or a piece of Wood, or Brass, or Gold, which such
or such a one has framed, is not God, their Wisdom is ridiculous: For what
other Person, that is not perfectly a Fool, looks upon those things as Gods,
and not rather as Things dedicated to, and Images of the Gods? To the same
purpose does Maimonides discourse, in his More Nevochim, chap. 36. Moreover
(says he) as to what concerns Idolaters, you know that none of them worship
the Idol with this Opinion, as if they thought there were no other God but
that: Nay, there never was any Man, nor will there ever be, who can fancy to
himself, that the Figure which he has made of Metals, Wood, or Stones, created
the Heavens and Earth, and governs them. But they worship them, inasmuch as
they look upon them as Things intermediate between them and God. And indeed,
generally speaking, it is morally impossible for any but the sottish and
beastly Multitude, to be guilty of such an Idolatry, as terminateth in the
Image it self; an Image, in the very nature of it, referring the Party that
uses it to him whom it is designed to represent. If the Heathens, as there is
no doubt they often did, worshipped those for Gods, in them, that were really
none, that is a Crime of another nature, and subjects them not for that reason
to the Crime of Idolatry, or Worshipping an Image; but of having other Gods
beside the True. Forasmuch then as the Heathen were not guilty of any other
Idolatry, than of worshipping God in and by an Image, either there never was
any such thing as Idolatry in the World, unless amongst the very Dregs of the
People; or it must be such, to worship God in and by them. There is but one
thing, that I know of, which is with any show of Reason objected, as to the
difference between the Heathen and Christian Idolaters in this particular; and
that is, That the Heathen imagined the Image not only to represent, but to
have the Deity inhabiting in, or rather united to it, as the Soul is united
unto the Body. But beside that the Papists seem sometimes of the same
Persuasion, witness Vid. Crack. Def. Ecclesiae Angl. contr. Archiep. Spalat.
cap. 66.
their attributing to their Images the Power of Speaking, with the Working of
several Miracles; a Reinold. de Romans Eccles. Idololatr. l. 2. c. 3. par. 77.
Learned Man of our own Nation has demonstrated, That the Heathens had not
that opinion of their Images, unless of some few, that were consecrated by
Magic Art: So that still there will remain the same Consent between the
Heathens and Idolatrous Christians, and either both be absolved from Idolatry,
or neither. It is true indeed, some Passages of the Ancient Fathers Vid. Grot.
Explic. Dec. Praec. 2.
give occasion to think, that under those Images some Evil Spirits did sometime
lurk, or at least were believed so to do by their Heathen Worshippers: But as
it follows not from thence, That the Heathen thought their Images to be
animated by them, and like Soul and Body in Man to make up one Person; so the
mere lurking of Evil Spirits in the Idols they adored, will make no material
difference between the Idolatry of the Heathen and the Christian; the Heathen,
as well as the Christian Idolater, passing his Worship through the Image, to
that Deity he believed to lurk in it.

My second Argument against the Worshipping of God by an Image, shall be taken
from the Crime of the Israelites in the matter of the Calves, as well that
which Aaron made in the absence of Moses, as those which Jeroboam set up in Dan
and Bethel. For if each of these were Idolatry, as there is no doubt they were,
then is it such to worship the True God in an Image, because they worshipped
the True God in them. That the Worship of the Calf which Aaron made was
Idolatry, is evident both from St. Stephen, and St. Paul; the former not only
terming it an Idol, but affirming the Jews to have sacrificed to it, which is a
known part of the Worship of the Almighty; the latter calling it Idolatry in
express terms, 1 Cor. 10.7. for exhorting (as he does) Neither be ye idolaters,
as were some of them, as it is written, The people sat down to eat and to
drink, and rose up to play; he thereby plainly declares their feasting before
the Calf (for that was it he refers to, as you may see Exodus 32.6.) to be pure
and perfect Idolatry. Which place is so much the more to be remarked, because
it does not only brand the Jews for it, but caution us Christians against it,
and that too under the fear of the like displeasure; lest any should say (as
some have done) That this Precept concerned the Jews only, and thereby leave
us at liberty to transgress it: For if (as St. Paul afterward infers) that,
and other the Crimes there remembered, were avenged upon the Israelites, to
deter us from the like Practices, we may be sure it will be no less Sin in us,
than it was in them, to commit the same Practices, and particularly to pay the
same Adoration to an Idol. The only difficulty therefore remaining is, whether
the Jews worshipped the true God in it; which accordingly I come now to prove.
And here I shall allege, first, that Saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 106.20.
where speaking concerning this particular Calf, and their worshipping of him,
he subjoyns, Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that
cateth grass. For if their design in that Calf was to represent their Glory by
it, that is to say, the God of Israel, then was it their design also to do
honor to the God of Israel, and not either to the Image it self, or some other
Deity. But let us come to the Story it self, as it is delivered in Exodus, and
see whether it is possible to be any other? Where, the first thing that
presents it self, is that Speech of the Israelites immediately upon the making
of it; These be thy gods which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, Exodus
32.4. For as it was impossible for the Jews to think the Calf it self brought
them up, which was framed after their deliverance out of it; so it would be
equally hard to think they meant some of the Gods of Egypt, to which Place they
are said in their heart to return. For how could they think the Gods of Egypt
would so much favor those who had despised them, and drown those that
sacrificed to them? Besides, though it be true, that it is expressed in the
Plural Number, which may somewhat favor the interpreting their Words of other
Gods; yet as that is not much to be wondered at, because the Word Elohim is
Plural; so, that it is to be understood of the One True God, Nehemiah shows,
chap. 9. 18. where repeating that Passage concerning the Calf, he brings them
in saying, not These be thy gods, but This is thy God that brought thee out of
the Land of Egypt. As for their stiling the Calf their God or Gods, it is but an
usual Metonymie, whereby the Name of the Thing signified is given to the Sign;
as the Images of the Cherubim over the Mercy-seat, are called the Cherubim; and
in like manner, those of the Oxen and Lions in the Temple, by theirs. The same
is yet more evident from that which follows after in the Story, when Aaron
had built an Altar before the Calf: For the Text tells us, that he immediately
made Proclamation, To morrow is a feast to the Lord, that is to say, to the
True God of Israel; what we render Lord, being the most peculiar Name of God,
and to which the Jews bear such a reverence, that they will hardly venture to
pronounce it. Neither will it suffice to object (as I find it is by some) That
the Psalmist, where he speaks concerning this very Argument, affirms, That they
forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt, wondrous works
in the land of Ham, and terrible things by the Redsea. For, as that is not of
sufficient force against so many Arguments for their meaning the True God,
especially when the same Psalmist affirms, That they changed their glory into
the similitude of an ox that eats grass; so they might very well be said to
forget God, without altogether casting him off, because forgetting, or at least
not remembering to observe that Commandment we are now upon, and to the
observation of which they had so many Obligations from his Goodness. For thus,
Deuteronomy. 8.11. we find God bidding them beware that they forgot not the Lord, in
not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which he had
so often enjoined them to observe.

Having thus shown the Calf which Aaron made to have been intended for a
Representation of the True God, and consequently (because their Worship of God
in it was reputed Idolatry) that therefore it is such to worship even the True
God in an Image; I come now to show the same of the Calves set up by Jeroboam;
that is to say, That they worshipped the True God in them, and that that their
Worship was Idolatry. That they worshipped the True God in them, is evident
from the Proclamation Jeroboam made, when he set up those his Golden Calves:
For, it is (says he) too much for you to go up to Jerusalem; behold thy gods,
O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, 1 Kings 12.28. For, as
it would have been a vain attempt in Jeroboam, to take them off altogether from
the Service of that God, to whom they had been so long devoted; so his Words
show very apparently, that his Design was rather to change the Place and
Manner, than the Object of their Worship; because assigning for the Reason of
his Fact, only the tediousness of the Journey to Jerusalem, and moreover
representing his Calves as the gods that brought them out of the land of Egypt,
which was a known Periphrasis of the God of Israel. And accordingly, though
Jehu, who was one of his Successors, departed not from the sin of Jeroboam, as
the Scripture observes of him, 2 Kings 10.29. yet is his zeal in the
destruction of Baal's Priests styled by himself a zeal for the Lord, ver. 16.
and which is of much more consideration, he himself intimated by the Scripture
to have walked in the law of the Lord God of Israel, save only in the matter
of the calves, ver. 31. of the same: Which could in no wise be affirmed, if he
and those of his Sect had renounced the God of Israel, and worshipped either
the Calves themselves, or some Foreign Deity in them. To all which, if we add,
That Ahab is said to have offended more heinously than all that went before
him, because serving Baal, and worshipping him, 1 Kings 16.31. so we shall not
in the least doubt, but that the setting up of the Calf was intended only to
worship the True God in it. For wherein had the great aggravation of Ahab's sin
been, if they that were before him had worshipped either the Calf it self, or
some of the Heathen Gods in it? The only thing remaining to be shown, is, That
their Worship of the Calves was Idolatry; which will be no very hard Task to
evince. For though their Worship is no where expressly styled so, yet are they
called Idols, which is enough to make the Worship of them Idolatry. But so that
they are, that of Hosea is an abundant Testimony, chap. 13.4. For having
premised the Israelites making them molten images of their silver, and idols
according to their own understanding, all of them the work of the craftsmen, to
let us know what Idols he means, he subjoyns, They say of them, Let the men
that sacrifice kiss the calves. Forasmuch therefore as the Calves were no other
than Idols; forasmuch as one Egg cannot be more like unto another, than the
Calves of Jeroboam were to that of Aaron; it must needs be, because they were
such, and the Worshipping that of Aaron reputed Idolatry, that that of
Jeroboam's was so also; and consequently, that it is Idolatry to worship even
the True God in an Image.

Two things there are which are commonly alleged against the foregoing
Arguments, to prove the Idolatry of the Israelites not to have had the True God
for its Object. 1. That what they sacrificed to their Idols, they are said to
sacrifice to devils, and not to God: And, 2. That the Prophets are frequent in
inculcating, That the Gods they worshipped were gold and silver, that they
could neither see, nor hear, nor understand; which may seem to import their
looking upon the Images themselves as Gods. And indeed, if only one of these
things had been objected, possibly it might have served in some measure to
shroud an evil Cause; but urging them both, they do but help to destroy it:
because urging such things as, taken in the strictness of the Letter, are
inconsistent with each other. For if the Israelites worshipped Evil Spirits in
all their Images then did they not worship the Images themselves; and if they
held the Images themselves for Gods, then did they not worship Evil Spirits in
them. The only thing remaining to be said, is, That some Images they looked
upon as Gods themselves, and others as Representations of Evil Spirits; both of
which being granted, will contribute little to the proving any thing against
us. For, nothing hinders all this while, but they might look upon some Images,
and particularly upon the Calves, as Representations of the God of Israel. But
let us a little more particularly consider both the one and the other
Allegation, and see how little force there is in either. It is alleged out of
Deuteronomy, chap. 32.17. That they sacrificed unto devils, and not to God:
But, does it follow from thence, that they did so in sacrificing to Aaron's
Calf? when there is not only no particular mention of it, but it is also
sufficiently known, that they worshipped many of the Heathen Deities besides.
But be it, that the Calf of Aaron were there included, as well as their other
Idols: Yet, will it follow from thence, that they directly and intentionally
worshipped an Evil Spirit in them? For may not a Man serve the Devil, unless,
after the Custom of the Indians, he fall down and worship him? But how then
could the Widows that forsook the Faith, be said to be turned after Satan, for
only breaking that Faith they had plighted unto God? Beside, when the Devil is
consessedly the Author and Promoter of all false Worship, what impropriety is
there in affirming those who comply with his Suggestions in it, to sacrifice
rather to him, than to God, whom they design to honor? Otherwise, what shall
we say to reconcile what the Scripture in several places affirms concerning
the Idols of the Heathen, to wit, That what the Gentiles sacrifice to Idols,
they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God (for so St. Paul tells us); and again,
That the gods of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands, as
the Psalmist? It being impossible that both should be true in the Letter, and
therefore a Qualification to be admitted. The only thing therefore to be
accounted for, is, the Scriptures so often inculcating, That their Idols were
but Silver and Gold; that they could not either see, or hear, or understand:
which may seem to import that the Hebrews looked upon the Images themselves as
Gods. But neither will this serve their turn, or enervate the Conclusion before
laid down: because it is certain, 1. They worshipped the Host of Heaven, and
erected Images to them. It is no less certain, 2. That the Heathen, who are in
like manner charged with the same sottish Worship, looked upon, not their
Images, but several Dead Men, as Gods, whom they represented by them. From both
which put together, it is manifest, That when we find both the one and the
other faulted for making Gold and Silver their Gods; as those Gold and Silver
Gods again decry'd, for not being able to see, or hear, or understand: we are
to understand thereby, that they dealt foolishly, not in looking upon their
Images as Gods (for this few or none were so sottish as to believe) but for
thinking such Representations as those to be either proper Representations of
the Divine Nature, or fit Passports of his Worship, which could neither see,
nor hear, nor understand. What remains then, especially since God has both
licensed and commanded us so to do, but that we go immediately to himself, but
that we fall down and kneel, not before his Image, but before the Lord our
Maker? or, if we will needs worship him in an Image, but that we worship him in
his Son, who is the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his
person? So doing, we shall be so far from dishonouring the Great God of Heaven,
that we shall, on the other side, do him actual Honor in it; because he is not
only the perfect Image of the Father, but of the same Divine Nature with
himself.

Having thus shown, from the Scriptures, the unlawfulness of worshipping the
True God by an Image; and that too, as well from those of the New Testament, as
of the Old: I should now, according as the Superstitions of the Church of Rome
lead me, proceed to consider the Worship of the Images of Christ, as also of
the Images of his Saints. Only to show the Worship of God by an Image, to be
as much a breach of the Law of Nature, as of that of Scripture, and the better
to plain my way to that which follows, I shall subjoyn a Reason drawn from
Natures Law, concerning the Worship of God by an Image.

It is commonly suggested by the Papists, when they know not what else to say,
That though they pass their Worship through the Image, yet they terminate it
not there; and do what they do to the Image, not for it self, but in Honor of
him whose Image it is. I will not now say, because I have said it often enough
already, That such Images of God are unlawful in themselves, and a dishonor to
the Divine Majesty, which they are intended to represent: From whence it will
follow, not only that they ought not to have any Respect whatsoever, for his
sake whom they represent; but that, for his sake, they ought to be rejected and
condemned. That which I shall insist upon, is, That See Dr. Taylor's Ductor
Dubit. ubi supra.
the Worship which is given to the Image, is either different from, and so less
than it; or the same numerical Worship with that of him it represents. If the
Worshipper gives a different, and consequently a less Worship, he does not
worship God in the Image; but his Worship, such as it is, is terminated in the
Image, and then comes not into this Inquiry, as being no more than loving a
Picture for Lesbia 's sake, or valuing a Pendant for her sake that gave it me;
and must be estimated according to its excess, or temper, and according to the
Will of the Person it relates to. For, as if the Person I respect, should
signify her dislike of that which I set a value upon, and particularly of some
Picture, wherein it may be she has little right done her; as, I say, in that
case I should show but little respect to her, by prizing that which she
professes to dislike; so must they be thought to show little regard of God,
who set any value upon his Image, both because all Images do but dishonor his
most excellent Nature, and because he has declared his own detestation of
them. But, if by the Image a Man means to worship God, as the Papists both
profess and practice, and pass his Worship through that, to what it represents;
then he gives to both the same Worship, and consequently is guilty of Idolatry,
because giving that Worship to an Image of God, which is truly and properly
Divine. Neither will it suffice to say (as I find it is by the Papists) That
what is done to the Image, is for the sake of him it represents, and
consequently does still set God above them, according to that known Maxim in
Logic, Propter quod unumquodque est tale, illud est magis tale. For, first of
all, still it will remain for certain, that Divine Worship is given to the
Image; which is downright Idolatry, and expressly forbidden by the Almighty,
where he says, That he will not give his honor to another, neither his praise
to graven images. I say, secondly, That though, by giving worship to the Image
for the sake of him it represents, they may seem to set him above the Image;
yet they do he challenges to himself alone, to that which is confessedly but
an Image of him. I say, thirdly, That when it is affirmed Propter quod
unumquodque est tale, illud est magis tale, it is to be supposed to hold only
where there is a magis and minus, which is not in the present Case; the Divine
Nature, and consequently the Divine Worship, which is but a just esteem of it,
and expression of that esteem, admitting of no Degrees: for, if it be less than
the Highest, it is not Divine. Either therefore let them say, or rather show by
their Practice, that they give not Divine Honor to an Image; or let them
confess withal, that they are guilty of downright Idolatry, which is that we
are endeavoring to prove. For, as for their assigning their doing of it to be
for the sake of him it represents, it makes nothing at all for the clearing of
them. For, as he who thus answers, confesses he gives Divine Honor to an
Image, and only tells us in what manner he does it: so either that Manner does
destroy the Thing, and then it is not Divine Worship that is given; or it does
not destroy the Thing, and then, for all the distinctions, it is idolatry.
Lastly, If (as they say) there be but one Motion of the Soul to the Image, and
that of which it is one; it must consequently be granted, That more cannot be
given to the one than the other by it, because one Act cannot be susceptible of
both; and therefore also, either that God must have less Honor than he should,
or the Image have the same Divine Honor with the Almighty. But concerning this
matter, as I think I shall not need to add more, to prove the Worshipping of
God by an Image to be Idolatry; so, if any desire further satisfaction, I shall
refer them to Dr. Taylor's Cases of Conscience, where this Question is so fully
and accurately handled, that no Man unprejudiced can go away in the least
unsatisfied.

To go on now, according to our proposed Method, to entreat of the Worship of
other Images; and, first of all, (because he stands between both, or rather is
both God and Man) of the Images of Christ. Concerning which, I shall no way
doubt to affirm, 1. That such Images may be lawfully enough made, because he
assumed a Nature into the Unity of the Divine Person, which is capable of being
depicted or engraved. 2. I shall not stick to grant, secondly, That an Image of
Christ, especially as hanging upon the Cross, may serve to excite in us a just
apprehension of his bitter Sufferings, and, by that means, of his immense Love,
who stooped so low as to undergo them: Nor yet, 3. But that they may be so far
regarded for his sake whom they represent, as not only not to be defaced,
where they are not abused by Idolatry; but have a place, where they are
admitted, among our choicest things of that nature. All these things, I say, no
sober Man ever did, or can deny to be free from offending against this Law of
God, or any other. The only Question is, 4. In what Place, or at what Times,
they may be expedient, or inexpedient; which must be left to Prudence and
Authority to determine: consideration being had of the Persons to whom they are
permitted, or of those with whom they converse. For thus, if Men be inclinable
to Idolatry (as they were extremely in the beginning of Christianity) or are
mixed among those that are; in such Cases there is no doubt it would be but
necessary either to restrain, or remove such and other Images, especially from
the Places of our Assemblies. Whence it was, that when Adrian the Emperor
sought to set up Temples for Christ, he dedicated them without Images: And the
Council of Eliberis, in regard of the multitude of Idolaters with whom they
conversed, decreed, That no Pictures should be had in theirs, lest that which
is worshipped should be painted upon the Walls. But as, I say, setting aside
where there may be a just fear of falling into Idolatry, there can be no doubt
in the least of the making, or having such and other Images, which pretend not
to represent the Divine Nature. So the main Question between us and the Papists
is, 5. Concerning the Worshipping of them; which accordingly I come now to
assoil. For the doing whereof, I will proceed in this method. 1. I shall show,
That all Divine Adoration of them is unlawful: And, 2. That all Adoration is
unlawful, that only borders upon it.



1. That our Savior is to be worshipped with Divine Adoration, we, as well as
the Papists, hold; because we do equally hold him to be God: But, that Divine
Honor ought to be done to his Image, we do constantly deny; because his Image
is not his Person. If it be said (as it may) That their intention is not to do
Honor to his Image, but to Christ, as God, in it; they who remember the
precedent Discourse, will soon discern the insufficiency of that Answer, as to
the freeing the Worshippers thereof from Idolatry; because I have before shown
it to be such, from the example of the Israelites, to worship the True God in
an Image. The only Question therefore that can be made, is,

2. Whether it be lawful to fall down or kneel before them (which borders upon
Divine Adoration) which therefore I come now to resolve. In order whereunto,
the first thing I shall observe is, That whereas the Reason of forbidding the
having of any other Gods before the True, is, because he is the Lord our God;
Dr. Tailor 's Ductor Dubit. ubi supra.
when he comes to forbid the Worshipping of Images, he subjoyns another Reason,
to wit, because he is a jealous God. Of which procedure, what other account can
be given, but that his intention was to cut off not only the giving of Divine
Honors to them, but of any thing that might be thought to be like them? For,
if the former only had been his intention, it would have been sufficiently
forestalled by his declaring himself to be the Lord our God: That, without any
other Reason, being a sufficient Argument, not to pay Divine Honor to another.
The same is no less evident, secondly, from the nature of jealousy, upon which
Quality of his, God grounds his Prohibition of Image Worship. For, would it
satisfy any jealous Person, think you, to tell him, that she of whom he is
jealous did not go so far as to commit Adultery with her Paramour; or, if she
did, that she did it only for his sake, and because of his likeness to him?
Nay, does not jealousy naturally arise from an over-familiarity with other
Men, and the making frequent use even of the usual Testimonies of Civility and
Friendliness? But how then (especially when God is pleased to assume the Person
of one) can we make any other Interpretation of his being jealous concerning
those Persons whom he has espoused, yea married to himself? For be it, that
they keep their Hearts from wandering after other Deities; that they do not
entertain the same respectful Thoughts of, nor have the same inward Love and
Affection for them: Yet if (as the Prophet speaks) their eyes are after their
Idols; if they bow down to them upon every approach to the Place of God's
Worship; if they kiss the calves, as often almost as they do behold them; who
can think a jealous God will brook such Testimonies of Kindness and Respect,
any more than a jealous Man would such a deportment in his Wife?

The same is much more true, concerning the Images of God's Creatures, and our
Fellow Servants, the Saints and Angels, together with all other things any way
relating to them; as the Relics of the one, or those things which are
dedicated to Gods Service. For when such things as these have (not as with us
the Bible, in the Administration of an Oath before a Magistrate, but) upon
every occasion that is offered, our Kisses and our Cringes; when Temples are
dedicated, and Altars erected to Saints and Angels; when we bow before them, as
often, if not oftener, than before God and Christ; when we do it in the Places
and upon the Times appointed for Divine Worship; what Deity, that were in the
least jealous of his own Honor, and of the Affections of his Servants, would
not be impatient of such Affronts, and revenge them upon the Heads of the
Authors of them?

PART IV.
Of the Sanction of the Precept, by a Threat, and a Promise. What is meant by
God's threatening to visit the Sins of the Fathers upon the Children. That God
neither will nor can make one Man bear the Punishment of another Sin. From
which, and other Reasons, it is made evident, That God's intention in that
Threat is either, first, That he will punish the Fathers in the Children, as he
does sometimes in their Persons and Estates; or, That, to show his displeasure
against Sin, he will lay some Affliction upon the Child, but which yet (if that
Child be innocent) shall turn to his Spiritual good; or, thirdly and lastly,
That he will take occasion from the Parents Sins, to punish the Children for
their own. What appearance there is of God's thus visiting the Iniquity of the
Parents upon the Children, and particularly upon those of Idolatrous ones. The
Explication concludes with that part of the Sanction which contains a
Declaration of God's showing mercy unto thousands in them that love him: Where
the exuberance of God's Mercy, above the severity of his Vindictive Justice, is
noted and exemplified.

II. OF the Precept now before us, what has been said may suffice: Proceed we
therefore to the Sanction of it, which is made by a Threat and a Promise:
Whereof the former imports, That God will avenge the Transgression of the
Precept upon the children of the Transreward the Observance of it to a far
greater tract of Time and Number, in the Posterity of those that shall observe
it. For though the Iniquity God here threatens to visit, be expressed under the
Name of hatred, which comprehends other Sins beside those which are here
forbidden; as, on the other side, that Piety which he promises to reward, by
the love of God, and the keeping of his commandments, which is no less
comprehensive than the former: Yet as it is but reasonable to understand both
the Promise and the Threat with a more particular relation to the observing or
not observing of that Commandment to which they are affixed; so there was
reason enough to express that Observance, or Nonobservance, by the loving, or
hating of the Almighty. For God assuming to himself the Person of an Husband to
his People (as the stiling of himself a jealous God shows) it was but agreeable
to that Married Estate to which he alludeth, that he should express the
Fidelity of his Spouse to him by that Love which is the ground of it; as, on
the other side, her going a whoring after Images, by the hatred of himself:
because it is from the loathing those Companions which they have assumed, that
adulterous Women seek out to themselves new and forbidden Loves. Forasmuch
therefore as both the Threat and the Promise, though in appearance of a greater
extent, do yet, if not only, yet in a more peculiar manner, belong to the
Violators or Observers of this Commandment; I shall not only deem this to be
the most proper place of handling them, but consider them more particularly
with reference to this Commandment, to which they are affixed by the Almighty.

Having given an account in my last of the Jealousy of the Almighty, so far as
that is useful to show the nature of the Crime here forbidden; we are now to
consider it with reference to that Penalty which it prompted the Lawgiver to
denounce. For my more orderly explication whereof, I will inquire, 1. What is
here meant by visiting the Sins or Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children:
And, 2. What appearance there is of God's executing this Threat upon the
Children of evil Parents, and particularly upon those of Idolatrous ones.


1. Now lest any should imagine, that when God threatens to visit the iniquity
of the fathers upon the children, his intention is to make one Man suffer the
Punishment of another Sin; I think it not amiss to admonish, in the first
place, That that is so far from being any part of his intention, that it is
perfectly inconsistent with his own Declaration elsewhere, and indeed with the
Justice of his Nature; as having not only declared his dislike of that peevish
Proverb, That the fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are
set on edge; but moreover affirmed, in express terms, Ezekiel. 18.20. That the
soul that sins, it shall die; that the son shall not bear the iniquity of
the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son; in fine,
that the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness
of the wicked upon him. Than which, what could be said with greater evidence
and conviction, to remove all suspicion of God's making one Man to bear the
Punishment of another Sins? Though setting aside that Declaration, the sole
Justice of God would oblige us to an abhorrence of all such Surmises: For,
what, I beseech you, makes any Punishment just, that is inflicted either by God
or Man? Is it any other than a Right in the Judge to punish, and an Obligation
in the Criminal to suffer? And if so, is it not alike evident, that it can be
no way consistent with God's Justice to make one Man bear the Punishment of
another Sin? For, as no one can have a Right to punish, where a Fault did not
precede; and therefore neither to extend it, where that Fault does not;
because, as to any other, it is as if there had been no Fault at all: so
neither can any Man be under an obligation to Punishment, who was not some way
or other Partaker of the Sin that caused it; because that Obligation arises
from demerit, which we have already supposed to be the peculiar of another. And
indeed, however some Actions of God seem to proclaim the contrary, and
particularly his imputing to us the Sins of our first Parents, and laying on
Christ the Iniquities of us all; yet neither do the one nor the other
contradict it in the least, if they be seriously and warily considered. Not the
former, because the same Scriptures which affirm that God imputes to us the
Iniquities of our First Parents, do also assure us (as I shall show more
largely hereafter Explication of the Doctrine of the Sacraments, and
particularly of that of Baptism.
) that we all offended in him, and consequently, that God does not so much
impute to us their Sin, as our own: As neither the latter, because Christ
voluntarily undertook the suffering of that Punishment, which our Sins had
deserved from the Almighty. After which, to lay upon Christ the Iniquities of
us all, was not so much to make him suffer for others Sins, as for those which
he made his own, by taking the burden of them upon himself. Whence it is, that
St. Paul tells us, 2 Cor. 5.21.
That God made him sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him.

It being thus evident, That God neither does, nor can make one Man bear the
Punishment of another Sin; and consequently, that that cannot be thought to be
the importance of the Threat here used: it remains that we pitch upon such a
sense of God's visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, as does
not imply any thing of that nature. In order whereunto, it will not a little
conduce to affirm (what I shall by and by show has sufficient warrant in the
Commination) That when God either threatens, or actually visits the Sins of the
Fathers upon the Children, it is not so much his intention to make them bear
the Iniquity of their Fathers, as to punish their Fathers in them, as he
sometimes does in their Houses or Estates, or whatsoever else they place their
Happiness in. By which means God does not so much make the Children suffer the
Punishment of their Fathers Sins, as make the Fathers suffer for their own,
through the sides of those Children whom he afflicts. Now, that this is the
intention of the Almighty, in such kind of Comminations, and particularly in
that which is the Subject of my Discourse, is evident from the end of all such
Comminations, and a particular Passage in this: For, the design of them being
manifestly to deter Men from those Crimes to which these Comminations are
affixed; to make those Comminations of any force, they must consequently be
thought to bring some Evil to that Criminal against whom they shall be found to
be denounced: No Man, and much less a sinful one, being like to be reclaimed by
those Evils, in which he himself shall not have the greatest share. From
whence, as it will follow, That the principal Design of the Almighty was to let
those Idolatrous Persons know, that he meant to punish them in their Children;
so it may not obscurely be collected from God's extending this Threat of his no
further than to the third and fourth Generation, those being Generations which
the Parents may live to see, and therein their own Bowels (as the Apostle calls
those that descend from our Loins) tortured for their Impiety against their
Maker. Though, supposing that they should not; yet if they have any thing of
natural Affection in them, they very thoughts that so it shall be with their
Posterity, cannot but stagger them in their Impiety, how strongly soever they
may be tempted to it; it being not a little Evil, to die with an apprehension
of our Posterities becoming miserable through our procurement.

Now though this be true, and in part also satisfactory, because the Punishment
is properly the Parents, the Calamity of the Child being made use of only to
punish the Parent by; yet, because it is evident that such Inflictions cannot
happen but by the Calamity of the Child, as it is no less from the phrase of
God's visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, that the Calamity
of the Child must happen by the procurement of the Parent; therefore, to show
the full importance of this Commination of the Almighty, as well as its freedom
from involving the Child in the Punishment of the Parents Sin, it will be
requisite to affirm, in the second place, That when he threatens to visit the
Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, his meaning is, not only that God
will punish the Fathers in them; but that, in order to that end, he will make
the Children miserable, and that too for the sake of the Fathers Impieties: But
yet so, that if those Children tread not in their Fathers steps, they shall be
free from the Effects of it; of which there is a sufficient presumption from
Ezekiel. 18.14. and so on: or, that that Calamity of the Children shall turn to
their spiritual and eternal advantage (for so St. Paul tells us, that all
things shall, to them that love God, Romans 8.28.) or, that if the Children tread
in their Fathers steps, or be any other way Irreligious, yet they shall not be
punished, even by occasion of their Fathers Sins, but for their own, and
according to the demerit of them: Which will at the same time both show how God
visits the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, and how far that
Visitation of his is from making the Child bear the Punishment of the Fathers
Sin. A familiar Instance will clear my Sense in the second of the Particulars
beforementioned, and together with it, the uprightness of God's Proceedings.
For, let us suppose, as we very well may, having oftentimes observed it; let us
suppose, I say, a fond Mother punished in the Sickliness of that Son toward
whom she has showed an immoderate affection, her love to him transporting her
into the neglect of her other Children, or any other sinful action. Here, I
say, it is manifest, supposing the Child also to be pious, and no way to desire
or approve of such an unreasonable fondness, that the Child becomes miserable
by the procurement of the Mother; or, if you had rather I should speak in the
Language of Moses here, that her iniquity is visited upon him: But yet so, that
that Calamity of the Child's is, in respect of him, no Punishment, but, on the
contrary, a signal advantage; God Almighty having promised, that all things
shall work together for good to them that love him; and if so, this Calamity
also. By means of which, at the same time he punishes the Mother, yet he only
afflicts the Child, or rather out of her Punishment procures a great Advantage
to him; which is so far from being an act of Injustice, that it is an act of
Grace and Mercy to him. But let us suppose, as in the third Instance, that the
Child whose Calamity God makes use of for the punishment of the Parents,
treads in their steps, or at least is irreligious another way; in which case,
the Calamity inflicted cannot but be looked upon as a Punishment, yea even to
that Child on whom it is so; yet even so, a way may be found out to verify
God's Threat of visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, without
granting them to suffer the Punishment of their Parents Sins: For, as that
Threat can no way be verified, without affirming the Punishment of the Child to
befall it by the Iniquity of the Parents; so, that may well enough be affirmed,
without granting the Child to bear the Punishment of his Parents Sins; it being
enough to the verifying of the former, and indeed as much as is consistent with
Justice, that the Rebellious Son, by occasion of his Fathers Sins, is punished
for his own; for which, but for his Fathers Sins, he had either escaped
unpunished, or not been punished after that manner wherein he is: For it is in
this Particular (as Sand. third Sermon on 3 King. 21.25. sect. 24.
one has happily compared it) as it is with a Man, who having contracted many
vicious and malignant Humors, happens to ride abroad in wet Weather, and takes
cold, falls thereby into a shaking first, and anon into a dangerous and
lasting Fever. For, as there the Parties malignant Humors were the true Cause
and Root of his Distemper, and his taking cold the Occasion only of its
breaking out; so the Personal Sins of the Son are the Cause of his Punishment,
the Fathers the Occasion only of the inflicting it: which is far from
inferring God's making one Man to bear the Punishment of another Man's
Transgression: This importing no more, than that by occasion of the Fathers
Sins, the Son may be sometime punished according to the demerit of his own. In
the mean time, we may see with how little reason some have condemned that
Prayer of our Church, which, agreeably to the Doctrine of this Commandment,
teaches us to beg of God not to remember the offenses of our forefathers: For
though those Offenses shall never be charged upon us, yet they may be a Motive
to God to punish us for smaller ones of our own, which is that which is here
meant by visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, to the third
and fourth generation.

2. What is meant by visiting the Sins or Iniquity of the Fathers upon the
Children, has been at large declared, together with the Justice of God's
Proceedings in it: Enquire we now (as our proposed Method obliges us) what
appearance there is of God's executing this Threat upon the Children of evil
Parents, and particularly upon those of Idolatrous ones. For the resolution
whereof, I will take this Threat of the Almighty asunder, and show the
Completion of it in every Particular thereof. Now, that God does often visit
the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, which is the first of those
things which are affirmed, the Scripture will afford many signal Instances;
whereof the first that I shall allege, is that of Samuel, 2 Samuel 12.18. In
which place we do not only find God threatening, but actually visiting David's
Adultery upon that Child which was the Offspring of it; and that too,
notwithstanding the Father's deep Humiliation, and earnest Supplication for his
Life. For well may we conclude, that God will not ordinarily be wanting in
visiting the Iniquity of a Parent upon a Child, when so pious a Man as David
could not avert it, though he sought it carefully with tears. But so that it is
also with a Father of a Country, no less than with a Natural one, the same
David, how eminent soever for his Piety otherwise, will afford us a no less
convincing Proof: the Scripture giving us to understand, that for his numbering
of the people, God slew in one day no less than seventy thousand of them, 2 Samuel 24.15. For though there be appearance enough that the Subjects of King
David contributed not a little to the procuring of this their Destruction, the
same Book of Samuel informing us, in the first Verse of that Chapter, That
because the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, he permitted Satan to
move David to do that Act which procured it; though it be also probable,
because there is no mention of their doing it, that the People of Israel, when
numbered, omitted to give each of them half a shekel for the ransom of his soul,
the neglect whereof God had long before told them he would punish with a
Plague, Exodus 30.1. and so on; by which means the Destruction of that People
will appear yet more particularly to have been drawn upon them by themselves:
Yet inasmuch as David takes the guilt of it upon himself, and desires of God
that he would rather turn his hand against him and his fathers house, than
against those sheep of his, as he calls them, who had no hand in the
procuring the numbering of themselves; inasmuch as the Book of Chronicles gives
us to understand, that the numbering of the People, which was David's own Act,
was the thing which displeased God, and for which he smote Israel, (for the
Text tells us in express terms, that God was displeased with this thing, even
with the Word and Command of David for the numbering of the People, and
therefore he smote Israel, 1 Chronicles. 21.7.) it is plain, that though the
Israelites were not without their guilt, and such as might provoke God to the
sending of that Pestilence among them; yet the chief occasion of their Calamity
was the Sin of David: and though they were punished for their own Sins only,
yet it was by his means that they came to be so, who might otherwise have been
respited at least from it. Add hereunto God's involving the innocent Children
of the Sodomites in the same Calamity with their Parents; and in fine, all
National Calamities, wherein Experience shows good Men have no less suffered,
than those who were the Procurers of them. But because it is not only
affirmed, that God will visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children,
but that he will also visit it to the third and fourth generation; therefore
inquire we, in the next place, what appearance there is of God's extending it
either to the one or the other. Now though this be not so easy to be made
appear, nor indeed absolutely necessary to be, partly because God never so
threatens to visit, but he leaves himself a liberty to suspend the execution
of it, as the Repentance of the Children, or some other Purpose of his Divine
Providence shall require; and partly because in this Commandment he does rather
insinuate his own likelihood of taking that Revenge, than absolutely assure
them that he will: yet that it was not without example, especially as to the
Children of Idolatrous Parents, the many Evils which God laid upon the Jews,
and their being carried Captive into Babylon, may serve for an abundant
evidence. For as there is nothing more evident from the Sacred Writers, than
that Idolatry was the chief cause of that and other their Calamities; so, that
the Idolatry of their Forefathers had not a little hand in the procuring of
their Captivity, is evident in part from that Lamentation of Jeremy, which was
written after, and upon occasion of it; he expressly affirming there, That their
fathers had sinned, and were not, and they had born their iniquities, Lam. 5.7.
If there be any thing of defect as to that particular proof, it is, that there
is mention only of the Sins of their Fathers, without specifying whether he
meant their immediate Fathers, or other their preceding Ancestors. But beside
that it is not easy to confine this Speech of his to the Sins of their
immediate Predecessors, when it is apparent those that went before them yielded
not to them in Idolatry; it is evident enough from other places, that God
looked farther back than the immediately foregoing Generation; yea, that this
very Prophet did so; the Author of the Books of Kings 2 Kings 24.3.
assuring us, that God had a respect to the Sins of Manasseh, who was four
removes from those of the Captivity, as the Prophet Jeremy Jer. 25.4.
reproaching them with his sending, and their refusing to hear all his
Prophets; which must consequently, because all his Prophets lived not within
that or a few foregoing Ages, show him to have intended the Sins of more
ancient Times, and of those their Forefathers that lived in them. And indeed,
well may we reckon the Fathers of more than four Generations backward, as the
occasioners of their Captivity, when the present Jews impute much of their
present Distress to Aaron's Calf; it being a Proverbial Saying among them, That
there is no bitter Fagius in Exodus 32.2. ex Mose Gerundensi. Non accidit ribi,
o Israel, ultio aliqua in qua non sit vel uncia de iniquitate vituli.
Cup they drink, which has not some of the Ashes of that Calf mixed with it.
If God does not at all times proceed to the execution of so severe a Threat,
that is imputable to his alone Will and Pleasure, which is uncertain as to us,
and therefore not to be depended upon by us, especially as to the Iniquities of
our immediate Forefathers: There being not a few Instances of the Miseries of
those Children who have had the ill fortune to be descended of Irreligious
Parents.

Having thus given an Account of that part of the Sanction which concerns the
Violators of this Commandment, it remains that we descend to that which
respects the Observers of it: Concerning which (because it contains nothing of
difficulty in it) it shall suffice me to observe, That as God is not wanting to
encourage our Obedience to, as well as to discountenance the Transgression of
this Commandment; so, that those gracious Expresses by which he endeavors it,
transcend those of his Justice, and particularly of his Vindictive one: For,
whereas God threatens to visit the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children to
the third and fourth generation only, he promises to show mercy unto
thousands of them that love him, and keep his commandments. But so that God
proceeded, as well as promised, the Scriptures do abundantly declare, they
giving us to understand, that for the sake of David, and other such pious
Persons, God was often entreated both for his Successors, and the Land of
Israel; and averted from them those Judgments which they had abundantly
deserved, and which he himself was otherwise in a disposition to inflict. For
thus, when Solomon had by his Sins, and particularly by his Idolatry, given
occasion to the Almighty to rend the Kingdom from him and his Son; yet in
respect to David, who had been more faithful in keeping of his Commandments and
his Statutes, he preserved the Kingdom entire to him all the days of his Life,
and left his Son, for the same David's sake, the Tribe of Judah, and those that
followed it, 1 Kings 11.34, and so on. In like manner, though in the time of
Jehoram, both Judah, and he himself, had made themselves ripe for destruction,
by treading in the Idolatries of Ahab, yet the Text gives us to understand,
that for David's sake, as well as for his own Covenant, God would not then
destroy them, nor give them over to those Calamities which they had deserved, 2
Kings 8.19. Which, as it is a sufficient Proof of the reality of God's
Intentions, in that Promise which he has here made to the Observers of this
Commandment; so cannot but, if attended to, prove a potent Inducement to the
Observation of this, and all other the Commandments of the Almighty: as by
means of which, not only we our selves may be made happy, but a Blessing be
thereby entailed upon many succeeding Generations.

THE THIRD COMMANDMENT.
THE THIRD COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

PART I.
The Contents.
The Affirmative Part of the Commandment, the Hallowing of God's Name; for
which cause the handling thereof is reserved for that Petition of the Lords
Prayer which prompts us to desire it: Only the Negative Part thereof, with its
appendent Sanction, considered here. The thing principally forbidden in it,
Swearing, and Swearing falsely. Other Profanations of God's Name, and
particularly in Oaths, reducible thereto, especially in the Christian sense of
it. An Inquiry what Oaths are to be looked upon as forbidden by our Savior:
Where is shown, first, against the Anabaptists, That all Oaths are not
forbidden; as, in like manner, against the Libertines, That other Oaths are,
beside what are made by a Creature; particularly, all Oaths in common
Conversation, yea, for which there is not a great necessity. The Grounds of
that Determination, and of the unlawfulness of such Oaths.

HAVING in the Preamble to my Discourse upon the Decalogue laid it for a
Ground, That every Negative in it includes an Affirmative, Reason would that I
should take notice of the Affirmative of this Precept, which can be no other
than the Hallowing of that Name which we are forbid by it to take in vain. But
because I shall say enough concerning the Hallowing of God's Name, in that
Petition of the Lord's Prayer which has that for the Object of it, I will
proceed without more ado to show, 1. The meaning of the Prohibition: Together
with, 2. That severe Sanction wherewith it is bound upon us.


I. I begin with the Prohibition, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy
God in vain: Where again these two things are to be inquired into.

1. Whether Swearing be the thing here forbidden, at least principally: And, 2.
If it be, What kind of Swearing is.
1. That Swearing is the thing forbidden, at least principally and chiefly,
beside the Consent both of Jewish Joseph. Ant. Jud. li. 3. c. 4. ubi sic
exprimit tertium mandatum. (...). Philo de special legibus.
and Christian Interpreters, we have the Phrase that is here made use of, to
attest; to take, or rather lift up the Name of God: because they who swore by
it, were wont to lift up their Hands to Heaven, being no other than to swear by
it. And accordingly, as the Chaldee Paraphrase, together with the Syriack and
Arabic Versions, render those Words, Thou shall not take the Name of God,
Swear not by it; so the Phrase of lifting up is so peculiar to the business of
an Oath, that it is sometime set by it self to signify it, and elsewhere with
the addition of Soul. For thus, Isa. 3.7. what is in the Hebrew, In that day
shall he lift up, saying, is in our Translation, and indeed cannot be well
otherwise rendered, In that day he shall swear; and the Psalmist, after he had
said, Who has not lift up his Soul to vanity, to let us know what he means,
adds by way of explication, nor sworn deceitfully, Psalm. 24.4. In the mean
time, as it is not to be denied, that the taking the Name of God may also
signify the making mention of it (after the same manner that it is, where God
asks of the Wicked what he had to do to declare his statutes, or take his
covenant into his mouth, Psalm. 50.16.) so the Rule before laid down, That under
the grosser Sins, the lesser also are forbidden, will warrant our Understanding
the Prohibition to extend to the irreverent use of the Name of God, as well out
of an Oath, as in it. But because I shall say enough concerning thus taking the
Name of God, when I come to entreat of that Petition which prays for the
Hallowing of it, I will confine my self at present to the matter of taking
God's Name in an Oath; and, because that is the next thing to be discoursed of,
inquire what kind of Swearing is here forbidden.

2. And here, in the first place, if we look upon the Commandment only as a
part of Moses Law, it is not in the least to be doubted, that all kind of
Swearing is not forbidden. For, as the Prohibition restrains it self to the
taking of God's Name in vain; so, that Restriction is so far from proscribing
all sorts of Oaths, that it does on the contrary establish those that are not
so qualified: according to that known Axiom of the Lawyers, That exceptio
firmat regulam in non exceptis. It is not to be doubted, secondly, if we regard
the Commandment under the former notion, that the principal design of it was to
forbid the taking of God's Name unto a lie: For as that is frequently the
meaning of the Word shave or vain, especially in the matter of Oaths, as you
may see in Grotius upon the Decalogue; so, I think, we cannot otherwise give a
satisfactory Account of the opposition our Savior makes between his own
Doctrine, and that of the Law; he representing the purport of the latter to be,
Thou shall not forswear thy self, but of his own, Thou shall not swear at all.
For, wherein lies the opposition between them, if the principal Design, at
least, of the Commandment were not to forbid the taking of God's Name unto a
lie? In the mean time, though I affirm the Swearing falsely to be the principal
thing struck at; my meaning is not to deny, but that vain Oaths may also be
condemned with them; partly because that is the prime importance of the Word
shave, and partly because I have before laid it for a Ground, That under the
greater Sins, the less also of the same species are forbid. But then, thirdly,
if we look upon the Commandment as all Christians ought to do, as either
explained or enlarged by our Savior, so no doubt can remain of the
unlawfulness of other Oaths beside false ones; our Savior's Words, after his
rehearsal of the Doctrine of the Law, being, But I say unto you, Swear not at
all. For the elucidation of which Doctrine, and together therewith, of our own
Obligation from this Commandment, I will proceed in this method.

1. I shall inquire what Oaths are simply and absolutely forbidden. 2. Whether
it be lawful in any case to swear by a Creature. 3. Whether the Magistrate has
power to exact an Oath. 4. Whether, and how far, he may exact one of the
Accused Party. 5. What is the Obligation of Oaths. 6. And lastly, (because that
is of kin to them, and therefore in reason to have a place here) entreat of the
Nature and Obligation of Vows.
I. There are a sort of Men who minding more the Letter, than the meaning of
the Scripture, have professed to believe themselves, and endeavored to
persuade others, that all Oaths are now forbidden. What the ground of their
Scrupulosity is, shall by and by be declared. This only would be observed in
passing, That they who in this matter are so tenacious of the Letter, are in
other things as regardless both of the Letter and the Sense. For what has more
the astipulation both of the one and the other, than Obedience to Magistrates,
which yet these scrupulous Persons do as irreligiously cast off? But because it
matters not much what the Persons are that propugn the Opinion, if it have any
Foundation in Scripture; leaving the Persons of the Objectors, we will descend
to the Texts on which they rely, which are especially that of our Savior, and
of St. James: The purport of the former whereof is, That they should not swear
at all; but that their communication should be yea, yea; nay, nay: the latter,
That they should not swear, neither by heaven, nor earth, nor any other Oath;
but simply affirm or deny whatsoever fell into discourse. For the clearing of
which Texts, or rather of the former thereof, (for every body may see that that
of St. James is borrowed from the other) I shall first of all propose the
contrary Example of St. Paul, in those Scriptures which God handed to the
Church by him: For, who can think it our Savior's intention to forbid all
Swearing whatsoever, when we find such a one as St. Paul doing so, in those
Writings wherein he was Divinely inspired? Now, for the Practice of St. Paul in
this particular, we have several Instances in those Epistles that bear his
Name. Thus, Romans 1.9. we find him vouching God for a Witness (which is the very
Formality of an Oath) that he did without ceasing make mention of them always
in his prayers: For God (says he) is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit
in the Gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you in my
prayers: as, in like manner, Gal. 1.20. where he gives an account of his
Conversion, and calling to be an Apostle: Now the things which I write unto
you, behold, before God, I lie not. Lastly, Where he speaks of the several
Persecutions and Troubles which he suffered for the Gospels sake, he does
appeal to the same God for the truth of what he said; For the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ (says he) which is blessed for evermore, knows that I
lie not, 2 Cor. 11.31. Which Texts are plain and evident Proofs of St. Paul's
swearing; and consequently, that our Blessed Savior has not universally
forbidden it. Let it remain therefore for a certain truth, That all Swearing
whatsoever is not forbidden by our Savior, which is the first thing proposed
to be proved. But as, on the one side, we are not to think all Oaths whatsoever
forbidden; so neither only such (which may perhaps be the Refuge of some Men)
that are made rather by Creatures, than by God; the opposition in that
fore-alledged place being not between swearing by a Creature, and by God; but
between Swearing, and a naked Affirmation and Denial: For, I say unto you
(says our Savior) swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is God's
throne; nor by the earth, for it is his footstool, etc. But let your
communication be yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these, comes
of evil. And accordingly, as St. James, where he enforces the same
Prohibition, to the mention of swearing neither by heaven nor by earth, adds,
neither by any other Oath; so it is easy to assign a Reason of our Savior's
instancing in such kind of Oaths, without restraining the Prohibition to them;
even because such kind of Asseverations were less scrupled by the Jews, as may
appear from a Tract Lib. de specialibus legibus.
of Philo: Where dehorting Men from swearing at all, he yet adds, That in case
they did, they should not swear by the Name of God, but by the Health or Memory
of their Parents, the Sun, the Earth, and the like; these being, in his
Opinion, much more excusable than swearing by the Name of God. Whatsoever
therefore is the meaning of those Words, Swear not at all, something more is
meant than that we should not swear by the Creatures; which what that is, I
come now more directly to show.

1. And here, in the first place, I shall not doubt to reckon (because the
thing principally forbidden) all Oaths in our common Conversation: For what
less can we think meant thereby, unless we would have our Savior's Words
signify just nothing? Especially when he himself adds, by way of explication,
Let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than
these, comes of evil. And here give me leave to take up a Lamentation,
especially in an Age which seems to bid defiance to our Savior's Precept, and
that August Name which it would preserve inviolate. For, as if, I do not say,
Christ had given no Command concerning it, but our lips were our own, and we
had no Superior to control us, every Man almost, from the oldest to the
youngest, calls God to witness in the most trivial and impertinent Affairs; at
a Game at Tables, at a Deal of Cards, when a Health is passing about, and it
may be Intemperance together with it: For, let the least question be made of
any thing that is then acting, and an Oath shall presently be brought to
confirm it, and God be called to witness that we threw twice Six, or that we
have been as intemperate as any that have kept the Round. Nay, to so great an
intemperance are the Tongues of Men now come, that God must be called to
witness, even where there is no question at all made of any thing, nor it may
be likely to be, unless it be whether the Party be a brave resolute Sinner, and
have as little fear of God as Man. For what other Interpretation can any Man
make of such Men's swearing, but that they are afraid of being thought
Religious, or rather of not being thought to have bid defiance to it? But as
all Oaths in common Converse are forbidden to us Christians, and Yea or Nay
substituted in their room; so, if the wisest of the Heathen or Christians may
be credited,

2. All Oaths whatsoever, for which there is not a great necessity. And
accordingly, we find the Fathers Tertul. de Idol. c. 11, and 23.
of the Church condemning Swearing, as a thing generally unlawful; and the
Ecclesiastical Stories Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l 6. c. 5. Loquitur de Basilide
Martyr in Alexandria.
telling us of one, of whom when his Fellow-soldier demanded an Oath, his
Answer was, That it was not lawful for him to swear, because he was a
Christian. But, which is admirable to observe, some of the Heathen sweetly
consenting with them, and with him whose Religion they propugned: For thus
Epictetus Enchit. c. 44.
in particular advises, (...) that is to say, to avoid swearing, if it were
possible, wholly; but if not, at least as far as they might: And Hierocles
Hierocles in illam clausulam (...).
, upon the Golden Verses of Pythagoras, That the best way to preserve the
Reverence due to an Oath, was not to use it frequently, or upon trifling
occasions, to fill up the vacuities of our Discourse, or procure credit to a
Tale; but, as far as they might, to use it only in things necessary, and when
there was no other way to secure them but by the help of an Oath. And, to the
shame of us Christians be it spoken, (for this Divinity was not only in their
Books, but in their Practice) there is mention of one Clinias Vid. Grot. in
Mat. 5.34.
, a Pythagorean, who, when he might have avoided a Mulct of three Talents, by
only taking an Oath, yet chose rather to suffer the loss of those, than take
the other. Such was the one and the others Opinion of the Sacredness of an
Oath, and of the unlawfulness of making use of it, unless where there was a
great necessity: Which, that it was not without ground, I shall show
immediately, when I make those the matter of my Inquiry. In the mean time, it
is evident, that all Oaths in common Converse are unlawful to Christians, and
much more the intermingling of Oaths with every Sentence we utter, which is so
frequent both with the Base and Honorable. And God grant, that, as the Land
has mourned because of them, so it may mourn for them, and we propitiate that
Name by our Humiliation and Reverence, which others and our selves hitherto
have only dishonored and blasphemed.

To go on now to show the Grounds of the Prohibition of unnecessary Oaths, and
to establish it by Reason, as well as by Authority: Where, first, I shall
allege the providing that every Man speak truth with his Neighbor, and be
punctual in the performance of their Words and Promises: For, as our Savior is
thought to intimate by those Words of his, Whatsoever is more than these,
comes of evil, the use of Oaths had undoubtedly its original from Men's
falseness and perfidiousness in their Words and Promises; neither would any Man
be desirous of an Oath, if he thought the Party he addressed himself to would
speak truth without. And accordingly, our Law does not generally exact an Oath
of those of the Nobler sort, because supposing their Birth and Education to set
them above any untruth and persidiousness; and the Word of an honest Man (as
Philo De spec. leg.
speaks) (...) that is to say, It has among those who deem him so, the nature
of an Oath, it is free from the suspicion of any falsity or change: Whilst he
who is put to an Oath (as the same Philo De Decalog.
speaks (...), lies under the suspicion of unfaithfulness. Now forasmuch as it
was manifestly our Savior's Design to implant Faithfulness and Truth in the
World, at least in that part of it which embraced his Religion; and the use of
Oaths (as has been already shown) is a sign of the want of that, and only
occasioned by it; it is easy to suppose, that the recovery of Truth and
Faithfulness, was the Reason of his forbidding them in common Converse; yea,
that he meant to forbid all that were not strictly necessary; all Oaths that
are not such, being a sign of want of Truth in them of whom they are exacted.
The second Reason which I suppose induced our Savior to forbid Swearing
generally, was to keep Men from swearing falsely; it being an hard matter for a
Man to allow himself in the one, and not be guilty of the other. We learn thus
much from the forementioned Philo; (...) for from much swearing (says he)
arises perjury and impiety: But much more clearly from Hierocles Loco prius
citato.
, whose Words I shall now subjoyn: (...), etc. Now the words Reverence an Oath,
do not only enjoin swearing truly, but the avoiding of swearing, as much as
may be; for so shall we best observe the Precept of swearing truly, if we
seldom allow our selves to swear at all: For by swearing frequently and
lightly, a Man may easily fall into Perjury; whereas he that swears seldom,
never. For, either such an one will not swear at all; or, if he does, he will
swear truly, and neither through an evil Custom suffer his Tongue to run before
his Understanding, nor his Understanding to be hurried away by the intemperance
of his Passions. And truly, what else can be expected from a common Swearer,
than that he should sometime swear falsely, and as well violate, as profane the
Oaths of God? For beside that such Men's frequent swearing is a certain Argument
that they do not esteem an Oath as Sacred (for then certainly they would
reserve them for Matters of importance, and where (as the Poet speaks) there
is a knot worthy God's untying) beside that, I say, the heat of Passion or
Inconsiderateness may make such Persons, ere they are aware, set an Oath to
that, of the falseness whereof they themselves are convinced; which is to call
the God of Truth to witness to a Lie, which of all other things he professes
to abhor. And if this be the consequent of customary swearing, no wonder if our
Savior have generally forbidden it, and enjoined Men as much as may be not to
swear at all. But beside the Perjury which unnecessary Swearing does naturally
draw after it, and for which cause therefore, if there were no other, it were
in reason to be avoided; it offers an affront both to God, and to his Name,
which we do thus take in vain. For, can it be other than an affront to the
Divine Majesty, to call him to witness to every Trifle, to interpose his
Testimony in every slight and impertinent Affair? That is to say, in such
wherein it would scarcely be decent to call in a Man of any Repute to witness?
Beside, when we call God to witness to the truth of what we affirm, our meaning
is, because there is no other way of witnessing it, that he would either
witness to the truth of what we say, by some extraordinary Accident; or to our
falseness, by some remarkable Judgment upon our selves. Now can any Man think
it other than an affront, thus unnecessarily to call upon God to show Miracles,
and alter the common Course of his Providence; when even God himself makes not
any such alteration, but in Matters of importance, and to evidence the truth of
a Revelation, or other such like Affair? If a Heathen could affirm of his
Deity, That he was not at leisure to intend small matters, we may very well
think that the True will not be well pleased to be called to witness, in
Matters that are neither serious nor important. It is true indeed, where the
Matter is weighty and important, and the Glory of God some way concerned in the
clearing of it, such as is the doing Right between Man and Man, or the
procuring Credit to that Doctrine which he himself has commanded us to
promulge; in those, I say, and such like Cases, especially when we have the
Warrant both of his Word and Apostles Practice, we may well presume it not
unacceptable to God, to call him to bear witness to them. But to do it, as is
commonly done, upon every slight and trifling occasion, when the question is
only, Whether we have thrown so much at Dice, or which of the Bowls lie
nearest to the Jack; in such Cases, I say, to call in God to Umpire the
Difference, must argue a mean Opinion of him, and may seem more proper for
those Dice we sport withal, and for those Reeds we are wont to measure the
difference that is between the other. But be it, that there were nothing of all
this in an Oath (which yet is the very Formality of it); yet, is it not some
affront to the Divine Majesty, thus unnecessarily to make mention of the Name
of God, and to interlard every Sentence we speak, with it? For though his Name
be not his Person, yet (as shall be elsewhere On that Petition of the Lord's
Prayer, Hallowed be thy Name.
observed) there is some Respect due to it, for the relation it has to him;
and accordingly, not either slightly, or regardlesly to be mentioned. But
because, where I shall make this Observation, I shall say enough to confirm it,
and the unlawfulness of unnecessary and trifling mention of the Divine Names;
in stead of prosecuting it, or the matter of Swearing any further, I will see
if I can provoke your Emulation, by what I find observed by Philo De Decalog.
and de specialibus legibus.
, concerning some of the more sober Jews: Which is, That in case necessity
prompted Men to it, they should not presently have recourse to the First Cause,
and swear by the Name of God, but rather by Heaven, or Earth, or some other
Creature; That in case they swore by God, they should rather do it tacitly,
than expressly; as (...), that is to say, By the, leaving the Name of God, by
whom they swore, to be understood: That they should show some kind of
backwardness and aversation to it, even where there seemed to be some necessity
for an Oath: That they should consider well, before they made Oath of any
thing, whether it were a matter of importance, whether it were true, and such
as they had sufficient knowledge of; whether they themselves were pure in Soul,
in Body, and in Tongue; it being a great Impiety to let any thing of filthiness
pass through that mouth which made mention of the Name of God. Lastly, That
they should take care not to swear in any profane and impure Places, in which
it seemed hardly decent to make mention of our earthly Parents. For, is it
possible, after all this, for Christians, who have been so much more obliged,
and better instructed by God, to have less regard to it; nay, to profane and
blaspheme that holy Name, to call him to witness to every Impertinence, to
vouch his Authority for a Throw or a Card? If it be, it is a sign we have as
little of Emulation as Religion, and are equally regardless of our own Honor,
and that of God. Lastly, (which is a Consideration by no means to be forgotten,
because made use of by God himself to dehort us from it) As there is little of
Honor or Religion in thus taking the Name of God in vain; so there is all the
reason in the World to believe, though we had not the Scripture to assure us,
that God will not hold him guilt less that does it. For, who can think, but
that he who has been so often summoned to come down among us, and witness to
our Extravagances and Impertinencies, will at length come down, though to a
quite different purpose, and make us feel the dreadfulness of that Name, which
we do either trifle with, or blaspheme.

PART II.
Concerning false Oaths, and the Impiety thereof, which is evidenced from the
affront they offer to the Divine Majesty, and the prejudice they bring to
Humane Society. This last evidenced at large, both in Assertory and Promissory
Oaths. Of Swearing by a Creature; and whether or no, and in what sense it may
be lawful. That it is unlawful to make a Creature the Term of our Oath, or the
Thing we swear by; but not so, to make mention of them in an Oath (though in
the common Form of one) when intended only as relating to the Divine Majesty,
or devoted unto him as Pledges of our Fidelity. That it is lawful for the
Magistrate to exact an Oath of his Subjects. This evidenced in part from the
nature of an Oath, which becomes so much the more lawful for being extorted;
from the Practice of Holy Men in Scripture, who have required an Oath from
their Children and Servants; and, in fine, from the necessity there is
oftentimes of it, for the securing both the Magistrate and the Commonwealth.

3. THAT all Oaths in common Converse are unlawful, that all vain and
unnecessary ones are so, you have seen already: Proceed we now to the
consideration of False ones, or such as are applied to a Lie. For that these
also are unlawful, the Letter of the Commandment shows, and may a fortiori be
concluded from our Savior's Prohibition of the other. The former of these I
shall now take for granted, as having sufficiently established it in the
foregoing Discourse: It remains therefore that I evidence the truth of the
latter, which will not cost me much time or pains to manifest. For, if we are
to have an Oath in such veneration, as not to use it in common Converse, nor
indeed where there is not a great necessity; how cautious ought we to be in
setting it to a Lie, which this very Decalogue has forbidden, and which,
beside that, God does elsewhere profess to have a great abhorrence of. To all
which, if we add that of St. Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10. so there will not
remain any the least doubt, I do not say of the unlawfulness, but of the great
enormity of setting the Oath of God unto a Lie; because not only affirming the
Law to have been made for perjured Persons, but reckoning them among
Parricides, and other such Monsters in Nature, as their Crime, together with
those of their Associates, among the things that are contrary to sound doctrine.

Now though this might suffice, at least amongst reasonable Men, to evince the
unlawfulness of setting the Oath of God unto a Lie: yet because, as was but now
intimated, it is a Crime of a very high nature, and yet by many Men as little
scrupled as vain and unnecessary ones, I think it not amiss a little to explain
the Nature of it, and the fatal Consequences wherewith it is attended.

I have before shown, and shall therefore now take it for granted, that an Oath
is a Religious Affirmation, wherein God is invoked as a Witness, and by
consequence also as a Revenger, if we be found to falsify in it. From whence
it will follow, That whosoever swears falsely, calls God to witness to a Lie.
Now, that no Man can do, without believing God to have no regard at all to
Humane Affairs, or that he is false, and a Patron of those that are so; neither
the one, nor the other of which, can be entertained into our thoughts, without
the highest Impiety in the World. Not the former, because not only denying an
Article of our Faith, but striking at the Root of all Religion; He that comes
unto God (as the Author to the Hebrews 11.6.
instructs us) being not only to believe that he is, but that he is a rewarder
of such as diligently seek him; which implies a more than ordinary Regard. But
let us suppose him that swears falsely, to believe God to have a regard to
Humane Affairs; though I am sure he that does so, will in the end give us no
thanks for the Supposition; yet can it not be denied, but that he must believe
God to be such as himself, even a Liar, and a Patron of those that are so. For
will any Man call those to witness to a Lie, of whom he has not a strong
presumption that they are false themselves? Nay, will he be so unmindful of his
own Interest, or rather take so much pains to ruin it? For, if the Party whom
he invites to give Testimony, be no false or deceitful Person, he will
undoubtedly give Testimony rather against than for him, and discover his
falsehood to the World. Now forasmuch as it cannot be supposed any Man will be
so far an Enemy to himself, as to seek a Testimony which shall only make
against him; he who thus calls God to witness, must be presumed to believe that
God will witness for him; and consequently, because a Lie is that he is called
to witness to, that God is false, and a Patron of those that are so. But what
Impiety can be greater than such a Belief, or more dishonorable to the Divine
Majesty; who has every where represented himself as True and Faithful; who
has, in several places, affirmed Lying to be one of those things to which his
Power, though Almighty, cannot reach; lastly, whose Veracity is the stay of all
those that trust in him, of all that come unto Christ by him? For, let God's
Veracity be destroyed, and all Trust in him must perish with it, and he be
accounted as vain a Confidence, as any which himself decries.

From the Affront which false swearing offers to the Divine Majesty, pass we to
the Consequences thereof, and the harm it does to Humane Society; which will
appear, if we reflect upon the several sorts of Oaths, which are either
Assertory, or Promissory. For Assertory Oaths, such I mean as are brought to
witness the Truth of any thing that is past or present, the Author to the
Hebrews tells us (and we may learn it from our own Experience) that they are an
end of strifes between Parties at variance; this being that by which all
Controversies are voided, and without which it is impossible they should ever
be. For, as it is not to be presumed, they who judge between Man and Man,
should have cognizance of their respective Interests, but from the report of
others; so the bare Affirmations of Men are generally too fallacious to ground
a sound Decision on; there being nothing more usual, even for those who make
some conscience of speaking Truth, than to stretch it beyond its bounds, to
serve the Necessity or Interest of their Friends. Either therefore Differences
must never have an end, which Religion, as well as the Interest of the World,
forbids; or they must be ended by that, which the Scripture has represented as
the proper way to terminate, and which all the World has made use of to
compose them. Now forasmuch as the Welfare of Mankind depends upon the
Composure of Differences, as that again upon the Religion of an Oath; he must
needs be a great Enemy to Humane Society, who shall subvert this surest Prop of
it, and call God to witness to a Lie. For what were this but to bring a scandal
upon those so necessary means of deciding Controversies; and consequently, to
leave Men either to differ without hopes of accord, or (what was sometime in
use in our Forefathers days) to decide their Differences by the Sword. Which,
as it is in it self a very unequal Umpire of Differences, so serves only to
create greater, and precipitate Men into that confusion which they sought to
avoid by it. The like is to be said of Promissory Oaths; such, I mean, as are
brought to assure Men, that they who make them, will perform what they promise.
For, let these once be vitiated and disgraced, and there can be no assurance to
any Man, of any thing that is yet to come. For, if an Oath will not hold a Man,
much less will a bare promise, because that contains a Promise in it, and
beside that, an Appeal to the Judge of Heaven and Earth. If it be said, as it
may, That the Laws and the Punishments annexed, may make them perform their
Oaths, whom the Religion of an Oath cannot; I answer, first, That there were
such Oaths made, must be confirmed by another, to those to whom the execution
of the Laws is committed. If therefore Oaths do once become cheap and vile,
that also may be suspected of falsehood, and consequently render the Proceedings
of all Courts of Judicature suspected, because directed by them. Again, What
security can we have that Judgment shall be rightly administered, if Oaths have
not their due regard? For, inasmuch as Judges are subject to the same
Infirmities and Passions with our selves; and the Laws, by which they proceed,
neither are nor can be so made, but they may, notwithstanding them, injure some
Persons in their Cause: what security can there be of their not actually doing
so, if that Oath restrain them not, which they gave to him whose Vicegerents
they are? Sure I am, nothing else can restrain the Prince himself, because he
is obnoxious to no Tribunal, but that of God. And therefore the condition of
the World must needs be bad, if those Oaths become contemptible, by which alone
their Exorbitances can be bounded. So pernicious to Humane Society, is the
setting an Oath to a Lie; so destructive to the Honor of God, and the Being of
Religion. And having said and evinced so much, I shall not need to say any
thing more to aggravate the Criminalness thereof; because transforming the
perjured Person into the Cruelty of a Wild Beast, and the gross Irreligion of
an Atheist.

II. Having thus shown what Oaths are simply and absolutely unlawful, that is
to say, all Oaths in common Converse, all unnecessary, and false ones; I come
now to inquire, Whether it be in any case lawful to swear by a Creature; the
second thing proposed to be discoursed of. For the resolution whereof,

1. The first thing I shall propose, is, That it is not lawful in the least to
make them the Term of our Oath, or the things which we swear by, in strict and
proper speech; that being to give them the Honor which is due to God, and
consequently to look upon them as such. For inasmuch as the Scripture requires
the swearing by his Name, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and, which is more, imputes to the
Israelites for a Crime, their swearing by them that were no gods, Jer. 5.7.
inasmuch as an Oath is in its own nature the calling him to witness who is of
infallible Truth, a Searcher of Hearts, and a most just and powerful Avenger of
Falsehood (which cannot be affirmed of any but God); he that in strictness of
speech swears by any Creature, must consequently be supposed to give it the
Honor that is due to God, or rather look upon it as such: A thing which it is
manifest many of the Heathen did, and accordingly swore by them. Thus Euripides
brings in Aegeus swearing after Medea, in these following Words.

(...),
(...).
That is to say, I swear by the Earth, and the bright Light of the Sun, and all
the Gods whatsoever, that I will be constant to what you enjoin me. And an
Assyrian Astrologer (as a Learned Man Joh. Seldom. Prolegom. ad Synt. De DIS
Syris, cap. 3. (...).
of our own Nation informs us) binds his Readers not to prostitute the Secrets
of it, under this following Oath. I adjure all those that light upon this Book,
by the holy Circle of the Sun, and the irregular Courses of the Moon; by the
Virtues of the other Stars, and the Zodiac; to keep these things secret, and
not either impart them to the unlearned, and such as have not been entered into
them; or be unmindful of paying Respect to the Memory of me their Instructor.
Let the forenamed Gods be propitious to those that keep this Oath; but contrary
to them that break it. From both which Passages it is manifest, that many of
the Heathen looked upon the Powers of Heaven and Earth as Gods, and accordingly
swore by them. And therefore, as some pious Men have, through the fear of such
like Idolatry, advised wholly to forbear the use of such Oaths, wherein there
is mention of Created Beings; so I shall so far concur with them, as to advise
the same, where there is any danger of our own falling, or drawing others into
the like Crime; it being one of the highest Impieties, to give Divine Honor to
the Creatures, and swear by them, as if they were Gods themselves. But from
hence we may guess what is to be thought of the Practice of the Papists, who,
beside the erecting of Temples, making Prayers, and other such Acts of
Adoration, do not infrequently swear by the Saints also. For, what other is
this, than to give them that Honor which, in all other Men's opinion, and even
in their own, is proper to the Almighty? Neither will it suffice to say, That
they do it not for themselves, but with respect to him to whom they do belong:
For still it will follow, because Swearing is a part of it, that they give them
that Adoration which the Almighty has challenged to himself, and which, unless
they were Searchers of Hearts, can in no wise belong to them. As little is to
be said in its defense, from those common Oaths by Heaven, our own Life, and
the like: For though these (as we learn from our Savior) have the Nature of
Oaths; though the Expressions themselves may seem to persuade those Things to
be the Things we swear by: yet, as they are not in the least invoked as
Witnesses, but God to whom they do belong, or are devoted by us; so they are
made use of only to express either some Attribute of God's, or our own
readiness to resign them up to his Vindictive Justice, if we be found to
falsify in them.

2. For the evidencing whereof (and together with it, in what sense it may be
said to be lawful to swear by a Creature) I shall instance, first of all, in
those forms of Oaths which have in them the force of an Execration, as By our
Health, Upon our Salvation, and the like. The meaning whereof, in the general
estimate of the World, is no other than this; So let God grant me Health and
Salvation, as I speak what I think, or mean to perform what I promise; and
consequently is but an abbreviation of that Oath of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 1.23.
Moreover I call God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as
yet unto Corinth: Which does manifestly make God the Term of our Oath, and not
either our Soul, or any thing else that appertains to it. The same is to be
said of those Forms of Oaths which are made by our Hand, Hands, or any other
Part of the Body; the intention thereof being only to devote them unto God, as
Pledges of the Truth of what we swear. In like manner, secondly, for those
Oaths that are made by Heaven, or any other Thing wherein the Power or Truth of
God is conspicuous; the meaning thereof, in the intendment of Christians, can
be no other, than to call him to witness, whose Glory shines forth in them; as
may appear both from Reason and Practice. For, can any Man be so senseless, as
to call those Creatures to witness to the sincerity of his Intentions, which he
himself is persuaded of not to have the least sense of any thing? Nay, would
not the so doing give Men cause to suspect, that he himself was as stupid as
they? It is true indeed, we read in Genesis, of Jacob and Laban's rearing a
Pillar and heap of Stones, for a Witness of the League between them, Genesis
31.48. Nay, we read further, (which is of more consideration) of Laban's
addressing himself to them after this manner; This heap be witness, and this
pillar be witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou
shall not pass over this heap, and this pillar, to me, for harm, verse 52. of
that Chapter. But, as the meaning thereof can be no other, than that they
should serve for a Memorial of the League then made, which is quite different
from the business of an Oath; so, that Laban had no other intention, may appear
from his own Words immediately before it: For, if (says he, verse. 50.) thou
shall afflict my daughters, or if thou shall take other wives beside my
daughters, no man is with us, see, God is witness betwixt me and thee. Which
Words do not only show him to refer the Matter to the Testimony of God; but
so, as to exclude all other Witnesses; because professing to refer it unto God,
for that there was no other to attest it. I conclude therefore, That where
there is mention of a Creature in an Oath, the design thereof is not in the
least to call that Creature to witness, but God, to whom it does belong. Which,
as it is no way like the swearing by the Saints departed, who are presumed by
the Papists to have knowledge of what we swear; so shows the swearing by
Heaven, or the like, according as was before understood, to have nothing at all
of unlawfulness in it, because not so much the Term of our Oaths, or That we
swear by, as the Adjuncts of it, and only inserted in it, to represent the
more strongly to our minds the Majesty of that God by whom we swear, or our own
extreme danger, in case we falsify in them. And accordingly, as in the Old
Testament we find Jacob Genesis 31.53.
swearing by the fear of his Fahter Isaac, and Elisha 2 Kings 2.2.
by the life of his master; so Apol. cap 32. Sed and juramus sicut non per
Genios Caesarum, ita per salutem eorum, quae est auguslior omnibus Geniis.
Tertullian tells us of the Christians of his time, and such too as would
rather die than swear by the Genius of the Emperor, because apprehended by
them to be an Heathenish Deity, that they would not refuse to swear by the
safety of their Lord, which was more August than all Genii. The result of the
Premises is this, That as it is not lawful to make a Creature the Term of our
Oath, because so giving Divine Honor to them; so it is not unlawful to make
mention of them in our Oath, when they are represented as Adjuncts of the
Deity, or devoted unto God as Pledges of the Truth of what we affirm.

III. The Order of my Discourse now leads me to inquire, Whether the Magistrate
may not exact an Oath of his Subjects? A Question to be wondered at, if it had
not been also made a Question, Whether there ought to be any Magistrates, or
those Magistrates ought to be obeyed? For,

1. First, Whereas other Acts of Adoration, by how much the more voluntary they
are, the more acceptable they are to the Divine Majesty; an Oath, on the
contrary, requires something of a necessity, to make it only lawful; and how
much more then, to make it acceptable to the Divine Majesty? And accordingly,
as it is a Proverb Andrew's Determine Theolog. de jure-jurando (...).
among the Greeks, That Oaths and War are evil, when spontaneous; and only
good, when they are extorted from us; so that Proverb of theirs stands
confirmed as to an Oath, by the Veneration we ought to have for it, and the end
for which it is given. For, Scripture and Reason requiring that Oaths should
not be lightly used, and the end thereof being for the satisfaction of those to
whom it is given; it follows, that they become good only when they are
extorted from us by the hardness of those Men's belief whose satisfaction is
intended in them. If therefore an Oath become so much the more legitimate by
being extorted; if it may be extorted from us by the incredulity of the Party
to whom we give it; how much more, when there is just cause for it, by the
Command of the Magistrate, to whom God has commanded every Soul to submit it
self?

2. My second Argument for the lawfulness of the Magistrates exacting an Oath,
shall be taken from the Practice of Holy Men, toward those who were subject to
their Commands, and that too where there was less Authority to constrain. For
thus Abraham made his Servant swear, that he would not take a wife unto his son
of the daughters of the Canaanites, but of his own Kindred and Country, Genesis
24.3, 4. and Jacob made his Son Joseph swear that he would carry his body out
of Egypt, and bury him in the Burying-place of his Fathers, Genesis 47.29. and so
on. In fine, thus Jacob made Esau swear to part with his birthright, Genesis
25.33. Now, if (as Bishop Andrews Determinat. Theolog. supra citat.
well argues) it were lawful for the Master to put his Servant to an Oath, as
it was to Abraham; if to a Father toward his Son, as in the case of Jacob and
Joseph; if to a Brother over a Brother, as to the same Jacob over Esau; how
much more shall it be lawful for him to require an Oath of his Subjects, whose
Empire is more excellent than all other Empires? To all which, if we add,

3. In the third place, the necessity there is of his so doing, in order to the
Security of himself, and the Commonwealth, so no doubt can remain of the Power
of the Magistrate to exact, and consequently of the Subjects Duty to comply
with his Commands. For, is it any thing less than necessary to the Security of
the Magistrate, to require an Oath of Allegiance to himself, when Men through
the pride and perverseness of their Nature, are so hardly brought to afford it?
Especially when in his Honor and Security, the Security of the Commonwealth is
bound up; neither can that be safe, unless his Person and Authority be
preserved inviolate? The same is to be said of that other sort of Oaths which
the Magistrate tenders to decide Controversies between Man and Man. For, being
it is for the Interest, yea Being of the Commonwealth, that Controversies be
determined; being (as I have before shown) those are not to be determined
without an Oath; it remains, That either the Magistrate is not furnished with
full Power to determine Controversies between Man and Man (which would make the
Institution of Magistracy vain) or it shall be lawful for him to exact an Oath
to determine them by. And indeed (as the forenamed Bishop well argues) well
may they exact the Oath of God, Ibid.
who have both his Name, and his Authority; who, as they represent his Person,
so do also judge for him; and, which is more (for so the Psalmist tells us) who
have him standing in their congregation, and judging in their Tribunal.

PART III.
Whether it be lawful to require an Oath of the Accused Party. This evidenced
in part from what God directed among the Jews in several Cases, which is shown
to have been conformable thereto. An Objection from the supposed
unreasonableness of a Man's accusing himself, proposed, and answered. The
reasonableness of exacting an Oath of the Accused Party, evidenced from several
Topics and particularly from the impossibility there sometimes is of the
Magistrates doing Justice without it. The Cases of Life and Limb to be
excepted, and why. Of the Obligation of Oaths, and what that Obligation is,
both in Assertory and Promissory ones. That an Oath obliges even where drawn
from Men by false and deceitful Stories, where it is to the Swearers
disadvantage, or extorted by Threats and Violence. If an Oath oblige not, it is
for the most part from the inhability of the Sweater, or the undueness of the
Matter; that is to say, when it is either impossible, or unlawful to be
performed.

HAVING shown it to be lawful for the Magistrate to exact an Oath; and
moreover, that in many Cases it is necessary for him to do it; ^nquire we, in
the next place,

IV. Whether he may require an Oath of the Accused Party? which may seem to
have more of difficulty in it; because, by means of that, a Man may be obliged
to be his own Accuser; which may seem contrary to each Man's Natural Liberty.
For the resolution whereof, I will proceed in this Method.

1. I will show what God himself directed among the Jews. 2. Examine the
Grounds upon which the Negative is founded. 3. Produce the Reasons of exacting
an Oath of the Accused Party. And, 4. And lastly, Declare in what Cases it may
be done.
1. If Men were always as willing to be regulated by the Scriptures, as they do
for the most part profess themselves to be, there would not long be any doubt,
whether it were lawful for the Magistrate to exact an Oath that may condemn the
Party that gives it: For there are two Instances wherein God expressly requires
the giving of an Oath to the Accused Party; the first whereof is, where the
Accused Party has any Goods committed to his Custody; the second, where there
is a suspicion of Falsehood in a Wife. For thus, Exodus 22.10, 11. If a man
deliver unto his neighbor an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast to keep,
and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it; then (says the Text)
shall an Oath of the Lord be between them both, that he has not put his hands
unto his neighbors goods, and the owner thereof shall accept of it, and he
shall not make it good. In like manner, Numb. 5.18, 19. if a Man had a
suspicion of his Wives dishonesty, and accordingly brought her before the
Priest for Judgment, it is commanded, that the Priest shall charge her with an
Oath concerning that whereof she is suspected. And though there be not the like
Evidence concerning any other Crimes, wherein the Oath of the Accused Party
might be requisite; yet, as it is apparent enough from Levit. 6.2, 3. that an
Oath might be exacted also, where there was a suspicion of dealing deceitfully
in Fellowship, or of violent taking away, or deceit, or concealing what a Man
had found, all these being there joined with a Man's lying unto his Neighbor
in that which is delivered him to keep, and an Oath supposed to have passed
concerning them: so it appears highly probable, from 1 Kings 8.31. That it was
lawful to exact an Oath of the Accused Party, in any Difference between Man and
Man; that place not only supposing the laying of an Oath upon the Accused
Party, but supposing also (because expressing it in those indefinite Terms, If
any man trespass against his brother) in any Crime whatsoever. However it be,
most certain it is, from the fore-quoted places in Leviticus, that an Oath
might be laid upon a suspected Party in Matters of Estate; which is as much, I
think, as is ordinarily claimed by any Magistrate: and if so, so far at least
it may be lawful to lay an Oath upon the Accused Party, whatever Pretense there
is from Men's Natural Liberty. For, though (as was before observed) the Judicial
Law, of which that was a part, be not of present Obligation; yet being a Law of
Gods making, it cannot be supposed to contain any thing in it, that is contrary
to the Law of Reason and Nature.

2. From what God directed among the Jews in this Affair, pass we to the
Grounds whereupon it is pretended to be unlawful to exact an Oath of the
Accused Party; which (as was before insinuated) is its seeming contrariety to
each Man's Natural Liberty, to be obliged to accuse himself. In answer to
which, I say, 1. That though, as it may happen, a Man may by such an Oath be
obliged to accuse himself; yet if he be innocent, he may have an opportunity
thereby to clear his own Innocence to the World, and so advantage, in stead of
condemning himself. I say, 2. That whatsoever is pretended concerning Men's
Natural Liberty, yet is it not to be understood to reach any further than is
consistent with the Rules of Government. For, as no Man can be born any other
than a Subject, because by his very Birth obliged to be so to those from whom
he received his Being; so God himself, to whom we are certainly Subjects, has
appointed Governors over us, and commanded us to be subject to them.
Whatsoever Liberty therefore we have, it must be supposed to be limited by the
necessary Ends of that Government to which he has commanded us to be subject.
If then the Ends of Government do sometime require the administering of such an
Oath, the Pretense of Natural Liberty can be no Plea against it, because by the
Command of God subjected to the other. And this Particular will minister to me
a fair entrance into

3. The reasonableness of exacting an Oath of the Accused Party; which is the
third thing proposed to be inquired into. Which I shall ground upon the
impossibility of the Magistrates doing Justice sometimes, where such an Oath as
we are now speaking of, is not administered. For it often happening, through the
cunning of those we deal with, that proof cannot be made of their deceitful
dealing with us; either it shall be lawful for them to keep that which they
have deceitfully gotten, which is against the Rules of Justice and Equity; or,
the Magistrate must have a Power to administer an Oath to the suspected Party,
concerning that which he is supposed to have unjustly gotten. Which whosoever
shall seriously consider, will not be very forward to think it unreasonable to
put a Man sometimes upon the accusing of himself. For as hard as it may be, and
contrary to his supposed Liberty; it may seem much more hard, and more contrary
to the Liberties of us all, that Men, for the close carriage of their
Injustice, should go away with the Properties of other Men, and there be no
Judiciary Course to retrive it from them. The Pretense of Natural Liberty will
appear yet more vain, if we consider, that all Men are liable to have the same
Oaths exacted of them: For, inasmuch as I have the privilege of laying an Oath
upon other Men, as they have upon me in any thing I am suspected of; though
such an Oath be prejudicial to me, yet it may be compensated to me upon other
Men, with whom I have occasion to deal. Add hereunto (which is of great
consideration, unless a liberty to sin may be reckoned among our Natural
Liberties) That as through the fear of such an Oath I may be restrained from
unjust dealing, lest I be afterward obliged to make my own Mouth witness
against me; so I may be obliged, by the taking of it, to make confession of my
Sin, and make satisfaction for it to my Neighbor and the World; which, without
the obligation of such an Oath, it is probable I should never have done, and
thereby have shut my self out from the Pardon of the Almighty.

4. It having been thus demonstrated, That it is not unlawful for a Magistrate
to take an Oath of the Accused Party, concerning that of which he is so
accused; it remains only that I inquire, in what Cases it may be done; which
is the fourth thing proposed to be discoursed of. Now, for that, nothing, I
think, can be said with more Reason and Judgment, than is by the Reverend
Person beforementioned; and that is, That it be administered only in such
Cases where the Crime which it is designed to detect, do not lay a Man open to
Death, or loss of Limb. Not perhaps because it is utterly unlawful in such
Cases (for what shall we then say of the Oath wherewith the Woman suspected of
Adultery was charged, together with the Water of Jealousy she was made to
drink?) but, 1. For the Oath of God's sake, which by being adminstred in such
Cases, is in great danger of being violated. For, since Life and Limb, but Life
especially, is so dear to us, that, as the Devil told the Almighty, a Man will
part with all to preserve it; there is just reason to suspect, if Men were put
to their Oaths in such Cases, they would forswear themselves, and thereby offer
an affront to the Oath of God, which ought as much as may be to be preserved
inviolate. There is as much reason, secondly, for the not administering it in
the forementioned Cases, because of its ineffectualness to attain the End which
is designed by it. For the End of such an Oath being the discovery of that
Crime, which he to whom it is tendered is suspected to be guilty of, it can
hardly escape the imputation of a Sin, to tender it there, where in all
probability he to whom it is so tendered will forswear himself, rather than
expose himself to so great a severity. But as (setting aside these Cases, where
there is danger of Life or Limb, or if there be any other of equal
consideration with it) there appears not the least reason why an Oath should
not be administered to the suspected Party; so there is less exception against
our Courts of Judicature, where such Oaths are in use: because as the
Complainant has the liberty of laying an Oath upon the Defendant, so the
Defendant has Power to interrogate the other upon the same Sacred Tie.

V. I am now arrived at my last Particular concerning Oaths, to wit, the
Obligation of them; where, first of all, I shall show, that they induce an
Obligation; and then, what that Obligation is. That they induce an Obligation
or Tie to the performance of something, the Prophet Moses shows, in the
thirtieth Chapter of Numbers; where we have not only an Oath frequently styled
by the Name of a bond, but the design thereof, verse. 3. said to be to bind the
soul with a bond. The only difficulty is, to what they do oblige or bind us;
which is different according to the different sorts of Oaths, which (as has
been before insinuated) are either Assertory, or Promissory. Assertory Oaths
are such as are given to attest the Truth of any thing, that is either past or
present. Now the Obligation which those induce, is, That what is so sworn to,
be agreeable to the mind of him that utters them; by virtue whereof, not only
all false Oaths are proscribed, but all Oaths which pretend to assert that
which we swear to, with any greater degree of certainty than we our selves are
persuaded of. Thus, for example, if a Man should swear peremptorily to the
truth of any thing which he is only probably persuaded of, in this case his
Oath would be sinful, because his Words carry a greater certainty in them, than
is in the Conscience of him that swears to it. When therefore we give an Oath
of this nature, care would be taken, not only that the thing we sear to,
appear to us to be true; but that it appear to us in that degree of assurance,
with which it is affirmed by us: For otherwise our Affirmation must be
concluded to be false, and consequently (which is evidence enough of the
criminalness thereof) that God Almighty is called to witness to a Lie. And
though, as I shall afterward show, those Oaths which we call Promissory ones,
by reason of the Matter about which they are conversant, have a particular
obligation; yet they also have this common with Assertory Oaths, that they
oblige those who swear, to take care that their Words be agreeable to their
Thoughts, that is to say, that they do not swear to do any thing, but what they
have at that time an intention to perform. For, though the thing they swear to
perform be somewhat future, yet the immediate Object of their Oath is their
present Resolution to perform it; and consequently, if they will free their
Oath from Falsehood, at that instant to resolve upon, what they swear in due
time to perform.

To go on now to show the Obligation that is peculiar to Promissory Oaths, or
such Oaths as are affixed to a Promise; which, if Reason it self did not teach
us, we might learn from the Scripture, to be no other than the performing of
what we so swear to. For thus, Number. 30.3. it is the express Commandment of the
Almighty, That if any man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his
soul with a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that proceeds out of his mouth. Which is so true, that it holds even where
the Oath was drawn from us by false or deceitful Stories; where the thing sworn
to, is to the disadvantage of him that swears; or lastly, where the Oath is
extort'd by Threats and violence. For thus,

1. When Joshua and the Israelites had given their Oath to the Gibeonites, That
they should be suffered to live among them; notwithstanding they who induced
them to take it, drew it from them by false and crafty Pretenses, yet the
Sentence of the Princes of the Congregation was, That they might not touch
them, because they had sworn to let them live, Josh. 9.19. Neither was this a
causless Scruple of Joshua, and other the Princes of the Congregation, (though
who can easily think those Men guilty of any such, who were the most eminent
for Knowledge and Authority among them?) for when, many years after, Saul slew
the Race of those Gibeonites, with whom the Oath of the Lord had passed, God
was so displeased with the whole Nation for it, that he visited it with a three
years Famine; neither would he be entreated for the Land, till David had
delivered up seven of Readiness Sons to the Gibeonites, to be by them hanged up
unto the Lord, 2 Samuel 12. ver. 1. and so on. This only would be added, That
what we have said of an Oath drawn from us by Craft, be understood to hold
only, where that in which we are imposed upon, is not expressed as the Ground
of our Oath: For, if that in which we are imposed upon be expressed as the
Ground of our Oath, there is no doubt that an Oath so drawn from us does not
oblige. Thus, to instance in the former Example, though the Israelites were
bound by their Oath to the Gibeonites, although they were no Foreigners as they
pretended, because the supposition of their being such, was not expressed as
the Ground of their League; but the thing, hand over head, taken for granted:
yet, if the same Israelites had made a League with them under the Name of
Foreigners, in that case there is no doubt (because that was expressly the
Ground of their League) that the Oath given by them had not obliged them: For
the Oath being given to them as Foreigners, could not in reason be construed to
relate to any but Foreigners, and consequently, not to advantage the
Gibeonites, when it appeared they lived among them. For the further evidencing
whereof, I will instance in a Case which is produced by a Learned Casuist
Sanders. de Juram. obligat. Praelect. 4. Sect. 13.
of our own, though by him somewhat otherwise explained. For suppose (says he)
that a Man should swear to a certain Person, under the Name of Titia, that he
would marry her, supposing her to be Titia, when indeed she was not: In this
Case the Oath would not oblige him, because the supposition of her being Titia
was expressly the Ground of what he swore. Which Resolution will appear yet more
clear, if we do farther suppose, that the true Titia should upon that Oath of
his claim him for her Husband. For, as the Laws of God and Man forbid him the
marrying of them both; so there is more reason she should have the Benefit of
his Oath, who was the Person expressed in it, than she who had no other
concernment in it, than as supposed to be the Person. In this case therefore,
that is, where that wherein we are imposed upon is expressly the Ground of our
Oath, an Oath drawn from us by deceit obliges not: but otherwise, as the
Instance of the Gibeonites shows, it ought to be held as Sacred, and we to do
whatsoever proceeds out of our mouth.

2. Again, As an Oath obliges, unless in the former Case, where it is drawn
from us by the Craft of him we swear to; so it obliges also, though the Matter
thereof should prove prejudicial to him that takes it: the Prophet David
reckoning it among the Characters of him that shall abide in God's Tabernacle,
That he swears to his own hurt, and changes not, Psalm. 50.4.

3. Lastly, As neither the Craft of him we deal with can generally rescind an
Oath, nor yet the Disadvantage that comes to our selves by it; so neither,
thirdly, the Violence of those Persons that forced it from us: as for example,
the Threats of Thieves or Pirates, who have, it may be, compelled us to make
Oath of paying them such a Sum of Money for our Ransom. For, as it is evident
from the Psalmist, That it is the Office of a Good Man not to change, though he
swear to his own hurt; and consequently, an Oath given to a Thief or Pirate not
to be rescinded upon that account: so there is no reason it should be upon the
account of the Swearers unvoluntariness, which is that which is most stood upon
in this Case: For though we would not have so sworn, if we could have helped
it; and consequently, our Oath was not perfectly voluntary: Sanders. de Juram.
oblig. Praelect. 4. sect. 16.
yet being under a fear of Death or Bondage from them, we chose to oblige our
selves, and therefore so far willed to be obliged. Now, having willed our own
Obligation, what should hinder us from performing it, and doing that which we
not only promised, but called God to witness we meant, and would perform? And
indeed, though some Men, consulting more their own Profit, than the Sacredness
of an Oath, have made light of those Oaths, when they have delivered
themselves; yet if they would more attentively consider it, they would not be
very forward to excuse themselves, for not performing even such an extorted
Oath. For, I demand of any such, Whether, to deliver himself from Thieves or
Pirates, he does not think it lawful to make Oath of paying such a Sum of Money
for his Ransom? If he says he does, (as I know not any that thinks or says
otherwise) he says that which will conclude him guilty of Perjury, if he
violate it: For, whatsoever it is lawful to swear, rebus sic stantibus, it is
necessary to perform; because an Oath, in the nature of it, is a Tie to that to
which it is affixed. Generally speaking therefore, as it is in the Place of
Numbers before-quoted, If a man swear an Oath to bind his soul with a bond, he
ought not to break his word, but to do according to all that proceeds out of
his mouth. If an Oath at any time oblige not, it is for the most part through
1. The inhability of the Taker: or, 2. The undueness of the Matter.


1. Thus, to instance in the first; If the Person swearing be under the Power
of another, the Law is express, That it shall be in the Power of those to whom
they are subject, to rescind that Oath which they have made. For, if (says the
Scripture, Numb. 30.3. and so on) a daughter shall vow a vow, and bind her self
by a bond, being in her fathers house in her youth; if her father disallow her
in the day that he hears it, none of her vows or bonds shall stand. The same
is afterward affirmed, if a husband disallow that of his wife: And how much
more then, if a Prince (whose Authority is certainly far greater than that of a
Father or a Husband) shall disallow the Oath of his Subjects, especially in
Matters relating to the Public. Which makes it strange, that the Solemn League
and Covenant should be pretended to oblige, which was so early and so heartily
disallowed by the late King, that most indulgent Father and Husband of his
Country.

2. From the Inhability of the Taker, pass we to the Undueness of the Matter:
Where again there are these two things to take off the Obligation of an Oath.

1. The Impossibility: And, 2. The Unlawfulness thereof.
1. Thus, for example, in the former Instance; If a Man should swear to pay a
certain Sum of Money at a time appointed; if he neither have, nor can procure
such a Sum, there is no doubt his Oath obliges not thereto, so long as that
Impossiblity continues: It being an undoubted Principle of Reason,
Impossibilium mulla obligatio est. Leg. 185. tit. de Reg. Juris.
That there can be no Obligation to that which it is impossible to perform.
Care only would be taken, that as we make not Oath of such things as appear
then impossible (for so we should be found to take God's Name in vain in the
strict and literal sense) so also that the thing sworn to, prove not impossible
through our neglect (for then it will oblige to Punishment) and that if it be
not utterly impossible, we perform so much of it as is possible to us. For,
since the only Reason of the Obligations ceasing, Sanderson. de Juramenti
Oblig. Praelect. 2. sect. 12.
is the Impossibility of the Thing; it must consequently cease only so far as
the Thing sworn to is impossible, and therefore also continue in full force, as
to what is possible to be done. Again,

2. In the second Instance, If a Man should swear to do a thing which is
unlawful, either by God's Law or Man's, such as was that Oath of David, that
before the morning light he would cut off from Nabal every one that pissed
against the wall: In that Case, I say, there is no doubt that the Oath obliges
not, save to a due Repentance for it. And accordingly we find David not only
not performing it, but blessing God for diverting him from it, 1 Samuel 25.32.
Now the reason why such Oaths are not binding, is, because the Party, at such
time as he swore, See Sandersons Case of a Rash Vow deliberately iterated. p.
65, etc.
lay under a former Obligation to the contrary: By which means the Party
swearing was divested of all Power to it; and consequently, till freed from the
former, could not by any Oaths whatsoever bind himself to the performance of
it. He might indeed (as we see Men too often do) swear to act contrary to it;
he might lay all the Curses of God upon himself, for the performance of what he
swore: but as such Oaths are unlawful to be taken, so they bind not where they
are, because prevented by a contrary and far greater Bond. Besides, it being
impossible to be at the same time bound to contrary things; if he who swore the
performance of any thing sinful, should be obliged to it, he must consequently
be supposed to be freed from his former Tie to those Laws which he swore to act
contrary to. But by this means we might cassate all our Obligations to the
Almighty, and, provided we would so swear, be at liberty, or rather obliged, to
follow our own Lusts and sinful Inclinations as our God. But because the late
Reverend Bishop Sanderson has said all that is necessary to be said upon the
matter of a Promissory Oath, in his Book of the Obligation of Oaths, I will
remit those who shall desire further satisfaction, to his learned and accurate
Labors. It shall suffice me to admonish you, That the Nonperformance of your
Oaths is most properly to take Gods Name in vain.

PART IV.
The affinity of a Vow with an Oath. What a Vow is, and what the proper Matter
of it. Things under Command the Matter of a Vow, as well as those which are
left free. That the Thing Vowed ought to be something morally good, or
conducing to it; and not either trifling, or sinful, or what exposes to it.
That it is at least behoveful that the Thing Vowed have some cognation with
that Blessing in consideration whereof it is made. That Vows are not only
lawful, but sometime necessary to be made; both because a Part of Natural and
Evangelical Worship, and because we stand in need of them. That the Persons who
Vow be of Years of Discretion; that they come to it with due deliberation; and
that God's Glory, and not the gratifying of a discontented Humor, be the Motive
which draws them to it. Of the Obligation of Vows, and particularly to a
Single Life.

VI. AS a Vow, whereof we are in the next place to entreat, is near of kin to
an Oath, in respect of the Obligation which it induces; so it serves equally
to hallow or profane that Name of God, which here we are forbidden to take in
vain. Reason would therefore, before we leave this Third Commandment, that we
should afford it a place in our Discourse, and, if not allow it a just
handling, (which my designed brevity will hardly permit) yet show so much
concerning it, as is generally necessary to be known. In order whereunto, I
will proceed in this method.

1. I will show in the general, what a Vow is. 2. Inquire into the proper
Matter of it. 3. Demonstrate our own Obligation sometime to make Vows. 4.
Describe the due Qualifications of the Maker. 5. The Obligation they induce,
when made. And, 6. Lastly, Show what Vows are here forbidden.
1. Now a Vow (as was before insinuated) is, in the general, nothing else than
a Promise to God of the performance of something on our part, either to obtain
some Blessing of him (which is for the most part the ground of it) or in
acknowledgment of some already received. I call it a Promise, for so indeed it
is properly, and in the common acception of the Word; though sometimes,
abusively, the Word Vow signifies no other than a strong Asseveration of what
we affirm: And, a Promise to God, wherein indeed the very Formality of it
consists, and by which it is distinguished both from a Promise to Man, and from
an Oath; the former, unless improperly, having only the Title of a Promise;
the latter, even an Oath, citing God only as a Witness to what is transacted
between us and other Men: whereas in a Vow we transact with God as with a
Party. The only thing remaining to be explained, is the End of a Vow, said
before to be most commonly to obtain some Blessing of the Almighty, or in
acknowledgment of some we have received. Of the former of these, we have not
only the Word (...) for a Witness, which signifies equally a Prayer and a Vow;
but also the most, if not all those Vows which we meet with in the Old
Testament. For thus, Genesis 28.20. we find Jacob vowing a Vow, and saying, If God
will be with me, and will keep me in the way that I go, and will give me bread
to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again in peace; Then shall the
Lord be my God, and this stone which I have set up for a pillar, shall be Gods
house; and of all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the tenth unto
thee. Of the same nature is that Vow of the Israelites, concerning the
destruction of the Canaanites, Numb. 21.2. as, in like manner, that of Hannah,
concerning the dedicating unto the Lord that Child which should be born to her,
1 Samuel 1.11. the former being upon condition of God's delivering the Canaanites
into their hands; the other, upon God's giving her a Man-child. Again, As a Vow
may be made to obtain some Blessing of the Lord; so also, in acknowledgment of
some already received; to wit, when it is not in the power of him who makes it,
to make that return of Gratitude to God, which it is no less his desire than
duty to perform: For otherwise, no doubt the receipt of a Blessing is a more
proper ground of paying our Vows, than of making any such unto the Lord.

2. The Nature of a Vow being thus explained in the general, pass we to a more
particular Explication; which will best be performed by inquiring into the
Matter of it, the second thing proposed to be discoursed of. For the resolution
whereof,

1. The first thing I shall offer, is, That things under command, no less than
those that are not, are a proper matter for our Vows. For though those things
which are under command, do oblige us by being so, and consequently may seem no
way proper to be the matter of a Vow: yet as nothing hinders, but one Bond may
be added to another, whence it is that we see Positive Laws every day made for
the observation of that which was before commanded by the Law of Nature; so the
superinducing of a Vow binds it so much the faster upon our Consciences, and
therefore a thing under Command no way improper for the matter of a Vow. Again,
though a Command oblige to the performance of what it does so; yet inasmuch as
it takes not away our Natural Liberty of acting contrary to it, it may seem but
reasonable, the more to oblige us to Obedience, to add to it the Bond of a Vow,
and tie our selves by Promise to what we are otherwise obliged to perform.

Now the Matter of such a Vow is again double, that is to say, General or
Particular; or (to speak yet more plainly) Obedience to the whole Law of God,
or only to some Particular one. Of the former sort is, first, the Vow of
Baptism, whereby we oblige our selves to the whole Duty of Man: For, as this is
actually done by all that are initiated into Christianity, at least where
Baptism is rightly administered; so, that it is the Design of Baptism it self,
is evident from St. Peter, who entitles it the Answer 1 Pet. 3.21.
, or rather Stipulation of a good Conscience toward God. Of the same nature is,
secondly, (as I shall afterward show more largely) that other Sacrament of the
Supper of our Lord. And accordingly, as for this Reason both the one and the
other have the name of a Sacrament, which in the proper acception of the Word
is no other than a Military Oath, whereby Soldiers bound themselves to their
General; so, that it was really looked upon as such, or rather as a Vow to God,
to whom they so obliged themselves, is evident from that Account which Pliny
Li. 10. ep 97.
gave to Trajan, of what was done in the Meetings of the Christians: Where,
among other things, he tells him, That he had been informed by some of them,
that when they met together, they obliged themselves by a Sacrament, not to
perpetrate any Villainy; but, that they would not commit Thefts, Robberies, or
Adultery; that they would not falsisie their Trust, nor, when examined, deny
any thing that had been deposited with them. Which Passage, as it is a manifest
evidence of their making such general Vows; so also, that it was their Design
in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: the Word Sacrament not only so
persuading, but the Celebration of the Lord's Supper being always an Attendant
of their Public Service, and the no mention there is in Ecclesiastical Story,
of any other such general Vow in it. Again, As a Vow may have the whole Law of
God for its Object, so also some particular one: And is not unusual with good
Men, when they find themselves pressed with the Conscience of some particular
Sin committed by them; in order to the appeasing of God's wrath, and the
security of their own Souls, binding themselves with a Vow to the avoiding of
it, and practicing the contrary Virtues.

2. Having thus shown a thing under Command to be no less the Matter of a Vow,
than that which is not enjoined by any; for the further explication thereof, I
shall add, secondly, That it ought to be something morally good, or conducing
to it. For, the Design of a Vow being to please God, to whom all Vows are
directed, that can be no proper Matter of a Vow, which is not morally good, or
conducing to the promoting of it. But from hence it will follow, first, That we
ought not to make Vows of any thing sinful, such as was that of Jeptha, who
bound himself by a Vow to offer up to God whatsoever came forth of the Doors of
his House to meet him, Judge. 11.31. This being in effect to promise we will
break his Laws, which is certainly a very improper way to please him, or obtain
any Blessing at his Hand. It will follow, secondly, That we ought not to make a
Vow of any thing that may expose us to the Commission of a Sin: Of which
nature, in particular, is the Vow of Single Life, especially in younger
Persons: For so doing, they vow that which may expose them to the danger of
Fornication without remedy, which is certainly no proper way to please God,
when he himself has appointed Marriage for it, and obliged those that cannot
contain, to enter into it. Lastly, it will follow, That we ought not to make
Vows of any thing light or trifling, such as are See Balduin. de Casib Consc.
lib. 2. c. 8. cas. 4.
the Vows of not eating the Heads of any Animal, in honor of John the Baptist;
or, of abstaining from broyled Flesh, in respect to St. Laurence, who was so
used. For beside that such things as these are not much conducing to Piety,
they are too light to become the Matter of a Vow, and involve the Maker of them
in the taking God's Name in vain, which is the very thing forbidden in this
Commandment.

3. Thirdly and lastly, As the Matter of a Vow ought to be something good, or
conducing to it; so it is highly expedient at least, that it should have some
relation to that Blessing, in consideration whereof we make it. For thus we
find Hannah vowing, That if God would give her a Man child, she would dedicate,
not some of her Possessions, or it may be of her Servants, but that very Child,
unto the Lord: as, in like manner, Jacob, That if God would be with him, and
give him bread to eat, and raiment to put on, and in fine bring him back to his
fathers house in peace and prosperity, he would, out of the Plenty which God
should afford, build a Temple to his Honor, and moreover give the tenth of all
to him. Both which Vows, as they had very eminent Persons for their Authors,
and such whose Example alone might invite us to the imitation of them; so they
have this farther to commend them, that they are more clearly expressive of our
intended Gratitude to the Almighty, because obliging the Parties vowing to make
that very Blessing, in consideration whereof they are made, to become a
Testimony of their Thankfulness unto God.

3. But lest all that has or shall be said concerning Vows, should fall under
the censure of Impertinence, as there is no doubt it would justly, if
Christians had no concernment in them; I will now, according to my proposed
Method, demonstrate our own Obligation to the making of them. In Order
whereunto, I shall show them, 1. To be a Part of Natural Worship; and, 2. Of
the Evangelical one.


That they are a part of Natural Worship, is evident, first, from the Nature of
a Vow, according as before described. For it being but reasonable we should do
what in us lies toward the pleasing of him from whom we either expect, or have
received any signal Favor; it is no less reasonable, if we are not at present
in a capacity to do it, that we should go so far toward it, as to oblige our
selves by Promise to the performance of it; he that cannot do all he would,
being to do what he can, or at least express a readiness to perform it. Which
as it is best done by a Vow or Promise, because that leaves no place for the
omission of it; so that Vow or Promise goes a great way toward the pleasing of
the Almighty, because consigning the Will of the Vower, which is that God looks
chiefly after, to the Will and Pleasure of him to whom it is made. Again,
Forasmuch as a Vow supposes him to whom it is made, to be conscious to our
Wants, and the Author of those Blessings in consideration whereof we make them;
what should hinder us, or rather how can we excuse our selves from giving God
this Testimony of our Adoration, and vowing what may be acceptable to him? The
same is no less evident from the Scripture, which not only joins it with
Prayer and Praise, but opposes it to Ceremonial Worship, as you may see Psalm
50.8. and so on; where having at large decry'd the Offerings of the Law, in the
fourteenth Verse of that Psalm, the Psalmist calls upon Men, instead of that,
to offer unto God thanks giving, and pay their vows unto the most High. Which
Passage is so much the more to be remarqu'd, because it affords us a Proof not
only of Vows being a part of Natural Worship, but also of the Evangelical one.
Mede Sermon on Psalm. 50.14.
For if (as Mr. Mede shows) that Psalm be also a Prophecy of the Times of the
Gospel, and the Service which should be offered up in them, the making of Vows
is properly and strictly Evangelical, and the first Service (as St. Paul speaks
in a like Case) taken away, that the second might be the more firmly
established. Neither will it avail ought to say, That that is not to be thought
Evangelical, of which there is not the least mention in the Gospel: For as the
great Design of the Gospel was to re-establish Natural Worship, and free it
from those Encumbrances wherewith the Ceremonial Law had clogged it; so the
Nature of Vows was so well known, both from Reason, and the Scriptures of the
Old Testament, as not to need to be insisted on by the New: Upon which account
also it is, that we find so little therein concerning Oaths, unless it be as to
the sparing use of them. Beside, when (as was before insinuated) the Sacraments
of Baptism and the Lords Supper are on our part Vows of Obedience unto God;
when we are initiated into, and confirmed in our Religion by them; when the Law
and the Prophets speak much and often concerning Vows, and our Religion
professes to establish all that is not Ceremonial in them; lastly, when we our
selves stand in need of Vows to confirm our wavering Minds, and establish us in
that Course of Life we have undertaken; what can be more apparent, than that we
should vow Obedience to God's Commands, and the use or forbearance of all such
Means as are apt either to promote or hinder it? And who knows whether the
omission of this be not one principal Cause why oftentimes we speed no better
in our Requests? For though we are importunate enough in asking, we are more
than cold enough in promising any Returns of Gratitude, if ever it should
please God to grant the Petitions we ask of him.

4. Having thus shown our own Obligation to the making of Vows, proceed we,
according to our proposed Method, to the Qualification of those that make them,
the next thing proposed to be discoursed of. Where first I shall reckon as a
necessary Qualification in those that make them, That they be of years of
discretion. For a Vow being a matter of importance, and so much the more,
because it is transacted between us and God; they are in reason to abstain from
the making of them, who, by reason of their want of Discretion, understand not
the Nature of it, nor the Obligation which it induces; lest happily, in stead of
honoring God thereby, they dishonor his Sacred Name, by vowing such things as
are either no fit Matter for them, or such as afterward they will not care to
perform. The same Reason will infer, That as the Persons that vow should be of
Years of Discretion, so those that are, should come to the making of them with
all requisite consideration; it being all one, as to the purposes of Religion,
to be without Discretion, and not to make use of it. Lastly, A Vow (as has
been before shown) being an Act of Religion, and a part of God's Worship and
Service; they that vow, are to take care that God's Glory be their End in
making them, and not, as it too often happens, the gratifying of their own
peevishness and discontent: A thing not unusual with the Papists, whom the loss
of a Mistress, the disappointment of a Place, or other such like Cause, is the
chief, and sometimes only Motive, to vow a Religious Life. Which said, I
should now

5. Proceed to the Obligation of them, as I did before in the matter of Oaths.
But because the Prophet Moses has delivered the same Rules concerning the
Obligation of them both; and because what I have before said, concerning the
Obligation of Oaths, may without any the least violence be accommodated to the
Obligation of the other; I will content my self with the proposing one only
Case concerning Vows, which will find no Resolution from what was there said:
And that is, Whether or no a Man having made a Vow of Single Life, be not
obliged to the keeping of it? For though (as was before said) the making of
such Vows be generally unlawful; yet it follows not from thence, that they may
be broke when made; because many things which ought not to be done, are yet of
force when they are. For the resolution whereof, the first thing I shall offer
is, That there is no doubt such a Vow obliges those to the keeping of it, who
(as the Apostle speaks) have power over their own Bodies. For a Single Life
being not only lawful in it self, but, where it is preserved inviolate, a
great opportunity of Religion; there is no doubt, a Vow concerning it is so far
from being null, that in that Case it ought to be Religiously observed. But
from hence it will follow, secondly, That he who has so vowed, ought to use
all means possible to keep to that State which he has so vowed. For if (as the
Prophet Moses instructs us) we are generally to do whatsoever proceeds out of
our mouth, we are in reason to make use of all requisite Means to enable us to
the performance of it; he that is obliged to the End, being ipso facto obliged
to the Means, because there is no attaining the End without them. Neither will
it suffice to say (as perhaps it may be) That a Single Life has Temptations
attending it, and therefore rather to be discarded, than continued in: For
inasmuch as there is no State or Thing which is without them, if for that
reason our Vow might be rescinded, no Vow at all could oblige, because there is
nothing in the World which may not expose us to Temptations. If there be any
thing which may rescind such a Vow, it must be some imminent danger of falling
into Sin, notwithstanding all our Endeavors to the contrary: And in this Case,
there is no doubt a Vow so made ought to be broken, with how much deliberation
soever made: he that forbids us a Sin, consequently forbidding all those things
which fatally incline us to the commission of it. Care only would be taken,
that Men pretend not imminent danger, when in truth that is not the thing that
moves them, but the gratifying of their own Carnal Appetites: For, generally
speaking, Whosoever vows a vow, to bind his soul with a bond, ought, for his
Vows sake, and the Honor of him to whom it is made, to do whatsoever
proceeds out of his mouth.

6. Having thus shown all that concerns the Affirmative part of the Precept, as
to the Making and Observation of Vows, nothing remains to the completing of my
Discourse concerning them, but that I descend to the Negative, and point out
those Vows that are forbidden. A Task which as I have in part already
discharged, so I am now qualified to complete, because having before shown what
is requisite to make them lawful. For if (as was shown in my second Inquiry)
the Matter of a Vow ought to be good, or conducing to the promoting of it;
those Vows must be unlawful, the Matter whereof is neither: such as are the
greatest part of the Vows now made. For what more ordinary, than to vow that we
will not come into such a House, or use any Communication with such or such a
Person? Things which whether a Man do or no, it matters not as to the Business
of Religion, and therefore not to be made the Subject of so Sacred a Tie as a
Vow. The same is much more to be said of such a Vow, or Vows, which have
something sinful for the Matter of them: that which is sinful, being not only
different from the proper Matter of a Vow, but directly contrary to it. Lastly,
If (as was observed upon the same Head) the Matter of Vows ought to be weighty
and important, those Vows must be concluded to be unlawful, which are made in
trifling Instances, and such as for the levity thereof are hardly worthy to be
made the matter of a Promise. As if a Man should vow to pare his Nails upon a
certain day, or not to take up a Straw that lay in his way. Again, If (as was
observed upon the fourth Head) they who vow any thing to God, ought to be of
Years of Discretion, and actually employ it when they have; those Vows must be
looked upon as unlawful, which are made by Persons before they arrive at it; or
rashly, and without consideration, by those that are. Which makes it strange,
that the Church of Rome should admit to Vows of Single Life those that have
attained to sixteen Years of Age: As if that Age, though not without the use of
Reason, were fit to judge what State of Life were profitable for them, and what
is possible for them to observe. Lastly, If (as was insinuated in my sixth
Head) a Vow be of the same Obligation with an Oath, if it oblige to all that is
not impossible or sinful, it must be looked upon as in like manner unlawful to
break those Vows we have made, and dishonorable to the Divine Majesty to whom
they are: he that thus breaks his Faith to God, supposing him either to have no
knowledge of his Perfidiousness, or to be a tame Spectator of the Affronts that
are done unto him. The contrary of which, as we are assured of by him, who
commands us not to do dishonor to his Name; so it will be much better for us
to believe upon his Affirmation, than venture the trial of: For, if God be but
just to himself, to be sure he will not hold him guiltless that any way takes
his Name in vain.

PART V.
Concerning the Sanction of the present Precept. What the importance of God's
not holding a Man guiltless is; and that it implies not only the punishing
him, but punishing him with severity. What appearance there is, both from
Reason and History, of God's executing what he has here denounced;
particularly, upon Blasphemers, Common Swearers, Perjured Persons, and the
Violators of their Vows. The Conclusion.

II. IT being certain, that though Laws oblige, yet they prevail little upon
the Conscience, where they have nothing but the Authority of the Lawgiver to
enforce them; it has pleased God not only to fortify the Body of his with
Threats and Promises, but sometimes also to annex them to particular Precepts;
lest happily whilst they are divided among so many, they should prove lauguid and
ineffectual, and rather give a weak force to all, than a considerable energy to
any one. And accordingly, (to go no further than the Decalogue) as the Second
Commandment has both a Promise and a Threat, and the Fifth a Promise to
enforce it; so, that we are now upon, is strengthened with the Threat of God's
not holding them guiltless who shall presume to take his Name in vain.

In the handling whereof, I will proceed in this Method: 1. I will show what it
is not to hold one guiltless: And, 2. Prove, That God will not hold them such,
who any way take his Name in vain.


1. If the Phrase wherein this Sanction is expressed, were the same in the
Original Hebrew, as it is in our own English Translation, our Account of the
meaning of it would be then much shorter, than it is now likely to prove. But
because though the Hebrew be the same in sense, yet it is somewhat different in
Expression from that we have made use of to explain it; it will be requisite,
in the first place, to give an account of the Expression there, if it were
only to establish the Propriety of our own.

Now the Hebrew phrase (...) or, The Lord will not make him clean, is capable
of a double Explication: For it may either refer to that Cleanness which is
opposed to the Filth of Sin, or to that Purification which came by the Blood of
Sacrifices. And in which sense soever we take it, we shall find it to be much
the same with that by which we have chosen to express it. For though our
Translation determine it to that Purity or Cleanness which imports a freedom
from Guilt; yet, as to hold one for clean, or innocent, is the same in sense,
because those that are so, are free from the imputation of the other; so,
though the Letter of the Hebrew be, The Lord shall not make him clean, yet it
may signify no more than the not accounting of him as such; after the same
manner that the Word justificare in the Latin, though literally it signify to
make righteous, yet in the forinsick and most usual sense, denotes the
absolving one from Guilt, and not so much the making him righteous, as so
esteemed. And indeed, as such a sense is most proper in this place, because the
Matter entreated of is the Penalty of a Law; so if we take it in the literal
sense, it would hardly pass for a Penalty in the judgment of those whom it was
designed to restrain: It being not to be thought, that they who make it their
Pastime to take God's Name in vain, would be deterred from so doing, by only
telling them, that God will suffer them to go on in it, and not purify them
from a Sin in which they so much delight. Forasmuch therefore as the Words Lo
Jenakkeh may import the not accounting of the Offender as clean; forasmuch as
that sense is the most proper in this place; lastly, forasmuch as the literal
one carries nothing at all of dread in it; it is but reasonable we interpret
the Hebrew (...) The Lord will not account of him as clean; which is all one
with He will not hold him guiltless. From that first Notion of the Hebrew
phrase, pass we to the second, and consider the Word (...) with reference to
the Purifications of the Law; with analogy to which, if we understand it, so
the meaning will undoubtedly be, That God will not hold such an Offender as a
guiltless Person. For it being certain on the one hand, that the Cleansing here
spoken of, must refer to the Sin before forbidden; as on the other, that the
Design of the Purifications of the Law was not to take away the Sin it self,
but the Guilt Men contracted by it: to say, The Lord will not cleanse such or
such a Person, is as much as, That he will suffer his Guilt to rest upon him,
and consequently, That he will not hold him guiltless. Which shows, that
though there be some difference between the Hebrew and the English in the
Expression, yet they are the same in sense; and consequently, whatsoever is the
importance of The Lord will not hold him guiltless, the importance of the other.

Now there are two things implied in those Words, The Lord will not hold him
guiltless.

1. That God will punish him that takes his Name in vain: And, 2. That he will
do it with rigor and severity.
For inasmuch as there is no Mean between Guiltiness and Guilty; inasmuch as
Punishment naturally follows the guilty Person; it must needs be, that if God
will not hold us guiltless, he will account of us as guilty, and accordingly
proceed to punish us. Again, Though those Words will not hold him guiltless, do
not necessarily, and of themselves, import any extraordinary severity; yet, as
it is not unusual for such Negative Expressions, by a Figure the Rhetoricians
call (...), to signify much more than they seem to intend; so, that that
Figure ought to have place here, beside the Consent of Interpreters, is evident
from the hainousness of the Sin against which it is denounced, and the little
dread it carries in it, if taken in the literal sense. For, who can think God
would threaten so great a Crime as Perjury, with a Threat which is common to it
with the meanest Offenses in the World? Or what likelihood is there, if he had
(which yet is the End of all Penalties) that the False Swearer should be
thereby deterred from taking God's Name in vain? It being not to be thought,
that he who has the impudence to call God to witness to a Lie, should be much
affrighted by only telling him, that God will look upon him as an Offender.
How small soever therefore the taking of God's Name in vain may seem, and how
mildly soever the Penalty wherewith it is threatened is expressed; the true
intent of that Sanction is, That God will severely punish such an Offender, and
not only not hold him as a guiltless Person, but as one of the greatest
Criminals in the World.

2. Having thus shown the Importance of the present Penalty, proceed we to the
Confirmation of it: For my more advantageous performance whereof, I will apply
it to the several Persons whom I have said to take Gods Name in vain. Where,

1. I shall set before you such as speak dishonourably of him, and either
attribute to him such Qualities as do no way belong to him, or deny him those
that really do. For, that God will not hold such Persons guiltless, may appear,
if we consider only the End for which the Tongue was given: For the Tongue
being given Man not so much for any other end, as for the glorifying the Maker
of it, it must needs be, that God should hold him as highly criminal, who shall
turn that Tongue against him, and not only not glorify, but dishonor him
therewith. The Threat will appear yet more reasonable and certain, if we apply
it to such a Person who shall proceed to downright blasphemy against the
Almighty: For beside the enormity of the Crime, we have Instances in the
Scripture of God's displeasure against the Authors of it. Thus when the Son of
an Israelitish Woman proceeded to so great an Impiety, as to blaspheme the Name
of the Lord, he himself was not only stoned to death for it, but a Law
thereupon made, That whosoever should offend in like manner, should be put to
death, as well the stranger, as he that should be born in the land, Lev. 23.11.
and so on. Again, when the King of Assyria sent Rabshakeh to reproach the
Living God, as one who could not deliver his People, any more than the Gods of
other Nations, God was so displeased with the contumely, that he sent an Angel
to destroy his Army, and delivered up the King himself into the hands of his
Sons, who slew him, 2 Kings 19.35. and so on.

2. From blaspheming the Name of God, pass we to the dishonouring it in an
Oath, which I have said to be the principal thing forbidden in the Commandment;
where again I shall consider those who take it in an Oath vainly and
unnecessarily, and then those who cite it to procure credit to a Lie.

That God will not hold the former of these guiltless, will appear to any who
shall consider only the nature of the Crime: For inasmuch as such an Oath is
nothing else than the calling God to witness to those Impertinencies to which
they are affixed, it must needs be a great temptation to the Almighty to
revenge it upon the Authors of it, lest his Name should be contemptible in the
World. And indeed, as where it has otherwise happened, it ought to be imputed to
the Mercy of the Almighty, and his willingness that even such Sinners should
come to repentance; so God has not left himself and Name without witness of
the dreadfulness of them both, lest any should think him tamely patient. For
thus it is storied, by an Author of good credit The Life of the Duke of
Espernon, lib. 4. page 190.
, concerning one Grillon, a famous Captain in France, and as famous; or rather
infamous, for his profaning the Name of God by frequent Swearing; That many
years before his death, though he had perfect strength and vigor in all his
other Parts, yet he had so great a weakness in his Tongue, that he could not
articulate or bring out one word that any Body could understand: God (as that
Author remarks) being doubtless pleased by a manifest Judgment to punish him in
that Part, which by so many Oaths and Blasphemies had so often offended against
his Divine Honor and Holy Name. Which Story is the more to be credited,
because the forecited Author relates it from the mouth of that truly Noble
Person the Duke of Espernon, who had that Captain long under his Command.

But leaving the Common Swearer to ruminate upon God's threatening not to hold
him guiltless, and upon this and such like Instances of his Judgments upon the
Associates of his Crime; let us go on to inquire, how little reason there is
for the False Swearer, or perjured Person, to expect to be free. In order
whereunto, I will first allege a Parallel, shall I say, or rather much more
severe Denunciation of the Almighty, against those who shall thus take his Name
in vain. It Is in the fifth of Zachary, and the fourth Verse; where speaking of
a Roll of Curses, he brings in God threatening that he would cause it to enter
into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely by
his Name; as also that it should remain in the midst of the House it did so
enter, and consume it with the timber and stones thereof. Than which, what more
could be said to express the height of God's displeasure against such Persons,
and the certainty of his not holding them guiltless in any measure? For, to be
sure he will not hold them such, whom he will not only visit for their
Transgression, but bring an utter devastation upon. Agreeable hereto is that of
the Oracle in Herodotus, though expressed under another Metaphor.

(...)
(...)
(...).
That is to say, An Oath has a Child which has neither Hands nor Feet; howbeit
it passes quickly into the House of the perjured Person, and laying hold of
it, destroys his whole Race and it. Neither does the Event (I speak as for the
most part) fall short of what is suggested, either by the one, or the other
Oracle: For, as I shall afterward produce from the Scripture remarkable
Instances of God's Judgments upon those who have thus violated the Oath of God;
so the verification of this Threat was taken notice of, where God was little
known, and where therefore one might think God would be less careful to secure
the Honor of his Name: Hesiod, and ancient Greek Poet (...)
, affirming of an Oath, That it does for the most part destroy those who either
swear falsely, or act contrary to it when they have sworn. But because the
Scripture, upon which we may most securely rely, is not without eminent proofs
of Gods displeasure against the perjured Person; setting aside the Proofs which
might be brought from Heathen Authors, I will betake me to the Scriptures, and
prove from thence, That God does not hold them guiltless who thus take his Name
in vain. And here, in the first place, I shall allege that known Story of the
Gibeonites, with whom the Oath of the Lord had passed. For though that Oath had
been drawn from the Israelites by the false Pretenses of the Gibeonites; though
those who had given them that Oath, had now a long time been laid in their
Graves, together with those Gibeonites to whom it was, and a new Generation
sprung up, which neither knew those Gibeonites, nor their own Ancestors; though
what Saul did to them, was out of his Zeal to the Children of Israel and Judah,
and not out of any private grudge, or worldly Interest whatsoever; lastly,
though that Saul was laid in his Grave also, and, as one therefore might well
imagine, his Wickedness and Guilt together with him: yet was his Destruction of
the Gibeonites, with whose Ancestors the Oath of God had passed, so displeasing
to the Divine Majesty, that he visited them with a three years Famine, neither
would he be entreated for the Land, till David had delivered up seven of Readiness
Sons to the Gibeonites, to be by them hanged up unto the Lord. All which
Circumstances, whosoever shall consider, will not doubt in the least of God's
holding him guilty who takes his Name in vain. For, what question can there be
of that, when, to say no more, we see the Guilt of it to have descended upon
the Children of the perjured Person, yea, to have involved a whole Nation in
it? So very great reason is there to interpret the Threat of not holding
guiltless, to a sense more severe than the Words do of themselves import: The
forementioned Story showing it to be alike, or rather more severe, than the
visiting of the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children to the third and
fourth Generation, with which the former Commandment is enforced. From the
Business of the Gibeonites, pass we to a no less famous Instance of God's
displeasure against Zedekiah; who after he had given an Oath of Fidelity to the
King of Babylon, yet no less impiously than foolishly brake it, by rebelling
against him: For, Shall he (says God by the Prophet Ezekiel) prosper? Shall he
escape, that does such things? or shall he break the Covenant, and be
delivered? As I live, says the Lord God, surely in the place where the King
dwells that made him King, whose Oath he despised, even with him in Babylon
shall he die, Ezekiel. 17.15, 16. And again, verse. 18. and so on, Seeing he
despised the Oath, by breaking the Covenant, (when lo, he had given his hand)
and has done all these things, he shall not escape. Therefore, thus says the
Lord God, As I live, surely mine Oath that he has despised, and my Covenant
that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head. And I will
spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him
to Babylon, and will plead with him there, for his trespass that he has
trespassed against me. Which accordingly we find to have come to pass: For the
same Scripture informs us, That, because Zedekiah rebelled against King
Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God, God brought upon him the Army of
the King of Babylon, which took him and brought him to their Master, where he
had Judgment given upon him, and after he had had his Sons slain before his
Eyes, had those miserable Eyes of his put out, as you may see in Jeremiah,
chap. 39. Such was the displeasure of God against King Zedekiah, for violating
the Oath of God: And if so, we may be sure God will not hold any Man guiltless
that so takes his Name in vain. The only thing remaining to be proved, is,
That God will not hold him guiltless who dishonors his Name in a Vow; which
accordingly I come now to evince. In order whereunto, I will consider, first,
those who make unlawful or trifling Vows; and then, those who violate what they
have made.

That God will not hold him guiltless who sins in Vowing, will manifestly
appear, if we reflect upon his displeasure against the Profaner of his Name in
an Oath. For inasmuch as a Vow is more Sacred than an Oath, because whilst in
the latter God is only cited as a Witness, in a Vow we contract with him as a
Party; he who holds the Swearer guilty, must be thought to do so much more to
him who profanes his Name in a Vow, and does not only apply it to a Sin, or to
an Impertinence; but, as I may so speak, does it to his face. The Reason is the
same in him who breaks the Vow he has made, and acts contrary to what he has
most solemnly promised to the Almighty; he that so does, as he contracted with
God as with a Party, so falsifying to him directly and immediately, and
consequently (because so much the more dishonouring him) the more liable to the
severity of his displeasure. And accordingly, when Ananias and Saphira had,
agreeably to the Custom of those Times, by a Vow dedicated the Price of their
Possessions unto God, God, for a partial breach of that their Vow, inflicted a
sudden death upon them, and made them feel the dreadfulness of that Name which
they had profaned. So true is that of Solomon Prove. 20.25.
, even in the Times of the Gospel, That it is a snare to a man to devour that
which is holy, and after vows to make inquiry: The forementioned Offenders
having not only been taken in the Snare, but made to feel the Hands of the
Fowler. Thus, which way soever Men take the Name of God in vain, they incur the
displeasure of the Almighty; and though they are not always immediately
punished, yet they are so often enough, to show that God does not hold any of
them guiltless; and that, whom he now spares, he will punish so much the more
hereafter, when he comes to render to every Man according to his Works.

What remains then, but that I admonish, if not for the Sacredness of the Name
of God, yet that at least for the security of their own Souls and Persons, Men
would not take that Name of his in vain. For if either the Threat of God, or
the Exemplifications of it in those that have offended, may be credited, the
taking of his Name in vain, however such as to what it is applied to, yet will
not be vain as to the Consequences thereof: For, as it shall be with effect, so
a very direful one to those who are the Authors of it, They shall not (as they
do often with Men) find Commendation and Applause; they shall not be looked
upon as so much the better bred, or the greater Wits for it; lastly, they shall
not (as they do for the most part here) find an Excuse for their Profanations,
and be absolved either from all Offense, or all that is notorious: God, whose
Name they take in vain, and who is the most competent Judge of their Actings,
having promised, or rather threatened, that he will look upon them under another
notion, and not only not hold them guiltless, but look upon them as notorious
Offenders. And indeed, thus far the Judgment of the World has concurred with
that of God, as to condemn the taking of it to a Lie; False Swearing and
Perjury having not only been branded with reproachful Punishments, but the
Authors thereof excluded from giving Testimony in any Courts of Judicature. If
other Profanations of God's Name have not found the like Censure, it is not so
much because they imagined them specifically different, but because they are
not so immediately destructive to Humane Society, which Humane Judicatures are
more particularly obliged to preserve. But as that is accidental to the taking
of God's Name in vain, or at least makes the Crime to which it adheres only
gradually different from the other; so the Judgment Seat of God takes notice of
all that entrencheth upon his Honor, and will therefore be sure not to hold
them guiltless who any way take his Name in vain.

THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT.
THE FOURTH COMMANDMENT.
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor, and
do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord
blessed the or, Sabbath day.
seventh day, and hallowed it.

PART I.
The Contents.
The general Design of the Fourth Commandment, the setting apart a Portion of
our Time for the Worship of God, and particularly for the Public one. The
particular Duties, either suh as appertain to the Substance of the Precept, or
such as are only Circumstances thereof. Of the former sort are, 1. The
Worshipping of God in private, and by our selves; the Morality whereof is
evidenced from the particular Obligation each individual Person has to the
Divine Majesty. 2. The Worshipping of him in consort with others; which is also
at large established upon Principles of Nature and Christianity. 3. The setting
apart a Time for the more solemn performance of each: As without which,
Religious Duties will be either omitted, or carelessly performed; but to be sure
no Public Worship can be, because Men cannot know when they shall meet in
order to it. 4. Such a Rest from our ordinary Labors, as will give us the
leisure to intend them, and free us from distraction in the performance of them.

BEING now to enter upon the Fourth Commandment, about the Nature whereof there
has been so much Contention in the Church of England, I cannot forbear to say,
There is all the reason in the World to believe it to be Moral in the main, as
having a place among those Commandments which contain nothing in them which is
not confessedly Moral. But because, when we come to understand its general
Design and particular Precepts, we shall be much better able to judge whether
or no, and how far the Matter thereof is Moral, I will without more ado apply
my self to the investigation of them, and show to what Duties it obliged.

Now the general Design of this Fourth Commandment is, the setting apart a
Portion of our Time for the Worship of God, and particularly for the Public
one. That it designs the setting apart some Portion of our Time, the very Words
of the Commandment show; as not only acquainting us with God's sanctifying a
Seventh part, but obliging the Jews, in conformity thereto, to rest from their
ordinary Labors and observe it as holy unto the Lord. The only difficulty is,
Whether it designs the setting apart of that Time for the Worship of God, and
particularly for the Public one. For the proof of the former part whereof,
though I cannot say we have the same clearness of Evidence from the Letter of
the Commandment it self, yet I shall not scruple to affirm, That it may be
inferred from thence by necessary consequence, and not only be proved to be a
part of the Precept, but the principal one. For how is that day kept as holy,
which has nothing holy performed in it? Or what reference can it have to God
(as the Word holy implies) where God is not at all honored in it? Neither will
it suffice to say, That the very Resting on that day, is of it self a
Consecration of it unto God: For as it becomes a Consecration only by the
Parties so resting in compliance with the Command and Ends of God; so it
supposes at least, that they should on that day order their Thoughts to him,
and rest from their ordinary Labors, in contemplation of his Command, and in
remembrance of his resting from that great Work of the Creation. Again, Though
to rest from their ordinary Labors, especially as was before understood, were
a kind of devoting it unto God; yet there being other and more acceptable ways
of keeping it holy, than by a simple Rest from them, it is but reasonable to
think, when God cautioned the Jews so to remember it, he designed no less to be
honored other ways. Lastly, Forasmuch as God not only commanded to keep it
holy, but in this very Precept represents, it as his own But the seventh day is
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.
, as in Isaiah Isa. 58.13.
, under the Title of his holy day, and the holy of the Lord; he thereby
manifestly implies, that it should be dedicated to his Worship, and not only
not be profaned by ordinary Service, but hallowed by his own. For how is it
God's Holy day, but by being dedicated to his Service? or how observed as such,
but by giving him his proper Service in it? Whence it is, that where the
Prophet Isaiah gives it those Elogies, he insers our honoring him from them,
as well as the not pleasuring of our selves. Though therefore so much be not
directly and in terminis expressed, yet it is clearly enough implied, that God
designed his own Honor and Service in it, and commanded it to be set apart for
the performance of it. Lastly, As God designed the setting apart of a certain
Time for his own Worship, so more especially for the Public one: Of which,
though there be no Indication in the Commandment it self, yet there is proof
sufficient in the 23d Chapter of Levitious, where we find not only the
forementioned Rest required, but the day it self appointed for an holy
Convocation, as you may see ver. 2. of that Chapter. And accordingly, though
the Jews did generally look no farther than the Letter of the Law, and some of
them (as is probable here) content themselves with an outward Rest, as by which
they thought to satisfy the Commandment; yet the generality of them have in
all times looked upon the Service of God as the End for which they were
commanded to keep the Sabbath. For thus Josephus, in his second Book against
Appion, tells us, Thorndike of Religious Assemblies, chapter 2. where this of
Josephus, and that of Philo are quoted.
That Moses propounded to the Jews the most excellent and necessary Learning of
the Law, not by hearing it once or twice, but every seventh day, laying aside
their Works, he commanded them to assemble for the hearing of the Law, and
thoroughly and exactly to learn it. As in like manner Philo, in his Third Book
of the Life of Moses, That the Custom was always when occasion gave way, but
principally on the seventh day, to be exercised in Knowledge; the Chief going
before and teaching, the rest increasing in goodness, and bettering in Life and
Manners. I will conclude this Particular with that of St. James, Acts 15.21.
where, to fortify his Opinion concerning the prohibiting of Blood to the
Gentile Christians, he alleges for a Reason, That Moses had in old time them
that preached him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbathday. From all
which put together, it is evident, that the Service of God, and particularly
the Public one, was the Thing designed in this Commandment. The Jews
themselves, who were none of the most quick-sighted, being able to discern it;
and accordingly, both of old and in latter days, framing their Practice after
it.

The general Design of the Commandment being thus unfolded, proceed we to the
Particular Things under Command; which, for my more orderly proceeding in this
Affair, I will rank under two Heads, to wit, 1. Such as appertain to the
Substance of the Precept: Or, 2. Such as are only Circumstances thereof.


I. Of the former sort again are these four things.

1. The Worshipping of God in private, and by our selves. 2. The Worshipping of
him in consort with others. 3. The setting apart a Time for the more solemn
performance of each. And, 4. Lastly, Such a Rest from our ordinary Labors, as
may give us the leisure to intend them, and free us from distraction in the
performance of them.
Now concerning each of these, there cannot be the least doubt of their being
Moral, and consequently of Universal Obligation.

1. That so it is to Worship God in private, the Obligation each of us have to
the Divine Majesty, and the Words of the First Commandment show. For being he
is the Creator and Sustainer of each Individual, as well as of Humane Nature;
being there is no individual Person which has not some peculiar Obligation to
the Divine Majesty, whether in respect of some Blessing received, or Evil
averted from him; lastly, being (as was before shown) those Expresses of the
Divine Goodness lay a necessity upon the Person that has received them, to
honor the Author of them; it follows, because each individual Person has been
so obliged, that each of them do for himself acknowledge those Obligations, and
pay God that Service and Adoration which is due because of them. Again,
Forasmuch as the First Commandment does not only exclude the having of other
Gods, but enjoin the having and owning of the True; forasmuch as it requires
that of every individual Person, as the expressing it in the Singular Number
shows; lastly, forasmuch as the Matter of that Commandment is Moral; it
follows, That to worship God in private, and by our selves, is a Moral Duty:
Which was the first thing to be proved.

2. From the Private Worship of God, or that which is due from each particular
Person, pass we to the Worshipping him in Public; which we have before shown
to be the Design of this Commandment. Where, first of all, I shall show it to
be a Moral Duty; and secondly, a Christian one.

To worship God in consort with others, being generally looked upon as so much
a Duty, that no Sect of Christians, for ought I know, have ever made a question
of it, I have often wondered with my self, whence so general a Persuasion should
arise, since the New Testament has said so little by way of Precept concerning
it: But considering with my self, that the same Persuasion has prevailed
wherever the Worship of God has taken place, I entered into a suspicion, that
the same Common Principles had been the Author of it in both, even those which
Reason and Nature teaches. And indeed, that there is enough in them to oblige
Men to a Public Worship, will appear to any that shall consider, 1. Not only
that God has made Man a Sociable Creature, but that Men have actually entered
themselves into Societies. For as it was but reasonable, that those whom God
had made Sociable Creatures, should, in return for so great a Blessing, give a
proof of it in his Service, and with joint Forces worship him, who had both
inclined and fitted them so to associate; so, actually entering into Societies,
they thereby became Sharers of the good or evil Fortune of those respective
Societies which they espoused. In consideration whereof, as they were obliged
either to pray or give thanks, according to the several Fortunes which befell
them; so, to do both those Duties, not only apart and by themselves, but in
conjunction with those to whom they were so associated; common Sense requiring,
that where the Blessing obtained relates to any Body, that Body to which it so
relates should pay its Thanks for it; as on the other side, that where the Evil
either threatened or undergone, relates to a Community, that that Community to
which it does so, should offer up its joint Prayers to God to avert that Evil
from it. My second Argument for the Morality of Worshipping God in Public,
shall be taken from the Obligation that lies upon us to provoke each other to
the Adoration of him. For being by the Design of our Creation not only to
glorify God in our own Persons, but, as much as in us lies, to procure the
Glorification of him by other Men, we are accordingly (as our Savior speaks)
so to make that light of ours to shine before men, that they seeing our works
of piety, may glorify our Father which is in heaven. Now forasmuch as it is no
way proper that our Personal Devotions should be so laid open, because of
necessity containing such Petitions as are not fit to be communicated to the
World, Reason requires that there be a Public Worship instituted, by our
diligent attendance whereof, we may provoke each other to the more devout
Adoration of our Maker. Which Argumentation I do the rather make use of,
because the Author to the Hebrews uses the same, where he speaks of the
Public Service; in pursuance of his exhorting to Heb. 10.24.25.
consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good works, adding, not
forsaking the assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some then
was; but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as they saw the day
approaching. Lastly, Forasmuch as on the one hand there is a necessity of
instructing the Generality in the Duty they owe to God, and every one that
stands in need of Instruction, cannot have a particular Teacher assigned him;
as, on the other, all of us do stand in need of each others help in promoting
our Petitions unto God: it is but necessary we should sometimes meet together,
that they who stand in need of Instruction may receive it, and both Teacher and
Taught put to the utmost of their Endeavors to obtain of God those Blessings
which they need. For, as (God knows) our Devotion is at best but weak, and
consequently may well require the twisting of some others with it; so there is
none of us which may not be sometime indisposed to ask as we ought, or
unlikely, by reason of some Sin, to prevail, though we should. By which means,
as our own Prayers must needs be very defective, so that defect naturally
prompts us to adjoyn our selves to other Men, as by whom it will be best
supplied: What St. Paul spoke concerning Charity, being no less true in the
matter of Devotion, That the abundance of such or such particular Persons may
be a supply for the want of others; as, on the other side, that when their
abundance fails, the abundance of the other may be their supply, and so by
turns be assisting to each other.

The Morality of Public Worship being thus established, proceed we, according
to our proposed Method, to show it to be a part of Christianity; which will
bind it so much the faster upon our Consciences. In order whereunto, I shall
allege, first, its being a part of Moral or Natural Religion, according as was
but now declared. For it being the design of Christianity to establish Natural
Religion, and oblige us to be pious, and just, and temperate, which are the
general Heads of it; whatsoever is a part of Natural Religion, is eo nomine to
be looked upon as a part of the Christian one, though it be not expressly
commanded: The confirmation of Natural Religion inferring the confirmation of
all those Duties which are clear and undoubted Portions of it. The same is yet
more evident, from the confirmation of those Grounds upon which the Public
Worship of God is founded; such as are the making our Piety to shine before
others, and the need each of us stand in of one another help in Prayer: For
our Savior in express Terms injoyning the observation of the former, and St.
Paul giving testimony to the truth of the latter, where he affirms us to be
members of each other, they do thereby consequently establish the necessity of
Public Worship, because (as was before shown) naturally arising from them. But
because what has been hitherto alleged from Christianity, is rather
constructive of the Morality of the Public Worship of God, than any immediate
or direct proof of its own enjoining it; for the fuller declaration of our Duty
in this Affair, I will proceed to more immediate Proofs, and such as are
properly Christian.

1. Now the first that I shall allege, shall be taken from those Spiritual
Gifts which God bestowed upon his Church; and particularly, the Word of Wisdom,
the Word of Knowledge, Prophesieing, Interpretation of Tongues, and Praying by
the Spirit, or Immediate Inspiration: For these being given to those that had
them, to 1 Cor. 12.7.
profit withal, or (as the same St. Paul elsewhere Ephesians. 4.12.
more expressly declares) for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ, suppose the meeting of that Body to receive profit by them, and
consequently (because that is the End of those Gifts) for Public Instruction
and Prayer.

2. My second Argument for the necessity of the Public Worship of God, shall
be taken from the Rules St. Paul often gives for the right management of
Christian Assemblies; such as are, That no man should speak in an unknown
tongue, if there were not one by to interpret; That when they spoke, they
should do it by two, or at the most by three; and in fine, That all things
should be done decently and in order. For what need were there of all this stir
about the management of Christian Assemblies, if the Author of our Religion had
not at all enjoined them, but left Men to their own Private Worship? Neither
will it avail to reply, as possibly it may be, That the Rules laid down for the
management of Assemblies, do rather suppose them useful, than necessary to be
held: For, as what is so hugely useful, cannot be supposed to be other than
necessary, if we consider the many Precepts that enjoin us the edifying of one
another: so he that shall consider St. Paul's Accuracy in laying down Rules
concerning Christian Assemblies, will not doubt of their being necessary to be
held: it being not to be thought, that he who is so careful elsewhere to
distinguish between his own 1 Cor. 7.8, etc.
Advices, and the Commands of the Lord, would take so much pains in prescribing
Rules for the management of Christian Assemblies, without so much as taking
notice, that those Assemblies, concerning which he gave Rules, were no other
than Advices of his own. Add hereunto,

3. The perpetual Practice of the Church, and that too at such times when those
Assemblies were perilous to those that held them: For that shows plainly, that
the holding of Assemblies had some higher Original, than only the usefulness
thereof: It being not to be thought, that the Christians of all Times, and even
of the most dangerous ones, would have held such Assemblies, if they had not
looked upon themselves as straightly obliged to them.

4. But to come up yet more closely to the Ground of holding Assemblies, which
I think I may not without cause establish in that of our Blessed Savior, Mat.
18.20. to wit, That where two or three were gathered together in his Name, he
would be in the midst of them. For, as those Words of his are an assurance to
those who should be so gathered, that Christ would be in the midst of them,
that is to say, (as the foregoing Words import) to grant them the Petitions
they should ask, and more particularly such as were of Public concern For he
speaks before of Men that neglect to hear the Church, and of God's confirmation
of the Churches Censure of them.
; so the same Words do imply, that he would not be so present to those who
should not so assemble together. Otherwise the Reason wherewith he recommends
the Assembling in his Name, would be weak and null; because so it might be
affirmed, that they might have Christ present to them without. Now, forasmuch
as Christ not only promises that he would be in the midst of those who should
so assemble, but insinuates also, and that clearly enough, that he would not be
so present to those that did not; he thereby lays a necessity upon Christians
of so meeting in his Name, for the welfare of the Church, and particularly for
the imploring of such Blessings as are necessary for it. I will conclude this
Particular with that of the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 10.23. Where having
exhorted in the foregoing Verses, that they should hold fast the profession of
the faith themselves, and provoke others to the same love and good works, which
are undoubted Precepts of the Gospel; he adds in the same breath, and by way of
explication, not forsaking the assembling of your selves together, as the
manner of some then was; but exhorting one another, and so much the more as
they saw the day approaching. Which Words, as they are a manifest condemnation
of the neglect of Assemblies, and consequently an establishment of the
necessity of Worshipping God in them; so such a condemnation of the forsaking
of them, as to make it in effect not only a breach of Charity, but a
renouncing the Profession of our Faith. However it be, most certain it is, that
Apostle manifestly condemns the forsaking the assembling of our selves
together; and if so, we may be sure the serving God in the Solemn Assemblies is
a part of a Christians Duty; and therefore the Fourth Commandment, wherein it
is enjoined, so far obligatory.

3. I am now arrived at the third of those Things which I said before to
appertain to the Substance of this Commandment, and that is, The setting apart
some portion of our Time for the more solemn performance of Gods Worship; this
being so much of the Substance of the Commandment, that it is the only thing
clearly expressed in it, and may seem at first sight not only to be the Main,
but the Whole. Now that this also is Moral, will appear, if we consider it with
respect to the Worship of God in general, or with respect to the Public one.
For, inasmuch as the Worship of God, as well as all other Actions, requires
some Time for the performance of it; and Experience shows, that what is left at
large for the Time, is either very rarely or perfunctorily performed; there
arises from thence a necessity of appointing a certain Time, that it may not
be either altogether omitted, or carelessly celebrated, when it is not. And
accordingly, as all Nations have agreed in the owning of a God, and in their
own Obligation to worship him; so we find them also universally to have set
apart certain Times for the Adoration of that Deity they professed to own: Not
perhaps without some hint from the Tradition of better Times, or from the
Example of God's peculiar People, (for even in Natural Precepts the dull Mind
of Man may sometime need to be excited by the instigation of others;) but,
without doubt, for the main, out of their own consciousness of the necessity of
fixing a certain Time, that so it might not either be omitted, or carelessly
performed. There is yet another Reason of setting apart a certain Time, if we
consider it with respect to the Public Worship; and that is, That they who are
so to worship, may know when they are to meet for that purpose: For, if 1 Cor.
14.8.
the trumpet give none, or an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the
battle? or know when (as Tertullian Apol. c. 39. Coimus ad deum, quasi manu
facta precationibus ambiamus. Haec vis deo grata est.
speaks) they are to meet to besiege God, and extort from him those Blessings
which they need.

4. But beside the setting apart of a certain Time for the Celebration of the
Worship of God, there is also requisite such a Rest from our Employments as may
give us the leisure to intend it, and free us from distraction in the
performance of it. For as the Mind of Man cannot at the same time intend Things
of so distant a nature as Sacred and Civil are; so, if there be not some
Interval between our Employments and our Devotions, the Businesses of the World
will be apt to insinuate themselves into our Thoughts, and thereby divert us
from intending of the other. Such are the Substantial Parts of this Fourth
Commandment of the Decalogue, such their Nature, and the Obligation which they
induce. What the Circumstances thereof are, and what their Nature and
Obligation, is another Question, and will therefore require a distinct
Consideration.

PART II.
Concerning such Duties as are only Circumstances of the Precept, which do
either respect the determination of the Time wherein we are to worship, or the
manner of the Observation of it. That there is no Obligation upon us, either
from Nature, or the present Precept, to observe a Just day, a Seventh day, or
that Seventh day which is here prescribed. The Ancient Christians Observation
of the Jewish Sabbath, together with their own Lord's Day, considered, and
answered. A Transition to the Observation of the Lord's Day, where is shown,
That much less than a whole day cannot be deemed a competent Time for the
solemn performance of God's Private and Public Worship; That since God exacted
of the Jews a Seventh part of their Time, we cannot give less, who have far
greater Obligations to the Almighty; and, That Christ's Resurrection upon the
Lord's Day, is as just a Motive to consecrate it unto God, as that of God's
Resting the Jewish Sabbath. The Observation of the Lord's Day founded in the
Universal Practice of the Church, which is there also deduced from the days of
the Apostles, down to the Times of Tertullian. That such a Practice is of force
to infer an Obligation; partly because declaring the Consent of that Body
wherein it is, and to which therefore it is but reasonable that particular Men
should subject themselves; and partly because an Argument of its having been
instituted by the Apostles: According to that known Rule of St. Augustine, That
what the Universal Church holds, and always has, if it appear not that the
same was first decreed by Councils, is most rightly believed to have been
delivered by the Authority of the Holy Apostles. The Reason why, when God gave
the Jews so clear a Precept for the Observation of their Sabbath, he should
leave us, who live at so great a distance from the Institution of ours, rather
to collect it from the Practice of the Apostles and the Church, than to read it
in some express Declaration.

II. HAVING shown in the foregoing Discourse what the Substantial Parts of this
Precept are, together with the Morality thereof; it remains that I proceed to
those which are Circumstantial, which may be reduced to two Heads.

1. The Determination of the Time wherein we are to Worship: And, 2. The Manner
of the Observation of it.
1. In the handling of the former whereof, I will proceed in this Method.

1. I will inquire whether the Determination of the Time, according as it is
here fixed, be directly obligatory to us Christians. 2. Whether, if not, any
thing may be inferred from it toward the establishing of the Lord's Day, and by
what it is further to be strengthened. 3. To which I shall add, in the third
place, an Account of other Christian Festivals; and show their Lawfulness,
Usefulness, and the Esteem wherein they ought to be held.
1. Now there are three things which this Commandment prescribes concerning the
Time of the Solemn Worship of God; That it be a Day; That it be a Seventh day;
and, That it be that Seventh day on which the Jewish Sabbath fell, or Saturday.
Concerning each of which, I will particularly inquire, Whether they are
morally, or otherwise, obligatory to us Christians.

And first, If the Question be concerning a Day according as the Jews reckoned
it, and as they were commanded to observe their Sabbaths Lev. 23.32.
, that is to say, of that space of Time which is between the Evening of the
foregoing Artificial Day, and the Evening of the following one; so no Reason
appears, either from Nature, or otherwise, why such a Day should be looked upon
as obligatory to us Christians. For be it, that that Account is most agreeable
to the Order of Nature, in which, as the first Chapter of Genesis assures us,
Darkness had the precedence of Light, and accordingly had the precedence both
in the Scriptures, and the Jews Account; Be it, secondly, as was before
insinuated, that the Jews were obliged so to reckon their Sabbaths, as the
forementioned Precept, and their own Practice show: Yet, as no Reason in Nature
can be given, why the Worship of God should begin rather with the Evening than
the Morning, according as it constantly does with us; so, that this Commandment
binds not such a Day upon us, the perpetual Practice of the Church, and the
Occasion of that Festival we weekly observe, show. For, the First day of the
Week, or Lord's Day, being set apart by the Church in Commemoration of the
Resurrection of our Savior, it is in reason to begin when that Resurrection
did, which we find to have been when it began to dawn toward day. All
therefore that can be meant in respect of us, must be the Observation of such a
portion of Time as their Day amounted to, which is the space of Twenty four
Hours, or the Natural Day. But even here it will be a hard matter to find any
thing in Nature to evince our Obligation to it: For though Nature it self
persuade, that a competent time be appointed for the Public Worship of God;
yet that the Time so appointed should consist of just so many Hours, this no
Principle in Nature teaches, so far as I have been acquainted with them. The
only thing that can found the Observation of such a Time, is that Positive Law
which is now before us: But, as I have already shown the Letter thereof not to
concern us as to the Day here required; so, Christianity being apparently not
so nice as to the observation of Circumstances, we are in reason to measure our
own Obligation as to the time of our Worship, rather by the Equity than Letter
of the Commandment; which what that is, I shall in due place declare.

Now though, from what has been said, a Judgment may be made, what we are to
think of the Observation of a Seventh day, and particularly of that Seventh day
which was the Jewish Sabbath; yet to make my Discourse so much the more
complete, and because there want not particular Arguments to propugn my Opinion
in those Particulars, I will make it my Business to show, That there is no
Obligation upon us Christians, either from the Law of Nature, or this
particular Precept, to observe either a precise Seventh day, or that Seventh
day which the Jews observed.

To begin with the former of these, even the Observation of a Seventh, which
has by some Men been pleaded for with so great earnestness; concerning which I
shall show, first, That it has no Foundation in the Law of Nature; and
secondly, That it has as little in this, if considered in respect of us. That
it has not in the former, this one Character of the Law of Nature may suffice
any sober Man to conclude: For the Law of Nature prescribing only such things
to our Observation, as are in their own Nature good, before the superinducing
of any Positive Law; it would follow, that the Observation of a Seventh day had
a peculiar Goodness in it, and that it ought to be observed, though God had by
no Positive Law enjoined it. But what Goodness can even they who profess to
believe it Moral, show in a Seventh day, more than in a Sixth, or Eighth, or
any other Day whatsoever? unless it be, that God rested upon it from the Works
of the Creation, which is the Reason here alleged for its observance. But,
first of all, if God's resting upon it gave it any peculiar Goodness, what need
was there of his adding his Blessing, and Command, to oblige Men to the
Observance of it? For the Day being Holy without and before it, it would have
sufficed to have declared, That that was the Day on which he rested. Again,
Forasmuch as Blessing and Sanctifying supposes that which is so blessed and
sanctified to have been before in the common condition of Things, God's so
blessing and sanctifying of the Seventh day, supposes that to have been of the
nature of other Days, and consequently not to be consecrated by his bare
Resting on it. Lastly, Forasmuch as whatsoever Goodness there is in any thing,
it must be supposed to descend upon it by the Influence of the Divine; if we
suppose the Seventh day to have had any peculiar Goodness and Holiness, we must
also suppose it to have received it from the same Influx: which cannot be
affirmed in the present case; because that to which it is ascribed, is not any
Influence of the Divine Goodness, but only the Suspension of it. I conclude
therefore, That God's Rest upon it did not give the Seventh day any peculiar
Holiness; and consequently, because that is the only Reason alleged, that
there is nothing of Morality in the Observance of it. From Nature and Morality
therefore, pass we to the present Precept, and inquire whether that induces
any Obligation upon us to observe it. Give me leave only to premise, That the
Question is not (as is commonly deemed) Whether One in Seven be of necessity to
be observed; but, Whether a Seventh day after Six days of Labor. For, though
it be true, that he who requires a Seventh day, requires One in Seven; yet
requiring it with reference to God's Rest from his Six days of Creation, he
determines it to the last of those Seven, because no other beside the last can
answer it. Which said, I shall not stick to affirm, That there is no Obligation
upon us as to a Seventh, because the Precept, so considered, related only to
the Jews. For the evidencing whereof, I will allege that of Exodus, chap.
31.16, 17. Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe
the Sabbath throughout their generations for a perpetual Covenant: It is a sign
between me and the children of Israel for ever. For in six days the Lord made
heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested and was refreshed. For, as
it is sufficiently known, that the Covenant between God and the Israelites left
no place for any that was not of their Nation or Religion; so the Sabbath being
for a Sign of that Covenant, was consequently to extend no farther than the
Covenant did, and therefore also to no other than themselves. The only
difficulty is, Whether what is affirmed of the Sabbath in particular, be to be
understood also of a Seventh day in the general. For the resolution whereof, we
shall need to go no further than the close of that Place we have now before us:
For affirming the Sabbath whereof he speaks, to be a Sign between him and the
Children of Israel, as it was an Image of his own Rest after his Six days work
of Creation, he thereby appropriates to them, though not the Remembrance of the
Creation, yet the keeping such a Memorial of it, and consequently, of a Seventh
day. And indeed, however some Men contend eagerly for a Seventh day, as
supposing thereby to advance the Authority of that which we Christians think
our selves obliged to observe; yet the granting of it to them, would serve
only to discredit that Day for which they so contend. For though the
Lord's Day be One of Seven, yet it is the First of those Seven, and is not
preceded by Six days of Labor, but followed: By which means it holds no
analogy with the Design of the Institution, because intended to commemorate the
Six days of the Creation, and that Rest which followed. Neither will it suffice
to say (as perhaps it may be) That the Analogy between it, and that Rest it is
proposed to imitate, may be salved well enough, by making it look back to the
Six foregoing days of Labor: For as by so doing we must alter our Account, and
make the Lord's Day not the First, but the Seventh; so, though this way of
Computing should agree well enough to the rest, yet it has no place at all in
the First and Chief; the Day of our Savior's Resurrection being not only the
First of the Gospel Age, but the First day after the Jewish Sabbath; which
leaves no place for any preceding Days of Labor.

From the Observation of a Seventh day, pass we to that Seventh on which the
Jews kept their Sabbath, even the Seventh from the first falling of the Manna
in the Wilderness, and, as is probable also, from the Creation of the World:
Which, that it is not obligatory to us, is sufficiently evident from the
foregoing Considerations; but will be rendered yet more clear from those which
follow. Whereof the first that I shall allege, is its being instituted to
remember God's giving them Rest after their sore Travels in Egypt: For, that so
it was, the Prophet Moses does more than intimate, Deuteronomy. 5.15. where repeating
the same Precept we are now upon, he alleges the Reason of God's commanding
it, to be, to put them in mind of their Bondage in Egypt, and of God's
wonderful delivering of them from it. Now forasmuch as that Mercy had relation
only to the Jews; forasmuch as their Sabbath was appointed to commemorate it:
it follows, that the Jews only were concerned in the Observation of it, and
consequently, that it is not obligatory to us. Add hereunto that of St. Paul to
the Colossians, chap. 2.16, 17. where not contented to forbid the judging of
any one in meat and drink, in respect of an Holy Day, or of the New Mood, or of
the Sabbath Days, which yet shows their Obligation to be null; he affirms
moreover, and particularly concerning those Sabbath Days, That they were
shadows of good things to come, and therefore to disappear when they actually
were. Now if any should demand (as the Question is not unseasonable) wherein
the Sabbath was a Shadow of things to come, according as St. Paul affirms; I
think we cannot more rightly place it, than in that Rest which it enjoined,
because that was one great End of its appointment; as neither the Typicalness
of that Rest, than in its shadowing forth that Eternal Rest which we shall be
possessed of in Heaven. For beside that the Author to the Hebrews not only
compares those Rests together, but calls that Eternal Rest by the Name of Heb.
4.9. (...), etc.
Sabbatism, as it were on purpose to show it to have been typified by the other
Vid. Lud Capell. in locum.
; the Jews themselves may seem not to have been without some knowledge of it,
because calling that Eternal Rest the day which is all Sabbath. The only thing
that can with reason be objected against this and the foregoing Argument, is,
the Christians so long and so generally observing the Jewish Sabbath, as well
as their own Lord's Day, or Sunday. But as it is to be observed, that that
Custom had no place in the Sea White's Treatise of the Sabbathday, p. 72.
Churches of Rome, and Alexandria, and throughout Africa, the first whereof was
anciently the most Eminent in the Christian World; so, where it had, it may
seem to have proceeded not so much from any firm belief of its Obligation, as
from weakness in some, and compliance in others, and in both an unwillingness
utterly to shake off that Day which had by God himself been set apart for
Religious Exercises: Witness their prescribing not to observe it after a Jewish
manner Interpolat. Epist. Ignat. ad Magnesianos. (...) Vid. Vser. Ign. p. 57.
, who advised the Observation of the Day; the Vid. Vsser. in notis ad loc.
Observation of it in such Places where the Jews most were, as in the Eastern
Parts, and not in the other; in fine, the Sea Bishop White ubi supra. and
Vsser. in Proleg. ad Ign. Epist. c. 13.
Romans and Alexandrians converting the Sabbath Day, or Saturday, into a day of
fasting; and the generality of the Christians at last agreeing with those of
Rome, in the abolishing of it. I will conclude this Particular with that of St.
Paul, Gal. 4.10, 11. where having twitted them with the Observation of days,
and months, and times, and years, agreeably to the beggarly elements of the
Law, to let them know how much he was concerned about it, he immediately adds,
I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain; thereby
intimating (as Grotius speaks) his fear of their falling back to Judaism, (to
which the Observation of their Days was a great step) and casting off that
Religion they had received from him. I speak not this to invalidate the
Authority of the Lord's Day, which some, I know, have endeavored to establish
upon such Grounds as I have labored to decry: For, as I mean by and by to give
such an Account of it, as shall oblige any sober Man to the Observation of it;
so, next to that, I know not what better Service I could possibly do it, than
by taking Men off from adhering too much to the Letter of this Commandment;
because, whilst some Men have gazed too much upon it, they have been induced
thereby, and not without reason, to observe the Saturday rather than the
Sunday, as which indeed the Commandment enjoins. Again, As by inculcating the
Letter of the Commandment too far, occasion has been given to prefer the
Jewish Sabbath before the Christian; so there is no doubt the like occasion may
be given, if not to admit of the Jewish, yet to think very meanly of the
Christian: It being not very likely that Day should be much esteemed, which
has nothing brought to establish it, but the Letter of a Commandment, that
establishes another day, and such a one as by the Design of God was a Shadow of
that Body which we enjoy.

2. But not any longer to defer the paying of that Debt which our Lord's Day,
as well as my own Promise, exacts of me; I will proceed, in the second place,
to inquire, Whether, though the determination of the Time, according as it is
here fixed, be not directly obligatory to us Christians, yet somewhat may not
be inferred from it, toward the establishing of the Lord's Day; and by what
that is farther to be strengthened? For the resolution whereof, the first thing
I shall offer, shall respect the appointing of a Day. For being (as I have
before shown) it is necessary that a competent Time be set apart for the
Worship of God; being less than a Day, or at least the major part of it, cannot
be deemed a competent Time for the Solemn Performance of the Private and
Public Worship of God; lastly, being God required of the Jews to set apart a
Day, to give him that Worship which is due unto him; we cannot think a less
Time incumbent upon Christians to observe as Holy, who have both a much greater
Obligation to the Almighty, and a much more weighty Service to intend. Again,
Forasmuch as it is no less necessary under the Times of the Gospel, than it was
under the Law, that a Time be set apart for the Public Worship of God;
forasmuch as it is but reasonable, that under the Times of the Gospel an equal
portion of Time, if not a far greater, should be allotted for the Performance
of it; the same Reason requires, that since God exacted a Seventh part of the
Jews, we are not to content our selves with a less, or imagine that God himself
will be. For, though there be no Morality in the Observation of a just Seventh;
though the specification of a Seventh, proceeded from a Reason which was never
cogent in it self, but to be sure is not now obligatory: yet, as whatever the
Reason thereof was, it is certain God required a Seventh part of the Jew, in
order to his own Service; so it is both Moral and Christian, that they should
not go less than a Seventh, who have much greater Obligations to the Almighty.
And indeed, well may we think so, when we find the Primitive Christians in the
Acts meeting every day to worship, and not only giving God a Seventh part of
their Time, but the greatest. Lastly, If the Creation of the World, Acts 2.46.
and God's Rest from it, were a just Motive to consecrate that Day into a
Holy Day, wherein God so rested from the Creation; to be sure that is no less,
upon which the Hopes of a Christian do so much depend, even the Resurrection of
our Blessed Lord and Savior. So that thus much may be inferred from the Equity
of this Commandment, That as much less than a Day, and a Seventh day, cannot be
thought necessary to be set apart for the Christian Worship; so, that which is
set apart by us, even the First day of the Week, had a juster Motive to the
Consecration of it, than that which was sanctified under the Law. But because
what has been hitherto, or may be inferred from this Commandment, does rather
persuade than necessitate the Observation of that particular Day which we
observe, and I have promised a farther strengthening of its Authority;
therefore, to give the greater force to it, I will produce the Practice of the
Church from the Apostles days; and when I have done so, show the Obligation it
induces.

That it had the Observation of a Christian Festival in the Apostles days, that
of St. Luke shows, Acts 20.7. where we find the Disciples met together upon the
first day of the week to break bread; that is to say, one Species being put for
all the rest, to communicate with each other in the Public Exercises of their
Religion: The breaking of bread not only referring either to the Lords Supper,
or the Love-teasts that closed it; but joined by this very Author with
doctrine, and fellowship, and prayer, Acts 2.42. The same is no less evident
from that of St. Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. where, according to
an Order he had before given to the Churches of Galatia, he enjoins those of
Corinth, That upon the first day of the week every one should lay by him in
store, that so there might be no collections when he came. For, wherefore (as
St. Chrysostom observes Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 43.
) should St. Paul appoint that day to the Churches of Galatia and Corinth, for
the laying by of what God had prospered them, for charitable uses, but that
that day, by the rest it afforded, gave them opportunity to do it? and
moreover, by the Blessing which it remembered, and the Sacred Offices that were
performed in it, was apt to incite them to a more cheerful and liberal
distribution? To all which, if we add the Title which St. John gives it, Rev.
1.10. so no doubt can remain of the Churches observing it as Holy. For as it is
evident from the Consent of Interpreters, and the Language of the succeeding
Age, that what St. John there calls The Lord's Day, was no other than what we
now style so; so the least that can be made of that Appellation is, That it was
set apart by the Church in memory of the Lord Christ's Resurrection, and
dedicated to his Honor and Service: The Lord's Day importing his having a
peculiar propriety in it, which must be either by his own Institution of it, or
the Consecration of it by his Church. From the Apostles days, pass we to those
that immediately succeeded; where we shall find yet more clear Testimonies of
the Observation of it. For thus Ignatius, the Contemporary as well as Successor
of the Apostles, in his Epistle (...) Ed. Voss. p. 35.
to the Magnesians, does not only make mention of the Lord's Day, but exhort
them, that laying aside the Observation of the Sabbath, they would keep the
Lord's day for a Festival, wherein our Life rose also. To the Testimony of
Ignatius, subjoyn we that of Justin Martyr Apol. 2. pro Christianis, p. 99.
(...), etc.
, as nearest to him, and to the Apostles; where we have not only an Account of
the Christians assembling on the Sunday, but the Business of those Meetings at
large declared, to wit, the reading of the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, Preaching, Praying, and other such Religious Exercises. And though,
in that known Passage of Pliny Plin. Epist. li. 10.
, where he gives an Account to the Emperor Trajan concerning the Assemblies of
the Christians; though, I say, in that Passage there be no express mention of
the Day wherein they were held: yet affirming from the Mouth of some
Christians, whom he had examined, that they were wont upon a set day to meet
together before the Morning-light, and sing a Song unto Christ, as unto God; it
is but reasonable to think that day was meant, the Observation whereof we are
now establishing. What should I tell you of Tertullian's affirming in one place
De Idololatr. cap. 14. Si quid and carni indulgendum est, habes, non tamen dies
tantum sed and plures. Nam Ethnicis semel annuus dies quisque festus est, tibi
octavus quisque dies, etc.
, That the Christians had every Eighth day for a Festival? and in another
Apolog. cap. 16. Aeque si diem Solis Laetitiae indulgemus, alia long ratione
quam religione Solis, secundo loco ab eis sumus, qui diem Saturni otio and
victui decernunt, exorbitantes and ipsi ab Judaico more, quem ignorant.
, That the Sunday was the Day? For, as that is so certain, that, as the same
Tertullian intimates, the Heathens accused them for it, as Worshippers of the
Sun, whose Name that Day bore; so, in and after his Time, there is so little
doubt to be made of its Observation, that I must but light a Candle to the Sun,
if I should go about to prove it. The only thing worthy our consideration,
will be, what use may be made of it, to infer our own Obligation to observe it.

And here, in the first place, I shall allege the Practice it self, as a
sufficient Argument to evince it. For, as an approved Custom has the nature of
a Law, because declaring the Consent of that Body wherein it is, and to which
it is but reasonable that particular Men should subject themselves; so St. Paul
gives it that force in the Church, where disputing against the Corinthian
Women's praying uncovered, he alleges, That they had no such custom, nor the
Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. For if the Argument from a Custom negative be
good and valid, much more from the same positive, and especially when there is
so general an one. But because such arguments as these, through the contempt
Men now have of the Church, may possibly not have their due efficacy, I will
allege, in the second place, that there is reason enough, even from that
Practice, to believe it to have been of Apostolical Institution. For, it being
morally impossible, that the Christians of all Places should so unanimously
agree to the Observation of it, if there had not been something of a Law to
constrain them to it; and there appearing no such Law of the Church it self,
antecedent to the Practice of it; it is but reasonable to believe it to have
been Instituted by those who were the first Founders of it; according to that
known Rule Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper
retentum est, non nisi Authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur.
of St. Augustine, That what the Universal Church holds, and always has, if it
appear not that the same was first decreed by Councils, is most rightly
believed to have been delivered by the Authority of the Holy Apostles. And
higher than that we shall not need to go; because he, who had all power in
heaven and earth given him, did at his departure hence delegate so much of it
to them, as was necessary for the regulating of the Church. The only thing
that may seem to have any difficulty, is, Why, when God gave the Jews so clear
a Precept for the Observation of their Sabbath, he should leave us, who live at
so great a distance from the Institution of ours, rather to collect it from the
Practice of the Apostles and the Church, than to read it in some express
Declaration. But even this, how difficult soever in appearance, will not be
hard for him to unriddle, who shall remember what has been before brought to
establish it: For the Law of Nature, and this of Moses, evidencing the
necessity of a Set Time; and the Equity of Moses Law, and our own Obligations
to the Divine Majesty, that we cannot give God a less proportion of our Time,
than what he exacted of the Jews; nothing remained for God to declare, but
whether he would require more than a Seventh (of which there is not the least
Indication); or if not, which of those Seven he would make choice of: which an
easy hint might suffice to discover. For the Saturday, which is the last of
those Seven, being expressly abolished, and no other having the like Pretenses
to succeed it, it was easy to guess God meant that Day, which had not only
our Savior's Resurrection to adorn it, but was moreover by the Apostles, and
those that followed them, kept as holy unto the Lord.

PART III.
A Digression concerning the Fasts and Festivals of the Church; where the
Lawfulness of their Institution is evicted, and vindicated from the Exceptions
of their Adversaries. That they are of signal use to insinuate the main
Articles of our Religion into the Understanding of the Weak, to bring the
Occasions thereof to the Memories of the Strong, and prompt us all both more
particularly, and with greater edification, to consider them. That being
instituted by the Church, they ought to be Religiously observed by all that are
the Members of it. Of the Manner of the Observation of the Jewish Sabbath,
which is another of the Circumstantials of this Commandment. Of the Strictness
of the Rest enjoined the Jews on it; and that, as such, it is not only not
obligatory to us, but superstitious. What Rest is now obligatory to us by
virtue of this Commandment; where that Rest is considered, both in the Letter,
and in the Mystery. To whom, and in what manner the Jewish Rest appertained;
with an application thereof to our own Concernments. A particular Inquiry
concerning those who are under the Power of others; and whether or no they are
obliged to Rest, where they are constrained to Labor by Threats or Stripes. Of
Recreation on the Jewish Sabbath, and our own; and that, rightly disposed, it
is not only not unlawful, but useful. An Objection from Isa. 58.13. proposed,
and answered. A Restriction of Recreations to such as are neither unsuitable
for the Kind to the Gravity of such a Solemnity, nor take up too much time in
the Exercise thereof. A Caution against profane neglect of the Lord's Day, with
the necessity that lies upon the Generality of Men, more than ordinarily to
intend their Eternal Concernments on it.

3. THE Lord's Day being, as you have seen, established upon Christian
Principles, and thereby equally secured from a Judaical Observance, and a
profane Neglect; the Commandment I am now upon, no less than my proposed
Method, obliges me to entreat of other the Festivals and Fast-days of the
Church. For though these have not the Authority of a Divine Command, as the
Jewish Sabbath had; though there is not the same clearness of Evidence for
their Apostolical Institution, as there is for the Lord's Day, or Sunday: yet
they have this in common with the Jewish Sabbath, and our own, that they have
the same Worship of God for their End, and the like signal Acts of God for the
Occasions of their Institution; even those which have the Title of Saints-days,
looking through them to the Mercy of God, who made them what they are, and
dedicated to his only Worship and Service. Having therefore so much affinity
with the Day here enjoined, I shall think it no way impertinent to my present
Argument, to inquire into the Lawfulness of their Institution, their
Usefulness, and the Esteem wherein they are to be held.

1. It being certain, that that is to be looked upon as lawful, which is not
forbidden by any Command; nothing can be required to establish the Holy Days of
the Church, but the taking off those Objections which may be made against the
lawfulness thereof. Now there are two things commonly objected against them,
and to which therefore, before I proceed, I will shape an Answer; the former
whereof strikes at the Observation it self, the other at the Injunction of it.
The ground of the former is laid in those Words of St. Paul, Gal. 4.10, 11.
where the Apostle not only finds fault with their observing days, and months,
and times, and years, but so far as to affirm, he was afraid he had bestowed
upon them labor in vain. As if the very Observation of such things, were
inconsistent with Christianity, or at least were in the way to destroy it. And
indeed, if (as is pretended) those Words of his were to be construed of the
Observation of all Days whatsoever, there is no doubt the Observation of those
I am now speaking of, were to be looked upon as inconsistent with Christianity.
But he that shall seriously compare these Words of the Apostle with the
foregoing and following ones, will find them to strike either at the Jewish
only, or at their Manner of Observation of them: For, asserting, as he does in
the beginning of the Chapter, their having been in bondage under the Law, and
the Son of God's Redemption of them from it; asserting moreover, ver. 21. That
they were desirous to be under the Law, and remitting them to the Law for their
satisfaction; what can we in reason think meant by their turning again to the
weak and beggarly elements wherein they desired again to be in bondage, but
their return to the beggarly Elements of the Law, and consequently (because
that is given as an Instance of it) either to the Observation of such Days and
Times as were laid upon them by the Law, or observing them after the manner
prescribed by it? The Case is yet more plain in that other commonly alleged
Text, Let no man judge you in meat and drink, or in respect of an Holy Day, or
of the New Mood, or of the Sabbath Days, Col. 2.16. Not only the mention of
Sabbaths, which every one knows to have been peculiar to the Jewish Nation,
determining it to their Fasts and Feasts; but St. Paul's affirming moreover,
that they were shadows of things to come, which is to be affirmed only of
Legal ones. To make these Texts therefore of any force, it must be proved,
either that ours are the same, or at least of the same nature with the Jewish;
or that a like Observation is required. But as the Festivals of the Church are
so far from being the same with the Jewish, that, on the contrary, they
proclaim the actual exhibition of those things which the other did only
foreshew; so there is nothing, either in our Canons, or Practice, which can
minister an occasion of suspicion, that a Judaical Observation is required.
For, beside that the Offices thereof are all purely Christian, and not mixed
with Incensing, as the Jewish were, and the Popish are; neither is their number
so great, as to be a burden to the Observers; nor those few that are imposed,
imposed upon them as Divine Commands. In fine, neither is the Duty of the Day
so appropriated to it, as to make it unacceptable upon others; nor yet exacted
with so much rigor on it, as not to leave place for necessary Occasions. All
therefore that can be supposed to lie against the Festivals of the Church, must
be drawn from their being instituted by Men, and that Will Worship which it is
conceived to involve. But as I have heretofore said enough to take off that
Charge, even as to this particular Affair; so, having done so, I shall in stead
thereof set before you the Practice of the Jews, which in this Particular
deserves hugely to be considered. For, if it were lawful for the Jews,
notwithstanding the many Festivals God had instituted among them, to add others
thereto upon occasion; how much more for Christians, where, setting aside the
Lord's Day, there is not any thing to determine the Time of their Solemn
Worship. Now that this was their Practice, is evident, first, from that of
Esther, chap. 9. and 27. where, upon occasion of their great Deliverance from
the Mischiefs intended against them by Haman, Mordecai wrote to the Jews, and
accordingly they ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon
all such as joined themselves to them, that they would keep those Days in which
they rested from their Enemies, according to their Writing, and according to
their appointed Time, every Year. In like manner, when the Altar of God had
been polluted by the Heathen, but was repaired and dedicated again by Judas
Maccabeus; the same Judas and his Brethren, with the whole Congregation,
ordained, That the Days of the Dedication of the Altar should be kept in their
Season from Year to Year, 1 Mac. 4.59. Which, as accordingly we find to have
been observed even to the days of our Savior; so, which is more, to have been
graced by his presence, as you may see Joh. 10.22. As to the Lawfulness
therefore, either of the Institution, or Observation of Festivals, there is not
the least doubt to be made; and much less can we suppose there will, if they be
also useful: which accordingly I come now to show.

2. For the evidencing whereof, the first thing I shall allege, is, that
Instruction which might thereby accrue to the weaker sort, if they were but
attended to as they ought. For the Church having appointed particular Days for
the Commemoration of the Chief Things that either were performed by, or happened
to our Savior, if the Plain Man (as a Reverend Person has expressed it) would
but ply his Almanac well, that alone Bishop Hall's Remains, Sermon. on 1 John
1.5.
would teach him so much Gospel, as to show him the History of his Savior. For
there, even upon the Feast of the Annunciation, might he see his Savior's
Conception, declared by an Angel; and him Born forty Weeks after, upon the
Feast of the Nativity: He should see him eight days after that, Circumcised on
New-years-day; then Visited, and Adored by the Wisemen, in the Epiphany: He
should see him presented to God in the Temple, on the Day of Purification; then
Tempted, and Fasting forty days, in Lent: He should see him ushered in by his
Forerunner John the Baptist, six Months before his Birth; attended by his
Twelve Apostles in their several Ranks, and Thomas the last for his Unbelief:
And at last, after infinite and beneficial Miracles, he should see him
crucified upon Good-fryday, Rising from the Dead on Easter, Ascending to Heaven
on Holy-Thursday; and, to supply the want of his Presence, the Holy Ghost
descending upon the Apostles, and the Church. In fine, there he should see the
Belief of all these summed up in the Celebration of the Blessed Trinity, on
that Sunday which bears its Name. All which, whosoever shall duly consider,
will not think such Institutions unuseful, nor the Church much beholden to them
who have endeavored to remove them. For, as it is apparent the foregoing Days
carry Marks upon them of the principal things which it is necessary for a
Christian to understand; so, by their separation from other days, they do
naturally prompt those that are ignorant, to inquire into the Occasion of them:
By which means, they who fly other ways of Instruction, would be in a manner
constrained to receive it here, and either be wrought upon to glorify God for
the Benefits they receive from them, or be rendered inexcusable if they did not.
But then, if we add farther, That they who have instituted those Days, have
moreover fitted them with such Services, as may both explain their meaning, and
the use we are to make of them; so it will be impossible for those who shut not
their Ears as well as their Eyes, to be ignorant of those Truths, the Notices
whereof they are intended to convey.

But beside that such Institutions minister to the Instruction of the weaker
sort, which (God knows) are both the most, and most carefully to be provided
for; they are also of excellent use to bring the Occasion thereof to the
remembrance of the Strong, and oblige them to consider what they know. For
being placed (so near as the Church can fix them) upon the Returns of the same
Periods of Time wherein they are recorded to have happened; and being moreover
distinguished from other Days by visible Solemnities, and the Commemoration of
that remarkable Work which they sometime produced: the notice of them is in a
manner thrust upon us, whether we will or no: And though we may be so brutish,
as not to remember them with those Affections which becomes us; yet it is made
impossible for us to forget them. Lastly, As the setting aside particular Days
for particular Accidents, is of excellent use to bring them to the remembrance
of the Strong, and oblige them to consider what they know; so they minister an
occasion shall I say, or rather an incitement to us all, more particularly to
consider them, and improve them to our utmost advantage. For, as it is easy to
suppose, those things will be but superficially considered, which are not
allowed a distinct consideration; so the thus separating them from each other,
lays a kind of necessity upon Men to look more nearly and narrowly into them,
and weigh all the Advantages which they contain: By which means, they who
otherwise perhaps would have had but a slight taste of any, shall suck them in
in greater proportions, and not only find in themselves a fuller perception of
their Sweetness, but a more grateful sense of his Goodness from whom they come.
Thus, for example, whilst the Feast of our Savior's Nativity does not only
admonish us of that, but in a manner determine our Thoughts to it, we have
thereby both an opportunity and an engagement, I will not say so much to dive
into the Mystery, as to contemplate the Goodness of him who was so incarnate;
passing through all those Stages through which his Goodness and Condescension
did, from the Assumption of a Humane Body, to all those humble and even
contemptible Circumstances in which he was pleased to assume it. Such are the
Advantages of the Fasts and Feasts of the Church, wheresoever they are
diligently intended. It remains that we inquire in what account they are to be
held, the third thing proposed to be discoursed of.

And here not to tell you, because no Man, for ought I know, has ever taken
upon him to affirm it, That such Days have no inherent Holiness in them; nor
yet (because the Church does not) represent them as Apostolical Institutions,
(though the Feast of Easter have a fair pretense to it) and much less as Divine
Commands; it shall suffice me to represent them as set apart by the Church of
God, for the Commemoration of those Things whose Titles they bear. For though
this do not make them equal to such as have the Command of God for their
Institution, nor yet to that Lord's Day which with great probability pretends
to an Institution by the Apostles: yet, as it separates them from the Rank of
Ordinary Days, and consequently obliges us so to look upon them; so it
particularly obliges us to intend those several Offices for the performance
whereof they are set apart. For if, for instance, it be in the Power of the
Church to set apart certain Days for the Commemoration of the Divine Goodness
toward us, there is no doubt but it is the Duty of particular Members to
comply with their Institutions, and make the Mercies which they so commemorate,
the Occasion of their Thanks and Praise. This only would be added, That as
what is so determined by the Church, may by the Laws of the same be taken away,
if the Profit or Necessity thereof do so require; so particular Persons may
without Sin omit the Solemnization of them, if the necessity of their Affairs
shall so require. For if the Sabbath it self was to yield to Necessity, much
more those Festivities which pretend not to the Institution of the Divine
Majesty. Care only would be taken, Vid. Daven. in Col. 2.16.
that, under a false pretense of Necessity, Men violate not the Order of the
Church: For, so doing, they shall offend against God, as well as it; because
profaning those Days which were set apart for his Worship and Service.

2. Having thus considered the Determination of the Time of our Worship, which
I said to be one of the Circumstantials of this Commandment; proceed we in the
next place to consider the Manner of its Observation: where again these three
things would be inquired into.

1. What kind of Rest it was to be observed with. 2. Whether it admitted of any
Recreation: And, 3. Lastly, With what Holy Offices to be celebrated? Subjoyning
to each, as being the principal thing we are to aim at, how far we our selves
are concerned.
1. I begin with the first of these, even the Rest enjoined the Jews in the
Observation of their Sabbaths: Concerning which, I shall show, 1. What kind of
Rest it was. 2. To whom, and in what manner it appertained.


1. For the Rest enjoined the Jews, it was evidently strict enough, and such as
excluded all kind of Labor which was not either plainly Necessary, or was not
grounded upon Pious and Charitable Considerations; such as were the
Circumcising of Children upon the Sabbath, slaying of Oxen for Sacrifices, or
lending Help to the Distressed. For, beside that here, and elsewhere, the Voice
of God is not, as it is in some others See Lev 23.7, 8.
, That they should do no servile work; but, that they should do no manner of
work upon it: beside, secondly, that they were forbidden so much as to kindle a
fire on it, as you may see Exodus 35.3. the Rest seems to have been so strict,
as not only to restrain Men from Labor, but even from moving from their
Places: For, abide ye (says God, Exodus 16.29.) every one in his place; let no
man go out of his place on the seventh day. And though there is no doubt this
was to admit of some relaxation, because that would have hindered them from
resorting to the Solemn Assemblies, for the holding whereof I have shown the
Sabbath to be set apart; yet it is apparent enough, from the End of its
Institution, and the Jews Vid. Act. 1.12. and Seldom. de Jure Not. etc. l. 3.
c. 9.
Practice, that there was somewhat more than ordinary enjoined, even as to
their not stirring from their Habitations. Now concerning each of these Rests,
I shall not stick to affirm, that, according as before-stated, they are not
only not obligatory to us Christians, but superstitious. That they are not
obligatory, will appear, if we consider, that the Sabbath it self is not: For
the Sabbath (as was before-shewn) being peculiar to the Jews, to whom it was
given as a Sign of the Covenant between God and them; that Rest which gave it
its Name, and a great part of its Nature, must be looked upon as in like manner
peculiar to them, and consequently not obligatory to us. But neither is it less
evident that such a Rest would be superstitious, if either imposed or observed
as Religious; because placing Religion in that, which however it might have
some place in the Jewish, yet is no part of the Christian, because exhibiting
that better Rest of which the other was a Type. If therefore there be any
Obligation upon us, from the Rest here commanded, it must be either to the
Observation of that Spiritual Rest of which it was a Type, or to such a Bodily
one as is requisite to the Solemn Performance of God's Worship; each of which I
come now to consider. Of the former of these Rests, there is not the least
doubt to be made; that is to say, of a Spiritual one, or Rest from Sin. For it
being evident on the one hand, that the Law of Moses was written for our
Direction and Obedience, as well that which is See the Discourse concerning the
Positive Laws of God, etc.
Ceremonial, as that which was Moral and Substantial; and it being no less
evident on the other, that that of it which was Ceremonial, was not written to
oblige us to the Ceremony it self: it follows, because it was written for our
Direction and Obedience, that it was intended to oblige us to those Spiritual
Duties of which the other were Types and Shadows. Now forasmuch as the Rest
enjoined the Jews was a Type of some Christian Duty; forasmuch as there is no
Duty in Christianity, which can better answer it, than a Rest from Sin; it
follows, that though we look not upon our selves as concerned in the Rest
enjoined the Jews, yet we look upon our selves as concerned in that Rest of
which it was a Type, and accordingly cease from our Sinful Works, as they did
on the Sabbath from the Works of their several Employments. Again, Though the
Rest enjoined the Jews, oblige us rather to the Thing signified by it, than to
the Rest it self; though, in the Circumstances in which it was enjoined, it was
apparently Legal, and consequently one of those Bondages from which Christ came
to set us free: yet so far forth as that is requisite to the performance of
God's Worship, there is no doubt it does oblige us, even as to the thing it
self: Because (as was before shown See Part 1. of the Explic. of this
Commandment.
) a part of the Moral Law, and subordinate to the main End of this. But from
hence (as was there observed) it will follow, that we are to rest from our
Employments, both in, and some time before the Time of God's Solemn Worship;
the Mind of Man being neither able to intend them both at once, nor yet the
Service of God alone, with that freedom which it ought, where the Cares of this
World press too near upon it. Which though it amount not to the strictnesses of
the Jewish Sabbath, yet will oblige us to such a Rest, as will leave little
leisure for other earthly Thoughts, than what the Necessity of our Affairs, or
the Conveniences of Life will take up. But, as farther than this I neither
shall nor dare press upon you the Rest enjoined the Jews; so even they who are
more severe, will not know how to free themselves, if they should be pressed
with their own Actions: For who of them thinks himself a Sinner, for gathering
a few Sticks on the Christian Sabbath, or going about to kindle a Fire on it?
The Exodus 35.3.
latter whereof was yet expressly forbidden the Jews, as the Number. 15.36.
former punished with death.

2. Having thus shown what kind of Rest was imposed upon the Jews, and withal
how far we our selves are concerned to observe it; inquire we in the next
place, To whom, and in what manner it appertained, or rather into the latter
only; the Commandment being express not only for the resting of all sorts of
Persons, but also of the very Beasts themselves. And first of all, if the
Question be concerning those who were sui juris, or permitted so to be as to
the Rest here enjoined; so there is no doubt that Rest appertained to them, not
only as a Privilege, but a Duty: the Rest here spoken of being the Matter of a
Command, and consequently intended to oblige all those who were in a capacity
to yield obedience to it. On the other side, if the Question be concerning
Cattle, which by the Tenor of the Commandment were to have a share in it; so
there is no doubt the rest here spoken of appertained to them only by way of
Privilege: For being incapable either of understanding, or giving obedience to
Laws, they must be supposed to have been free from this, and consequently, what
is said concerning their Rest, to have appertained to them only by way of
Privilege. Setting aside therefore both the one and the other, as whose Case
admits not of the least difficulty, we will consider, first of all, the Case of
Parents and Masters: 2. Of Children and Servants: And 3. and lastly, (because
there is something particular in his) of the Stranger that was within their
gates. For the first of these again, there is no great difficulty in
explicating their particular Concerns, because the Commandment is clear, not
only that they should rest themselves, but oblige those who were under their
Power to do so: For those being more in their Parents and Masters Power, than
in their own, the Command is in reason to be supposed to have appertained
chiefly to them in whose Power their Labor or Resting was. From Parents and
Masters, pass we to Children and Servants, and inquire into their particular
Concerns: Where, first of all there is no doubt, for the Reason before
alleged, that it was no less their Duty than Privilege, to rest from their
Labors, where they might be permitted so to do. The only doubt is, whether it
were incumbent upon them so to do, though their cruel Masters should have used
Threats or Chastisements to constrain them to their ordinary Labors. For the
resolution whereof, I shall desire you first to consider that of Deuteronomy. 5.15.
For it being manifest from thence, that the great Design of the Rest enjoined,
was, that Servants should have ease from their Labors, it is hard to suppose,
God would oblige them so to rest, when a far greater Evil than their Labor
impended on them: For, by this means God should not only not have consulted
their Benefit, but brought upon them a far greater Evil than their own Pains.
The Case will be yet more clear, if we remember, that the principal End of
Rest, was the attending to the Worship of God: For it being not to be thought,
that they would suffer their Servants to intend the Worship of God, who would
be so wicked as to constrain them to their ordinary Labors, the main Reason of
the Commandment must have been taken away as to them, and consequently the
Command also. All therefore that remains to be considered, is the Concernment
of the Stranger, who was not of the same Religion with the Jew: Where, in like
manner, it must be said, That the Precept of Rest appertained rather to the Jew
that had Authority over him, than unto him: For the Sabbath (as was before
said) being a Sign of that Covenant which God made between the Jews and
himself, it is in reason to be construed to have laid an Obligation upon such
only to whom the Covenant appertained. All the Obligation that a Stranger
could be supposed to lie under, must have risen not from the Law of Moses, with
which he had nothing to do; but from the Law of Nations, which prescribes, that
they who live in any Place, should be obedient to the Orders of it. By which
means the Stranger's Obligation became rather Civil, than Religious; and
consequently, tied him not to the Observation of it upon a Religious account,
but only upon a Civil one. The same, mutatis mutandis, is to be said of the
Concernment of Christians, unless it be as to the Rest of Cattle: For though it
be a matter of Morality to allow them Rest, yet neither Morality, nor
Christianity, ties us to allow it them on that day wherein we are to rest our
selves. This only would be added, That as the doing it at that time is
generally necessary, because we cannot well deny them Rest, but we must abridge
our selves; so it is no unhandsom Expression of our Thanks to God for the
Benefits we our selves enjoy, to make our Fellow Creatures at the same time to
taste of ours. But as, setting aside this particular Case, little need to be
added, to show in what sort the Rest here spoken of appertains to us and ours;
so I will not trouble my self, or you, with making any Application of it: Only
because what I have said concerning Servants, may be liable to misconstruction,
I will resume that Matter anew, and apply it to our own Case. And first of all,
when I say, That Servants are not obliged under Sin to rest from their Labors,
if they who are their Masters shall constrain them to it by Threats or Stripes,
my meaning is, provided they use all due Means to free themselves from them,
which in a Christian State are not ordinarily wanting to them that look after
them: For so long as the State forbids such Labors, it is in the power of
Servants to complain to those that are in Authority, and thereby procure both a
freedom from their Labors, and a Liberty to attend the Worship of God. Where
therefore such a Redress is to be had, there no doubt it ought to be
endeavored after: otherwise the Servant becomes accessory to his own
Profanation, as well as the Master that compells him. But when, as it may
sometimes happen even in Christian States, the Servant is in no capacity of
delivering himself from so great an Evil; or when (which is, God knows, the
Case but of too many) a Man falls into the Hands of Turks, who it may be will
exact a greater Service from him on that Day, than on any other: in such a
Case, there is no doubt he need not expose himself to danger, by refusing that
Service which is imposed upon him: It being not to be thought God will punish
him for those Labors, which are rather his Unhappiness than Choice, and by the
refusal whereof, he should not only not have the more freedom for Religious
Actions, but the less. It may suffice such a one to lift up his Heart to God,
which no violence of Men or Devils can restrain him from: For, as that is all
he is able to do, so it is the best part of that Worship for which the Jewish
Sabbath of old, and the Christian now, is commanded to be set apart. I will
conclude this Particular with that known Affirmation Mark 2.27.
of our Savior, That the Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the
Sabbath: For if it was made for Man, to be sure it was not meant to ruin him,
and bring upon him a greater Evil than all his Toil or Travel.

2. Of the Rest here enjoined I have spoken hitherto, and shown both what it
is, and to whom, and in what manner it appertains: It follows, that we inquire
whether either that, or the Day, admitted of any Recreation. For, as nothing
hinders, but at the same time Men might cease from Labor, and yet not cease
from Recreation; so he that shall consult either the Jewish Writers, or their
present Practice, will find them not to have understood it to have extended to
the prohibition of it. Vid. Seld. de Jure Not. and Gent. li. 3. c. 9.
Whence it is, that Lyra, a converted Jew, speaking of their permitting a
Sabbath Days Journey, alleges for the Reason of it, That such a Walk was more
a Recreation, than a Labor; for which cause it was not against the Rest
enjoined. And indeed (however some Men's Prejudices have made it otherwise
thought) neither is Recreation, provided it be moderate, any way unsuitable to
their Feasts, or ours. For, as it is but reasonable that the Body should share
with the Soul in its Joys, as well as be afflicted in its Griefs; so
Recreation, rightly disposed, may make the Mind so much the more apt to intend
the Offices of Religion. In fine, take away all Recreation, and you make the
Sabbath to afford little Refreshment to Servants, and other such Laboring
People, for whose Benefit we find it to have been in a great measure designed;
a continued Intention of Mind, especially to those who know not the pleasure of
Contemplation, being no less wearisom to the Flesh, than the Labor of the
Body. The only thing that can in reason be offered against the allowance of
Recreations, is that of Isa. chap. 58.13. where we find the doing and finding
of ones own pleasure, joined with the doing of a man's own ways, as equally
unlawful on the Sabbath. But beside that the Word we render pleasure, does also
signify Vid. Eccl. 3.1. ubi quod in Heb. (...) LXX. reddunt (...). Chald. Omni
negotto, sensu etiam id postula^te.
purpose, which, if admitted here, would convert it to another sense; beside,
secondly, that no other may be meant, than the forbidding of Pleasures in
excess, and when they are used rather to thrust out the Worship of God, than to
fit Men the better, and render them more apt for the Practice of it; both the
Chaldee Chal. pro eo quod est in Hebr. -- faciendo voluntatem tuam, -- ut non
facias necessaria tua, pro -- ab inveniendo voluntatem tuam -- neque provideas
in eo quae tibi necessaria sunt.
, and the LXX. pro -- a faciendo vias tuas, ab inveniendo voluntatem tuam, --
(...).
Septuagint, understand it of the pleasure of gain, of making provision for
their necessities and commodities. Which restriction is the rather to be
admitted, as because the Sabbath was ordained for Vid. Exodus 23.12. ubi LXX.
(...), etc.
refreshment, so because there is not the least mention elsewhere of forbidding
Recreation on it. Add hereunto, what will farther confirm the former Notion,
that of the same Prophet, verse. 3. Behold, in the day of your fast you find
pleasure, and exact all your labors. For as it is probable from what he there
subjoyns concerning the exacting of their labors, that he meant no other
pleasure than the pursuing of their profits; so, that he could not mean
pleasures, in the proper acception of the Word, the fifth Verse of the same
Chapter shows, he there intimating, that they were not wanting in afflicting
their souls, which shows they were far from finding pleasure. This only would
be added, That as Recreation, how lawful soever in it self, may upon other Days
become unlawful, according as it may happen to be circumstantiated; so it will
become so more especially upon this, if either it be unsuitable for the Kind to
the Gravity of such a Solemnity, or take up too much Time in the exercise
thereof. Upon which account, I should make no difficulty to condemn, (as the
Statute 1 Caroli, chap. 1. did) all Meetings, Assemblies, or Concourse of
People, out of their own Parishes, for any Sports or Pastimes whatsoever, or
any Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting, Enterludes, or Common Plays, within them; these
latter, as they are rarely managed without either those Vanities or Heats which
are very unsuitable to the Day, so both the one and the other being not well to
be either provided for, or attended to, (according as that Statute remarques)
without entrenching upon those Duties for which it was set apart. Besides, when
it is apparent how great the Necessities of Men's Souls are, and how little
leisure the Common sort have to consider them upon other Days; when it is
farther apparent, how ill the other Festivals of the Church are observed, and
consequently how little likelihood there is of Men's supplying those Necessities
in them, by a conscionable discharge either of Public or Private Duties of
Religion; lastly, when it is apparent how apt Men are to exceed, and, upon a
pretense of the lawfulness of Recreation on it, to convert that Day, which was
set apart for God's Service, into a Day of Sloth or Merriment; it is easy to
see how much it concerns Men to set Bounds to their Recreations on it, and
avoid a profane neglect, as well as a too nice and superstitious observation of
it.

PART IV.
By what Religious Offices the Jewish Sabbath was sanctified; which, beside the
offering of Sacrifices, and other such Legal Ministrations, are shown to have
been, the reading of the Law and the Prophets. An Explication of, and
Exhortation out of them, Praying to, and Praising God. A Transition to the
Public Sanctification of the Lord's Day, where the several Offices thereof are
commemorated, and evidenced at large, both from Scripture and Antiquity. Of
Reading the Scriptures in the Public Assemblies, and the both Necessity and
Usefulness of continuing that Practice in them. That the Reading and Hearing of
the Scriptures is no improper part of God's Worship. A Caution against those
who reject the Reading of the Scriptures, as insufficient to convert Souls unto
God. Of the Explication of the Scriptures, and Exhortations out of them. What
the Ancient Form of Sermons was, and the Usefulness of all. Concerning Prayer
and Praise, both which are at large evidenced to be Parts of the Lord's Day
Service. The vanity of those Men's Pretenses, who absent themselves from our
Public Prayers, because (as they think) they can make as good at home. The
Administration of the Lord's Supper, a great part of the Office of the Day.

3. BEING by the Order of my Discourse to inquire by what Offices the Jewish
Sabbath was, and ours is to be sanctified after its example; I must admonish
you in the general, That it is especially by such as are strictly and properly
Religious: For though God may be honored by other Offices, yet those tend more
directly toward it, and consequently also to the Sanctification of those Days
which were set apart for his Honor. Setting aside therefore, for the present,
what place other good Offices may have in it, I will make it my business to
inquire, what Religious ones were required toward the Sanctification of the
Jewish Sabbath, and what are to the Sanctification of our own.

And first of all, if the Question be concerning the Sanctification of the
Jewish Sabbath, and particularly concerning the Sanctification of it in
Public; so, beside the offering of Sacrifices, and other such Legal
Ministrations, we shall find they had,

1. The Reading of the Law and the Prophets. For that this was a great part of
the Business of their Sabbath, is evident from what was See Part 1. of the
Explic. of this Commandment.
heretofore alleged out of the Jewish Writers, and a Passage of St. James; but
may be made yet more clear from Acts 13.27. where St. Paul not only affirms
the Prophets to have been read every Sabbath Day, but makes it an aggravation
of the Jews ignorance in the matter of our Savior, concerning whom they so
clearly foretold.

2. But beside the Reading of the Law and the Prophets, which yet was always a
part of their Service, they had, at least for the most part, an Explication of
them by those who were the most eminent in Knowledge among them. And
accordingly, as we find our Savior, after the reading of a Passage in Isaiah,
proceeding to the Explication of it, Luke 4.16. so the Rulers of the Synagogue
of Antioch, after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, sending to Paul and
Barnabas, to tell them, that if they had any word of exhortation to the people,
they should say on, Acts 13.14. Agreeable hereto is a Passage of Philo,
concerning a Sect among the Jews called Essenes; to wit, Thorndike Rel.
Assembl. chapter 3. p. 60.
That coming to their Holy Places called Synagogues, they sit down in Ranks
according to Years, the Younger under the Elder, with fit decorum disposed to
hear: Then one takes the Book and reads; another of the best practiced
comes afterward, and recogniseth that which is least understood, that is,
expounds it. From all which it appears, that the Exposition of the Law and
the Prophets was a part of their Sabbath-Service, as well as the Reading of it.

3. The Case is no less plain as to the Duty of Prayer, which is one of the
most proper Acts of Divine Worship; St. Luke not only telling us of a Place
built for Prayer, but of certain of the Jewish Women also resorting to it on
the Sabbath Day; and St. Paul taking occasion from thence to open his Doctrine
to them, Acts 16.13. Which Passage is the more to be noted, because where there
were no Synagogues, yet they had their Places Grot. in Act. 16.13.
of Prayer, which shows they looked upon that as one of the more especial Parts
of God's Worship, and such as ought not to be neglected, though the Reading of
the Law and the Prophets should.

4. Again, As Prayer was a Part of the Business of the Sabbath, so also Praise
and Thanksgiving, even by the Directions of God himself. For, as we find it to
have been the Office of the Levites to stand every Morning and Evening to
thank, and particularly See the Septuag. Version of that place; and Thorndike
of Rel. Assem. c. 7. p. 219, etc.
upon the Sabbath Days, 1 Chronicles. 23.30. so the Title of 92 Psalm proclaims it
to have been made for the Sabbath Day, as you may see if you please to peruse
it. And indeed, well may we think Praising God a part of the Business of the
Sabbath, when the Sabbath it self was instituted in remembrance of the
Creation, and therein both of their own Being, and the Means which that
furnished for their Support. Such were the Offices by which the Jewish Sabbath
was to be sanctified; and not unlike, it is probable, was their way of
Sanctification of it in private: But because we have not the like Evidence for
it, we will leave Men to their own Conjectures, and pass to the Sanctification
of the Christian one; for my more orderly Explication whereof, I will consider
it, 1. As to the Public; And, 2. Then, as to more Private Concerns.


1. And, first of all, if the Question be concerning the Sanctification of it
in Public, for which both the one and the other Sabbath were chiefly
separated, so we shall find the Reading of the Scriptures to have had a place
in it, as well as in the Jewish one. It is true indeed, if we look no farther
than those slender Narrations which the New Testament gives us of the
Lord's Day Service, we shall not be able to discover any thing which may
warrant us to affirm, that the Reading of the Scriptures had any place in it:
But as that is not much to be wondered at, when we see so little there
concerning the Observation of it at all; so there want not Reasons to believe,
however there be no express mention of it, that the Reading of the Scriptures
had a part in it, even then. For, as it is not easy to suppose (especially
when there were so many newly converted Jews) that they would lightly depart
from the Custom of the Synagogue, where the Scriptures were constantly read; so
it is probable they did not, because there was the like necessity of Reading
them, that there had been in the Jewish Synagogues. For though, since Printing
came in use, the Scriptures are become more common, yet anciently they were in
few Persons hands; and consequently, if they had not been read in Public, the
generality of Christians would not have had Knowledge enough of them, to have
guided them in their Opinions and Actions. Since therefore it was but necessary
they should be read, it is but reasonable to conclude they were, especially
when we know our Savior to have exhorted to the search of them, and St. Paul
to represent them as able to make a man wise unto salvation. But it is not
only Probability we have to ground our selves upon, as to the Scriptures being
made a part of the Lord's Day Service: For though (as I said) there be no
mention of Reading them upon that Day; yet there is mention of Reading them in
their Assemblies, which that Day was set apart for the holding of. For thus,
Col. 4.16. we find St. Paul giving in charge, that when that Epistle of his had
been read amongst them, they should cause it to be read also in the Church of
the Laodiceans, and in like manner read that from Laodicea themselves. And thus
too, though with much more earnestness, he gives a Charge to the Thessalonians,
that that Epistle of his should be read unto all the holy Brethren, 1 Thessalonians.
5.27. But because Customs, like Rivers, are beheld with the greatest advantage
at some distance from the Springs from whence they flow; from the Practice of
the Church in the Apostles Times, pass we to those that immediately succeeded,
where we shall find clearer Expresses of it: For thus it is the Affirmation of
Justin Martyr (...). Apol. 2. page 98.
, one of the Ancientest Writers the Church has, That upon the day called
Sunday there was an Assembly of all that abode in the Cities, and the adjacent
Countries, where the Commentaries of the Apostles, or the Writings of the
Prophets were read, so far as Time and other Duties would give leave. Agreeable
hereunto is that of Tertullian, in Chap. 39. of his Apologetick, where speaking
of the Business of Christian Assemblies, which is principally to be understood
of those of the Lord's Day, because the Chief, he has these Words: Coimus ad
literarum divinarum commemorationem; siquid praesentium temporum qualitas aut
praemonere cogit, aut recognoscere.
We come together to the repeating of the Divine Scriptures, according as the
condition of the present Times enforces, either to forewarn, or look back. In
like manner, the same Tertullian De Anima, cap. 9. Jam vero prout Scripturae
leguntur, aut Psalmi canuntur, aut Adlocutiones proferuntur, aut Petitiones
delegantur, ita inde materiae Visionibus subministrantur.
speaking of a certain Virgin, who had Revelations during the Solemn Service of
the Lord's Day, affirms, That the matter of her Visions was ministered as the
Scriptures were read, or Psalms sung, or Exhortations produced, or Prayers
preferred. Which shows the Reading of the Scripture to have been a part of the
Public Service, and particularly of the Day of the Christian Sabbath.

Now, though what has been said, be sufficient to show the Reading of the
Scriptures to be a part of the Public Service; and as such, to be diligently
attended to: yet because some have rejected it, as of none, or of little
Edification; and others, as more proper for the Closet than the Church; I will,
before I proceed, obviate each of these Opinions, and show the groundlesness
thereof. For, be it, first, that the main Design of the Scriptures is to teach
us how to live, and particularly in reference to God; upon which account, the
Reading of them may seem rather a Means to instruct us in, than any Part of the
Worship of God: yet if it be with a regard to the Author of them, so we shall
find both the Reading and Hearing thereof to be no improper Parts of God's
Worship: He that reads or listens to them, as to the Word of God, no less
acknowledging his Authority over us, than he who either prays to, or praises
him. And accordingly, as Prayer and Praise (as being immediate Parts of God's
Worship) were always accompanied with some outward Testimony of Respect; so we
find also, that the Reading of the Law and the Prophets sometime was, as is
evident from a Passage in each Testament: The former giving us to understand,
that when Ezra opened the Book of the Law, not only he himself, but all the
People stood up, Nehem. 8.4, 5. the latter, that our Savior used the same
Posture at the Reading of the Prophet Isaiah, and sat not down till he closed
it: both the one and the other thereby declaring their Acknowledgment of his
Authority by whose Spirit each of those Books was dictated. Whilst therefore
the Scriptures are thus attended to, we do no less worship God, than learn how
to do it; and the Reading and Hearing of them, is not only the way to, but a
part of that very Worship to which it leads. But because there are some who,
though they question not the Reading of the Scriptures upon that account, yet
reject it either as unedifying, or at least not very proper for the Public
Assemblies; in stead of prosecuting the former Argument, we will consider each
of these Pretensions, and first that which excludes it as no way proper for the
Public. For, be it, which is commonly alleged, that Men may read the
Scriptures at home, as well as at the Public Assemblies: yet as there are a
great number of Men who cannot read at all, and others who have no leisure for
it, though they could, by means whereof they must have been ignorant of the
Scripture, unless God had provided for them by the Public Reading of it; so it
is apparent, that they who both can read, and have leisure for it, are too apt
to omit it, and consequently, were it not for the Public Reading of it, would
have had no farther knowledge of it, than they should have received from the
Discourses of their Instructers: By which means they might not only have
sucked in their Infirmities together with it, but sometimes also their Errors
and Extravagancies. Again, If the Scriptures had been confined to Closets, and
no more of them produced in Public, than what might serve either for the
Subject or strengthening of a Sermon, it had been no hard matter (especially
before Printing came in use) to have corrupted the Scriptures, without remedy
as to the Common sort, and made them speak, not what they ought, but what every
perfidious Heretic would have had them: for so those that are unlearned would
have had no means to inform themselves, whether that which was suggested to
them as Scripture, were genuine or no. But when the Scriptures were not only
in the hands of Private Persons, but preserved in Churches, and, which is more,
publicly read in them; as there was not the like encouragement to evil Men to
corrupt private Copies, as knowing that their Corruptions might be detected by
those Books which were in the custody of, and publicly read by the Church; so,
if they had been so bold, what was read in the Assemblies would have helped Men
to have discovered the Fraud, and preserved them from the Attaque of it. This
only would be added, That though there be not the like danger since Printing
came in use, and Men were appointed by Authority to preside over it; yet there
would be danger enough, if the same Custom were not continued, of Reading the
Scriptures in the Assemblies. For, as corrupt Copies may come abroad,
notwithstanding all the diligence of those who have the Charge of the Press;
so, if they should, the Common sort of Men would have nothing left to fence
themselves against them, if the Reading of the Scriptures were banished out of
the Assemblies. Add hereunto, which, though but an Argument ad hominem, may
perhaps prove more prevalent, than those that speak to the Thing it self; and
that is, the abhorrency that even they who would not have the Scriptures
publicly read, profess to have for the Papists robbing the People of it: For,
what do they less, who would have them banished from the Public Assemblies,
where alone the Ignorant sort are in a capacity of receiving them? So slight,
or rather so dangerous, are the Pretensions of those, who would have the
Reading of the Scriptures appropriated to Men's Closets: How much more then, the
rejecting of the Reading of them, as if, when only read, they were not able to
convert a Soul unto God? For as whatsoever force there is in Sermons, is for
the substance of them derived from the Scriptures, and therefore the Power of
converting Souls to lie chiefly there; so, if those Scriptures have not lost
their credit, as well as their converting Faculty, the bare Reading of them,
through God's Blessing, may be a means to convert Souls unto God. Otherwise,
why should God, as he did, command the Reading of the Law, that the children of
Israel might hear and learn, and fear the Lord their God, and observe to do all
the words of this Law? Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12. or St. John affirm of his Gospel, that
it was written that we might believe, and that believing we might have Life
through his Name? For, if it was written that Men might believe, there is no
doubt it is able to effect it when read, because that is enough to let Men into
the Sense of it. And indeed, as, if Sermons prove more effectual, it is
oftentimes because they are more attended to, their novelty and spruceness
engaging our attention, whilst the plainness of the other makes it less
regarded; so, if they have any advantage in themselves, it is not so much for
the Arguments they allege, which are the same in both, but by the order
wherein they are disposed, and the manner of application.

Having thus shown the Reading of the Scriptures to be one part of the Public
Service, and thereby asserted it from that Contempt into which it is now
fallen; I proceed to inquire, Whether, as in the Service of the Jewish Sabbath,
so also in the Christian, the Explication of the Scriptures is to have a part.
Now that so it is, will appear if we look into the Service of the Church, as it
was in the first Institution of it. And here, not to tell you, that the first
Account we have of the Public Service, presents us with the mention of the
Apostles Doctrine, I shall begin my Proofs with that of Acts 20.7. because
speaking of the First day of the Week, or Sunday: For there we are told, That,
among other the Exercises of that Day, the Disciples had a Sermon from that
excellent Preacher St. Paul. All the difficulty is, what kind of Sermon that
was, and whether it were not made rather in regard to his being to depart the
next day, than out of a belief of its being a Requisite of that Days Service.
But as the former will be easily voided, if we consider what he elsewhere Acts
26.22.
affirms of his Preaching, That he said no other things than the Prophets and
Moses did say should come; thereby making his Sermons but an Explication and
Confirmation of the Prophets: so, that it was in regard to the Day that he so
preached, as well as to his being to depart the next, the mention of the
Apostles Doctrine before, among the Parts of their Public Worship, as well as
the subsequent Practice of the Church, shows. If, as that Text manifestly
implies, his purpose of going away the next day had any influence upon it, it
was not so much for the producing of it at all, as for his drawing it out to
that length to which it was; and would therefore more agreeably to the Sense,
and no way dissonant to the Style of the New Testament, where such like
Trajections Vid. Knatchbull, Animadv. in Nov. Test. speciatim in Annot. ad Act.
13.27.
are used, be rendered, That on the forementioned day St. Paul preached unto
them; and, because he was to depart the next, continued his Speech until
midnight. From the Apostles Days, pass we to the subsequent Age, where again we
shall have a pregnant Proof from Justin Martyr Ibid. (...).
, who continuing his Account of the Sunday-Service, adds, That after the Reader
had done, the President or Bishop, in a set Discourse, made an Admonition and
Exhortation, to the imitation of those excellent things they had before read;
agreeably to the Customs of those Times, as Mr. Thorndike Religious Assembl.
chapter 6.
has observed, where the Sermon or Discourse was not, as now, upon any Subject
indifferently, but to the Explication and Application of that which was read in
the Assembly. From the Testimony of Justin Martyr, pass we to that of
Tertullian Apol. c. 39. Certe fidem sanctis vocibus pascimus, spem erigimus,
fiduciam figimus, disciplinam praeceptorum nihilominus inculcationibus densamus.
, where we shall find a Proof of the same usance: For after he had given an
Account of their coming together to rehearse the Scriptures, he adds, which, to
my seeming, plainly referrs to their Sermons, However, we fail not with holy
Speeches to feed Men's Faith, erect their Hope, fix their Confidence; neither
forget we in the mean time to thicken the Discipline with the frequent
inculcation of Precepts: This thickning of the Discipline with the inculcation
of Precepts, being more proper to Sermons, where there is liberty to heap up
many to the same purpose, than to the Reading of the Scriptures, which pass
from one thing to another. However it be, as it there follows, that there also
are Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes, and censura divina.
Exhortations, Castigations, and a Divine Censure; so, in the Place
before-quoted out of his Book de Anima, among the Solennia Dominica as he there
calls them, he reckons Adlocutiones, or Speeches, as distinct from the Reading
of the Scriptures. And indeed, though the Word barely read might suffice to
Edification, if it were but attended to as it ought; yet forasmuch as some Men
are dull of hearing, or rather of understanding, and a greater number are
backward to make application of it to themselves, hence it comes to pass, that,
to make them the more prevalent, it is at least very behoveful, that they to
whom the Office of Preaching is committed, not only open their Understandings
in them, but bring such things especially to their remembrance, as it most
concerns them to consider; thickning them moreover (as Tertullian speaks) by
the frequent inculcation of those several Precepts which lie dispersed in the
Scriptures. But other advantage than this, as Sermons have not above the Word
read, so to give them any other, were to set up the Compositions of Men (for
such all Sermons are) above the pure Dictates of God's Spirit.

From the Word Read or Preached, pass we to Prayer, an Office of the Jewish
Sabbath, and no less undoubtedly of the Christian: For, as in the place
before-quoted out of the Acts Act. 2.42.
, it is expressly reckoned as a Part of the Public Worship; as, before that, by
our Savior Mat. 18.19, 20.
, for one of those things in the performance whereof he would be present to
them when they met; so, that it was one main Business of the Lord's Day
Service, those very Ancient Authors before-quoted, largely show: Justin Martyr
Apol. 2. (...).
after the ending of the Sermon, mentioning their all rising up to Prayer, and
praying not only for themselves, but for all the World; of Prayer again, at
the Consecration of the Eucharist, which he moreover affirms the President or
Bishop to pour forth with all his might. In like manner Tertullian Coimus ad
deum, quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus. Haec vis Deo grata est. Oramus
etiam pro Imperatoribus, pro ministris eorum ac potestatibus, pro statu seculi,
pro rerum quiet, pro mora finis.
not only affirms the Christians to come together to God, as it were to make
up a Party, by which to besiege him with their Prayers; adding moreover, that
therein they recommended also the state of Emperors, and their Ministers: but
in the place so often quoted out of his Book de Anima, makes mention of the
preferring of Prayers, as one of the Lord's Day Solemnities. Which Testimonies
I do the rather inculcate, because though Public Prayer be one of the Chief,
and always so accounted, yet it is now neglected and contemned; upon how small
a pretense, we may easily judge, by what we often hear from some, That they can
make the same, or as good Prayers at home: For though they could, yet not with
the same advantage, either to themselves, or others, because wanting the
concurrence of the Devotion of other Men, which is that that makes Prayer so
acceptable. And I cannot but upon this occasion call to mind a Saying of
Maimonides, remembered out of him by Thorndike Rel. Assembl. chap. 6.
a Learned Man of our own Nation, to wit, That he that dwells in the City
where there is a Synagogue, and prays not there with the Congregation, this
is he that is called a Bad Neighbor. For, as he may well be called a Bad
Neighbor (as the same Learned Man goes on) that will not lend his Neighbors
Prayers the strength of his own; so he himself finds the Fruit of his own bad
Neighborhood, when his own Prayers want the assistance of his Neighbors.

Next to Prayer, subjoyn we the Duty of Praising God, whether in or out of a
Song: For that this was a part of the Public Service at the Assemblies, and
consequently of the Lord's Day, which was appointed for the holding of them,
the Scriptures do abundantly declare. For beside that St. Paul calls upon the
Colossians, that they should teach and admonish one another in Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs, Col. 3.16. it is evident from several Passages in
1 Corinthians. 14. that it was a great part of their Public Service. Thus when the
Apostle, verse. 15. and so on, says, I will sing with the spirit, and I will
sing with the understanding also. Else when thou shall bless with the spirit,
how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of
thanks? he plainly supposes, (because speaking all along of their Assemblies)
that the Blessing and Praising God in a Song, was a part of the Public Service
at them. In like manner, when he says, verse. 26. How is it then, Brethren?
when ye come together, every one has a Psalm, a Doctrine, and a Tongue, etc.
Let all things be done to edifying; though he finds fault with the disorderly
performance of those several Duties, yet he supposes them to be Duties,
because prescribing Rules for the right ordering of them. From the Times of the
Apostles, pass we to those that immediately succeeded, where we shall find yet
more express Testimonies of this being a part of their Lord's Day Service. For
thus Pliny Lib. 10. Ep. 97. Adfirmabant autem hanc fuisse summam vel culpae
suae vel erroris quod essent soliti state die ante lucem convenire, carmenque
Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem.
, giving an Account of what the Christians did upon the Set-day of their
Assemblies, which, as was before shown, could be no other than the Lord's Day,
tells us, from the mouth of some of themselves, That it was, among other
things, to say one with another, by turns, a Song or Hymn to Christ, as unto
God; thereby not only showing that to have been a part of their Public
Service, but, as a Learned Ham. Pres. to Annot. on the Psalms.
Man has well observed, confirming that way of alternate Singing, which is
still in use in the Church of England. Neither is Pliny alone in this
Testimony, either as to the Singing of Hymns upon that Day, or Singing Hymns
unto Christ, as God: For, as Tertullian expressly reckons the Singing of Psalms
among the Lord's Day Solemnities, so Eusebius Eccl. Hist. lib. 5. c. 28. (...).
alleges against those who denied the Divinity of our Savior, certain Psalms
and Songs, written anciently by the Brethren, wherein they magnified Christ as
God. It is true indeed, he says not in that place, that they were sung in the
Church, which may seem to render that Testimony so much the more defective: But
as it is evident from Tertullian Apol. c. 39. Post aquam manualem and lumina,
ut quisque de Scripturis sanctis, vel de proprio ingenio, potest, provocatur in
medium deo canere.
, that Men were invited to sing in their Assemblies, as well their own
Compositions, as those of Scripture; so Eusebius elsewhere Eccl. Hist. lib. 7.
c. 30. (...).
gives us plainly to understand, that the Psalms before spoken of were sung in
their Assemblies: He there charging Paulus Samosaetenus with causing them to
cease, and Songs in honor of himself to be sung in the Church. For how could
Paulus Samosatenus cause those Songs to cease, unless they had been publicly
sung? or, what likelihood is there, if they had not been so, that he would have
introduced Songs concerning himself? I will conclude this Particular with that
famous Canon of the Council of Laodicea Can. ult. (...), etc.
, where the Canonical Books of Scripture are enumerated: For, forbidding, as it
does, the use of such private Psalms in the Church, it shows them to have been
before in use; and much more, that the Singing unto God was.

But of all the Religious Exercises wherewith the Christian Sabbath was to be
celebrated, there is certainly none which has more to be said for it, than the
Administration of the Lord's Supper, that real Thanksgiving and Praise of the
Almighty, for the Blessings of the Creation, but more particularly for the
Death of our Savior. For, as we find it to have been the Attendant of the
Public Assemblies of the Christians, both in the Acts, and in the First
Epistle to the Corinthians; so, to be so much a part of the Lord's-days
Business, as to be set to denote the whole: St. Luke, Acts 20.7. making the end
of the Disciples meeting together upon the First day of the Week, to be to
break Bread, that is to say, as the Syriack interprets it, the Bread of the
Eucharist. Agreeable hereto is that of Pliny Ibid. Seque sacramento non in
scelus aliquod obstringere, sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria
committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum appellati negarent.
, in the Testimony so often produced, he there telling us, That upon the
Set-day spoken of before, they obliged themselves by a Sacrament, not to any
wickedness, but that they would not commit Thefts, (...) ^^ries, Adulteries,
etc. Which (as has been before shown) (...) be understood of any other than
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which we know to be an Obligation to that
purpose. And though it be true, that Tertullian makes no mention of it in his
Apologetick, probably because it was not his purpose to make known the manner
of it to the Heathen, lest the misunderstanding of it should bring it into
contempt; yet, as in his Book de Corona militis Cap. 3. Eucharistiae
Sacramentum, and in tempore victus and omnibus mandatum a Domino, etiam
antelucanis coetibus, nec de aliorum manu, quam praefidentium sumimus.
, he mentions it as a part of the Business of those Assemblies before day,
whereof we have mention in Pliny; so Justin Martyr Vid. Apol. 2. loco prius
citato.
not only mentions it as a part of the Lord's Day Service, but describes the
Manner of the Celebration of it. From all which put together, it is evident, I
do not say, how much we have departed from the Devotion of the Apostles Times,
and those that succeeded; but even from the due Observation of that Day which
we pretend to keep as Holy unto the Lord.

PART V.
An History of the due Observation of the Lord's Day, both in Private and
Public: Where, among other things, is shown the Excellency of our Churches
Service, and with what Affections it ought to be intended; the unsuitableness
of Fasting to so joyful a Solemnity, and the great inconvenience that must
necessarily ensue from the not relaxing of our Intentions: In fine, The both
necessity and benefit of Meditating upon what we have heard, and applying it to
our own Souls. That the Visiting and Comforting of the Sick and Distressed, the
Reconciling of Parties that are at variance, and the begetting or maintaining
Friendship, by kind and neighbourly Entertainments, are no improper Offices of
the Day.

2. BY what Public Exercises of Religion the Christian Sabbath is to be
celebrated, has been at large declared, both from the Precepts and Practice of
the Apostles: It remains, that we inquire how it is to be sanctified in
Private, which is a Duty no less incumbent upon us, than the former. For the
multitude of our Affairs not permitting us on other Days to intend the Matters
of Religion with that freedom and solemnity which becomes them, there arises a
necessity, when we have both leisure, and so fair an Invitation to it, to apply
our selves to the performance of it, and supply those Defects which the
Necessities of the World have made. Taking it therefore for granted, that such
a Sanctification is required, I will make it my business to inquire wherein it
does consist, and what particular Duties it exacts. Only because I have not
told you how we are to intend the Public Exercises of Religion, I will mix
that with the Consideration of the other, and so give you a kind of History of
the due Observation of the Day.

The Lord's Day saluting our Horizon, and admonishing us both of the Blessings
and Duties which it brings; it is but reasonable, where the Labors of the
foregoing Day have not made it necessary to do otherwise, that we should be up
betimes to meet them, and pay them that Regard which they deserve; as
remembering, that the Christian Sabbath is rather a Day of Business, than of
Rest, though of an easy and a gracious one. Now the first Business that
presents it self on that Sacred Day, is the offering up our Sacrifice of Praise
for the Resurrection of our Lord, and the Opportunity we our selves have to
celebrate it. And herein it becomes us to be so much the more hearty, because
it is the Ground of its Institution, and that which gives it both its Being,
and its Name. Next to the Sacrifice of Praise, subjoyn we that of Prayer for
the Assistance of God in the due Celebration of it; not only our own unaptness
so requiring, but the importance of the Business we are to intend, and
particularly of the Public one. For now we are not, as upon other Days, barely
to worship God, but to do it with a more than ordinary fervor, as being
thereby to supply the Defects of our past Piety, and lay a firm foundation of
our future one. The Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise being thus offered up to
God, and thereby an entrance made into the Sanctification of the Day, there is
then place for those Businesses which our own Necessities or Conveniences
invite to the performance of; but so, as that we remember we have a weightier
Business to intend, and particularly our looking back into our past Impieties:
For inasmuch as we are assured that God hears not sinners, such I mean who
continue in them without remorse, we are in reason, before we address our
selves to the Duty of Public Prayer, to break off our sins by repentance, and,
like the Prophet Moses, to put off our shoes before we tread upon holy ground.
Not that it were not convenient that this should be done at other times, and we
to inquire every Night (as Pythagoras his Scholars were obliged) (...); Wherein
have I offended? what good have I done, and what omitted? and accordingly, as
that Philosopher (...). Vid. Pythag. (...).
advises, either to afflict, or cheer our selves: But that, howsoever it
should, either through the necessity of our Affairs, or inadvertency, be
omitted at other times, we should not fail to do it then, when we are to
address our selves to Public Prayer, by which, if by any thing, we must hope
to obtain God's Favor.

Imagine now the Bell calling you to the Public Assemblies; or rather, because
both the Jewish Sabbath and ours was instituted for the holding of them, that
you hear God himself doing it: In answer to which Call, you are to bring both
your selves and your Dependents, and that too at the Beginning of God's Public
Worship. The former, because though other Persons may sanctify the Sabbath by
their own single Piety; yet they who have Children and Servants, are to see to
the Observation of it in them, as being under their direction and command:
Though, were they not so obliged, the Advantage that might arise from the doing
of it, might be a sufficient inducement to endeavor it; that which made
Abraham so great a Confident of God, being, that God knew he would command his
children, and his household after him, to keep the way of the Lord, as you may
see Genesis 18.19. But neither is there less reason that the Beginning of God's
Service should have both their Company and ours, than there is that it should
have it at all; an imperfect Service arguing a slight esteem of him, and that
we are no farther his Servants than we our selves please: And it calls to my
mind that Expostulation of God in Malachi, chap. 1.8. And if ye offer the blind
for sacrifice is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not
evil? Offer it now unto thy Governor: Will he be pleased with thee, or accept
thy person, says the Lord of hosts? For what is that, but a blind and a lame
Service, where it may be the best part of it is wanting? or, how can we think
God will be pleased with that which an Earthly Prince would disdain to accept?
We may suppose, by this time, the Man who desires to sanctify the Lord's Day
aright, entered the Church; where having prostrated himself before the Divine
Majesty, and implored his Blessing upon his Endeavors, he will need little
other direction than to mind that which he comes about, and not either drowsily
or irreverently to perform it: Only, that I may set the better edge upon his
Devotions, I will apply my Instructions to some of those particular Duties
which the Day, and the Order of our Service does require. With admirable reason
does our Church, and almost Thorndike Rel. Assembl. chapter 10.
all the Reformed ones, begin their Service with Confession of Sins, as knowing
how likely they are, whilst thus bewailed, to separate between us and God: And
there is the same reason we should bring to the Rehearsing of it, that due
Remorse and Sorrow which the consideration of our several Offenses call for;
otherwise we rather dare God to avenge himself upon us, than take the way to
appease or please him. But when we, who are vile enough in the eyes of God,
make our selves such both in our own esteem and expression; when we frankly lay
open the Errors we have committed, and acknowledge them to be such, by our
inward Contrition, and outward Sorrow; then our Confession is no less sure to
be followed by the Absolution of God, than it is by that of the Priest; or
rather, that God will confirm that which the Priest pronounces: it being not
certainly for nothing, that our Savior has said, Whosesoever sins ye remit,
they are remitted; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained. From the
Confession and Absolution, pass we to the Lord's Prayer, according as our
Liturgy does; in the Repetition whereof, there is but reason we should rally
together all the Forces of our Soul, and intend it with all our Heart and
Strength; I say, not only in respect of its Author (though that certainly
should procure its Regard) but in respect of its signal Use and Advantage. For
whereas in our other Prayers we may ask amiss, whether in respect of the Things
themselves, or the Order of our Petitions; here we are sure not to offend,
because the Prayer we so utter contains all that is to be desired, and in that
manner and order wherein it ought. Again, whereas in the long continuance of
our Devotions, our Thoughts may be apt to flag, or wander from that Subject
which they have before them, we have an opporunity to make some amends for it,
by intending this excellent Prayer, wherein all those Petitions are summed up.
The Mind being thus prepared by Confession of Sin, and the Devotion which the
forementioned Prayer suggests, it may not be unsuitable for us to sound forth
the Praises of God, which is the next thing the Liturgy suggests. For though
the Psalms which it makes use of for this purpose, are generally read, and
therefore looked upon by some as only matter of Instruction: yet as care has
been taken that they should be sung where they may be, which shows for what use
they were designed; so it is apparent from the Psalms themselves, that they
were intended not so much to instruct us, as to be Instruments in praising God
for the several Blessings they commemorate. And indeed, as its Strains are all
admirable, and worthy that Spirit by which they were first suggested; so they
are fraught with such variety of Matter, that there is no State or Condition of
Life which may not find somewhat in them suitable to it. If we lie under the
Conscience of Sin, the 51 Psalm will fit us, as containing both an ingenuous
Acknowledgment of it, and an earnest Prayer for the Pardon of it. If we find in
our selves that Pardon, the 32. will be a fit matter for our Devotion, because
composed by David after an Absolution from his. If we lie under any Sorrow, by
reason of the Prosperity of the Ungodly, we have the 72 Psalm to entertain us,
the Subject whereof is no other than to show both the certainty and suddenness
of their downfall. If we have received any great Deliverance from them, the
Eighteenth will furnish us with Words to express our Resentment of it, as being
David's Triumphant Song, when God had given him rest from his. In fine,
whatever it be, here our Condition may be fitted, from the sorest Evils we lie
under, to the greatest Blessings we are in a capacity to enjoy. Neither will it
suffice to say, That each particular Psalm cannot fit all the Conditions before
remembered: For, as it is not to be expected that they should, so an Advantage
may be made of them, even by those States and Conditions with which they seem
but ill to accord. Thus, for example, if the Psalm be a Psalm of Joy and
Thanksgiving, and it may be too for those very Mercies under the want whereof
thou now labourest; yet being agreeable enough to the Condition of other Men,
thy Charity will teach thee how to make use of it, by prompting thee to rejoice
with those to whom it is more accommodable. In like manner, though the Psalm
should spend it self in Complaints, which thou, through the Mercy of God,
find little cause for; yet so long as there want not such to whose Condition
they are agreeable enough, there is place for the same Charity, and an
Invitation to mourn with and for them. Which Answer is of so much the more
force, because we are not now entreating of Private Worship, which, as much as
may be, ought to be adapted to our own particular Concerns; but of the Public
Worship of God, which is to extend it self to the Concernments of all. As
little ground of Exception is there against the use of the Magnificat, because
in the strictness thereof proper to her that made it: For, beside that the
Repetition of it is one of the most signal Completions of all Generations
calling her Blessed, according as she there foretold, each of us has so much
Interest in the Birth of our Savior, especially if he be also born in us, that
it can be no way improper to say, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit
has rejoiced in God my Savior. If there be any thing in that, or other the
like Psalms, peculiar to the Makers of them, it will be no hard matter for a
diligent Observer so to accommodate them to himself, as to make them fit his
Mouth, provided he take care to suit his Heart to them, and to that Heavenly
Spirit wherewith they were framed. Sure I am, what is now thought an Objection
against them, was not thought so by St. James, or St. Paul; the former whereof
invites to the Private Singing, the latter to the Teaching and Admonishing one
another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs: For what other Psalms can
we think intended, than those of David, which before and since that time have
in a manner appropriated that Title unto themselves? I will conclude this
Particular with that Doxologie wherewith they are closed, of giving Glory to
each Person in the Trinity: For whilst we thus direct them to the Son, and to
the Holy Ghost, as well as to the Father, we fit them yet more to our Mouths,
because making them to proclaim the Honor of our Savior, and of that Spirit
which he has poured out upon his Church. Such are our Concernments in the
Duties before remembered; and not unlike are those, in the Duties that remain:
and therefore, in stead of prosecuting them any further, I shall subjoyn this
general Advertisement, which each one may make use of as occasion requires; to
wit, That as the Remainder of our Service does ordinarily consist in Reading,
or Preaching the Word, in Confession of Faith, and in Prayer; so Men will
satisfy the first by a diligent and affectionate Intention; the second, by a
Resolution to adhere to that Faith which they profess; and the third and last,
by a hearty and fervent Devotion.

The Morning-Sacrifice being thus offered up to God, Custom, and our own
Necessities license us to retire to our own Homes, there to give our selves
that Repast, and other Relaxation, that is due. Which Particulars I the rather
allege, to confront the Practice of some Men, whom Superstition, more than any
well-guided Zeal, has influenced. For is it any other, to turn a Festival into
a Fast, and keep that Day as a Day of Humiliation, which was the happy Parent
of the greatest Joy? Nay, is it not in some measure an Affront to that Blessed
Work, by which it became separate from others? For, if that were a matter of
rejoicing, why should we make it a matter of Sorrow? and when God calls so
loudly to Joy and Gladness, present him with all the Expressions of Grief? And
it calls to my mind that known Passage of the Book of Nehemiah, where the
People of Israel wept sore at the hearing of the Law: for, in stead of
encouraging them in it, Ezra, who read the Law, bad them go their way, eat the
fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions to them for whom nothing was
prepared, because that day was holy to the Lord, Nehem. 8.9. plainly
intimating, that such a Return was no way becoming a Day of Gladness; and if
so, neither a Christian one. Sure I am, as the Ancient Church Tertull. de
Corona. Die Dominico jejunium nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare.
religiously abstained from fasting on the Lord's Day, as no way suitable to
the Business of it; so the Apostles, and the Church in their time, not only
held their Lord's Supper on it, but those Feasts of Charity also which were the
Attendants of it. But neither is it less unreasonable, if Men would consider it
without prejudice, to enjoin Men so to keep up their Intention of Sacred
Things, as not to allow a Relaxation of it at their Meals. For, as it is
absolutely impossible, so long as we carry about us the Infirmities of Humane
Nature, to have our Thoughts always fixed upon Heaven, and Heavenly Things; so,
by imposing it either upon our selves, or others, we make our selves the more
unapt for the Public Worship of God, when we are called to the Celebration of
it: our preceding Intention taking off from that Vigor and Spriteliness which
is requisite to the performance of it. On the contrary, if we would but for
some time unbend our Cares, or divert them to less serious purposes, like those
who run back to make the more advantageous Leap, we should come on with the
greater vigor, and not only not dishonor this Sacred Day, but sanctify it
the more.

Having thus given our selves some respite from Religious Exercises, and
thereby fitted our selves for the more advantageous performance of it, it will
be time for us both to look back to the Duties we have passed, and forward to
the Duties that remain: the former, that if any thing have been amiss in them,
we may retract and bewail it; the latter, that we may come prepared to the due
performance of them. But of all the Duties that are to take up our Thoughts,
between the Morning and the Evening Sacrifice, there is none which is more
incumbent on us, than a serious Reflection upon those we have received from the
Mouth of our Instructor: For, as otherwise they will be apt to slip out of our
Minds, and thereby deprive us of those Advantages which might otherwise accrue,
so, unless we meditate upon them, like Meat unchew'd, they will contribute
little to our Nourishment, in those Spiritual Graces wherein we are to grow.
From a Reflection upon what is past, pass we to a Consideration of that which is
to come, even those several Public Duties we are again to pass: Where, setting
aside all other Thoughts, we should endeavor to imprint in our Minds how much
it concerns us to intend them: For, as by so doing we should be the more
excited to implore the Divine Assistance, without which it is impossible to be
done, so we should be much more apt to pay them that Regard which the
Importance thereof does require: It being no slight Consideration, where it is
well inculcated, that our Eternal Welfare does depend upon it, and that, as we
observe this Temporal Sabbath, we may either attain, or come short of that
Eternal Sabbath in the Heavens. For, as there is no doubt our Eternal Welfare
depends upon the performance of Religious Actions, and particularly of those
wherein the Honor of God is immediately concerned; so there will be little
likelihood of our intending them at other times, if we slight them over then,
when we have both leisure, and all other requisite means, to help us in the
performance of them. By these, and such like Considerations, if we arm our
selves, we shall be in a good disposition to offer up the Evening-Sacrifice;
which supposed, we shall neither need any Incitement to the performance of it,
nor Direction after what manner we are to doit; it being not hard, especially
after what was said concerning the Morning-Service, to read our own
Qualifications in those Duties which we are summoned to perform.

Suppose we now, having laid down Rules for the Observation of it so far, that
the Religious Man has assisted at the Evening Sacrifice, and thereby acquitted
himself of the Public Duties of the Day; yet, even so, there will not want
wherewith to exercise himself, till he commit himself to his Rest, and unto
God. Not but that there is place for necessary Occasions, and a moderate
Relaxation of himself; but that his Heart ought to be in a disposition to
embrace all Occasions to do Honor to God, and to the Day. Among which, I
reckon chiefly the Meditating upon what he has heard, and Applying it to his
own Soul; it being for want of this, that so many Souls perish, which might
otherwise have proved glorified ones. They hear indeed what they ought, and
what they ought not to do; they listen to the Judgments which God denounces
against the one, to the Promises whereby he encourages the performance of the
other: but taking no care afterward to consider how far they are concerned in
either, both the one and the other quickly vanish, and they go on as securely,
as if they had nothing to fault in themselves, or there were no other World to
punish them, though they had. But not any longer to entertain the Mind of the
Religious Man with such Things wherein God's Glory is immediately concerned,
let us see whether he may not find Matter enough for his Lord's Day Service in
visiting the fatherless and widows in their affliction, in which St. James
makes Religion in part to consist: For though it be true, that those are no
part of the Worship of God or Christ, for which especially this Day is set
apart; yet they draw so near toward it, that they may not only be thought to
be a part of the Business of it, but a considerable one; our Savior having
told us, that what is done unto the Sick and the Distressed, he takes as done
unto himself. And accordingly, as Justin Martyr Apol. 2. p. 98. (...).
tells us, that Charity had a constant place even in their Public Assemblies
upon it, the Rich, according as they saw good, contributing to that Stock out
of which the Poor and the Necessitous were to be relieved; so, that that and
other such like Works were no way improper to the Day, St. Paul shows, where he
commands the Corinthians, as he had before the Churches of Galatia, to lay by
them on that day, as God had prosper'd them, toward the relief of the poor
Saints at Jerusalem. The same is to be said of reconciling Parties at variance,
of endeavoring to beget or maintain Friendship, as by other ways, so by a kind
and neighbourly treating of each other; witness those Feasts of Charity of
which St. Jude speaks, which were anciently an Appendix of the Lord's Supper,
as that was of this Sacred Day. Care only would be taken, that whilst these
have their due Regard, we forget not those higher Purposes for which the Day
was set apart; such as are the Reading of the Scriptures, and other such Books
of Instruction and Devotion; our instilling into those who are under our
respective Charges, the Precepts of a Holy Life; and, in fine, the Commending
both of our selves and them, by Prayer, to the Protection of that God to whose
Service this Day was set apart.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE EXPLICATION OF THE FOLLOWING Commandments.

IN A DISCOURSE Concerning that Most Excellent RULE OF Life and Manners, Which
prescribes The doing as we would be done by; And is moreover Represented by OUR
SAVIOR AS The LAW and the PROPHETS.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, at the Bell in St Paul's Churchyard.
M.DC.LXXV.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE EXPLICATION OF THE FOLLOWING COMMANDMENTS. In a
DISCOURSE concerning that Most Excellent RULE of Life and Manners, Which
prescribes The doing as we would be done by.
The Contents.
Of the Nature of the present Rule, and that it is neither the Primary, nor an
Absolute Rule of Humane Actions. The former hereof evidenced from our Savior's
recommending it as the Sum of the Law and the Prophets; but, more especially,
from that Divine Law's being the Primary Rule of them: The latter, from the
possibility of our Desires becoming irregular, and so far therefore no
legitimate Measure of our Actions. Inquiry is next made into the Sense and
Importance of it; where is shown, first, both from the Nature of the Rule, and
particular Instances, That we are to understand thereby The doing unto others
what we our selves can lawfully desire to be done unto our selves by them. An
Objection against this Limitation, answered. It is shown, secondly, That we are
to understand by it, The doing unto others what we should desire to be done
unto our selves, if we were in their place and condition: As, thirdly, That we
should do to others what we should desire to be done unto our selves, by those
particular Persons, or any other. A Transition to the Consideration of the
Equitableness thereof; which is evinced, first, from the Reputation it has
either procured to it self, or met with among Natural Men; from its being so
esteemed of even by those who do most transgress it; and from the Equality of
all Men, both in their Nature, and Obligation to the Divine Laws. Of the
Comprehensiveness of the present Rule, and in what sense it may be affirmed to
be the Law and the Prophets. In order whereunto, is shown, first, That it is
not to be understood as an Abstract of that Part of the Law and the Prophets
which contains our Duty to God, as which the present Rule is neither any proper
Measure of, nor intended by our Savior as such: Secondly, That it comprehends
in it the whole of our Duty to our Neighbor, and particularly all those which
are comprised in the following Commandments. A Conclusion of the whole, with a
Reflection upon that more usual Rule of Humane Actions, even of doing to Men as
they have done to us; the Iniquity whereof is noted, and censured.

THOUGH Abridgments, where they are rightly ordered, do only pare off
unnecessary Things, and, like Pictures in little, present us with all the
Lineaments of that Work they pretend to abridge, without taking notice of its
Dress, or the Embellishments thereof: yet they are for the most part so ill
managed, that they do rather maim than contract it; and, in stead of giving us
a just Prospect of the Whole, present us with no one Part entire. But as we
cannot lightly presume those Abridgments to be such, which have the Wisdom of
the Father for their Author; so, if we carefully survey the Abridgment that is
now before us, we shall find it to be as comprehensive as our Savior has
represented it, and not only a Compendium of, but the very Law and the
Prophets: There being no one Precept of the Second Table, to which this Great
Rule of Life and Manners will not reach, and lead us both to understand and
practice. Only as in reason Men ought to have a distinct knowledge of the Rule
it self, before they proceed to consider it as the Abstract of others; so I
intend accordingly to inquire into its Nature, Importance, and Equity, before I
attempt to show the Comprehensiveness thereof.

1. primary Rule of Humane Actions, is evident both from that Argument whereby
our Savior has enforced it, and the Measure from which Humane Actions receive
their Rectitude or Obliquity: For our Savior pressing upon his Disciples The
doing as they would be done by, upon the score of its being the Sum of what the
Law and the Prophets taught, he gives us thereby to understand, That the Law
and the Prophets are the Measure of that also, no less than of our Conversation
and Obedience. And though, to Minds not prepossessed, this one Consideration
might suffice to persuade, that the Rule now before us is no Primary Rule of
Humane Actions; yet I cannot forbear to say, it will become much more apparent,
if we consider from whence Humane Actions receive their respective Rectitude or
Obliquity. For receiving both their Denomination and Quality from the Law and
Will of God, to whom, as being our Lord and Maker, we are in reason to conform;
the doing as we would be done by, can be no farther a Rule of our Deportment,
than as those Desires of ours shall appear to be conformable to his Laws, and
consequently those Laws of his, and not our own Desires, the Primary Rule of
Humane Actions. Of what use this Observation is, will hereafter appear more
clearly, when I come to declare the due Importance of the Rule now before us:
It may suffice here to note, That, being no Primary Rule of Humane Actions, it
cannot have place but either in the want of some express Law, or where we are
under any prejudices against it. For, the Law and Will of God being the Primary
Rule of Humane Actions, there is no doubt but, if that give us information, we
ought to be guided by it, and not seek direction elsewhere: Otherwise we do
like those who take directions from a Clock, at the same that the Sun stares
them in the Face, and, by a Language that is easy to be understood, calls upon
them to look up to him, or upon those Dials whereon he shines: For, as it would
be absurd for any Man to take his Directions from such Helps, when he may know
the Hour of the Day from the other; so it would be no less for us to
investigate our Duty to our Neighbor, by what we our selves would desire to be
done to us, when at the same time we may read that Duty in God's express
Declarations concerning it. Only, as it may sometime happen, (and I wish I
could say it does not often do so) that what is clearly enough revealed, may
yet be obscure to us, or at least difficult to be practiced, through the
Prejudices we have against it; so, in that case, I should no way doubt the
forementioned Rule may be made use of to instruct us in our Deportment to our
Neighbor: He who in such a case considers, what he himself could be content to
have done unto himself, if he were in the same Circumstances with his
Neighbor, making use of it, not so much to detract from the Honor of the
Primary Rule of Virtue (which, so far as he understands it) he fails not to
consider) but in compliance with his own Infirmities, and that he may be the
more easily induced to yield Obedience to it; Men being more apt to see what is
just and equitable, when their own Concernments are interwoven with it, than
they are in the condition of a Stranger.

2. It is to be observed, secondly, That as to do as we would be done by, is no
Primary Rule of Humane Actions; so neither is it, though in a secondary sense,
an absolute and unlimited one: Because, though we cannot desire any thing which
comes not unto us under the notion of Good, yet we may take that for Good which
is far from being such, and consequently make it the Object of our Desires.
For, what through the weakness, or rather crazedness of our Understandings;
what through the Power our Affections have to corrupt and debauch their
Sentence, it happens not infrequently, that even these also do (...), and
prophecy rather what is suitable to the corrupt temper of those that ask, than
what is agreeable to Truth and Equity. Upon which, as there will necessarily
follow a like Irregularity in our Desires, because molded and fashioned by our
Understandings; so those Desires of ours therefore can no more be an absolute
Rule of our Deportment, than they can be supposed to be the Primary one. But
from hence it will also follow, that when we make the present Rule our own, we
understand the doing unto others as we our selves can fairly desire to have
done unto us by others. For, to do as we would be done by, being not the
Primary Rule of Humane Actions, nor yet an absolute and unlimited one, it is in
reason to be bounded by that Law of God which is the Primary Rule both of our
Desires and Actions, and therefore also the Measure of this Rule, no less than
of our Conversation and Obedience.

It being thus evident of what nature the Rule before us is, due Importance of
it. Where,

1. First, The Premises so persuading, we are necessarily to understand the
doing unto others what we our selves can Lawfully desire to be done unto our
selves by them: For if our desires be irregular, those Actions will be also
such which receive their Measure from them, and consequently cannot be supposed
to be any part of our Savior's meaning. Thus, for instance, if a Woman should
consent to comply with another Lust, upon the score of her own desiring that
that other should so comply with hers, we are not to think that Action of hers
to be therefore legitimate, or indeed to admit of any Excuse; because her
Desire being sinful, that Action must also be so, which is influenced and
directed by it. In like manner, if it should be pleaded, as it sometimes is by
those who call for Liberty of Conscience, That we our selves, if we were in
their Circumstances, would not be well pleased to be restrained; I should think
it no hard matter to prescribe against that Plea, from the Limitation before
laid down: For, the Question is not, Whether we our selves, if we were in their
Circumstances, should not desire a freedom from Punishment, (for what
Malefactor does not, how obnoxious soever to the stroke of it?) but, Whether we
can lawfully desire it, and whether the Supreme Magistrate ought not to punish
those who seem to him to transgress the Rules of Christianity, whatsoever their
Pretenses be? Which, if true, that other Plea will come to nothing. For, as it
cease not to be lawful for the Magistrate to inflict a Punishment upon
Malefactors, because it is not unlikely that, if he were in their Condition, he
would not be overwilling to suffer it; so, neither for the same Person,
supposing as was before supposed, to restrain those who live in disobedience to
the Laws of Christianity, because if he were so affected, he would be desirous
to be freed from it. It is indeed an excellent Rule to do as we would be done
by; it is of great advantage to the right ordering of our Lives, and of like
necessity to be considered: But as it is not either the Primary, or an Absolute
Rule of Humane Actions; so, there is no doubt it is a much more excellent Rule,
to do to other Men what God has particularly directed us to do, and what we
our selves, if we were well advised, would desire they should do to us. This
only would be added, That when I say, we are to understand by doing as we
would be done by, the doing what we our selves can lawfully desire to be done
unto us by others, we understand this Limitation only where some particular
Rule may appear to judge of the Lawfulness of the Action by: For though there
may, and no doubt ought to be place for the consideration of the Lawfulness of
our Desire, where any such Rule appears; yet there is no necessity at all for
such a Consideration, where no such particular Rule appears: partly, because
in that case we may reasonably presume the Desire to be lawful, and therefore
need not make any scrupulous Inquisition into it; and partly because the Rule
now before us having place especially in the want of a more particular one, it
is in reason to have its full force in the directing of our Actions, where no
such particular Law appears to control it.

But because it may be said, That, if the foresaid Limitation be at all
admitted, the Rule we have now before us will be so far forth of no use; it
seeming as easy to discover what we ought to do unto others, as what we may
lawfully desire to have done unto our selves: Therefore, before I proceed to
any new Limitations, I will endeavor to remove that Umbrage, which the
following Considerations will effect. For, though it may be as easy in it self
to discover what we ought to do unto others, as what we may lawfully desire to
have done unto our selves; yet it is not so, considering the Prejudices we lie
under against the Improvement of their Happiness: what we do toward the
Improvement of their Happiness, for the most part detracting from our own, and
therefore not likely to be very favorably considered by us. Again, Though it
should be as easy to discover what we ought to do to others, as what we our
selves may lawfully desire from them; yet will not the former Discovery be of
equal force to incline us to the doing of it: because, whilst that has mere
Duty to bind it on us, this has Self-interest also to recommend it, which is
one of the most potent Incentives to Obedience. And indeed, as Experience
shows, that we do never with greater advantage consider the Concernments of
other Men, than when we do consider what we in the like case should desire to
be done unto our selves; so we do not infrequently take that course, not so
much to satisfy our selves concerning our Duty to them (as, which is
oftentimes apparent enough) but the better to inculcate the Practice thereof
upon us. In which case, the bounding of our Duty to our Neighbor, by what we
our selves may lawfully desire, will be no hinderance to its use; because there
can be no doubt, that what we ought to do unto others, may lawfully enough be
desired by our selves. Thus, without leaving the Rule in that generality
wherein it is delivered, it may be of signal use to us in directing our
Deportment to our Neighbor; he who makes his Neighbor's Case his own, as the
present Rule obliges, being both most likely to discern the Equitableness of
what he demands, and most likely to be prevailed upon to comply with it.

2. I observe, secondly, That when question is made concerning the Importance
of the present Rule, we are to understand the doing unto others what we would
should be done to us if we were in their place and condition. For, it being
manifestly its intention, that we should take our measure of doing to others,
from what we our selves should desire to have done unto our selves; it does
consequently suppose, that their Case and ours be brought to an equality,
because otherwise there could be no equality in the Measure. Thus, for example,
if a Man be well provided of this Worlds Goods, and consequently neither
needs nor desires to borrow ought from others; yet it will not follow from
thence, that he may lawfully hold his hand from the dispensing of those Goods
to the Necessitous: because the Question is not, Whether a Rich Man, as such,
would content himself without any Contribution from others; but, Whether or no
he would be so contented, if his Case were as necessitous as theirs, who
address themselves to him for Relief. On the other side, if a Man be of mean
and private Condition, and agreeably thereto content himself with it, and
neither aspire after Honor and Obedience from others; yet it will not follow
from thence, that he may withhold that Respect and Obedience from those who are
his Superiors in Birth or Place: because, the Question is not, Whether, under
the present Circumstances, he can content himself without them; but, Whether,
if he were in the Quality and Condition of those that are above him, he would
not expect that Respect and Obedience which is due to their Place and Birth. A
thing which is not hard to be divined by those who have seen the World, or made
any Observations in that Part of it in which they live themselves. For thus we
have seen Men, who, when low, walked with down-cast Looks, and breathed nothing
but Mortification and Self-denial; but being advanced to Places of Eminency,
looked as high as those whom they before condemned, and called for that Respect
and Obedience which before they thought it so indifferent to show.

3. Lastly, When it is said, (for so our Savior, whose this Rule is, has
expressed it) Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you do ye also to them;
the meaning thereof is not, Whatsoever ye would that this or that particular
Person should do to you, do you also to those particular Persons; but,
Whatsoever you would should be done to you by whomsoever, do you also do to all
in the like Circumstances. For, the force of our Savior's Words consisting in
this, that we should make our own Desires the Rule of our Deportment unto
others, it matters not whether we desire the Thing in question of this or that
particular Person, so we desire it at all under the same Condition. And
therefore, if there be any so fond, as not to afford Relief to a distressed
Enemy, because he himself would, it may be, be so haughty as not to desire it
from any such, he is not therefore to think himself to be disobliged from this
Rule of doing as he would be done by: For if he could not but desire to be
relieved under the same distressed Condition, the Rule obliges to the
affording of it, because making our own Desires to be the Measure of giving
unto others. And more than this I shall not need to say concerning the
Importance of the present Rule, and may therefore go on to show the Equity
thereof, the third Thing proposed to be discoursed of.

Now the first thing that I shall allege for the Equity of this Rule,
Reputation it has either procured to it self, or met with among Natural Men,
and such as had no other Light than their own Reason to direct them. For,
though it be apparent, that the Heathen borrowed many of their Sayings from the
Scriptures, and we therefore not lightly to look upon every thing that
proceeds from them, as a pure Dictate of Reason and Nature; yet I know not
how we can avoid the looking upon this Rule as such, because used by a Heathen
long before our Savior's time, and indeed before there was any clear mention
of it in the Scripture. For thus we are told by Diogenes Laertius Lib. 5. in
vita Arist. (...).
, of Aristotle, That when he was asked how we ought to carry our selves toward
our Friends, he made answer, That we are so to carry our selves toward them,
as we our selves could wish they should carry themselves to us. And though the
Emperor Severus, who had this Saying often in his Mouth, Whatsoever thou
would not should be done unto thy self, do not thou unto another; though he,
I say, be known to have borrowed that Saying either from the Jews, or
Christians; yet the great esteem he, though a Heathen, had of it, showed that
it was agreeable to Reason; and though his own Understanding helped him not to
discover it, yet it taught him to approve it.

I allege, secondly, (For in things of this nature such kind of Proofs are
allowable, partly because things so clear will hardly admit of any other Proof,
and partly because the last Appeal in things of Reason and Morality, must be
made to the Consciences and Persuasions of Men.) I allege, I say, for the
Equitableness of the present Rule, That it is so esteemed of by all sorts of
Persons, yea even by those who do most transgress it. For, as Tertullian De
testimoni^ animae, cap. 2.
concluded it to be the Testimony of a Soul naturally Christian, That there is
but One True God, because they who worshipped Many, could not yet forbear, in
their common Discourse, to say, God grant, and If God will, and God sees all
things; so may we, That this Precept is a Dictate of Nature; because even those
who transgress it themselves, do yet acknowledge the Equity thereof. For though
in the Concernments of others, such Persons cannot, or will not see it; yet
when the Tables come to be turned, and their Adversaries deal more harshly with
them than they think themselves to have deserved, there is nothing more usual
than to object, That they themselves would not be contented to be so used, if
they were in the same Circumstances with them.

Lastly, (For I am unwilling to let any thing pass without a more direct Proof,
which may be supposed to be capable thereof.) I allege for the Equity of the
present Rule, the Equality of all Men, both in their Nature, and Obligation to
the Divine Laws. For, being there is no difference between one Man and another
in their Nature, and much less in their Obligation to the Divine Laws; being
whatsoever difference there is between us in Condition, is by God's setting one
above another, and placing him in a higher State and Degree: if, that
Difference set apart, as the present Rule supposes, and the Change that
happens in Humane Affairs obliges us to do; if, I say, that Difference set
apart, I could not but desire, that he who is better furnished with this Worlds
Goods, should afford some Relief to me in my necessity, I cannot but think it
just to afford the same Relief to him who is under the like Circumstances. For,
it being but reasonable, that those things which are equal, should have an
equal measure; If I, who am but equal to my Brother in Nature, and, by my own
supposition, now equal to him in Condition, could not yet but desire Relief my
self, from those that are able to afford it; there is the same reason for his
desire of it, and consequently the same necessity of his being gratified in it,
by me, or any Man else that is in a Capacity to afford it.

The last thing comes now to be spoken to, Comprehensiveness of the Rule now
before us; a thing which our Catechism does not obscurely insinuate, when it
premiseth it to those Duties we owe unto our Neighbors: but our Savior much
more clearly, when he affirms it to be the Law and the Prophets. Now there are
two sorts of Duties which the Law and the Prophets contain, and to one or both
of which therefore this Rule is to be supposed to have a regard; the Duties we
owe to the Great Creator of the World, or the Duties which are owing by us to
our Neighbor. The former of these are no way pertinent to the present Rule, or
at least not in those Terms wherein it is delivered by our Savior; because the
Persons from whom we expect a favorable deportment, and to whom accordingly we
ought to be ready to afford it, are by our Savior Mat. 7.12. Therefore all
things whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to them.
supposed to be Men, or rather in express Terms declared so to be. Not to tell
you, that it would be a kind of arrogance to apply it to the Duty we owe to
God, or attempt to judge of that Duty by it; because so we could not do,
without seating our selves in the Place of God, which is too great a
Presumption to do, even by a Supposition. If the doing as we would be done by,
may with any propriety be referred to God, it is only as the desire of his
dealing favorably with us, is considered as an Argument to prompt us to the
like deportment toward our Brethren. And in this sense there is no doubt it
has the countenance of Equity, as well as the Suffrage of the Almighty. For,
as God has not allowed us to expect Mercy from him, upon any other Terms than
the showing the like Mercy to our Brethren; so they who consider the little
reason we have otherwise to expect it, will think it but equitable to afford
it. For, if we would that God, who is no way obliged to us, yea, who is many
ways disobliged by us, should yet afford some Relief to our Necessities; how
much more reasonable must we think it to be, to allow the same unto our
Brethren, to whom we are even by that God obliged?

But not to insist any longer upon so remote a Sense, especially after that we
our selves have declared it so to be; proceed we to consider it with reference
to the Duty we owe to our Neighbor, and as the Sum of the Law and the Prophets
concerning it. For my more advantageous Explication whereof, I will apply it to
all those Precepts of the Decalogue, which respect the Welfare of our Neighbor.

To begin with that which gives beginning to them, even that which calls upon
us to Honor our Father and Mother, whether as that imports the Honor that is
due unto Superiors, or as it does also connote that Fatherly and gentle Usage
which those Superiors are to show to those that are under their command. For,
who that carries about him, I do not say the common Infirmities of Humane
Nature, but even the most innocent Affections of it; who, I say, that is only
such, but would expect Honor and Obedience, if he were advanced to that
Dignity, to which his envied Neighbor is? Shall we suppose the lowliness of
his Mind to repress such Desires? But as that requires no more than such an
humble Opinion of a Man's self as is answerable to his own Quality and
Condition; so we see but too frequently, that a change of Fortune produces a
change also in the Mind, yea such a change as is also superior to the other.
Shall we then say (and indeed more than that we cannot say) that the present
lowness both of his Fortune and Mind may keep him at least from thinking that
he should give entertainment to more lofty Desires? But even that will not be a
bar to the discovery of other Inclinations, if he will but advert to his
present Demeanor under it. For, as there are few so low, who have not some
also under them, whether in the relation of Children or Servants; so we see but
too apparently, that even they cannot without regret receive from the other any
Disrespect or Disobedience. Now forasmuch as it is impossible for any Man not
to desire Respect and Obedience, supposing himself advanced to that Dignity
which does require it; forasmuch as that Impossibility will easily discover it
self to him who shall but reflect upon his own Demeanor toward those that are
below him; it will not be hard to collect, That, if he have also a regard to
this Rule of our Savior,, he will find himself in a manner necessitated to pay
the same Respect and Obedience unto others: He who does as he would be done by,
being not in a condition to deny it; because, if he were in their
Circumstances, he could not but desire it. And though they who are in any Place
of Eminency, will be as apt to forget their respective Duties, and treat their
several Inferiors rather as Slaves than Subjects; yet would they not continue
so to do, if they would but suppose those their Subjects Condition to be their
own, and reflect withal upon that Demeanor which such a Supposition, and the
present Rule infers. For it being not to be thought that any Man will be so
much an Enemy to himself, as not to desire to be favorably treated, though in
the Condition of a Subject; the very supposition of such a Condition, and the
Rule we have now before us, will oblige him that makes it, to show the same
favorable Treatment unto others: He doing not as he would he done by, who
treats his Subjects as Slaves, when it is manifest, that, if he were in their
condition, he would both desire and expect a more gentle usage. And indeed, if
even the Greatest Princes would consider the Inconstancy of all Earthly things,
and how often it falls out that they who are now at the Top, are brought down
to the lowest Round, they would not think it any way unreasonable to suppose
themselves in the condition of Subjects, or, doing so, to learn Clemency by it;
it being certainly more eligible to learn Clemency by so easy a Supposition,
than by their own sad and dear-bought Experience. So easy a matter were it
both for Superiors and Inferiors to read their respective Duties in this
short Aphorism of our Savior. And if so, we may well allow it to be a
Comprehensive one, yea, so far as the former Persons are concerned, the whole
Law and the Prophets.

To that Commandment which enjoins the Honor of Superiors, subjoyn we that
which forbids the killing of any Man; whether we understand it as taking care
for the Lives and Persons of Men, or forbidding either greater or lesser
violations of them. For who sees not, that the present Rule has equal place
here, yea that it extends it self to the several Injunctions and Prohibitions
of it? For, is there any Man who would not desire all requisite Love and
Benevolence to his Person, or at least who would not be in some measure
provided against the several Necessities and Exigencies thereof? Is there any
Man who would not be secured from any greater or lesser Violences, who would
not desire to have his Life preserved to him, yea the Pleasures and Happinesses
thereof? But, so if there be not, let the Transgressour of this Commandment
see, how he will answer either his own Uncharitableness or Maliciousness to
other Men's? his withholding from them the Offices of Humanity, or bringing upon
them Misery and Death? For whatever this may otherwise be, to be sure it is no
way answerable to his own Expectations or Desires; and he must give the Lie to
his own Conscience, as well as to the common Sentiments of Humane Nature, if he
pretend to act herein as he desires to be dealt withal himself.

I will not so much as ask, or only ask, if I do, whether the Adulterer or
Adulteress would be content to fall under that Injury and Reproach which they
stick not to bring upon another: for as there is no one thing which Humane
Nature does more passionately resent, than the Violation of the Marriage Bed;
so it is not at all rare, to see those exalt the Fidelity of their Consorts,
who are not overguilty of it themselves. Instead therefore of insisting any
longer upon this Commandment, I will go on to those that follow, and see
whether they also do not stand or fall, according as this most excellent Rule
is either observed or neglected.

For to address my self to that which is next in order, though that no more
than the other will require any long Discussion; Is there any Man who could be
contented to have his Property either invaded or purloyn'd, to have it extorted
from him by force, or drawn away from him by deceit? Nay, is not the contrary
apparent enough in those who are most concerned to inquire, because, without
any scruple, preying upon the Properties of Men? For, as it has been of old
observed, that Justice is so necessary a Virtue, that even Thieves think
themselves obliged to preserve it among themselves; so, how ill pleased they
would be with the loss of their legitimate Properties, their ill resenting of
any unfaithful dispensation of the Common Booty, proclaims both to others and
themselves.

Lastly, (For in so large a Subject it is harder to know when to make an end,
than to want proper Matter for a Discourse.) As there is no Man who can well
brook the being falsely spoken of, or that his Neighbor should covet his
Possessions; so the Rule we have now before us, obliging us to frame our
Deportment by what we would should be done unto our selves, does consequently
restrain us from bearing false witness against, or coveting the Possession of
our Neighbor. For, whatever guilty Men may say or think, he certainly that
cannot keep his Mind from hankering after his Neighbor's Possessions, would be
much less satisfied to have that Neighbor of his cast an evil eye upon his own.

Now though having said thus much concerning the Rule that is now before us, I
may seem not to have omitted any thing which may be of force to recommend it;
yet because there is another Rule which pretends to Rival it, and which
therefore, whilst it continues in reputation, may not a little impede the
espousing of it; I deem it but necessary to bring that also before you, and
examine the legitimateness of its Pretensions. For, do not the generality of
Men think it reasonable enough to do to others as they have done to them, and
return upon them those Violences they have offered? Does not the Magistrate
proceed conformably to that Rule, in his several Decrees and Judgments? and all
Men look upon those as receiving but their Deserts, who suffer no other than
what they inflicted? And though Tully be a Person who has certainly done more
right to Morality, than any or almost all that preceded or followed; though the
Precepts he delivers be generally very conformable to those of Nature and
Christianity: yet even he seems to advise, or at least not to forbid the doing
unto other Men as they have before done themselves; where he represents it as a
part of Justice, De Offic. l. 1. Sed justitiae primum munus est, ut ne cui quis
noceat, nisi lacessitus injuria.
not to hurt any Man; adding by way of exception, unless before provoked by an
Injury: which shows at least, that he thought it no way unlawful to retaliate.
But as the Scripture, which is more to be credited, has taught us another
Lesson, because forbidding us to say, Prove. 24.29.
I will do to my Neighbor as he has done to me, I will render to the man
according to his works; so it has elsewhere assigned such Reasons of it, as
both show the unlawfulness of such a Procedure, and take off from the force of
its Pretensions: For giving us to understand, that God, to whom Vengeance
originally belongs, reserveth that part of Justice to himself Romans 12.19.
, and to those whom he has entrusted Romans 13.4.
with his Authority; it does consequently make it unlawful to any other than
such, to assume to themselves the Execution of it, and therefore also to do to
Men as they have before dealt with them. If he who has his own Injuries
returned upon him, receive no more than he does deserve; yet will not that
warrant our retaliating them, because we have no Authority to chastise him. The
more Equitable, as well as more Christian Rule, is certainly, Do to other Men
as ye would they should do to you; as you your selves, if you were in their
Circumstances, would be forward enough to desire from them. So doing, you will
not only not usurp upon the Prerogative of God, or of his Vicegerent; but
comply with the Sentiments of Nature, and Revelation; with the several Precepts
and Intimations of the one; with the Law, and the Prophets, and Gospels of the
other.

THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT.
THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee.

PART I.
The Contents.
A Transition to the Duty we owe to each other, whether considered only as
Men, or under a more near Relation. The latter of these provided for in this
Fifth Commandment, which is divided into a Duty and a Promise. An Essay toward
a general Explication of the Duty; where is shown, That under Father and Mother
are comprehended, 1. Grandfather and Grandmother, and other the Ancestors from
whom we came; because, though at a distance, Authors of our Being. 2. Kings and
all that are in Authority; partly because in the place of Parents to their
People, and partly because their Authority is a Branch of the Paternal one, and
succeeded into the place of it. 3. Our Spiritual Pastors, because begetting us
to a better Birth: And, in fine, All that are our Superiors, whether in
Authority, Dignity, or Age. The like Comprehensiveness evinced in the Honor
that is required; which is shown also to include Fear and Love, together with
the Expressions of them, and Honor. The Duty of Superiors connoted in the
Honor that is to be paid to them; and how that Duty may be inferred. An
Address to a more particular Explication of the Duty; where the Honor of
Parents is resumed, and the Grounds thereof shown to be, first, Their being
under God the Authors of ours, and, secondly, the Maintainers of it. The
Consequences of the former Ground proposed, and shown to preclude all Pretenses
of Disrespect.

OUR Duty to God being provided for in the first place, as which is both the
Foundation and Limitation of all others; proceed we, according as the Decalogue
invites, to consider the Duty we owe to each other; which may be reduced to two
Heads, that is to say, such as we owe to one another as Men, or such as arise
from some more intimate Relation between us. The latter of these is my Task at
this time, because the Design of the Commandment that is now before us; for the
Explication whereof, I will consider, 1. The Duty enjoined: And, 2. The Promise
wherewith it is enforced.


I. Now though, if we look no further than the Letter, we could not be long to
seek what that is which is here bound upon us; yet because I have before shown,
that many things are contained in a Commandment, beside what is expressed in
it; to attain the full importance of this, we must enter into the very Bowels
of it, and extract that Sense which is wrapped up in it, as well as that which
is apparent. In order whereunto, I will inquire, 1. Whether any Superiors are
here meant, besides Fathers and Mothers. 2. What is the importance of that
Honor which is here required. 3. Whether the Commandment provide for the
Behavior of Superiors toward Inferiors, as well as of Inferiors toward
them.


1. And first of all, though Father and Mother be the only Persons expressed,
to whom we are required to give Honor; yet the general Reason of the
Commandment obliges us to extend it to Grandfathers and Grandmothers, and
other the Ancestors from whom we are descended; because, though they
contributed not immediately to our Birth, yet mediately they did, as being the
Authors of those from whom we derived it. Whence it is, that in the Scripture
they have often the Name of Fathers; as, Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my
day, and was glad.

But beside that Grandfathers and Grandmothers are to be understood, and other
the Stocks from whence we came; there is no doubt but Kings, and all that are
in Authority, are included in the same general Names: Witness first, their
being in the place of Fathers to those who are under their Dominion. For
though, as Moses sometime told God, they do not beget their People, if we
understand it with reference to their Natural one; yet as their Civil Birth is
from them, so they carry them in their bosom, as a nursing Father bears the
sucking Child, as the same God commanded the angry Moses, Number. 11.12. Again, As
Kings are in the place of Fathers to their People, especially in respect of
their Tuition, so the Authority of Kings is a Branch of the Paternal one, and
succeeded into the Place of it. Of which, beside the Testimony (...). Vid.
Sanders. de Oblig. Conscient. Praelect. 7. sect. 16.
of Aristotle, who was no Friend of Kingly Government, and the great number of
Kings that was anciently in every little Country, and particularly in the Land
of Canaan; we may discern evident Marks in the Authority of Fathers, even after
the Empire was otherwise disposed of: these having anciently the Power of Life
and Death, which is one of the principal Flowers of the Regal Diadem. Now
forasmuch as Kings are not only in the place of Fathers to their People, but
vested in that Authority which was originally and naturally theirs; it is but
reasonable to think, that when God commanded to honor these, his Intention was
to include the other, as who, beside their resemblance to them, had also the
best part of their Authority.

Next to Kings and Princes, consider we our Spiritual Fathers, even those who
beget us to Piety, and to God; concerning whom, there can be no place for
doubt, that they ought to be understood in those Fathers we are here commanded
to revere: For if our Earthly Father is to have Honor, those certainly ought
not to go without it, who beget us to an infinitely better Being. To all which,
if we add, that the Decalogue is a Summary of all Moral Duties, as well those
which respect our Neighbor, as those which have an aspect upon God; so there
can be no doubt, not only that the former are included, but all other our
Superiors, whether in Authority, or Dignity, or Age: Because, as the Honor of
these may be fairly reduced to this Commandment (as I shall show more at large,
when I come to handle them apart) so there is no other Commandment to which
they can, if you except only the Honor of Husbands, which may have a place in
that Commandment which forbids violation of it.

2. Having thus shown what is meant by that Father and Mother which this
Commandment requires us to honor, I come now to inquire what is the importance
of that Honor, which we are under an Obligation to exhibit; it being likely
enough, where the Objects thereof are so various, that there is some variety in
that Honor which is due. To find out therefore the full importance of it, I
will inquire, 1. Whether under the Affection of Honor, any other be
understood: And, 2. Whether the Expressions thereof be not equally due with the
Affections themselves.


For the Resolution of the former whereof, the first thing I shall offer, is,
the primary Notion of the Hebrew Word we render Honor, which the Masters of
that Language inform us signifies to be heavy, or weigh so, and consequently in
Piel, not to account lightly of, to esteem of as a thing of weight and moment.
Now though in the common acception of the Phrase, that be most accommodable to
that Honor by which we have chosen to express it; yet it contains within the
compass of it, all other Respects which arise from any considerable Quality of
the Thing we so value, that is to say, as well those which arise from its
loveliness or terribleness, as from the eminency of its Nature and Authority.
For, if we give any Thing or Person its due weight and moment, we must also, if
they be lovely, afford them as great and intense a Love; or, if terrible, fear
them proportionably to it. Whence it is, that what is here, Honor thy father
and mother, is in Lev. 19.3. expressed by fear or reverence them; and
accordingly, is no less usually set to denote the Duty we owe to our Parents,
than that which is here made use of to express it. But beside the
Comprehensiveness of the Hebrew Word, with the Addition of God's expressing our
Duty as well by Fear as Honor; it is to be observed, that there is not in
Parents a greater ground for any thing than Love; witness the tenderness they
have over us, and particularly that which the Mother has: For, if so, Love
must be supposed to be as much a Duty as any thing, and consequently to be
included in that Affection which is required. To all which, if we add, That it
is not unusual under one Species to understand all of the same Genus, so no
doubt can remain, but under the Name of Honor all the former Requisites are
contained. For the Commandment we have now before us, being one of those which
were intended as an Abstract of the whole Duty of Man, it is in reason to
comprehend the whole of our Duty to our Superiors; and therefore also, because
not otherwise to be done, to set that Species of our Duty for all the rest.

But beside that the Affection of Honor includes all the rest that are due
from us to our Parents, they are in like manner to be supposed to include the
Expressions of them, and particularly the Expressions of Honor; of which,
beside the usual acceptance of the Word Honor, which, together with the
Esteem of the Mind, connotes the Expressions of it, we may fetch a Proof from
the Nature of the Affections of the Soul, and the necessity of their exerting
themselves in outward Acts: For, as the Affections of the Soul are naturally
operative, and seek out proper ways to express themselves; so, unless they do,
they are of little, or rather of no use to whom they are commanded to be
exhibited. For what avails Charity to a distressed Person, if it show not it
self in Alms, and other such like Expressions of it? Or, what satisfaction can
an honorable Esteem bring to our Parents, if it contains it self in the Mind,
where it is neither to be discerned, nor can produce any Advantage to them? But
because, to make it evident that the Expressions of Honor are required, no
better way can be taken, than by instancing in the Expressions themselves;
before I leave this Head, I will attempt the Probation of it in each, beginning
with the Expression of it in Outward Gestures: For thus Lev. 19.32. we are
commanded to rise up before the hoary head, and to honor the face of the old
man. For, if we are to do that before the Face of the Old Man, much more before
the Face of our Natural Parent, or him that is the Father of our Country. From
Reverence in Gesture, pass we to the same testified in Words, which we shall
find to be no less a Duty than the former; witness the several Cautions that
are given against cursing our Natural, or speaking evil of our Civil Parent:
For, that shows our Words to be under a Law as to that particular, and
consequently, because they are equally capable of honoring our Parents, that
they ought to be employed to that purpose. The same is much more evident
concerning our Actions, and particularly concerning yielding Obedience to their
Commands: For, as a due apprehension of their Authority does naturally lead us
to yield Obedience to those Commands that have their Authority stamped upon
them; so, that this Expression of our Honor was intended, St. Paul plainly
shows, Ephesians. 6.1, 2. For inferring, as he does, the Justice of Obeying our
Parents from this very Commandment we have now before us, he supposes Obedience
to their Commands, to be a part of that Honor which this Commandment requires
us to give. In like manner, forasmuch as where submission to chastisement is
not, there can be no due apprehension of their Authority, the opposing our
selves thereto being a denial of it, and therewith of the Justice of their
Proceedings; it follows, that to honor our Parents, includes that Expression
also; and we are not only to be obedient to their Will, but suffer without
murmuring under the Inflictions of it. Such are the Superiors whom we are
required to honor, such the Honor and other Duties which we are by the same
Commandment enjoined to pay. Nothing remains toward a general Explication of
it, but to inquire,

3. Whether Superiors may not read their Duty also in it? Which Question is
the rather to be asked, because, setting aside this Commandment, there is no
other to which it can be reduced. But, as, for that cause, it is but reasonable
to seek it here, where the Duties of their several Correlatives are described;
so it will be no hard matter for Superiors to read it in that Honor which is
commanded to be paid unto themselves: For though, as I shall afterward show,
their very begetting of us require our having them in esteem; yet, if it be not
also accompanied with a Paternal Care over us, it must needs be a great
Stumbling Block to us, and, if not destroy, yet very much diminish their
Esteem. Again, Forasmuch as our Honor, though built in part upon their giving
us a Being, yet is also founded by the Scriptures themselves upon their lending
us their Assistance to support it; hence it comes to pass, that, to obtain a
complete Honor from us, they must show us the way by their Kindness, and feed
us with the same Kindness that the Stork does her Young ones, that Emblem both
of Paternal Affection, and Filial Duty: It being impossible for Children to
(...).
requite their Parents, as the Young ones of the Stork do theirs, where the
Parents have not showed themselves Storks before.

Having thus given you a general Scheme both of this Commandment, and my
Design; and shown both who, and to what they are obliged: I intend now to
present them to you a second time, and allow them a more distinct
Consideration. In order whereunto, I will begin with Parents, because expressed
in the Commandment; and show both, 1. What is due from their Children unto
them: And, 2. What is due from them unto their Children.


I. Now there are Five things, within the resolution whereof, all that is
necessary to be known concerning the former of these Obligations, is
comprehended.

1. The Grounds of our Honor. 2. The Kinds of it. 3. With what variety it is
to be exhibited to either Parent. 4. Whether or no, and how far a Child may be
freed from it. 5. To which I shall subjoyn, in the fifth place, somewhat
concerning Fear and Love, which I have said to be a part of Childrens Duties.
1. And here, though I very well might, not to establish it upon this
Commandment, nor yet upon that Strength which Christianity has added to it by
its own; I will make it my Business to inquire, whether Nature it self has not
afforded Grounds enough to establish that Obligation upon. Now there are two
things upon which the honoring our Parents is grounded, and which indeed do
each of them evince its necessity: how much more then, when as for the most
part conjoined? The former whereof is, their being under God the Authors of
ours; and, secondly, the Maintainers of it.

That they are the Authors of our Being, is too evident from Experience, to
admit of any the least doubt: That, as such, they ought to be honored, will be
no less evident, if we consider either the Excellency thereof, or the Authority
that it naturally infers. For, inasmuch as Excellency is a just Object of
Honor (Honor, as was before observed, being a just Valuation of that which is
so); inasmuch as there is a peculiar Excellency in being the Author of another
Being, he who is so, thereby partaking of one of the great Prerogatives of the
Divine Nature; it follows, because our Parents are Partakers of that
Prerogative, that they are to be looked upon as the Objects of Honor, and next
to him to be regarded by us. And accordingly, as some have not stuck to call
them visible (...). Philo de Decal.
Gods, in respect of that resemblance which they have to the Great Creator of
us all; so, if it be cautiously understood, it is not without Warrant, even
from the Scriptures themselves; God himself so stiling both the Angels and
Magistrates, for that Image they have of his Nature and Authority. However it
be, there is a great Resemblance between our Earthly Parents and God, as being
each in their measure the Authors of our Being: and if so, there can be little
doubt of their being the just Objects of our Honor, if God may be allowed to
be a just Object of it. But then, if we add moreover, That the Authors of our
Being have eo ipso a Natural Authority over those to whom they are so; Nature
and Reason dictating, that the Maker of any thing should have the disposal of
it: so there will not only follow a necessity of honoring them, but of giving
them such an Honor as includes Obedience to their Commands. But besides the
Resemblance there is between our Parents and God in that particular, and that
Authority which it naturally infers; we are also to consider, according as was
before insinuated, that they are God's Instruments in the producing of us. For,
if so, they cannot be neglected without casting a contempt upon God, (...).
Philo de Decalog.
whose Instruments and Ministers they are; the Virtue of an Instrument being
not so much its own, as that Causes by which it is managed. And accordingly, as
among Men, what is done or not done unto an Agent, is by the Prince, and all
others, interpreted as done or not done unto himself; so there have not wanted,
even among the Heathen, who saw the legitimateness of making such an
Interpretation of the Dishonor that is done to God's Instruments, our Earthly
Parents: Menander (...).
in particular affirming of him who reproacheth his Father, That though his
Words go no farther than him, yet he aims at the Divine Nature. The same is no
less evident, in that the Honor of Parents has even in the New Testament the
Title of (...), 1 Timothy 5.4.
Piety. For that being the proper Word to express our Duty to our Maker, shows
the thing to which it is attributed to have a peculiar aspect upon him, and
that it is Sacrilege, as well as Injustice, to deny it. I have insisted so much
the longer upon this Head, as because the Scripture seems to found our
Obligation upon it, when it requires us to hearken to the father that begat us,
Prove. 23.22. so also because it cuts off all Pretenses of doing dishonor to
those whom this Commandment obliges us to revere. For, be it, first, that thy
Parents may prove unnatural, and thereby so far divest themselves of that
Honor which is due from other Children unto theirs; yet so long as that which
is past cannot be recalled, they cannot cease to be thy Parents; and it is
eternally true, that the one is thy Father that begat thee, and the other thy
Mother that conceived thee. Be it, secondly, which is another Pretense of
Disobedience, that though they gave Being to thee, yet they designed not that
so much as the gratification of their own Appetites, which will consequently
cut off all Moral Right to that Honor which they exact of thee; yet inasmuch
as they were the Authors of thy Being, they have a Natural Right to it, and
therefore ought not to be denied it, any more than we may deny Honor to a Man
of Natural Parts, or to one who was born a Prince. Be it, thirdly, that all
other Obligations could be fully requited, and consequently we our selves freed
from any Tie of Honor which might be supposed to arise from them; yet unless
(as (...). Philo. de Decalog.
Philo speaks) we could beget those who begat us, that of our Birth will remain
uncancell'd, and together therewith, our Obligation of honoring them because
of it. Lastly, Be it, that thou had no Obligation to thy Parents in
themselves, as neither intending any other than their own Pleasure in the
Begetting, nor concerning themselves for thee when thou were; yet so far as
they were God's Instruments in bringing thee into the World, they call for thy
Regard; neither can they be neglected, without casting a Contempt upon God
himself: So that still, if our Honor have this ground, it will be of eternal
necessity; and we may as soon cease to be Children, as cease to be obliged to
those whom we are required to honor.

But because there are few Parents who contribute no farther to their Children
than their Birth, and much less like the Ostrich, which Job speaks of, that
leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust; forgetting in the
mean time that the foot may crush them, or that the wild heast may break them,
Job 39.13. and so on: Because, I say, there are few Parents that show
themselves so unnatural, nay, which do not, on the contrary, dandle their
Children in their Arms, and in their Heart, and never leave off providing for
them, till they are in a capacity to provide for themselves; hence there
arises another Obligation to pay them Honor and Obedience, and such a one as
we must be very ungrateful to forget. For, if we think it a just ground of
Honor, that we feed those whom we retain, and furnish them with all other
things necessary for their support; in the mean time not concerning our selves
any farther, and much less making them the Subject of our perpetual Care, and
the End of all our Toil and Travel: what Ground of Honor may we think it to
be, when we have infinitely much more done for us by our Parents, to make us
happy, both in this World, and in the next?

PART II.
Of the Kinds of that Honor which is to be given to Parents, which are shown
to be, 1. An awful Esteem of them, as which is the very Soul of Honor. 2. An
outward Declaration of it, whether it be in our Gesture and Behavior, where
the general necessity of such Expressions of Honor is evinced; or in our
Language to or of them, the Nature whereof is also declared; or in our Actions.
These last divided into such as minister directly and immediately to their
Honor, or indirectly and by consequence. Of the former sort are, first, Our
administering to them in their Wants, which is shown both to be a Duty, and, as
it may, and ought to be managed, an Expression of our Honor: and, secondly,
ministering to them in their Weaknesses. Of the latter sort are such Actions,
whatever they are in themselves, which are done with their Consent, in
compliance with their Advice, or in obedience to their Commands. The Question
concerning the Consent of Parents resumed, and that shown to be generally
necessary in the Principal Actions of our Life, such as are, in particular, the
disposal of our selves in Marriage, or entering upon any lasting Course of Life.
The Advice of Parents also considered, and shown to have the nature of a
Command, where the Parent may be presumed to make use of that Form of Speech
for Loves sake only; but however not to be departed from, where we have not a
considerable Reason to the contrary. Of the Commands of Parents, and by what
our Obedience to them is to be bounded; where is shown, That their Commands are
of no force against the Commands of God, or the Magistrate; in things that
carry an invincible Antipathy to our Inclinations, or such as are greatly
dishonorable to the Child. Submission to the Chastisements of Parents, the
fourth and last Declaration of our inward Esteem.

2. THOUGH this, and other such like Precepts, whilst they continue in their
generality, do carry Conviction with them where-ere they come; yet they have
not the like success when drawn down to particular Instances, and applied to
each Man's immediate Concern: The Reason whereof is, partly their pressing so
hard upon Men, and partly that Relief which the consideration of General
Precepts gives. For finding themselves pinched with so particular an
Application, and, what such a Pressure does naturally produce, desirous to free
themselves; and considering moreover, that there is no Precept almost so
general, which does not admit of some Exceptions; the forementioned Pressure,
and their desire to free themselves from it, makes them first willing to
believe their own case to be one of those Exceptions, and after that actually
to do it. In consideration whereof, as the Masters of Morality have ever
thought it their chiefest Business to be as particular as they could in
describing and confirming the several Duties of it; so I intend at this time to
follow their Example, and show what particular Duties the Honor of Parents
does involve.

1. And here in the first place, because that is the very Soul of Honor, and
gives Life both to it and all the Expressions of it, we are to entertain in our
Minds such an awful Regard of them as the Dignity of their Relation does
require; that is to say, we are to account of them as so many Mortal Gods, as
by whom, under the True, we live, and move, and have our being: lastly, we are
to account of them as his Images and Agents, as Resemblances of the Great
Creator, or rather Cooperatours with him: For, as the Notion of a Parent
involves all this, and therefore in reason to regulate our inward esteem of
them; so the consideration thereof is of excellent use to stifle all those
Conceptions which the weaknesses of our Parents might suggest. For, be it that
our Parents are either of crazie or deformed Bodies, that they have weak
Understandings naturally, or have lived to see them die before them, either of
which may tempt unsettled Minds to abject thoughts concerning them; yet if we
remember they were under God the Authors of our Being, and thereby, as Moses
sometime was to Aaron, a kind of Gods to us, such thoughts as the other will
quickly vanish, and we shall, in spite of all their Infirmities, look upon them
as in the place of God, and next to him to be honored and revered.

2. But beside the entertaining honorable Thoughts of our Parents, to which I
have over and above represented the most proper Motives; we are also, as was
before shown, to express those Conceits of ours by some sensible declarations
of them: Whereof, 1. The first I shall represent, is, that which of all others
seems to be the most natural, even that of our outward Gesture and Behavior.
For, as Nature it self has prompted us to such an Acknowledgment, because
inclining us to show forth in the Behavior of our Bodies those Affections and
Passions we have within; so the Custom of the World, which is the most proper
Judge of Affairs of this nature, has made it a necessary part of that
Acknowledgment; I say, not only in respect of the Esteem of the World, but
also in respect of God: For requiring, as he does, an Acknowledgment of our
inward Esteem, and such a one as may satisfy the World concerning it, he does
consequently leave it to the Judgment of the World to determine after what
manner it is to be done. Now forasmuch as the Judgment of the World has
determined the showing our Respects by our outward Gesture and Behavior, it
follows, that to the due honoring of our Parents, we are to take that course,
and make our outward Behavior bespeak our inward Reverence and Esteem. But
from hence it will follow, that according as the Custom of the Country is, we
are to rise up or bow before our Natural Parents: Which is the rather to be
represented, because a Generation of Men have sprung up, with whom all these
things are either superfluous or superstitious; never considering in the mean
while, that they not only run counter to the Judgment of the World (which yet,
as was before observed, is the most proper Judge of Affairs of this nature) but
also to the Judgment and Practice of the best of Men, and such whose Carriage
is not lightly to be despised; among whom we find nothing more usual than
bowing down before their Superiors, and sometimes throwing themselves as low
as the Earth they trod on. Now though the omission of such like Expressions of
Reverence be a sufficient breach of this Commandment, which enjoins us the
honoring of our Superiors, and particularly of our Parents; yet certainly
that is much more, because contrary to it, which presents them with
contemptuous ones: Of which nature is the receiving their Advices with
Laughter, or a less composed Countenance, pointing at them with the Finger, or
winking with the Eye; there being no doubt a Child may be as undutiful in his
Looks, as either in his Words or Actions. That of Solomon Prove. 30.17.
shall serve both for a Proof and a Conclusion of this Affair, because showing
both the undutifulness of such a Behavior, and the displeasure of God against
it: The eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother, the
ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it. 2.
Next to honoring our Parents in our outward Gesture, proceed we to the
honoring of them with our Tongues, which is another requisite Expression of
it; the Tongue being of all the other Members the most apt to express our
inward Conceits, and therefore not to be wanting in this. Now this the Tongue
may do, by speaking honorably to or of them; by proclaiming their Virtues, and
our own Obligations to them; by extenuating, as much as may be, their supposed
Defects; by taking off the several Objections that are made against them; in
fine, by not suffering any thing to fall from it (for even such a Silence is
expressive) which may any way offend or grieve them. Agreeable hereto is that
excellent Advice of the Hebrew Masters Vid. Seld. de Jure Not. and Gent. l. 7.
c. 2.
, when the Children had occasion to represent to their Parents any of their
Miscarriages: For, in such a case (say they) a Man was not to say to his
Father, You transgress the words of the Law; but rather, It is written in the
Law thus or thus; and so as if he meant rather to consult them about the
meaning of it, than to admonish them of their Transgression. But so, which is
of much more force, St. Paul insinuates, 1 Timothy 5.1. For requiring Timothy not
to rebuke an elder, but to entreat him as a father, he plainly supposes, that
Fathers ought to be treated with respectful Language, even when they do offend;
and how much more then, when they are not guilty of any Miscarriage? 3. From
Respectfulness in our Language, pass we to Respectfulness in our Actions, which
is another Requisite to the honoring of our Parents; as because they are the
most effectual Expressions of our Thoughts, so because they are the clearest
Acknowledgments of that Authority which God has vested in them, and of our own
readiness to comply with it. The only thing worthy our pains, will be to point
out those Actions whereby we may do Honor to them. Now there are two sorts of
Actions whereby we may and ought to do Honor to our Parents, the former
whereof minister directly and immediately to it, the latter indirectly and by
consequence, that is to say, as they are Instances of our Compliance with their
Will and Pleasure.


I. Of the former sort is, first, the administering to them in their wants, and
furnishing them with all things necessary to their support. For beside that the
Law of Gratitude requires this of us, and therefore in reason to be supposed to
be included in that Commandment which entreats of our Duty to our Parents; it
is by the Jewish Masters Vid. Seld. de Jure Not. and Gent. l. 7. c. 2. p. 834.
resolved to be the very Formality of that Honor which here we are required to
exhibit: Wherein though perhaps they too much over-lash'd, because the Word is
of a more general signification; yet that they thought not amiss, when they
made it a principal part of Honor, the language both of the New Testament and
Heathen Writers show; St. Paul expressing the relieving of Widows, by the Title
of honoring them, and Hierocles In Carm. Pyth. (...), etc.
declaring that we shall then honor our Parents exceedingly, when we afford
them the ministry of our Bodies, and the assistance of our Wealth. But so, when
our Savior recommended the Virgin Mary to St. John, saying, Behold thy Mother;
St. John, as knowing that to be a part of the honor that is due unto a Parent,
expressed his Obedience to it by taking her to his own home, Joh. 19.27. And
indeed, however the notion of Honor may seem no way to agree to this affair,
because maintenance of it self contributes little honor to him that receives
it; yet, if we look more narrowly into it, we shall find it oftentimes to be a
mark rather of Honor than Contempt. For first of all, Though Kings are of all
others the greatest Almsmen, if we should judge of their Quality by their
Receipts; yet inasmuch as what they so receive, they receive by way of Homage,
and as an Acknowledgment of their Authority over their respective Kingdoms; the
maintenance they receive, is not only no lessening of their esteem, but on the
contrary, an aggrandizing of it. The case is much the same as to those of whom
we are discoursing, and to whom we are required to give honor as well as to
Kings and Princes; that maintenance which we afford them, being not, like other
Gifts, the results of a voluntary Bounty, but a Tribute which we owe them, and
an Acknowledgment of our Obligations to them: It being but just, as Hierocles
Loco prius citato. (...).
speaks, that Parents should make use of those whom they have begotten and bred
up. From that first instance pass we to another, which will yet more fully
evidence the propriety of this Notion of Honor, and that is the large Pensions
which Kings bestow upon their Subjects in consideration of some signal Service
they have done them. For these are so far from being a dishonor to the parties
that have them, that on the contrary they are a credit, because marks of his
Esteem by whom they are bestowed. Whence it is, that among the Latins they had
the Title of Honoraria; as if you should say, The honorable gifts. But such
will our Liberality to our Parents prove, if it be in some measure answerable
to the many Obligations they have laid upon us. For thereby we shall declare we
give them not as Alms, but as a mark of that esteem we have for them. Our
Liberality to our Parents will prove yet more an Honor, if it be transmitted
to them with that respect which is due from a Child unto his Parents. For so
doing, be the Gift never so small, it will be looked upon as an honorable
maintenance, and be an instance of our esteem, as well as of our Love and
Tenderness. And I cannot but upon this Occasion call to mind some custom of the
Spaniards See Howels Letters. Vol. 1. Sect. 3. Let. 31.
, who, however a proud Nation otherwise, do in this give a great testimony of
their Humility; it being reported of them, that when they give an Alms they
pull off their Hats, and put it into the Beggars hands, with a great deal of
Humility. For whatever may be due from us toward indigent Persons, this is but
due from us to our Parents, and we cannot hope our Liberality will be accepted,
if we consult not their reputation in it, because obliged as well to honor, as
relieve them.

Next to the administering to our Parents wants, place we the ministering to them
in their weaknesses, according as Hierocles Loco supra citato.
does; for so doing we shall yet more declare the honor we have for them, and
consequently our observation of this Commandment: It being far more irksom to
part with our ease than wealth; to lend them our personal Services, than some
of the good things we enjoy. And indeed, as whosoever shall consider the Care
and Pains of a Father, the Fears and sleepless Nights, and homely Offices of a
Mother; as, I say, whosoever shall consider these things, will not think much
to minister to them, in the meanest employments which their several Infirmities
may exact; so I know not whether it be possible to give them a greater
testimony of our Honor, or requite that Care and Pains toward us. For, by
thus ministering to them by our personal Services, we do in a manner outdo our
selves, and show our selves not their Children but their Servants. The only
thing wanting to make us completely such, is, that love draws us to it, and
that we embrace as well as submit to the Employment. That known story of Aeneas
shall put a period to this Argument, because a noble Instance of his Piety. For
when others, after the Destruction of Troy, took care to rescue other things,
this man took up his Housholdgods first, and after that his aged Father upon
his shoulders. By which last, as well as by the former, as he very well
deserved the Title of Pius, which is given him by the Prince of Poets, so he
therein acted the part rather of a Father than of a Son, because carrying him,
who was now become a Child as he had been before borne himself.

2. But beside such Actions of ours as minister directly and immediately to the
honor of our Parents, such as are especially those before remembered; there are
other that minister to it indirectly, and by consequence, that is to say, as
instances of our Compliance with their Will. Of which sort are all those that
are done with their consent, in compliance with their advice, or in obedience
to their commands; whatsoever is so done, being a manifest acknowledgment of
their Authority with whom we do so comply. The only difficulty is, how far we
are bound to comply with our Parents in each of these, which accordingly I come
now to consider.

And first of all, If the question be concerning the consent of Parents, which
is the first of the Instances before remembered, so I shall not doubt to affirm
that it ought to be had in the principal Actions of our Life. Among which I
reckon particularly, Childrens disposing of themselves in Marriage, or entering
into any lasting course of Life. That the consent of Parents is generally
necessary, in the former may appear, not only from hence, that Children are not
sui juris, but those in whose power they are; but also from the power which God
has given them over their Children, as to this particular affair; witness the
Scriptures prescribing Rules for Parents taking Daughters unto their Sons, and
again, for giving their Daughters in Marriage unto others, as you may see,
Exodus 34.16. and 1 Cor. 7.38. For the Scripture there and elsewhere attributing
the Marriing of Sons and Daughters to the act of their respective Parents,
supposes them as to that particular, to be more in their Parents power than
their own, and consequently their Consent at least to be requisite to the
making of it. Generally speaking therefore there is no doubt, the Consent of
Parents is necessary to be had, to make the Marriage lawful before God. Then,
and then only may it be wanting when the Child is in imminent danger of falling
into sin without it, in which case, though the Consent of Parents may and ought
to be sought, yet it is not necessary to be obtained. From the Consent of
Parents in Marriage, pass we to the necessity of it toward the taking any
lasting Course of Life; which we shall find to stand upon as firm Grounds as
the other: For the Son, till freed by the Father, being more the Fathers than
his own, he is in reason to be disposed of by him to whom he does so belong, or
at least not without his Consent. If the Son do at any time fall into his own
disposal, as I will not say but sometimes he may, it must be, when the Father
takes no care at all of him, which is a kind of emancipation of him.

From the Consent of Parents, pass we to their Advice, and consider what Regard
is due to it in our several Actions; where again we are to consider, whether
the Father intends it only as an Advice, and leaves it to the liberty of his
Son either to follow it, or not; or whether or no, for Loves sake, he chooses to
express his Will in the form of one, as St. Paul did his to Philemon in the
form of an Entreaty. If the latter of these be it, there is no doubt it is not
only obligatory, but much more obligatory than any Command: For, beside that
it has in effect the nature of a Command, it has over and above the addition
of the Parents Kindness, which cannot be resisted without a great Ingratitude.
The Case is somewhat different, and our Obligation also, if he who does advise,
leaves it to the liberty of his Child either to follow it, or not: For, in such
a Case, there is no doubt, if our own Reason leads us otherwise, it is lawful
for us to depart from it. This only would be added, That as we are to receive
it with respect, and to show some kind of unwillingness even in our departing
from it; so we are not to depart from it, where we have not a considerable
Reason to the contrary, and such as may absolve us before God, and all
disinteress'd Persons, for not adhering to it. For though an Advice have not
the nature of a Command, and therefore neither the departure from it the nature
of Disobedience; yet the neglect of it, where there is not a weighty Reason to
the contrary, has the nature of a Disrespect, which is equally a breach of
this Commandment.

The third and last Rule follows, even the Command of our Parents, which is
much more cogent than the other; this being a Natural Effect of that Authority
they have over us, and therefore not to be despised, without a manifest
violation of their Honor. And accordingly, as among the Jews Disobedience to
them was punished with Death, as a kind of abdication of their Parents; so the
Scriptures of the New Testament represent it among those things that are worthy
of death, as you may see Romans 1.30, 32. The only thing of difficulty is, how
far our Obedience is to extend; which accordingly I come now to consider. For
the resolution whereof, the first thing I shall offer, is, That it ought not to
extend to those things that are forbidden by a Power Superior to that of our
Parents: For the Ground of Obedience being the Authority of him that commands,
it is in reason, where it cannot be given to more, to be given unto him, where
is the greatest Authority to require it. But from hence it will follow, first,
That we are not to obey our Parents in things before forbidden by God; God
being not only Superior to all other Powers, but the Fountain and Author of
them. Whence it is, that though St. Paul in one place exhort Children to be
obedient to their Parents in every thing, Col. 3.20. yet, as he assigns for the
Reason of it, its being well-pleasing to the Lord, which shows, that it was not
to extend to things of a contrary nature; so elsewhere Ephesians. 6.1.
he limits it to Obedience in the Lord, that is to say, so far as our Obedience
to him is consistent with it. It will in like manner follow, secondly, That we
are not to obey our Parents in things forbidden us by the Magistrate: For,
though his Authority be not like that of God, yet it is superior to theirs, as
having by the command of God the Souls even of Parents subject to it. But
beside that Obedience to Parents is to cease there, where either God or the
Magistrate have laid a Prohibition, it is also to be supposed not to be
required, where the thing under command carries an invincible Antipathy to our
Inclinations. Thus, for example, if a Father offer such an Husband to his
Daughter, whom, though she has endeavored, yet she can by no means bring her
self to like of; in this case, there is no doubt she is not obliged to marry
him, how strongly soever her Father enjoins it on her: It being not to be
thought, that where the Children themselves have not power over their own
Affections, the Parents of the Children should. Lastly, As our Obedience is not
to be thought to be required, where the thing under command carries an
invincible Antipathy to our Inclinations; so, neither where it is greatly
dishonorable to the Child upon whom the Command is imposed. Thus, for example,
If a Father, for the hope of Lucre, or any such like cause, command his Son to
marry a Person who is of an ill Fame, or to enter into some Trade that is
infinitely below his Quality; as, for example, if a Person of Noble Rank should
command his Son to be a Cobbler: In these, and other the like Cases, there is no
doubt he may refuse that which is so imposed upon him; because the Son, where
the Father's Ability will suffice, has a Natural Right to be bred up in some
measure answerably to that Condition wherein he was born. Care only would be
taken, that, as we pretend not such a disparity, where in truth there is no
other but what our Pride and Self-conceit makes; so, in this, and all other
Refusals of Obedience, we proceed with Modesty and Humility, and rather seem to
decline the Task that is imposed upon us, than contemptuously reject it. But as
other Carriage than this is not consistent with that Honor, which we owe to
the Authors of our Being; so other Commands than those before-remembred, we
cannot think it lawful to disobey, if we consider, that the Apostle enjoins us
to be obedient to our Parents in all things.

4. One only thing remains to fill up the measure of that Honor which we have
said to be due from us to our Parents; and that is, that we express our Esteem
of them by submission to their Chastisements, as well as by yielding Obedience
to their Commands. But because that will fall in more pertinently hereafter,
when I come to entreat of the Chastisements of a Father, I will defer the
prosecution of it till then, contenting my self at present with that of the Son
of Sirach Ecclus. 3.8.
as it lies in the Vulgar Latin, Honor thy father and thy mother in work, in
word, and in all patience, that a blessing may come upon thee from them.

PART III.
With what variety the Honor here required is to be given to either Parent:
Where the giving the Father the priority in our Honor, and, when they draw
different ways, the obeying him against the Mother, is asserted against Mr.
Hobbes, and his Objection answered. The Honor of our Parents otherwise equal.
The Case of a Mother, who is either a Princess or a Christian, when the Father
is either a Subject or Heathen, proposed and stated. A Caution against
despising our Mother, even when we depart from her Advice or Command; and with
what Humility and Modesty that is to be done. Inquiry is also made, whether or
no, and how far a Child may be freed from the Obligation of Honor; which is
considered with relation both to Deceased and Living Parents. That even
Deceased Parents ought to have all those Honors of which they are capable in
that State, which also are there enumerated. Whether any Regard be due to their
past Advices and Commands; which also is answered, and our Regard limited to
such Commands wherein the Honor of our Parents is concerned; or such as enjoin
few things, and easy of practice. The like Regard not due to those Commands
which relate peculiarly to the Child, or to such as enjoin things many and
burdensome. The Case of the Rechabites proposed and considered. That Children
cannot be altogether free from the Obligation of any Honor, so long as their
Parents are alive, because their Parents are as much such at one time as at
another. All the Exemption that they can plead, is either in the Manner or the
Measure; the Exemptions in both which, are exemplified and proved. That those
Exemptions arise from a straiter or more important Obligation, and therefore
are no farther pleadable against the Honor of a Parent, than those Obligations
shall be found to contravene it. Of the Fear of Parents, what the Ground of
that Fear is, and how it ought to be expressed. A brief Account, in passing, of
the Dreadfulness and Efficacy of their Curses. What Obligation we also have to
love our Parents, and how that Love of ours is to be expressed. That our
Honor, or Fear, or Love of our Parents, is not to terminate in their Persons;
because a Parent may be honored, or feared, or loved in others, as well as in
himself; as, on the other side, so disregarded and hated: The Consequences
whereof are, 1. The paying Honor to them that stand upon the same Level with
our Parents, and particularly, to Uncles, Aunts, and Mothers-in-law. 2. The
showing Affection to those who do alike descend from their Loins, as Brothers
and Sisters. 3. The affording it, though not in an equal degree, to Cousins,
and other remoter Kindred, because issuing from the same Grandfathers and
Grandmothers. As also, 4. To those Friends or Servants they set a value on.

3. HAVING in the foregoing Discourses established the Grounds, and shown the
several Kinds of that Honor we are to exhibit; the Method before laid down
prompts us to inquire, with what variety it is to be given to either Parent:
For though, as Grotius has observed Explic. Decalog. Leges a viris factae
ferme solis consulunt patribus, ut Persica memorata Aristoteli Romana descripta
in Digestis ac Institutionibus, Graecis etiam Philosophic, Epicteto primum
deinde and Simplicio memorata neque minus Philoni Judaeo libro de legatione.
, the Laws made by Men provide mostly, if not only for the Honor of the
Father; yet the Commandment we have now before us, makes the Mother also the
Object of it: And not without Reason, if we consider, that the Mother has a
great share in the begetting, a far greater share than the Father in the first
Education, and, if not an equal, yet a considerable part in the succeeding one.
Taking it therefore for granted, that the Mother ought to have a share in it;
we will inquire, whether Honor be to be exhibited to both alike, or, if not,
with what proportion to each. That it is not to be exhibited to both alike, we
need no other Argument, than that it impossible it should be: For the Father
and the Mother drawing different ways, it is impossible they should be both
complied with; and therefore either both to be disobeyed, which were a strange
way of honoring our Parents; or one of them of necessity to be preferred. The
only Question therefore is, which ought to be preferred, and how. A Modern
Writer Hobbes Leviath. chapter 20.
of our Nation, whether out of his kindness to the Female Sex, or rather to new
and uncouth Opinions, prefers the Mother, because of the surer side; and
possibly not without reason, if there were any such Natural State as he, though
groundlesly, fancies. But as in reputation of Law both Parents are alike
certain, and therefore that Suggestion of his of no force in the present
Affair; so God himself, in the very Beginning, subjected even the Mother to the
Father, and thereby plainly showed, that he ought to be preferred: There being
no doubt (as that Author himself afterward acknowledges) that he who is Head
even of the Mother, is, to a far greater purpose than she, the Head also of her
Child. If it be sometime otherwise, as, for example, when the Mother is a
Princess, and the Husband a Subject; yet is not that so much because she is a
Mother, in which respect she is Inferior; but because she has over and above
the addition of the Regal Power. One only Case remains, to wit, Where the
Father is Heathen, and the Mother Christian, which of the two ought to be
preferred? But as in Civil Matters there is no doubt the Father ought, because
Christianity does rather confirm than destroy the several States and Conditions
in which it found us at our Conversion; so, if in Religious Matters the Mother
be preferred, as for example, in the Educating her Child in Christianity, it is
by the Prerogative of God and Christ Vid. Tailor. Duct. Dubit. l. 3. c. 5. Rule
4.
, who is the Head of the Church, to which all Earthly Powers are to yield. It
being thus evident, that generally the Father ought to be preferred; we are in
the next place to inquire, after what manner that is to be done. In answer to
which, I say, first, That it ought not to be done to the contempt of the
Mother: For both of them being by Natures Law, and God's, to be the Object of
our Honor, neither is to be despised; yea, though one of them, and
particularly the Father, should be so wicked as to oblige the Son to it. I say,
secondly, That so far as they may be both honored, so far there is no doubt
they ought to be; both of them being Sharers in the begetting of us, and in
like manner in our Education. I say, thirdly, That so far as our outward
Behavior can declare it, they are both to have an equal share of it, because
the Father is honored in the honor of the Mother, as the Mother again in the
honor of the Father. Only as the Father ought to have the precedence, as being
but due to him for the Order wherein he stands; so, where they command
different things, there is no doubt those of the Father ought to be preferred,
as because for the most part the most capable of judging what is fit; so
because the head of the other Parent. Only a good Child will so far take care
to honor both, as never to despise either; and at the same time he prefers the
commands of his Father, show by his humble and modest behavior to his Mother,
that he does it not in the least wise to aggrieve her.

4. The fourth Question follows, to wit, whether or no, and how far, a Child
may be freed from the obligation of Honor. For the resolution whereof, I will
consider the Child, 1. As bereft of his Parents by death, and 2. As having them
still living.

And first of all, if the Question be concerning deceased Parents, who may
seem, and no doubt have the least tie upon their Children, so I shall not stick
to affirm that they ought to have all that honor of which they are capable in
that state: Not only the Law of Gratitude so requiring, but the Honor of
Almighty God whose Instruments they were, and to whom they live, though they be
dead to us. Of this nature is the bestowing upon them a Funeral answerable to
their Condition, speaking honorably of their Persons and Actions; in fine,
esteeming those persons for whom they had a regard, and especially such as they
upon their Deathbeds commended to ours; for as these are no other than their
Relation, and our Gratitude does require, so they are such of which they are
equally capable as when alive. The only difficulty is, what regard is due to
those Advices or Commands which they laid upon us when alive. For as on the one
side it may seem unreasonable, that the Fathers authority on Earth should abide
after he himself has no further place on it; so on the other side it has been
observed, that God has strangely blasted those Children who have gone contrary
to the Commands of their deceased Parents; and as strangely blessed those who
have been obedient to them; witness for the latter, that known story of the
Rechabites who are not only commended by the Almighty for abstaining from Wine,
and dwelling in Tents, in obedience to their Ancestor Jonadab's command, but
promised moreover that their Generations should abide, Jer. 35.14.19. For the
reconciling of which two, so as neither to depress the authority of the Son,
who succeeds into the Fathers Rights, nor yet to despise the Authority even of
a deceased Father. I will first of all distinguish between such commands
wherein the Father's honor is concerned, and such as relate peculiarly to the
Son. Now in the former of these it is, especially, wherein a Father is to be
heeded, because he has an equal concernment in them. Thus for Example, if, as
it sometime happens, a Fullers Worthies, Hertfordshire, Speaking of the
Horseys, observes that one of them disobeying such a command of his Father
prospered no whit the better for it; not one Foot of Land in Hertfordshire now
remaining to his Posterity.
Father should command his Son, if need were, rather to sell an Estate that
came to him by others, than that which came to him by descent from himself; in
such a case I should not doubt the Son were obliged to observe his command, and
rather sell any thing than that his Patrimony; because by selling the latter he
should do dishonor to his Family, and therein in particular to his Father from
whom it immediately descended. In like manner, if a Father should charge his
Son not to marry into a Family which has been at enmity with himself; in this
case I do no way doubt but the Son is bound up to observe the Commands of his
Father, because as the matter of it has nothing of evil in it; so the acting
contrary thereto, unless where there is a great necessity, would be a dishonor
to his Father, inasmuch as it may give that Family occasion to triumph over the
memory of him whom they before hated. I say not, the same of that command,
which the Father of Hannibal laid upon him with an Oath, to prosecute the
Romans his Enemies with an immortal hatred. For though it be not unlawful to
avoid an intimate alliance with some persons, yet it is both inhumane and
unchristian to prosecute any person with an irreconcilable hatred, and
therefore no fit matter for a Son's obedience. But let us suppose the command
laid upon the Son, relate to his person only, (which is the other member of the
distinction) as for Example, not to be a Bishop, a Priest, or a Magistrate; in
which case, though a pious Son will be well advised before he transgress it,
and consider what reason his Father might have so to advise or command him, yet
he will not suffer himself to be so far over born by it, as to neglect his own
Reason and great Conveniences. For (as a Learned man Tail. Ductor Dubit. Book
3. Chap. 5. Rul. 6.
has well observed) in those things wherein a man's own mere Interest is
concerned, his own Understanding must be his guide, and his Will his Ruler. For
he alone does lie at Stake, whether it be good or bad, and it is not reasonable
that he should govern, who neither gets nor looses, nor knows. Again, the
things that are commanded (those I mean that relate to the Sons person only)
are either few, and easy of practice, or many and burdensome. If the things
commanded be either few, or easy of practice, or both, they cannot be omitted
without a dishonor to our Parents, whose memory we will not gratify in so
small a matter. But if they be many, and burthensom, the omission thereof is
not to be looked upon as a dishonor to them, but as a just compliance with our
own reasonable Conveniences. The only thing that will give us any trouble, is,
the Instance of the Rechabites, who may seem to have had no very easy load
imposed upon them. But beside that, the story is only mentioned on the By, by
which means we cannot so easily judge of the intentention of Jonadab in it;
beside secondly, That it is not improbable it was enjoined in order to
Religion, which if it were, will determine such lasting commands to the things
of Religion only; it is apparent enough they did not think themselves so tied,
but when there was a just cause, such as the fear of the Chaldeans, they
dispensed with their own dwelling in Tents, which was one of the things
enjoined them. And indeed, as it will become Children not lightly to depart
from their deceased Fathers commands, lest they be thought to have a less
regard for them than they should. So it will no less become Parents, when they
extend their Authority beyond their own time, to see that the things they
impose be neither many nor unreasonable; as remembering that after their
decease, they are at their own disposal for the main, and have reason enough
for the most part to guide them in the management thereof.

From the honor of deceased Parents, pass we to that of those that are alive,
and consider whether or no, and how far Children may be freed from it. In
answer whereunto, I say first, that they can never be absolutely freed from any
of the kinds of Honor before remembered: Because our Parents are as much such
in our riper years, as in our greener, when we are departed out of their
Houses, as whilst we continued in them. And indeed, as no question has been
made of that part of honor which is usually styled Reverence, that is to say,
of thinking honorably of, and expressing it in our words and gestures; as
moreover, no question has or can be made of that part of Honor which has the
name of Piety, because Children must generally be supposed both to be of years,
and of a distinct Family, before they can be in a capacity to relieve their
Parents; so as little question would be made of Obedience, if men did but
consider that the principal ground of it does always abide: for it being alike
true at all times, that the one is thy Father that begot thee, and the other
thy Mother that conceived thee; it must be alike true, because that is the
ground of thy Obedience, that thou art always to give obedience to their
commands. If therefore Children be at any time free from the tie of Honor, it
must be as to the manner or measure, which accordingly I come now to consider.
Thus for instance, Though Reverence be always due from us to our Parents, and
accordingly has by good Children been always paid to them, yet there is no
necessity it should be expressed after the same manner by one of full age, as
by one who is still under Pupillage; because the same gestures become not one
of full age, that are suitable enough to the tenderness of the other. Whence it
is, that though Children in their minority are always bare before their
Parents, yet those of Riper age have by a general custom (which must be judge
of matters of this nature) been indulged a greater liberty as to that
particular, even by the consent of Parents themselves. In like manner, that I
may instance in the measure, Though Children dwelling in their Parents houses,
and under their power, be to yield Obedience to all their commands, and
particularly those that concern the Family whereof they are Members; whence it
is, that we find the Father in the Parable, Mat. 21.28. commanding his Sons to
go and work in his Vineyard; yet there is not the same tie upon those that are
sent out of it, that have a Wife and Family of their own to provide for, that
are delivered over to the tuition of other persons, or in fine, have any
public charge upon them. Not upon those that are sent out of the Family,
because as sent out with their leave, so of necessity to intend their own
proper Affairs. Not upon those Children that have a Wife and Family of their
own to provide for, because, beside the forementioned reason, by the command of
God himself to forsake Father and Mother, and cleave unto their Wives, Genesis
2.24. The same is to be said much more of Daughters, when Married, because not
only equally obliged to cleave to their Husbands, but also subjected to their
commands. Whence it is, that when Pharaoh's Daughter was brought to be a Wife
to Solomon, we find her exhorted to forget her own people and her Fathers
house, and to look upon, and worship Solomon as her Lord, Psalm. 45.10, 11. But
neither thirdly, is there the same tie upon Children that are subjected to the
Tuition of others, as to those that are under their Fathers roof and power, as
will appear if we consider them as made Servants to another, or passed over
into another Family by Adoption; for being by the Parents consent subjected to
other Masters or Fathers, they are now no more theirs who gave them Being, but
those Masters or adopted Fathers, to whom they are so transferred. This only
would be added, That as the Children spoken of in the former Instances, are
only free from their Fathers commands by means of those new Relations they have
contracted; so they are consequently no farther free from yielding Obedience to
their Fathers commands, than the necessity of serving those Relations does
exact. And therefore if a Son or Daughter that is sent abroad to intend their
own Affairs, or one that is entered into Marriage, or made a Servant, or a Son,
and Daughter by Adoption; if (I say) any of these have opportunity and power to
serve their natural Parents, there is no doubt they ought to do so, no less
than those who continue under their Roof. For the exception of their obedience
being only in regard to those new Relations they have contracted, according to
that known Rule of the Lawyers, Exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis, it
must strengthen the tie of Obedience where those Relations do no way hinder.
The only Children to be accounted for, are such as have a public charge upon
them, whether in the Church, or in the State. For though Children are not to
enter into these without the consent of their Parents, if under their Fathers
Tuition, or at least not without the call of their and their Fathers
Superiors; yet being entered, they are in reason to prefer the discharge of
their Place, before any Commands of their Father; the Private Good being in
reason to yield to the Public; the Commands of Parents, to those of Kings and
Princes. Only, as if the Child can, without the neglect or debasement of his
Charge, fulfill his Fathers Commands, there is no doubt he is obliged so to do;
so there is so much of Authority in the Name of a Father, that no Dignity
whatsoever will make a good Son forget it, where it is not contrary to a more
important Concern.

5. The Duty of Honor being thus explained, and shown in what manner and
measure it is incumbent upon Children; it may not be amiss to subjoyn somewhat
concerning Fear and Love, which I have said to be also a part of their Duty.
Only because they are rather Accessaries, than Principal parts of Childrens
Duties, I will be so much the shorter in describing the Obligation they have
upon them.

That we are to fear our Father and Mother, the Scripture has told us, Lev.
19.3. and not without cause, if we consider, either that it is a part of
Honor, or that there is in Parents a just Object of it. For, as Fear is a
confession of the Power of those whom we have such an apprehension of; so there
is Power enough in Parents to excite that Passion in us, and make us as well to
dread as esteem them. Of this nature is, first, the Power of Chastisement,
whether as to the Body or Possessions of the Son: For, as I shall afterward
show, that Parents have Authority to inflict either; so, Experience makes it
evident, that they want not Power, especially as to the latter Chastisement; it
being ordinarily in the power of Parents to withhold their Possessions from
such as are disobedient to them. But of all the things we are to fear in a
Parent, there is certainly nothing more requiring it, than the Power they have
with God to procure a greater Punishment of our Disobedience, than they
themselves are able to inflict. For, though (as the Scripture speaks) the Curse
causeless shall not come; yet both Reason and Experience warrant us to believe,
that the Curses of Parents shall not be without effect, where they proceed upon
a just Cause. For be it, which is true enough, that such Curses are not lightly
to be used; be it, that generally they are not suitable either to the
Tenderness of a Father, or the Spirit of the Gospel, which will render them so
much the more unlikely to have effect: yet, as it is evident from St. Paul's
denouncing a Curse against Simon Magus, and Alexander the Coppersmith, that
Superiors are not wholly forbid the use of them; so, that it is not improper
for Fathers toward their disobedient Children, their being a kind of Gods to
us, may serve for abundant evidence. But then if we add thereto, Noah's cursing
the Posterity of Cham, for making a mock of his Nakedness, and that Effect
which it had upon them in aftertimes; if we moreover reflect Jer. Tailor,
Duct. Dubit. l. 3. c. 5. Rule 1.
upon the sad Examples which Heathen Stories have represented to us in the
Children of Oedipus, Amintor, and Theseus, who grew miserable upon their
Fathers Curses; lastly, if we add, that the same thing was observed by the
Jews, one of whom, even the Son of Sirach, observes, that the Curse of the
Mother rooteth out Foundations, Ecclus. 3.10. so we shall not need to doubt of
the Effect of their Curses, and therefore neither of their being the Object of
our Fear. For if, as the Greek Poet observes, (...), the Curses of Parents are
grievous upon the Earth, we have reason enough to fear lest their Curses should
sometime fall upon our Heads. The only thing worthy our farther inquiry, is,
how this Fear of ours ought to be expressed; which is, in short, by our
carefulness to please them in all things: For, as by so doing, we shall best
declare the Fear we have of them, Fear naturally prompting Men to seek the
Favor of those they have such an apprehension of; so we shall thereby secure
our selves from the Effects of their Displeasure, and (which is more to be
dreaded) from the Effects of that of God.

From the Duty of Fear, pass we to that of Love, which we shall find to be no
less incumbent upon us than the former, as because our Savior has reduced the
Whole of the Law to Love, so because our Parents are of all others the justest
Object of it: Witness the extraordinary Love they have naturally for us; their
many, and weighty, and constant Demonstrations of it; their taking care of us,
when we are not able to provide for themselves; their continuing that care over
us, even when we are; their furnishing us from time to time with all things
necessary for our Temporal Happiness; their instilling into our Minds what may
make for our Eternal one; their bearing with the weakness and peevishness of
our Infancy and Childhood; their enduring, with much long-suffering, the
disobedience and stubbornness of our riper Years; lastly, their perpetual fears
lest any Evil should betide us, their frequent and importunate Prayers to avert
any Evil from us. For, as out of the Bowels of a Parent such a Love will hardly
be met with, though you should search for it even in the most tender and
affectionate ones; whence it is, that God, to commend the Love he has to us,
does for the most part assume to himself the Person of a Father: so, for a
recompense in the same (as St. Paul speaks) it is but requisite that our Hearts
should be equally enlarged, and express it self in the same or the like
Instances; that is to say, in providing for them, when they are not able to
provide for themselves; in endeavoring to lessen their Care and Trouble, when
they in some measure are; in bearing with the weaknesses and peevishness of
their declining Years; in doing what in us lies either to remove or abate them;
in furnishing them, when they lie upon their Sick-beds, with our Assistance and
Comfort; in supplying the defects of our Endeavors, by begging the Aid of the
Divine; lastly, in giving them the satisfaction of seeing their Care and Labor
successfully employed, whilst they behold those for whom they have thus
labored, traveling equally for their Happiness, and reflecting back upon them
that kindly Heat which they sometime gave. So doing, we shall at the same time
give a proof both of our Love, and of our Honor; pay them the Affection which
is due to the Bowels of a Father and a Mother, and the Respect which belongs to
their Authority.

Now though, if we look no further than the Person of our Parents, what has
been already said concerning their Fear, and Love, and Honor, will comprehend
within the compass of it the whole of our Duty to them; yet because a Man may
be loved and honored in his Relations and Dependents, as well as in his own
proper Person; and in like manner hated and despised: hence it comes to pass,
that to complete our Duty, we are to extend our Love and Honor unto them,
according as their several Relations do exact. The sequel whereof will be, 1.
The paying Honor unto those which stand upon the same Level with our Parents.
Thus, for instance, though an Uncle or an Aunt can claim no Reverence or Love
by virtue of the Letter of this Commandment; yet inasmuch as they are the
Brothers and Sisters of my Father or Mother, and the Sons and Daughters of the
same Common Parents, if I either love or honor my Parents, or theirs, I must
afford these a portion of it, because of their near Relation. In like manner,
though a Mother-in-law can claim no Reverence or Love of her self, because none
of the Stock from whence I came; yet a Regard is due to her, as being made one
with him whom this Commandment requires me to revere. Which Particular I the
rather observe, because, contrary to all right, those are usually both hated
and despised: For, how can he honor his Father, who despises the one half of
him, yea, such a one as by the Laws of God and Man is become one Person with
him? 2. Again, As Love and Honor is due to those who stand upon the same Level
with my Parents, by reason of their Proximity to them; so an Affection, though
not an Honor, is due from us to our Brethren and Sisters, because descended
from the same Common Parents, and no less the Object of their Love: To whom
therefore, as it concerns me to show my self affectionate, if I would oblige my
Parents; so, if I show my self churlish to them, I wound my Parents Bowels
through their Sides, if those Parents be yet alive; but, if they be not, their
Honor. 3. It is to be observed, thirdly, as the result of the forementioned
Principle, That though the same Love be not due to Cousins, and other remoter
Kindred, that is to Brethren and Sisters; yet there is a Love due to them, by
reason of those Common Grandfathers and Great-grandfathers from whom both they
and we are descended. For, inasmuch as they, though at a greater distance,
contributed to our Being, and consequently are to have a proportionable Love
and Honor from us; so, if we have a Respect and Kindness for them, we must
have a Love for those who are equally descended from them with our selves. 4.
Lastly, If Love and Honor do naturally diffuse themselves from those that are
the immediate Objects of it, to those that are their Relations and Dependents;
if we have a Respect for our Parents, we shall show some portion of it to
those, whether Friends or Servants, whom they made the Object of theirs.


PART IV.
A Discourse of what is owing by Parents to their Children; which is shown to
be, first, the providing for their Subsistence. This evidenced from the common
Consent of Mankind, that Natural Affection which God has implanted in Parents,
and from the Scripture. The same farther evidenced from the Intention of God
and Nature, in that Being which he conferreth upon Children by them, from that
Dignity to which Parents are advanced, and from that Self-love which God has
implanted in their Hearts. That the Provision Parents are to make for their
Children, ought to be as large as their Necessities, till they come of Years to
provide for themselves; yea, to continue always such, if they prove impotent or
foolish. The like not to be affirmed, where there is no such Inability.
Consideration only to be had, whether the Ability of Children can reach to
such a Provision as is suitable to their Condition; for otherwise it ought to
be supplied by the Parents. That the Provision of Parents ought to extend
beyond their own Times, and they accordingly either to lay up for them, or put
them into a Vocation whereby they may provide for themselves. A Caution against
Parents suffering their Care for them, to entrench upon the Duties of Justice
or Charity; because these are alike incumbent on them, and the best Legacies
they can bequeath their Children. Institution of Children in Life and Manners,
a second Duty of a Parent, as is made appear both from Nature and Scripture.
The particular Duties implied in it, Instruction, Command, and Example; the
first being necessary to teach them how to live; the two latter, to oblige them
to the Practice of it. Chastising of Children, a third Duty of a Parent, and
therefore also largely insisted on. That it extends not now to Death, or the
cutting off a Limb; as neither to a total Disinheriting, or the setting a
lasting Note of Infamy upon them: Because either the Peculiar of Princes, upon
whom a great part of the Parents Authority is derived; or not so agreeable to
Paternal Affection; or tending rather to provoke than amend the Parties
chastised. Corporal Punishments less than those, within the power of Parents;
but yet not to be inflicted upon those of riper Years, or not in the same
manner wherein they are upon younger Persons. Of the Measure in which
Chastisements are to be inflicted upon Children. That a principal Regard ought
to be had that they be within the Quality of the Offense; and how they may be
known so to be. The Strength of the Child, another Measure of Chastisement; and
that that, and that alone, can be looked upon to be within it, which does not
disable the Child from the performance of those several Offices which Nature or
Religion does exact. The Relation of the Chastiser, another Measure; and what
that Relation leads to: which is either, first, the reforming of the Party
chastised, or the deterring other Children from the like Offenses. To correct
either for ones own Pleasure or Revenge, not suitable to a Parent. That all
possible Submission is due to those Chastisements which are within the
forementioned Bounds; but however, no other Resistance to be made, than by
Flight, or an Appeal to the Magistrate. An Inquiry into the supposed Obligation
of the Mothers Nursing her own Child; and the Arguments for it proposed, and
answered.

II. OF the Duty of Children to their Parents, what has been said may suffice;
proceed we therefore to consider the Duty of Parents toward them, or rather
unto God concerning them. Where, 1. First, I shall consider those that are
common to each Parent: And, 2. After that inquire, Whether there be any
peculiar to the Mother.


1. Now there are three things incumbent upon Parents, in order to the Welfare
of their Children.

1. Providing for their Subsistence. 2. Institution of them in Life and
Manners: And, 3. Chastisement.
1. I begin with the first of these, even Parents providing for their Childrens
Subsistence; where again these three things would be inquired into.

1. How it appears to be a Duty. 2. Whence the Obligation thereof arises: And,
3. What Provision they are to make.
1. Now though the Duty of Parents in this Affair would most naturally be made
out by pointing at the Grounds from whence it arises; yet because there are
other ways to make the necessity thereof to appear, and such too as are more
intelligible to the Common sort of Men, I think it not amiss to begin with
them; whereof, the first I shall allege is, the Common Consent of Mankind
concerning it: For, it appearing not how all Mankind should so unanimously
agree upon the Necessity of Parents providing for their Children, if there were
not some Principle in Nature to lead them to it; it is in reason to be presumed
to be a part of Natural Duty, and such as Reason, no less than Revelation, does
tie upon them. From the Consent of Mankind, pass we to that Natural Affection
which God has implanted in the Breasts of Parents: For, as that does naturally
lead Men to make Provision for those toward whom they have so strong an
Affection; so it is a sufficient Proof of the Intention of the Almighty to
oblige Parents to the Practice of it: no other account being to be given, why
God should implant in them so strong an affection, but to be as a Spur to them
to make Provision for them. But so that Parents are naturally obliged, St. Paul
declares in his Epistle to the Romans, and the Second to the Corinthians:
Witness for the former, his charging upon the Heathen, among other things, the
Text. Graecus (...). Quod proprie significat expertes naturalis affect^^ erga
liberos.
want of natural affection to their Children, Romans 1.31. for the latter, his
express Affirmation, that Parents ought to lay up for them, 2 Cor. 12.14. For,
inasmuch as nothing but a Sin could be the matter of a Charge; as nothing could
be a Sin to the Gentiles, which was not a breach of Nature's Law; by charging
the want of natural affection upon the Heathen, he manifestly implies it to
have been a transgression of Nature's Law, and consequently that the contrary
was commanded by it. The same is yet more evident from that other place, where
he affirms in express terms, That Parents ought to lay up for them, for, though
(as a Learned Man Sanderson. Two Caser of Conscience, page 72
has observed) St. Paul speaks it, but upon the By, and by way of illustration
of another Argument, yet is that so far from lessening the importance of it,
that on the contrary it adds a greater Force to it; such illustrations (as the
forequoted Person remarks) being ever taken a notiori, and from such common
notions as are granted and consented unto by all reasonable men.

2. Having thus shown it to be a natural duty of Parents to provide for their
Childrens subsistence, which is the first of those things we proposed to
consider, proceed we in the second place, according to the method before laid
down, to show from whence the Obligation thereto arises; which is first of all
from the intention of God and Nature, in that Being which he conferrs upon
Children by them. For the Intention of God and Nature being to make those to
whom he gives it happy, he must consequently be supposed to have enjoined the
adding of those things which may serve for the procuring of it. Otherwise our
Birth would have been rather an Infelicity than a Benefit, because exposing us
to those Evils which but for our Birth we should never have received. Now,
forasmuch as God intended our Birth for our benefit, forasmuch as that cannot
be, where the conveniences of Life are wanting, he must consequently be
supposed to have enjoined the adding of them also, so far as it is in the power
of Parents to procure them. From the intention of God and Nature in our Birth,
pass we to that dignity which we have before said, Parents to be advanced to;
that is to say, to be as Gods to those whom they were the Authors of. For as
that dignity of theirs does oblige those who are their Children, to look upon
and revere them as such; so it does no less oblige the Parents to do things
becoming that divine dignity to which he has advanced them. Otherwise they
shall not only bring a scandal upon themselves, but upon him whose Images they
are. Now forasmuch as it is no way becoming that dignity to which they are
advanced, to cast off those creatures which they have produced, God whose Image
they bear no less, providing for his Creatures when made, than contributing to
the Being of them at first; it follows, that as Parents are a kind of Gods to
us, by the Being which they gave us, so they ought to show themselves to be
farther such, by preserving what they have made, and continuing what they
before gave. Lastly, forasmuch as Children are not only the workmanship of
their Parents, but also like that of the Spider, woven out of their own Bowels.
Hence there arises another Obligation of making provision for them so far as
they may stand in need of them. For, inasmuch as no man yet either did, or
could without a great unnaturalness, hate his own flesh, no man can without the
like unnaturalness withold nourishment from those who are no other than a
portion of it.

3. That Parents ought to make provision for their Children, together with the
grounds of that Obligation, we have seen already; proceed we now to consider
the provision they are to make. In order whereunto, I will consider their
several stages through which their Children are to pass. And first of all, If
the question be concerning Children, before they have either Ability or Reason
to provide for themselves, so, there is no doubt the provision of Parents ought
to be as large as the necessities of their Children. For as the weakness of
Children in that state takes away all pretense of putting any part of it upon
them, so the same reason, which obliges Parents to provide for their Children
at all, obliges them to provide for them altogether, where there is a like
necessity of it. The same is to be said of Children, who, however of years of
strength and discretion, are yet by reason of some defect in Nature, either
impotent or foolish; these being as much Children, as those of younger years,
and therefore to have a like Interest in our care and providence. From Children
which have not arrived to Ability and Discretion, pass we to those that have,
but continue still in their Fathers Family, or at least have the opportunity of
their Fathers Assistance and Advice. Where first, I shall not stick to affirm
that there is no necessity the provision should be as large, as for Children of
a lower state. For the general ground of making provision for others, being the
necessities of those we provide for; our obligation to make provision must so
far cease, as we see their necessities do. And therefore if a Child be in some
measure able to provide for himself, there is no doubt but a Father may oblige
him to it, and substract so much of his own providence. But to those very
creatures, whom God has sent us to learn Providence of, have taught us by
their example to proceed. For how great soever their affection to their young
ones is, yet they generally leave them to their own conduct, when they are able
to shift for themselves. This only would be added, which has no place in other
creatures, that consideration ought to be had of the quality of Children, or
rather of those from whom they are descended. For, as, the provision Parents
ought to make for their Children, ought to be answerable to the condition, both
of themselves and of their Children; so if the ability of their Children will
not reach to such a provision, the Parent is to supply it by his care and
providence, and not only furnish him with such things as are necessary for a
Son, but for the Son of such a Father. For by the same reason a man is to
provide more for a Child, as being of a nobler Nature, than we find other
Creatures do for their young Ones; by the same, a Man of more noble Condition,
is to provide more largely for his Child, than if he were the Son of a more
Inferior Person. But because what has been hitherto said, does rather concern
the making provision for a Child in his Fathers House, or at least during his
Life, then after his Fathers decease; and because St. Paul has represented
this last as no less the Duty of Parents, where he tells us, that they ought to
lay up for them: therefore inquire we, in the third place, Whether or no
Parents are obliged to do it, and after what proportion. Now, that so they are,
(which is the first thing to be shown) beside what was alleged out of St.
Paul, will appear from the necessity Children generally stand in of it. For,
beside that after their Parents decease they must needs be less able than
before to attain to such a condition of life as is suitable to their respective
qualities, they wanting in that state, that Advice and Assistance of their
Parents which might have facilitated their way to it; so it is but requisite,
that, to supply that defect, Parents should either train up their Children to
some Calling by which they may be able to provide for themselves, (which is
indeed an excellent Portion) or, if that will not suffice, or be not suitable
to their Condition, that they lay up for them that which Solomon tells us
answers all things? Otherwise they will leave them unprovided for, as to that
state, which stands most in need of it. Neither will it avail to say, there is
no reason the Fathers care should reach beyond his own life, when we have
before said, that the Child's obedience generally ought not. For as I have
before shown, that the Honor of a Parent ought to abide after his death, and
Obedience to his Commands also, so far as that is concerned in it; so it is but
requisite, that, answerably to that, a Fathers care should extend beyond his
own time, and not only provide for his Children during his own life, but as
much as in him lies afterward; especially when the necessities of his Child,
which is the ground of making provision for them, is then likely to be greater
than before. The only thing to be enquired into, in this affair, is, after what
proportion a Father is to provide for them. For the resolution whereof, though
I might have referred you to what was said before, concerning making provision
for them in the Parents life time, because giving us to understand that both
the one and the other ought to be according to the condition of the Father, yet
I thought it not amiss to bring it anew before you, if it were only to add this
necessary limitation to a Fathers care; to wit, that he ought not so to see to
the providing for his Children, as to forget to minister of his substance to
the more public concernments of Church or State, or the pressing and instant
necessities of those charitable Objects he has before him. For, as both the
one and the other ought rather to be regarded, than the leaving to our Children
a pompous and glorious Estate, so he that forgets not to do good and to
communicate, provides much better for his Children, than he who will not suffer
any, the least part of his Estate to pass away from them; Money lent to God, as
all that is so employed is Pro. 19.17.
, being (as Master Herbert has well observed Country Parson. chap. 10.
) placed surer for the Child's advantage, than if it were given to the Chamber
of London, which was in his time the best security in the world.

2. The second duty of Parents follows, even the institution of their Children
in Life and Manners, which is a provision for their better part, their Souls,
concerning which, therefore, I will show first, the Authority by which it
stands, the Duties it contains, and the Inconveniences that attend the omission
of it. And first, if we enquire by what Authority the Institution of Children
stands, we shall find it to be by the same whereby all other moral Duties do,
that is to say, by the Law of Nature and Revelation; both the one and the other
binding it upon the Consciences of Parents, and that too, more stronger than
the former. That the Law of Nature does, the Argument before alleged for
Parents making provision for their Subsistence, is to me an abundant Evidence.
For the design of God in our Birth, being the happiness of those to whom he
gives a Being, he must consequently be supposed to have enjoined the adding of
those things which may serve for the procuring of it: Which being in an
especial manner to be understood of a holy Institution, because our Eternal
happiness does depend upon it, will make the addition of that, even by Natures
Law, more incumbent upon Parents, than the providing for their Temporal one.
The same is no less evident from the positive Laws of God, as well those of the
Old Testament, as the New; in the former whereof Deuteronomy. 6.7.11.19.
we find Parents commanded to teach Gods Commandments diligently unto their
Children, and to talk to them of them when they sit in their House, and when
they walk by the way, when they lie down and when they rise up; in the latter
Ephesians 6.4. (...), quod significat institutionem per poenas. vid. Grot. in loc.
, which is tantamount, though expressed in fewer words, that they should bring
them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. From the Authority by which
this Duty stands, pass we to the particulars it contains, which may be reduced
to these Three Heads, Instruction, Command, and Example; the first to show them
how they ought to Live and Act, the two latter to induce them to the practice
of it. For as it is impossible for Children to live well till they know what it
is to do so, or know it without a precedent Institution, they neither bringing
with them into the world a knowledge of their Duty, nor being able through the
tenderness of their Understandings to find it without the help of others; so
the pravity of their Natures makes it but necessary that they should be Obliged
as well as Instructed, and Encouraged as well as Obliged. The former whereof,
as it is best done by the Parents commands, which, till the minds of Children
come to be debauched, have a mighty influence upon them; so the latter, by the
Parents showing themselves a Pattern of those things which they bind upon them
by their Instruction and Commands; nothing prevailing more with Children than
Example does, nor any Example more than that of a Father. Which therefore, as
it is but necessary that Parents should superadd to complete the Institution of
their Children, so woeful experience shows, that the want of that alone makes
all other ways of Institution fruitless; it being rare to find a Child, who is
not more debauched by his Fathers ill Example, than regulated by his wholesome
Instruction and Commands. Having thus shown, as well what the Institution of
Children implies, as by what Authority it stands, it remains only to give it so
much the more weight, that I represent some of those inconveniences which
attend the omission of it. For, to say nothing at all, that that Father is like
to be ill served himself, who has not taught his Children to revere his and
their common parent God; nor yet that the omission of a Holy Institution may
expose them to the taking such Courses as will bring little comfort, either to
their Children or themselves; I shall desire such Parents to consider how they
will be able at that great day to look those Children in the face, whom they
have begotten only to Eternal Torments. For, as, if they have the bowels of a
Father, it cannot but be an infinite affliction to them, to see those who are a
part of themselves plunged in Eternal Torments; so, if they have any the least
shame, it will be an equal confusion to them to consider, that they became so
by their means, even by theirs who ought in reason to have done their utmost to
make them happy, and enstate them in Gods Kingdom, as well as in their own
possessions. For by how much greater their obligation thereto was, so much the
more reproachful must be the violation of it, and though it could be supposed
possible to bear up against the reproaches of a stranger, yet it will be a hard
matter certainly to hear a Son, and that justly, cursing his Father for giveing
him a Being, which has only helped to make him Eternally miserable.

3. To the Institution of Children in Life and Manners, subjoin we the
chastizing of them, for so both the necessities of Children and the Scriptures
require; there being no Children so towardly, which may not stand in need of
it, nor any other thing more enjoined upon Parents when they do. Of which,
beside the many Precepts that the Scriptures afford us, and particularly the
Proverbs of Solomon Prove. 13.24.19.18.22.15.23.13.
, that of the Heb. 12.8.
Author to the Hebrews, If ye be without chastisement, whereof all are
partakers, then are ye Bastards and not Sons, may serve for an abundant
evidence. For well may that be looked upon as a duty of a Parent to his Child,
the omission whereof must put the Child into the number of Illegitimate ones.
The only thing of difficulty in this affair, is to what evils it may extend,
what ought to be the measures of the inflicting of those which it does, and
what submission is due from Children to them. And first of all, If the question
be concerning the Evils to which a Fathers chastisement may extend, so I shall
not doubt to affirm first, that it ought not to go so far, as the taking away
the Life of the offending Son. For, though Fathers anciently had power of Life
and Death, yet it was then only when they were also Princes; which Authority
being now vested in other hands, the power of Life and Death must be supposed
to pass over to them, and consequently, not now to belong to Fathers. The same
is to be said of taking away a Limb, however, no doubt, anciently in the power
of Fathers. For beside that, this would be an entrenchment upon the
Prerogatives of Princes, to whom by the Institution of God, the Sword of
Justice is committed, it is neither agreeable with the nature of a Father,
which is kind and affectionate, nor with those bounds which the Apostle has
set to a Fathers chastisement; there being, no doubt, such an Evil would rather
exasperate Children against their persons, than prompt them to yield them a
more ready obedience to their commands. The same is to be said Thirdly, of
cutting off an offending Son from any Right in his Fathers Estate, that is to
say, not only from being his Heir, but from enjoying any part of his
Possessions. For, however such Actions as these may well suit with the
Authority of Kings, yet not with that of Fathers, which is an Authority mixed
with Clemency, and designs not so much the execution of Vengeance, as the
reclaiming of the Offender. Lastly, though it may be suitable enough to the
Authority of Princes, to set a lasting note of Infamy upon the Disobedient, yet
it is no way agreeable to that of Parents, because, though allowed to chastise,
yet not to provoke their Children, which such a Brand would infallibly do. But
other Chastisements than these, as I see no reason to forbid Parents, provided
they be used with moderation; so, the Charge of Chastising being general, it is
in reason to extend to all those Evils which there is not some peculiar Reason
to restrain Parents from; especially when it is certain they have the power of
Corporal Punishment See the places before-quoted out of the Proverbs.
, which is the highest they are in a Capacity to inflict. This only would be
added, That in the inflicting of Corporal Punishments, respect ought to be had
to the Age of the Party chastis'd: For though, as was but now said, Corporal
Punishments are within the power of Parents, if we consider it in the full
Latitude thereof; yet they are not to be inflicted upon Children of full age,
or at least not in that manner, in which they may be upon younger Children:
such Chastisements, by the reproachfulness thereof, being more likely to
provoke Persons of Years to show themselves undutiful, than incline them to
yield a more ready Obedience to their Commands.

Having thus shown to what Evils the Power of Paternal Chastisement does
extend, inquire we, in the next place, into the measure of inflicting them: For
the resolution whereof, I observe in the general, That consideration ought to
be had of the Quality of the Offense, of the Strength of the Offender, and of
the Relation of the Chastiser: He that chastises his Child beyond the merit of
his Offense, being certainly unjust; he that chastises him beyond his
Strength, cruel; he that does beyond the measures of a Father, unnatural. But
because it may be still inquired, when the Chastisement is within the aforesaid
limits, that is to say, within the Quality of the Offense, the Strength of the
Offender, and the Measures of a Father; I think it not amiss, for the farther
elucidation of this Affair, to say somewhat to each of these. For the first of
these, to wit, when the Chastisement is within the Quality of the Offense, much
must be left to the Conscience of the Chastiser, because of the variety of
Circumstances wherewith they may be attended: Only, that I may not leave it
altogether uncertain, I will subjoyn this general Rule, which may serve for a
competent Direction in it; that is to say, That consideration be had of the
Contumacy of the Offender, and the general Custom of Parents. For, as one and
the same Crime may admit of Degrees, according to the Degrees of Contumacy
wherewith it is committed; so, what Chastisement is due to each, will be best
judged of by the general Custom of Christian Parents; a general Custom being,
for the most part, the result of an approved Reason, and therefore no unfit
Rule for particular Persons to proceed by. From the Quality of the Offense,
pass we to the Strength of the Offender, which will minister less Matter for
our Inquiry: For, as it will be easy for Parents, upon the knowledge they have
of their Childrens Constitutions, to discern what they will be able to bear;
so, that, and that only, is to be concluded to be within their Strength, which
does not disable them from the performance of those several Offices which
Nature or Religion does exact. The only thing requiring a more accurate
Examination, is, What are the Measures of a Father; which are, in short, these
two: First, and chiefly, the Reformation of the Party chastis'd; and secondly,
the deterring his other Children from the like Offenses. For, as it is evident
from the Prove. 13.24. -- But he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes. Heb.
12.6, 7.
Scripture, that the Parents Love of the Child is the most proper Ground of
Chastisement; so, the Places before-quoted out of the Proverbs, show the
Reformation of the Child to be the principal, if not only end of Gods obliging
Parents to chastise them. But from hence it will follow, not only that Parents
ought not to chasten Children for their own pleasure, or to gratify their
Anger and Revenge; but also, that, where a less Chastisement is likely to have
effect, the Parent is not generally to inflict a greater: I say, generally,
because a greater one may be sometimes necessary, to deter his other Children
from the like Offense: Which, as there is no doubt the Parent ought to have a
regard to, as being concerned for the welfare of them all; so the offending Son
has no just Cause to take exception at it, provided the Punishment be within
the measure of the Offense: It being but reasonable, that he should instruct
those by his Chastisement, whom by his evil Practice he has given a temptation
to offend. Which said, nothing remains to account for, but what Submission is
due from Children to the Chastisement of their Parents; which will require no
great pains to resolve. For, as no doubt can be made, but where the
Chastisement is within due Bounds, all possible Submission is due from the
Children to it; the same Authority that licenseth the Parent to chastise,
obliging the Child to acquiesce in it: so, even where the Chastisement is
exorbitant, no other Resistance can be supposed to be lawful, than what is made
either by flying from it, or appealing to those to whom even Parents ought to
be subject; other Resistance than that, overthrowing that Subordination which
God has ser between a Child and a Parent.

2. Of those Duties which are common to both Parents, what has been said may
suffice; proceed we therefore to inquire, whether there be any peculiar to the
Mother. The Ground of which Quaerie is an Opinion that has prevailed, of
Women's being generally obliged to nurse their own Children. What Reasons there
are for such a Surmise, may be seen in a Dissertation of Favorinus Vid. A.
Gell. N^ct Atric. l. 12. c. 1.
, where that Matter is argued with great Eloquence and show of Reason. The sum
of his Argumentation is, That Nature does as it were prompt the Mother to it,
by that Nourishment which it sends into her Breasts; that the Milk of the
Mother is most agreeable to the Child that is to be maintained by it; that ill
Dispositions of Mind may be contracted from the Nurses they make use of; and in
fine, that much of that Affection which is due from the Child to the Mother,
and, on the other side, from the Mother to the Child, may be taken off, by
putting them out to Nurse to Stranger Women. Which Reasons, how plausible
soever in appearance, seem to me not to have that force which they are commonly
apprehended to be of: For though it be true, in the first place, that Nature
commonly furnishes the Mother with an Ability to perform that Office to the
Child; yet as that may be looked upon rather as the Kindness of God and Nature,
than any Obligation to the doing of it; so, that it induces no Obligation to
the Undertaking of it, will need no other proof, than that the Nourishment of
the Child may be otherwise as happily procured. For the Means of any thing
becoming valuable by its subserviency to that End which it is made use of to
procure; where the End may be attained by more Means than one, there, no doubt,
it shall be lawful for the Party concerned to make use of either, according as
their own Conveniences, or other Circumstances shall persuade. All therefore
that it will concern us to show, is, That the End may be as happily attained by
other Means; which will consequently lay the stress of Mothers Obligation (if
indeed there be any) upon the less aptitude of other Means, which the following
Objections are intended to establish. To bring therefore the Controversy to an
Issue, let us consider those Objections, and first of all that which pretends,
that the Milk of the Mother is most agreeable to the Child that is to be
maintained by it. Now, that so it is not, will appear, if either we compare it
with the Bringing up of Children by Hand, as it is commonly called, or with the
Milk of other Women. For beside that late Experience shows, that many Children
have been brought up the former way, without any considerable inconvenience;
the same Experience gives us to understand, that Nurses, if healthful Women and
stirring, (as the greatest part of them are) do perform that Office with as
great or greater success, than the Mothers themselves do, especially if (as
most of those are that put out their Children) they be Women of more nice
Constitutions, and more dainty, and therefore less healthful Feeding. As little
or less am I moved with that following Suggestion of Favorinus, of Childrens
contracting ill Dispositions of Mind, and particularly Poorness of Spirit, from
those mean Persons Women make use of for their Nurses. For beside that the
contrary is frequently seen in the Children of greater Personages, who are all
upon the matter nursed by Women of meaner Birth than their Mothers, there want
not even among the poorer sort, Women of Spirits above their Fortunes, and, to
whom therefore, if that be all, they may put their Children. By which means,
all the force there is in Women's being obliged to nurse their own Children,
must be grounded upon the presumption of the Affections of the Mother and the
Child being likely to be abated, by making choice of a Stranger to perform the
Office of a Nurse to them. But as that is on the part of the Child a groundless
Presumption, it being not at all rare for those Children who have been nursed
by their Mothers, to show as little affection to them, as those that have been
nursed by others; so, that it is otherwise on the part of the Mother, will be
hard to be believed by those who have made any Observations upon it: Women of
better Fortunes, and who therefore for the most part place their Children
abroad, being generally as fond or fonder of their Children, than Women of
meaner Birth and Fortunes, who for the most part are their own Nurses.

PART V.
Of Kings or Princes, and all that are in Authority. The Ground of the Honor
of Princes, their being, 1. God's Ministers and Vicegerents; and, 2. Of his
Designation and Appointment. The former of these evidenced from their being
styled Gods, as their Throne the Throne of God. That this was not peculiar to
the Jewish Princes, evidenced from St. Paul, who styles the Powers of his Time
the Ministers of God. An Answer to what is objected out of St. Peter,
concerning their being styled the Ordinance of Man. That Princes are of God's
Designation and Appointment, as well as his Ministers and Vicegerents; because
that Authority wherewith they are invested, cannot become theirs, but by the
Grant of him to whom they do originally belong. How it may appear, that the
Princes that now are, are of God's Designation and Appointment; where is shown,
first, That they neither do nor can pretend to any Immediate Appointment, as
those of the Jews might; but only a mediate one: And secondly, That that
Appointment is marked out to us by the Dispensations of his Providence, which
are moreover shown to be a sufficient Testimony of it. Evidence of that
Appointment in such Princes as arrive at their Authority by the ordinary Course
of Things, or such as arrive at it by extraordinary Means, and particularly by
Fraud and Violence. By what Means these last become legitimate Powers; and
particularly, by what Means the Roman Emperors came to be so. Of the sorts of
Honor which are to be paid to Princes, which are shown, as before in Parents,
to be, 1. An Inward Esteem of them; and, 2. An Outward Declaration of it. This
latter evidenced in the Declaration that is made by the Gesture, and by the
Tongue: where moreover is shown at large, the Sinfulness of speaking evil of
Princes, even where there want not real Failings in them.

IT being evident from the general Explication of this Commandment, that Kings,
and all that are in Authority, are included in the Name of Fathers; and it
being no less evident from St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.17. that the Honor of Kings is
a part of Christianity; for the fuller Explication of this Commandment, I will
allot them a place in my Discourse, and therein inquire, 1. What the Grounds of
Honoring Kings or Princes are. 2. What Honors are to be exhibited to them. 3.
Answer the Objections that are commonly made for the denial of those Honors,
and particularly that of Submission to their Censures. 4. After which I will
descend, in the fourth place, to consider of the Honor of Inferior
Magistrates, and show upon what Grounds, and after what Manner and Measure,
that Honor is to be paid. 5. And lastly, Speak a Word or two of their Duty.


1. Honor, as was before shown, being nothing else than an Acknowledgment of
his Excellencies whom we honor; to know what the ground of the Honor of
Princes is, we must enquire what those Excellencies are by which they stand
commended to the world. In order whereunto, I know not what shorter course to
take, than by having recourse to the 13. Chapter to the Romans, where this
matter is both largely and perspicuously handled. For exhorting, both once and
again, that every Soul should be subject to them, and that too, not only for
Wrath, but for Conscience sake; the Apostle assigns for the reason of that
subjection, that they are men of Power or Authority, that they are invested
with that Authority by God, that they are appointed by him over those that are
under their subjection, that they are Gods Ministers and Vicegerents in the
governance of them, that they have both Authority and Command to reward and
encourage the good, and to draw out the Sword of Justice against Evil doers;
from all which put together, it is evident that the ground for which a Prince
is to be honored, is, that he is Gods Minister and Vicegerent here on Earth,
and of his designation and appointment.

For the further evidencing the former, whereof, as in which it concerns us to
be well satisfied in regard of some evil Opinions that have been lately opposed
to it; the first thing that I shall allege, is, Gods giving them his own
August name. For thus, Exodus 22.28. after he had said, Thou shall not revile
the Gods, to let us know what Gods he means, he subjoins in the next words, nor
speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. But so we find them elsewhere more
apparently styled, Psalm. 82.6. For as his words there are express, I have said
ye are Gods, so it is apparent from the whole Psalm that they are Princes to
whom he thus speaks, such, to whom it belongs to judge the causes that are
brought before them, to do justice to the afflicted and needy, by defending and
delivering them, and ridding them out of the hand of the wicked. Which Offices,
though they may, and for the most part are communicated to Inferior
Magistrates, and particularly to those that have the name of Judges; yet as
they are originally in the Prince by whom they are so communicated, and
executed in his Name, and by his Authority, so that they are a part of his
natural Power, Solomon shows, 1 Kings 3.7.9. he upon Gods making him King in
the stead of David his Father, begging of him that he would give him an
understanding heart to judge his people, and to discern between good and bad.
And accordingly as we find Solomon himself, in consequence of the Royal
Authority, giving judgment between the two Harlots that contended for the
Living Child, verse. 27, and 28. of the forequoted Chapter; so that the Kings of
England heretofore sat personally in judgment, is notorious from Story, and the
Bench whereon they sat, for that very reason styled to this day, The Upper or
Kings Bench. But beside that, Princes have the name of God, which is no
contemptible indication of their being his Substitutes and Vicegerents; we find
moreover, that God judges among them, yea, that their Throne is no other than
Gods. For thus, what is in 1 Kings 2.12. Then Solomon sat upon the Throne of
David his Father, is elsewhere expressed, Then Solomon sat upon the Throne of
the Lord as King, instead of David his Father. 1 Chro. 29.23. And, which comes
yet more home to our purpose, what was said by Jehosaphat to the Judges he had
appointed, that they judged not for man but for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. for
what greater proof can we desire of Princes, being Gods Substitutes and
Vicegerents, than the bearing of his name, and sitting in his Throne, and that
they who judge for, and under them, judge not for Man, but for the Lord?
Neither will it avail to say, that how true soever this may have been of the
Kings of Judah, which had sometime the Title of a Theocraty, yet the like
cannot be affirmed of other Princes. For as it is apparent enough that they
were not such at the time of their Kings (God himself having told Samuel, that
when they went about to desire a King, they rejected him from being King over
them, and the Word of God, that they both desired and had a King after the
manner of other Nations) So what is in the Old Testament affirmed of the Jewish
Kings, St. Paul sticks not to affirm of the powers that then were, where he
calls them the Ministers of God. But from hence it will follow, whatever has
been pretended to the contrary, that Princes do not derive the power they have
from the people. For, if they be Gods Ministers, it is his Authority by which
they shine, neither have they any other Fountain of their Power, than that
Irenae. l. 5. c. 24. Cujus enim jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and reges
constituuntur.

Tertul. Apol. c. 30. Inde est imperator, unde and h mo antequam imperator;
inde potestas illi unde and spiritus.


which is the Fountain of their Being. And though I know the contrary has been
pretended from the Scripture, inasmuch as those Powers are by our Translation
of it styled the ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.13. yet, as the words which they
render, Submit your selves to every ordinance of Man, import no other than
(...). See Ushers Power communicated by God to the Prince, etc. page 3. and seq
the doing of it to every humane creature, that is to say, (for so both the
Subjection enjoined, and the Persons (...).
into whom it is branched shows) to every humane creature that is in Authority;
so what the same St. Peter adds, as the grounds of our so doing, does plainly
overthrow that counterfeit interpretation. For, requiring the subjecting our
selves to them for the Lords sake, he shows it is his Authority which commends
them, and for which they are to be revered.

That Princes are Gods Vicegerents here on Earth, has been at large declared,
it remains that we also show them to be appointed by God as such. For as no one
takes to himself the honor of Priesthood, but he who is called of God, as was
Aaron, so undoubtedly no one can assume to himself the honor of Gods
Vicegerent, unless he be thereto appointed by himself: That which is originaly
another being not capable of becoming ours, but by the grant of him to whom it
does so belong. To make out therefore the rightfulness of Princes Pleas, we
must enquire after the donation of the Almighty, and by what means both they
and we may be assured of it. That the Princes of the Jews were appointed by God
as his Vicegerents, no doubt can be made, because he, whose Vicegerents they
were, declared them to be such by men immediately inspired by himself, and
assured them of that declaration by his word: After the former, whereof as it
was not in the power of their people to doubt, so it would have been extremity
of madness, as well as of Impiety to deny it. But because there is not the
least appearance of any such immediate appointment of other Princes, and,
beside that, they who arrogate to themselves the same Authority, do not in the
least pretend to it; therefore to make out the legitimateness of their Plea,
some other course must be taken, which accordingly I come now to attempt. In
order whereunto unto, the first thing that I shall allege, is those words of
St. Paul before remembered, that the powers that then were, were ordained of
God. For, though that will give us little light into the manner of their
appointment, and consequently contribute little to the understanding of that of
our own; yet thus far it will contribute to it, as to give us to understand,
that those Princes may be appointed by God who have no immediate designation.
For, inasmuch as it is notorious both from the Scriptures and Profane Authors,
that the Powers that then were, were no other than the Roman Emperors, of
whose immediate appointment by God there is not the least footstep either in
the one or the other; it will follow, that those Princes may be appointed by
him as his Vicegerents who have no such immediate call. I observe, secondly,
That as the Powers that then were, though they had no immediate call, yet are
affirmed by St. Paul to have been ordained by God; so that they who know
nothing of God, or of their own appointment, are styled the Anointed of the
Lord, which, if any thing, may seem to have been peculiar to the Jewish
Princes. For thus in particular, Isa. 45.1. We find God stiling Cyrus his
anointed, though, as the same God immediately after tells us, he had then no
knowledge of him. I observe, thirdly, which will bring us yet more near to the
thing intended, that though the Powers, that now are, have no such immediate
appointment as the Jewish Princes had, yet is there as good Authority for the
being of such Power, though there be no such designation of the persons that
are to be invested with it. For it being the voice both of Nature and
Scripture, that God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace and Order; and
it being no less evident from experience, that Peace and Order cannot be either
had or maintained without the Institution of Rulers; it is necessarily to be
presumed to be the will and pleasure of God that there should be such Rulers in
every Nation. Which said, a way is opened to the discovery of that appointment,
which we have said the Powers on Earth to stand by. For, it being of Divine
appointment that there should be Rulers in every Nation, and God Almighty
having not by any immediate Revelation signified his pleasure concerning the
Persons that are to be so; it follows, that to attain the knowledge of his Will
in this particular we are to have recourse to his Providence, which is the only
way besides to come to the knowledge of it. For, though the Providence of God
be no Rule against his revealed Will, because that is the proper measure of
Good and Evil; yet, inasmuch as that also is a declaration of his Will, nothing
hinders, but it may have place, where the other is not contradicted, and mark
out the appointments of our great Master to us. But from hence it will follow,
first, That those Powers are to be looked upon as ordained by God, which come
to that Power they have, as without any fraud or violence, so by the ordinary
course of Gods Providence. For that Authority, to which they arrive, being
consigned into their hands by his alone Providence, in whom all Authority in
Heaven and Earth is vested; it is in reason to be presumed to be appointed by
himself, and accordingly to be looked upon as such. Upon which account all
those Powers must be looked upon as ordained by God, that either come to the
Throne by a lineal descent from former Kings, where the Kingdom is Hereditary;
or by a free and unconstrained Choice, where it is Elective. It will follow,
secondly, That those also are to be looked upon as ordained of God, which,
however they do at first attain to their Power by Fraud or Violence, yet are
confirmed in it by the Submission and Acceptance of those in whom the
Government formerly was, and over whom it is to be exercised. For, it being the
Appointment of God, that there should be Rulers in every Nation; and, which is
more, where there is no other Declaration of his Will, that we should have
recourse unto his Providence: it follows, that where the Throne becomes empty,
as it is by the Rendition of those that before sat in it, he is in reason to
be presumed to be appointed to it, who is not only permitted by God to ascend
to it, but those to whom it formerly belonged, together with those that were
governed by it, moved by God to accept of him for their Governor, who was so
advanced to it. And upon this account it is, that the Powers St. Paul spoke of,
became legitimate, and the Christians were so earnestly exhorted to submit
themselves to them: Because, though the Authority of those Powers were founded
in Violence, yet it was submitted to and accepted Justinianus in Instit. lib 1.
tit. 2. Sed and quod Principi placuit, legis habet vigorem; quum lege Regia,
quae de ejus imperio lata est, populus ei and in eum omne imperium suum and
potestatem concedat. Vid. and Strabonem in fine Operis, cit. a Grotio in Flor.
sparsione ad Jus Justinianeum. (...).
by the Senate and People of Rome, who were both the Governed and Governors.
In which Case, as there could not be any pretense for any other Powers to
interpose; so God Almighty sufficiently intimated his Pleasure concerning the
Roman Emperors, by not only suffering them to rise to that Creatness, but by
moving the Hearts of the Senate and People quietly to submit to, and own them
as their Lords and Governors.

2. Having thus shown that there is in Princes a just Foundation of Honor; and
moreover described at large what are the proper Grounds of it: my proposed
Method leads me to inquire, what Kinds of Honor we are to give them; which we
shall find to be much the same, though in a greater degree than that of
Parents. Of this nature is,

I. The entertaining an awful Apprehension of them, and regarding them in our
Thoughts both as God's Vicegerents, and of his Appointment. For, the very Life
of Honor consisting in our Inward Esteem of those whom we pretend to honor,
it is in reason to be given to those who are a kind of Gods on Earth, and
appointed as the Representatives of the only True and Immortal One. The same
is no less evident from the Influence which the want of it is apt to have upon
our Outward Actions: For, it being impossible for Men to give the best and
chiefest Expressions of Honor, where there is not a due Apprehension of the
Excellencies of the Party honored; where such an Esteem is wanting, those
Outward Expressions will naturally fail, and consequently our Honor together
with it. For though a Man may bow down before, or speak with submission to
those whom he honors not in his Heart; yet it is impossible he should submit
his Actions to be guided by their Laws: which I shall afterward show to be a
great part of the Honor that is required.

II. From our Inward Esteem, pass we to the several Acknowledgments which the
Honoring of any Person does manifestly involve: among which, I reckon, first,
the honoring them with our Outward Gesture and Behavior, Bowing down to them,
or falling down before them. For, as Nature it self has prompted us to such an
Acknowledgment, because inclining us to show forth in the Behavior of our
Bodies, Vid. Part 2. of the Explic. of this Commandment.
those Affections and Passions we have within; so, where the Custom of the
Place has made them necessary, they cannot be omitted without a manifest
violation of their Honor; it being impossible for him to think himself
honored, who wants those Expressions of it, which the Custom of the Place, and
of the World, has appointed as Declarations of it. Whence it is (as was before
observed) that we find all Good Men have ever given it, and that too in such
Instances as would be looked upon by us as Notes of Servitude; witness one for
all, their falling flat upon their Faces before them, and thereby in a manner
professing themselves their Footstools.

Next to the honoring them with our Gesture, proceed we to the honoring them
with our Tongues, and giving them those Titles which their High Place and
Authority does exact. Which is the rather to be inculcated, as because the
Tongue was given us to express our inward Conceits, so because we find the
Apostles thus honoring even the Heathen Powers, and such by whom they were at
that very instant called in question. For thus, when St. Paul answered for
himself before King Agrippa and Festus, he did not only give Agrippa
frequently the Title of King, as you may see in the 26 Chapter of the Acts; but
when Festus told him he was beside himself (which had been enough to have
stirred an ordinary Patience) yet gave him the Title of most Noble Festus, as
you may see verse. 25. of that Chapter. But from hence we may collect, I do not
say, what is to be thought of those who omit such Acknowledgments, but in stead
thereof, employ their Tongues to defame and to disgrace them. For, if we are to
honor Princes with our Tongues, to be sure we are not to revile them, as being
directly contrary to the other. And accordingly, as in the Law of Moses, which
to be sure was so far Moral, because containing no other thing in it, than what
the Light of Nature does confirm; as, I say, in the Law of Moses, Men were
expressly forbidden to revile the Gods, or speak evil of the Ruler of the
People, Exodus 22.28. so, that it was of force to St. Paul when converted, and
consequently to us Christians, his Acknowledgment before the Jewish Sanhedrim
shows: For having been charged by the Jews for calling the High Priest Whited
wall, in stead of going about to excuse the Fact, any other way than that it
was done through inadvertency, he acknowledges it for a Fault, as being
committed against that known Rule, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of
thy People, Acts 23.5. Which Passage is the more to be remarked, because it
shows the Prohibition to extend not only to Calumnies or unjust Reproaches,
but also to the speaking reproachfully even of the real Failings of our
Governors; there being no doubt he was no better than a Whited wall, who
pretending to judge according to the Law, did, in contradiction to that Law,
cause an undeserving Person to be stricken. Neither let any Man say, That these
are trifling Matters, or at least not so criminal as we have endeavored to
represent them: For, beside that we are not lightly to esteem of any thing
which God has thought fit to make the Matter of a Prohibition, and much less
of what he has so in relation to those to whom he has given the Name of Gods,
and moreover imparted to them of his own Authority; beside that the speaking
evil of Princes is apt to expose them to contempt, as that Contempt to the
resisting of them, which St. Paul has pronounced to be damnable; beside these
things, I say, St. Jude has represented it as the Character of those Ungodly
ones, which he places in the same Rank with the Apostate Angels, and filthy
Sodomites: For, likewise also (says he, verse. 8.) these filthy dreamers defile
the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities; adding, verse. 9.
(which shows yet more the hainousness of the Crime) That Michael the Archangel
had it in such abhorrence, that when contending with the Devil, who was
sometime a glorious Angel, he disputed with him about the Body of Moses, yet he
durst not bring even against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord
rebuke thee. I will conclude this Particular with that of St. Peter, as well
for the affinity it has with the fore-quoted Passage of St. Jude, as because
it will add more strength to the Prohibition of Evil speaking. It Is in 2 Pet.
2.10, 11. For, as he there reckons those that despise Government amongst such
unjust ones whom God has reserved to the day of Judgment to be punished; so,
resuming their Character anew, he tells us, among other things, that they are
not afraid to speak evil of Dignities; plainly intimating the so speaking to be
a thing which is not only unlawful for a Christian to do, but to such a degree
also, as that he ought to tremble at the very thoughts of it; adding moreover,
that the Angels themselves, however mightier and greater, do not bring a
railing accusation against them before the Lord. They may perhaps, according to
their Office, represent their Crimes before the Almighty; they may, for God's
Glory, and the sake of the Oppressed, invoke the Divine Majesty to avenge
himself upon them: But remembering that, how criminal soever they may be, they
are God's Vicegerents, and of his own Divine Appointment, they abstain from all
reviling Speeches, and rather accuse their Enormities than their Persons. Now
forasmuch as even the Angels, who are mightier either than us, or Princes
themselves, do yet religiously abstain from all reproachful Language of them;
forasmuch as Michael the Archangel durst not so treat the Devil himself,
because, as anciently a glorious Image of the Almighty, so, at this very time,
an Instrument of his Vengeance upon ungodly Men; forasmuch as both St. Peter
and St. Jude reckon those who speak evil of Dignities amongst the worst, yea
the most obnoxious to the Divine Justice; and St. Peter moreover intimates the
so speaking to be a thing which a Christian ought to tremble at the thought of:
it is easy to guess, that Princes, as they are in no small consideration with
God, so they ought to be had in no small veneration with those over whom God
has appointed them to preside.

PART VI.
Of that Declaration of our Esteem which is made by Obedience to the Commands
of Princes; the Necessity whereof is evidenced from their Legislative Power, as
that again from the Scriptures attributing that Power to Princes, and from the
impossibility of compassing otherwise the Ends of their Institution. The same
Obedience evidenced to be necessary, from express Precepts of Scripture. That
every Soul whatsoever is under the tie of this Obedience, as well of the
Clergy as the Laity. The only particular Limits of this Obedience, an express
Prohibition from the Almighty, or those which the Prince has set to himself.
Of the Authority of Princes in Religious Matters, which is either Indirect, or
Direct; the former whereof is evidenced from the Influence Religious Matters
have upon the State, and which therefore are to be so far under their
Inspection, as the Weal of the State is concerned in them. The Result of this
Power, the Calling or Limiting of Religious Assemblies, the Appointing those
that shall serve at the Altar in them, or putting by those that are. That
Princes have also a Direct Authority in Religious Matters; that is to say, an
Authority in them considered as such: Where is also shown, what that Authority
is, and that it consists rather in encouraging or compelling those that preside
in Religious Matters, to do their respective Duties, than to take upon
themselves the Administration thereof. The Result of which Authority is, the
Defending the Church from all both Foreign and Domestic Enemies, the keeping
the Members of it within their respective Duties, and punishing with the Civil
Sword those that shall refuse so to do; the calling Councils to determine of
Matters of Religion, and giving force to those Things that shall be rightly
determined by them. The Accordance both of the Practice of this Kingdom, and of
the Doctrine of the Church, with the foregoing Determination. Of Submission to
the Censures of Princes, which is another Declaration of our Inward Esteem. The
Necessity thereof evidenced from the Power of Coercion in them; which infers a
like Necessity in the Subject, of submitting to it. Whether this Submission be
to be understood, where the Coercion is ill employed; which is answered by
distinguishing of Submission; to wit, as that is opposed to all Means of
avoiding it, or only to forcible ones. The former Submission no way necessary,
as appears by our Savior's exhorting Men to flee in Case of Persecution; and
the Liberty that is given by the Laws to appeal to the Princes Courts of
Judicature. The latter Submission is of indispensible Duty, as appears both by
the Scripture, and the Practice of the Ancient and Purest Church. The like
evidenced from the inconsistency of Resistance, with Princes being the
immediate Ministers of God, with the End of their Institution, and the Counsels
of the Divine Providence: The first, because he who resists them, endeavors
to subject those who are God's immediate Ministers, and therefore subject to no
other, so far at least unto himself, as may secure him from the Effects of
their Violence: The second, because leaving it in the power of the Subject to
resist when he will himself; which will make the Power of the Prince
precarious, and consequently, because, that depends upon it, the Weal of the
People; which is the end for which all Governors were instituted: The third,
because the Counsels of the Divine Providence are no less interessed in the
Violence of Evil Princes, than in the Power of Good. Of the paying of Tribute
to Princes, and that it is both a Duty, and a Declaration of our Esteem. What
Tribute to be paid, to be judged of by the Laws.

IT having been before shown, That Honor, in the Latitude of the Word,
comprehends Obedience to Commands; it remains, that we now inquire, whether the
Honor of Princes does so also, by whom, and in what measure that Obedience is
to be paid.

1. That Obedience is part of that Honor we are to give to Princes, is evident
from that Legislative Power which God has given them over their respective
Subjects: For Laws being nothing else than Rules prescribed by those that give
them, for the regulating the Actions of those to whom they are; if it be in the
power of Princes to prescribe such Laws, it must be the Duty of the Subject to
obey them; because that Power would be otherwise in vain. Now, that it is in
the power of Princes to give such Laws to their Subjects, will appear, first of
all, from the Scriptures annexing this Power to them, as the main of that
Authority by which they shine. Thus, for instance, when Jacob would describe
the continuance of the Regal Dignity in Judah, till Shiloh or the Messiah
should appear, he expresses it by affirming, that as the Scepter (which is an
Ensign of Regal Power) should not depart from Judah, so neither a Lawgiver from
between his knees, Genesis 49.10. In like manner as Homer (if we may join Profane
Authors with Sacred) where he speaks of the same Regal Dignity. -- (...)
(...)
(...)
But so also, that I may return to the Scripture, after it had been said, that
Moses commanded a Law to the Inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob; to let
us know by what Authority he did so, the Scripture adds, And he was King in
Jesurun, when the Princes and Tribes of the People were gathered together to
receive it, Deuteronomy. 33.4, 5. But not to content my self with these or the like
Texts, which attribute the Power of Making Laws to Princes; let us (which will
be a yet more convincing Topic, at least to some Men) consider the End of
their Institution: For, if that End be not to be compassed without the Power of
Making Laws, Princes must consequently be supposed to be invested with that
Power, and their Subjects under a necessity of obeying them. It is the
Affirmation of St. Paul, Romans 13.3, 4. That Rulers are appointed by God for the
encouragement of those that do good, and the avenging of those that do evil.
Now though each of these Ends may seem to be compassed by having a regard in
them to the Laws of God and Nature; yet, if we do more nearly consider it, we
shall find they cannot compass either, unless they have a Power of Making Laws.
For, the Laws of Nature and Scripture descending not to all those Particulars
which are necessary to be observed in order to the attaining of them, hence
there arises the necessity of a Power to draw them down to particular
Instances, and accommodate them to the Exigencies of their respective
Governments. Thus, for instance, though the Laws of God require the Judging of
Offenders, and inflicting on them such Punishments as they shall be found to
deserve; yet inasmuch as they prescribe nothing concerning the Manner or Time
of Judging them, and much less mark out the Punishments which are to be
inflicted on particular Offenders, hence there arises a necessity in Princes
to prescribe when and after what manner they shall be judged, and what
Punishments they shall undergo, if they be found guilty of the Crimes laid
against them. In like manner, though the Laws of God and Nature prescribe the
encouraging of the Good, and doing (as much as lies in Princes) toward the
securing and advancing of their several Properties; yet inasmuch as they
prescribe nothing at all by what Means that is to be done, nor indeed can do,
by reason of the multiplicity and variety of Humane Affairs; hence there
arises a necessity of making Laws, by which they may be secured in their
several Properties, or enabled to improve them to their and the States
advantage. Forasmuch therefore as without Laws the Good cannot be secured, as
neither Evildoers either judged or condemned, it follows, that they who are
appointed both for the one and the other, are invested with a Power of Making
Laws, and consequently the Subjects under a necessity of obeying them. But so
that they are, is yet more evident from the express Declarations of the
Scripture: For, beside that in the forequoted place of St. Paul, Men are
required to be subject to them, which, as Grotius has well observed, imports
Romans 8.7. (...). Ephesians. 5.24. (...) 1 Pet. 3.5. (...), etc. (...), etc.
Obedience to their Commands, as well as Submission to their Coercion: Beside
that disobedience in Things lawful, is a resisting of their Authority, and
therefore the contrary to be thought to be intended in that Subjection which is
there required: Beside, lastly, that he who requires every Soul to be subject,
does it upon intuition of their receiving Praise from them, as well as not
receiving Vengeance, the former whereof cannot in reason be expected, where
there is no compliance with their Commands: to cut off all doubt concerning
Obedience to them, the same St. Paul admonishes Titus, chap. 3.1. not only to
put his Charge in mind of being subject to Principalities and Powers, but to
obey Magistrates, and to be ready to every good work, in compliance with their
Commands, as well as far from doing so much evil as to oppose themselves
against their Power and Government.

2. That Obedience is to be given to Princes, we have seen already; inquire we
now by whom, and after what measure. For the resolution of the former whereof,
it may suffice to allege that of St. Paul, Romans 13.1. ^or requiring there
every Soul to be subject to the Higher Powers; and neither he, nor any other of
the Apostles, elsewhere making any Exception from it; he thereby plainly
shows, that all are to be so, of what Rank and Condition soever. And
accordingly, as whatever is now pretended by the Papists for an Exemption of
the Ecclesiastical Order, yet no such Plea was ever made by the Priests or
Prophets of the Old Testament; so till Luxury and Wantonness made the Clergy
forget their Duty, they also were of the same mind, and declared it both by
their Actions and their Writings; St. Chrysostom Hom 2.3. in Epist. ad Romans
(...) --
in particular explaining every Soul by the Soul of an Apostle, as well as of a
Layman; of one in the highest rank in the Church, as well as of the most
inferior Members of Church or State.

3. From the subjects of this Obedience, therefore pass we to the measure of
it, which is both a more important question, and more difficult to be resolved.
Where, first of all I shall observe, that it must be in such things as are not
forbidden by the Almighty. For, as where God and Man's commands come in
competition; it is so clear we are to prefer those of God, that St. Peter
permits it to the judgment of those who commanded him to act contrary to it,
Act. 4.19. So that we ought to obey God rather than Princes, the place they
hold under God, may serve for an abundant Evidence. For, inasmuch as Princes
are only the Ministers of God, they are in reason to be post-posed to him whose
Ministers they are. Care only would be taken, first, That we do not fondly, and
without just ground, pronounce those things as forbidden by God, which are
imposed upon us by the commands of Princes. For though we may be excused for
not obeying where the thing commanded by Princes is so forbidden, yet we cannot
without sin refuse our Obedience to such commands, as are not any where
countermanded by the Almighty. Again, though we are not to obey, where the
matter of the Command is evidently against that of God, because the Inferior
ought to give place to the Superior, yet there is not the same reason, where
the thing commanded is not evidently against the Law of God, but only doubted
of, whether it be so or no. For, it being certainly a duty to obey the
Magistrate in all things not forbidden, and but uncertain, whether the thing
commanded by him be forbidden; reason would that that which is the more
certain, should be preferred before that which is uncertain; and consequently a
clear and express Command, before an uncertain scruple. But, as where the thing
commanded by Princes, is apparently against that of God, there cannot be the
least pretense of yiedling Obedience to it; so other limits of our Obedience I
know none (saving those beforementioned Vid. Part 2. of the Explic. of this
Commandment.
where we entreated of the Obedience due to Parents, and which are no less
appliable here) unless it be where the Prince has set bounds to his own Power
by Laws, or accepted of them when tendered by others. In which case (because the
Princes Laws are the most Authentic declarations of his Will) it is to be
presumed, that he wills not my obedience in any thing, which is contrary
thereto, and consequently that in those things it is no sin to refuse it.

Now, though what has been already said concerning the measure of our
Obedience, may suffice any reasonable man in civil matters, yet because Princes
do also challenge to themselves an Authority in Religious ones, and we of this
Nation, in particular, are obliged under an Oath to acknowledge it; it will be
necessary to enquire farther, whether they have any such Authority, and what
obedience is due from us to it. Now, the Authority of Princes in Religious
matters may be twofold, indirect or direct; by the former whereof, we are to
understand that which pretends to have an oversight of them only in relation to
the State; by the latter, that which pretends to have an Interest in Religious
matters as such. If the question be, whether Princes are invested with such an
Authority as pretends to an oversight of them in relation to the State, so no
doubt can be made by those who shall consider the influence Religious matters
may have upon the State. For, inasmuch as on the one hand the powers of the
world were before the Church, and the Church it self is by the command of God
obliged to revere them, and on the other hand, the things of Religion,
according as they are constituted, may be profitable or hurtful to the State
which is committed to their custody; those Powers must of necessity be invested
with such an Authority therein, as may preserve the peace of the State entire.
But from hence it will follow, That Princes have a power, so far, of calling or
limiting Religious Assemblies, of appointing who shall serve at the Altars in
them, or putting by those that are. For, inasmuch as the Peace of the State may
be concerned in all these particulars, they are of necessity so far to fall
under the cognizance of those to whom the Government of the State does
appertain. And accordingly, as all Princes, of what persuasion soever in
Religion, have in Profession or Fact, arrogated such an Authority to
themselves; so, provided they do not entrench upon the Laws of Christianity,
they cannot in the least be faulted for the exercise thereof, nor be disobeyed
without a violation of the Ordinance of God that constitutes them: Because what
they do is no more than necessary for the preservation of that State, which God
has committed to their charge. Thus for instance, inasmuch as by means of the
Assemblies of discontented Persons, there may arise great prejudice to the
State; no man in his right wits can deny but it may be lawful for a Prince to
retrench the number, or appoint the manner of the holding of them. For, though
Christianity enjoin upon Christians the assembling of themselves for Religious
Worship, yet no Law of Christianity appoints, that they should meet by
Thousands, but on the contrary assures them, that where even two or three meet
together in his name, there Christ is in the midst of them. From the indirect
Authority of Princes in Religious matters, pass we to that which we call
direct, which interests it self in Religious matters as such. For the
establishing whereof, I shall desire you in the first place to reflect upon
that of St. Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 2. from Verse 1. to 4. I exhort therefore,
first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made for all men: For Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved,
and to come to the knowledge of the truth. From which words, as it is evident:
that it is acceptable to God that Kings become Christians, (this, as will
appear by comparing the first Verse and the fourth, being the thing he
instructs Timothy to beg of God for them,) so also, that being made Christians,
they should by their Authority procure to other Christians, a peaceable
exercise of that Religion whereunto they are called: The reason assigned by the
Apostle for praying for their Conversion, being, that under them, and by their
Arbitriment they might lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all godliness and
honesty. From the exhortation of St. Paul, pass we to that of David, which will
both lend light to the former Exhortation, and more clearly discover to us that
Authority which we seek. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss
the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is
kindled but a little: -- For herein (as St. Augustine observes) do Kings serve
the Lord as Kings, if in their Kingdom they command those things that are good,
and forbid evil, and, that not only such as appertain to Humane Society, but
such as appertain also to the Religion of God. And elsewhere, Wherein then does
Kings serve the Lord in fear, but by forbidding and punishing with a Religious
severity those things which are done against the commands of the Lord Jesus?
For one way does a King serve the Lord as a man, and another way as a King; And
a little after to the same purpose, though yet more closely; Herein therefore
do Kings serve the Lord as Kings, when they do those things to serve him, which
they could not do unless they were Kings. Add hereunto that known Prophecy of
Isa. 49.23. where speaking of the times of the Church, he affirms that Kings
should be its nursing Fathers, and Queens its nursing Mothers. Which, what
other is it than that the Church should be taken care of by them, and
consequently, that it should be committed to their trust? But from hence we may
collect what the Authority of Princes in Religious matters is, and wherein it
ought to be exerted, to wit, not in determining of them according to their own
will and pleasure, and much less in invading the Office of the Priesthood,
which we know he that attempted was stricken with a Leprosy for, but in
defending the Church from all, both Foraign and Domestic Enemies, in keeping
the Members of the Church within their respective Duties, and punishing with
the civil Sword those that shall refuse so to do, in calling Councils to
determine of matters of Religion, and giving force to those things that shall
be rightly determined by them. For, as more than these cannot be legitimately
inferred from those places we have made use of, to establish the Authority of
Princes by, so that they cannot rightly claim more, the nature of the Church
(according as I have before stated it) shows. For, since the Church, by the
Institution of Christ is endowed with a power in determining in things relating
to it self, since also the secular Powers, as well by their Baptism as the
precepts of the Scripture, are bound to be defenders of it, (for he who gives
up himself to the Christian Religion, does thereby profess that he will perform
his proper part in it, and therefore, if he be a King, the part of a King) it
must needs be, that their Authority in sacred matters, should consist rather in
obliging the several members of it to their respective duties, than in
determining of their own head concerning them. The same is no less evident from
the practice of Christian Princes, in calling together a Council, as often as
any thing has stood in need of a definition. For, as Mr. Thorndike De ratione
ac jure finiendi controversias.
has well observed, he who calls a Council, of Bishops to make a Decree, to
receive a civil sanction from himself, does thereby profess, as well, that it
belongs to the Church to determine in it, as to himself to pass that Decree
into a Law: Which is so true, (as the same Mr. Thorndike Ibid.
has observed) that though Constantius the Emperor would fain have undone
what had been decreed by the Council of Nice, yet he never attempted it, but by
Decrees of other Councils, which shows what opinion was had of the Authority of
the Church, even by the Enemies of the Church it self. These two things only
seem necessary to be subjoined, that we may give Christian Princes the whole of
what is due to them.

1. That it belongs to Princes to judge what is rightly or not rightly decreed
by the Church, and according as they shall judge either to give or withold
their assent, and

2. That though in things dubious, or not at all determined by Councils, the
Prince is to expect the decision of the Church, yet there is no necessity of so
doing, where the thing is evident from the word of God, or has been generally
defined by former Councils. For as where the word of God is clear, the Prince
need no other warrant, who by that word it self is called upon to serve the
Lord, and add the force of his Sanction to the general Injunctions of it; so
where the thing has been generally defined, little doubt can be made of
Princes passing what is so into a Law, partly because it has been in some
measure defined by the Church, and partly because it is to be presumed the
Church gives way to a more particular determination, where the thing does
require a present definition, or is not of such moment to require the calling
of the Bishops from their several charges, with the far greater detriment of
the Church over which they are appointed to preside. In the mean time, as it is
not to be denied that those Princes shall best provide for the peace of their
own Consciences, who shall not ordinarily determine of Ecclesiastical affairs
without the consent of the Church, or at least of some of the principal Bishops
of it; so we can never sufficiently commend the Institutions of this Kingdom,
whereas in the Parliament, the place where all Laws are framed, the Bishops
have the principal place; so the commands of King and Parliament in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, do for the most part follow the Canons dereed by our
Convocations. For after this manner, both now and heretofore, the Book of
Common Prayers underwent the Examination of a Convocation before the use of it
passed into a Law, and extraordinary Forms of Prayers are approved by some
Bishops, before they have the Kings Mandate affixed to them. I will conclude
this Discourse with the Doctrine of the Articles of our Church, because exactly
according with what I have before delivered. For as the 20th. of those Articles
declares the Church to have power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and Authority
in controversies of Faith, so the 37th. not only excludes from Princes the
ministering either of Gods word or of the Sacraments, but makes their Supremacy
to consist in ruling all Estates and Degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restraining with the civil
Sword the stubborn and evil doers. To which, as I know not what any reasonable
man can oppose, because so exactly distinguishing between the Churches Power
and that of Princes; so I see not how any reasonable man, where the Authority
of Princes keeps within these bounds, can think himself exempted from yiedling
obedience to it. He who commits the care of the Church to secular Princes,
necessarily allowing them a superintendency over it, and consequently also,
where that superintendency is not manifestly made use of to the prejudice of
Religion, obliging all the Members of the Church to yield obedience to their
Commands.

How we are to honor Princes by our Obedience, has been at large declared: It
remains that we also show, both that we are, and how we are to honor them with
submission to their Censures: Which will appear, first of all, from that
Authority wherewith they are invested, of drawing the Sword of Justice against
Offenders. For, as an Authority to Command, infers a necessity of Obedience in
all those that are subjected to it; so, a Power of Coercion, a like necessity
of Submission to it, in all those who are subjected to it. The only thing of
difficulty is, Whether that Submission be necessary, where the Power of
Coercion is used against those who seem to themselves, and it may be not
without reason, to have done nothing to deserve it: For, inasmuch as the Sword
of Justice is committed to Princes for the avenging of such only as are Eyil
doers, it may seem but reasonable to infer, that they who are not Evil doers,
are free from submitting themselves to the Stroke of it. And indeed, if the
Question be concerning the avoiding of it by Flight, there is no doubt it is in
the power of the Subject, who conceives himself not to have deserved it, so to
avoid, if he can, the falling under the Power of it: Our Savior having
expressly given leave, that if we be persecuted in one City, we should, to save
our selves, flee from that unto another. As little difficulty should I find, if
that were the thing in question, to license the avoiding of the Princes
Severity, by appealing to his own Courts of Judicature, where that is by Law so
allowed, as it is in several Cases here; that being not to be looked upon as a
Resistance, and much less as an injurious one, which is with the leave of him
against whom it is directed. But if the Question be concerning resisting by
Force of Arms, and so avoiding the Severity of the Prince; so it is as certain,
both from the Scripture, and Reason, that we ought not to avoid it, but rather
with all readiness submit to the Strokes of it. That it is certain from the
Scripture, that known passage of St. Paul may serve for an abundant Evidence;
he not only affirming, Romans 13.2. that whosoever resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God; but also that they that resist, shall receive
to themselves damnation. For though it be not there expressed in totidem
terminis, that it is not lawful to resist where the Party suffers undeservedly;
yet to resist being in that place indefinitely forbidden, and no Limitation
being in that Chapter or elsewhere affixed, nor deducible from any Principle of
Reason or Nature, it is but reason it be understood in its full Latitude, that
is to say, so as to exclude all Cases whatsoever; especially if we add thereto
that of another Apostle, even St. Peter, where Resistance, even by an innocent
Person, is forbidden: For, What glory is it (says that Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.20.)
if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if when
ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with
God: for even hereunto were ye called; because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example that ye should follow his steps: Who did no sin, neither
was guile found in his mouth: Yet not withstanding, when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not: but committed himself to
him that judges righteously, as to whom only it was lawful for him to appeal,
even from the unjust Sentence of the High Priest and Pontius Pilate. Which
Instance shows by the way, that though the Apostle primarily intended to
proscribe Servants resisting of their Tyrannical Masters, yet it is alike to be
understood of resisting the Supreme Powers, because they were such, whom our
Savior is commended for suffering patiently under. And though it be true, that
few now follow his Examples, and Men of all Professions almost take upon them
to resist the Secular Power, as often as his Commands thwart either their
Persuasions or Interest; yet it is clear from Tertullian and others, that the
Ancient Christians were of the same temper with their Master Christ, and
submitted themselves to the Penalties of those Laws, whose Injunctions they
thought it not lawful to observe. And this they did too, not, as a Seditious
Person would have the World believe, when they were not in a capacity to
resist; but, as the same Tertullian instructs us Apolog. c. 37. Si enim and
hosts exertos, non Tantum vindices occultos agere vellemus; deesset nobis vis
numerorum and copiarum. Plures nimirum Mauri and Marcomanni, ipsique Parthi vel
quantaecunque, unius tamen loci and suorum finium gentes, quam totius orbis.
Heslerni samus and vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castalia, etc. Vid.
ibid.
, when there were great numbers of them, and such too against which, if they
would have rebelled, their Persecuting Princes would not have been able to have
stood. And accordingly, when the Vid. Hug. Grot. de Jure Belli, etc. lib. 1.
cap. 4. sect. 17.
Thebean Legion, which consisted of Six thousand six hundred sixty six
Christian Soldiers, were by the Emperor Maximian commanded to offer Sacrifice
to the Heathen Gods, though they refused to obey his Commands, yet when the
Emperor, upon that refusal, commanded every Tenth Man to be slain, they
suffered themselves to be so, without making any the least resistance. In like
manner, when the Emperor, not satisficd with the former Slaughter, gave
command to those that survived to offer Sacrifice; though they refused, as
their Fellows had done, to offer Sacrifice, yet they submitted themselves to
his Coercion, in these following Words: We, indeed, O Caesar, are thy Soldiers,
and have taken up Arms for the Defense of the Roman Commonweal; neither have we
ever been Deserters of the Wars, or Betrayers of the Soldiery, or fallen under
the imputation of any base and sluggish Fear. We would also obey thy Commands,
if we were not forbid by the Laws of Christianity to pollute our selves with
the Worship of Devils. We find that thou have resolved either to pollute the
Christians with them, or terrify us by the slaughter of every Tenth Man. Do
not inquire any longer after us, as Men that would conceal our selves; know,
that we are all Christians. All our Bodies thou shall have subjected to thy
Power; but our Souls thou shall never have, because remembering they belong to
their Author Christ. In conformity whereto, as we find they did proceed,
preserving themselves pure from the Sacrifices of Idols, so that when the
Emperor gave order for the Slaughter of the rest, they threw away their Arms,
and offered their naked Bodies to the Fury of his Executioners. What the Voice
of the Scripture is, together with the Comment of the Primitive Christians,
both Opinion and Practice, you have heard already: It remains that we evidence
the same to be the Voice of Reason and Nature. In order whereunto, I shall
first of all allege Princes being the immediate Ministers of God: For, being
his immediate Ministers, they are subject to him only whose immediate
Ministers they are. Now, forasmuch as no Man can resist a Prince, without an
intention of subjecting him so far to himself, as may secure him from the
Effects of his Violence; it will follow, that no Man can, without Sin, resist
him in any case, because endeavoring, by that Resistance, to subject the
Minister of God to him. And here very opportunely comes in an Answer to that
Objection, which I before alleged, in behalf of resisting the Prince, where he
endeavors to inflict an undeserved Punishment. For though it be true, that a
Prince has no Authority to inflict an unjust Punishment; yet he is privileged
by the Place he holds under God, from being subjected unto Man; and ought not
therefore, by any Force, to be brought into subjection to him. From the Place
which Princes hold, pass we to the End of their Institution; which we shall
find to be equally inconsistent with making resistance to them. For, as if it
be allowed the Subject to resist in case of Innocence, you must leave it at
liberty to him to resist when he will himself, because it must be also left to
him to judge whether his be such or no: so, if you leave it at liberty to the
Subject to resist when he will himself, you make the Power of the Prince
precarious; and consequently, because that depends upon the Power of the
Prince, the Safety of the People; which is the End for which all Governments
were ordained. Lastly, As Resistance in any case is inconsistent with the End
of Government, and therefore to be rejected by all those, I do not say, who
believe it to be the Ordinance of God, but who believe it only to be necessary
to the Well-being of the World; so it is equally inconsistent with the Counsels
of God's Providence, which are no less interessed in the Violence of Evil
Princes Cujus enim jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and Reges constituuntur
apti his qui in illo tempore ab ipsis regantur. Quidam enim illorum ad
correctionem and utilitatem subjectorum dantur, and conservationem justitiae;
quidam autem ad timorem and poenam and increpationem; quidam autem ad
illusionem and contumeliam and superbiam, quemadmodum and digni sunt. Dei justo
judicio, sicuti praediximus, in omnibus aequaliter superveniente. Iren. adv.
Haeres. lib. 5. cap. 24.
, than in the just Administration of God. For, as whosoever believes that there
is no Evil in a City which God has not done, must believe also, that Evil
Princes are from God, no less than Good: so, he that so believes, must conceive
also, that God, who acts nothing without Advice, must have some peculiar End in
it, whether it be, as in the Case of Saul and many others, for the punishment
of an Evil People; or, as is most probable in the Case of the Roman Emperors,
for the trial of the Primitive Christians Faith, and the Honor of that Gospel
which they believed. In consideration whereof, as whoever resists Evil
Powers, must be thought in a particular manner to fight against God; so I will
leave you to judge, what a disappointment must needs have been to the Counsels
of the Almighty, if it had been permitted Christians to resist. For where then
had been all those glorious Examples of Meekness, and Submission, and Patience,
for which the Faith of Christ was then so renowned, and by which we, who live
at this distance from its first Institution, are in a great measure induced to
embrace it? Forasmuch then as Evil Princes are from God, no less than God;
forasmuch as God, by their injurious Actions, does not only punish an Evil
Nation, but brings Glory both to himself and to his Son: I think it not only
lawful to say, as Tacitus sometime did, Quomodo sterilitatem aut nimios imbres,
and caetera naturae mala, ita luxum vel avaritiam dominantium tolerate. Hist.
l. 4.
That they ought to be tolerated as we do Barenness and Rains, and other such,
the Evils of Nature; but submitted to with cheerfulness, and as such; which,
however now afflictive, may prove hereafter Matter of excess of Joy. If there
be any thing that can enervate such an Inference, it must be, that such a
Ground of Subjection would oblige us to make no resistance to the injurious
Actings of Private Persons. But as I do no way doubt, that we are in some
measure so obliged, and shall not therefore go about to avoid the force of it
altogether; so there is not the same reason for the not resisting of Private
Persons, though injurious, as there is for the not resisting of injurious
Princes; because these are appointed by God for the Government of the World,
which the other have no pretense to.

One only Species of Honor remains, even the Honor of Tribute; concerning
which I shall say the less, because it is so evidently both our Duty, and a
Species of Honor. Witness for the former, not only the reasonableness of our
Contributing to the Maintenance of those who watch for the Public Good, but
also the clear and express Precepts of the Gospel: Our Savior Mat. 22.21.
, where he speaks of this very thing, commanding us to give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's; and St. Paul Romans 13 6, 7.
, to render to all their dues, and particularly, Tribute to whom it is so, even
to those Ministers of God who attend continually upon the Public Welfare. But
neither is there less Evidence of Tribute being a Species of Honor, and
consequently a part of that Duty which the Commandment calls for; the
forenamed St. Paul representing Tribute not only as due to the Higher Powers,
but due to them as the Ministers of God, and as a Testimony of our Subjection
to them. The only difficulty is, what Tribute we are to pay: For the
resolution whereof, we of this Nation shall not need to go any farther than our
own Laws, by which that Tribute is exacted, and beyond which our Princes do not
pretend at all. For, as those Laws are a formal Declaration of the Pleasure of
the Prince, who is the most competent Judge of the Necessities of that State,
which is by God committed to his Tuition; so they do moreover involve in them
the Consent of those by whom that Tribute is to be paid; whether Implicit, as
all those Tributary Laws do, which stand by the Usances of the Kingdom; or more
Explicit, as those which are consented to by their several Representatives in
Parliament. After which, to inquire whether we may pay a less Proportion, were
to inquire whether it might be lawful for us to depart from that which we our
selves have consented to perform: The Consent of particular Persons being
sufficiently implied in a general one, or in the Consent of those who are
empowered to act for them.

PART VII.
An Answer to certain Pleas which are made in the behalf of Resistance; where,
first of all, is considered the Magistrates setting himself against our
Religion, the Cause whereof may seem preferable to all Considerations
whatsoever. That that Plea is not strong enough to justify a Resistance, is
made probable, 1. Because Submission to Princes is an undoubted Duty of
Christianity, and consequently, the contrary thereof no proper means to defend.
2. Because God, who has commanded that Submission, has not derogated from it
by the Exception of any Case. 3. Because the Princes to whom the Apostles
required Men to submit, were both foretold by our Savior to be Persecutors of
Christianity, and showed themselves such in an extraordinary manner; which made
it reasonable for the Apostles to except the Case of Religion, if that had been
intended by God so to be. 4. Because to allow of Resistance in the Case of
Religion, would open the gap to all manner of Seditions; because Religion
comprehending within it the whole Duty of a Christian, that Pretense may be
adapted to infinite Cases. An Address to a more direct Solution of the
Difficulty; where is shown at large, That Religion gains more by a patient
Submission to Persecuting Princes, than it can be supposed to do by opposing
them. The like evidenced from the prospering of Christianity under the
Primitive Persecutions. An Answer to that Plea which is made for Inseriour
Magistrates resisting, upon the account of their being Public Persons, and by
the Prince himself Commissionated to execute Justice. The former of the two
Pretenses evidenced to be vain, because though the Inferior Magistrate be a
Public Person, in respect of his Fellow Subjects; yet he is but a Private one,
when considered with relation to the Supreme. The Case of the Decree of a Judge
prevailing against any private Order of the Prince, shown not to make at all
for Inferior Magistrates resisting the Supreme; because the Prevalency of that
Decree is founded upon the Presumption of its being the Will of the Prince,
rather than any private Order against it. The latter Pretense, of Inferior
Magistrates being Commissionated by the Supreme to punish Offenders, shown to
be more vain than the former; because it is not to be presumed, that he who by
Divine and Humane Law is Supreme, will Commissionate any Person against
himself. That famous Saying of Trajan to the Praefectus Praetorio, Hoc pro me
utere, si recte impero, si male, contra me, rather a piece of Ostentation, than
any real Intendment of his; but however, no way suitable to the Mouth of the
Supreme Magistrate. Another Plea for Resistance, drawn from Princes swearing
before their Coronation to Govern according to the Laws; that seeming to imply
a Compact between them and their Subjects, upon the breach whereof on their
part, the Subjects may depart from their Allegiance, and resist them in the
Execution of their Power. This Plea evidenced to be vain as to the Kings of
England, because fully such before their Coronation; and the Reason of such
Oaths declared. The like Vanity shown in that other Plea, which alleges, That
some Kings are such rather in Title than Reality, and consequently not Supreme
in their Dominions: Where the Supremacy of our own Kings is evidenced, both
from their Titles, and their Actions. Of the Honor of Inferior Magistrates,
and what the Grounds thereof are, which are shown to be, The Authority they
have from God for the Deputing of Inferior Magistrates, and their actual
Deputation of them. The former of these evidenced from the impossibility of
their discharging the Duty of their Place without it; as the latter, from their
being God's Ministers in solidum, in those Places where they are appointed to
Preside. Those Inferior Magistrates which are invested by lesser Powers, no
prejudice to the forementioned Ground; because those Powers do what they do by
Commission from the Prince. The Honors of the Inferior Magistrate the same
upon the matter, for the Kind, with those of the Supreme; but different as to
the Measure, which also is there declared. That the Honor which is to be paid
to them, be with subordination to that of God, the Supreme Magistrate, and
those of Higher Authority than themselves; in fine, that it be according to the
Measure of that Authority which is imparted to them, and according to the
Pleasure of him by whom it is imparted. The Result whereof is, 1. That if the
Inferior Magistrate command any thing which is not within his Commission, it
is lawful to disobey him. 2. That in case of hard Measure showed by him, we may
appeal from him to the Superior. 3. That as they who have a greater Authority,
ought to have a greater Honor; and they who have a less Authority, a less: so
the precise Measures of them are best learned from the Laws, because the
clearest Declarations of the Pleasure of the Prince. A short Paraenesis to
Inferior Magistrates, where somewhat also of their Duty is described.

3. HAVING in the foregoing Discourses established the Grounds, and shown the
Kinds of Honor, that are due to Sovereign Princes, nothing more seems
requisite to be done, than to show why, and in what manner or measure we are to
honor those Persons that are Commissionated by them. But because some Men's
impatiency of the Yoke of Government has made them willing to find out Reasons
to license them to shake it off, and after that, actually to believe them; I
think it not amiss, before I proceed any further, both to propose and and
answer their Objections.

That it is not lawful to resist the Supreme Powers, even when they make use of
their Power against the Innocent, has been at large declared, and confirmed
both from Reason and Scripture; and possibly not without effect, as to the
Resisters themselves, if there wanted not some specious Reasons to take off the
force of it, as to some particular Cases. Of this nature is, first, those
Princes opposing themselves oftentimes against God, and against that Religion
which he has established in the World: For, though we may be obliged to sit
down tamely under the Violence of Evil Princes, when that Violence reaches no
farther than our Persons; yet, who can think the same Patience necessary, when
Religion it self is struck at, which we are in reason to prefer before all
other Considerations? In answer to which, not to tell you, as I well might,
that Submission to Princes is an undoubted Duty of Christianity, and
consequently, that the contrary thereof is no proper Means to defend
Christianity by: Not to tell you, moreover, that that God who has commanded
our Submission to the Higher Powers, has no where derogated from that Command,
by the exception of any Case; (And what reason have we to distinguish, where
the Law of God does not?) Not to tell you, thirdly, that the Princes to whom
the Apostles required Men to submit, were both foretold by our Savior Mat.
10.18.
to be Persecutors of Christianity, and showed themselves to be such in a more
than ordinary manner; which made it reasonable for the Apostles to except the
Case of Religion, if that had been intended by God to be so: Lastly, not to
tell you, that to allow of Resistance upon color of Religion, would have
opened the Gap to all manner of Seditions, both because it had been easy to
adapt that Pretense to a thousand Cases, and because Religion comprehends
within it the Whole of a Christians Duty: But not, I say, to insist upon any;
or all of these, which yet are a sufficient Prejudice to the Exemption pleaded
for, I shall choose rather to show (which will come up more closely to the
Objection) That Religion gains as much or more by a patient Submission to
Persecuting Princes, than it can be supposed to do by opposing our selves
against them. For the evidencing whereof, I will first inquire, What Religion
may rationally be supposed to gain by opposing Persecuting Princes? 2. What it
may hope for from submitting to their Coercion? And, 3. and lastly, compare
them both together. I begin with the first of these, even What Religion may be
supposed to gain by opposing the Persecutors thereof. For the resolution
whereof, the first thing I shall return, is, That the utmost it can be supposed
to gain, above what Submission does, is only the free Exercise thereof in
Public; the Inward Acts of Religion, and all private External ones, being
equally secure when we submit to all those Severities that are laid upon us. I
observe, secondly, That as the free Exercise of Religion in Public, is the
only peculiar Advantage that can be supposed to arise from making opposition
to Persecuting Princes; so, it is very uncertain, whether we may be able to
attain it, notwithstanding all the opposition we can make. For, as Princes
seldom want a competent Assistance against those who oppose them in the
Administration of their Government; so Experience shows, that in tract of Time
they rarely fail to reduce those to Obedience, who have set themselves against
their Authority. Upon which, what can any one expect, but that they should lay
a more severe Restraint upon those, by whom they have been so opposed? I
observe, lastly, That as it is very uncertain whether the free Exercise of
Religion in Public may be compassed by all our Resistance; so it is very
hazardous, that that Resistance may draw those that do resist into more than
ordinary Cruelties and Extravagancies; no Wars having been observed to be more
bloody and exorbitant, than those which have been made upon pretense of
Religion. From the Advantage that may arise to Religion from opposing the
Persecutors thereof, pass we to inquire what Advantages may accrue from a
patient Submission to their Coercion: Which are, first of all, the
glorification of it; I do not say, only by those that submit (who do so obey a
Precept of it) but also by others, yea Strangers: It being impossible not to
think honorably of that Religion by which Men are induced to suffer the
extremest Evils the Persecutors thereof are able to inflict. In consequence
whereof, as it is easy to suppose many that were Enemies to it, may be brought
to the embracing of it (which may pass for a second Recommendation of it); so
also, which may serve for a third, that those Persecuting Princes may be
thereby mollified, and induced to permit, if not an unlimited, yet some
tolerable Exercise thereof: That which generally draws Princes to the
persecuting of those that are of a different Religion from themselves, being
not so much any hatred of their Religion, as the jealousy they have, lest,
under the Pretenses of that, and the Assemblies which are made for it, some
secret Design against the State should lurk. Which Jealousy must needs be
taken away, when it appears to them from undoubted Experiments, that they who
do profess it, will not attempt any thing against them, how severely soever
they may be handled by them. The Advantages both of the one and the other being
thus unfolded, in order to the showing on which side they do preponderate; let
us now, if you please, put them into the Scales, and make our own Eyes the
Judges, which of the two is most conducible to Religion. On the one side
indeed, even on the side of Resistance, there is a possibility of attaining the
free Exercise of Religion in Public, which is of very great advantage to the
welfare of it, as by means of which, God may not only have the Tribute of his
Public Worship, but the weak Christian be encouraged to grow in Grace, and our
Religion be transmitted to Posterity inviolate. But as it would be considered,
that it is very uncertain, whether Men by all their Resistance shall be able to
attain that Freedom, and much more, whether it be worth attaining, if it be not
likely to be compassed without enormous Wickednesses; so it would be considered
on the other hand, that there is a possibility of attaining by submission some
tolerable Exercise thereof, and that too not only without any Enormity, but by
our Graces; a patient Submission to the Censures of Princes, being no
improbable means to mollify their Hearts, and induce them freely to grant what
the others are forced to contend for. But let us suppose, that Submission fell
short of Resistance, as to this particular, that is to say, as to the freedom
of Public Worship, or the probability of attaining it; yet even so it would
not follow, that it does at all yield to it, as to the Great Concernments of
Religion: For, beside that God is glorified no less by our Sufferings, than by
our Actions, which is the main thing we are to look at in the Business of
Religion, (he who suffers for the sake of it, not only fulfilling the Precepts
thereof himself, but inviting other Men to think honorably of it, and embrace
it, which it is not at all likely Resistance should ever effect) there is as
great a probability of its securing the weak, and transmitting of Religion to
Posterity: The former, because as those Weak ones may be strengthened by the
Constancy of the Strong, and that Patience wherewith they shall behold them to
undergo all their Sufferings; so there is reason to believe, that God, who is
not wanting to any, will furnish them with Grace proportionable to the
greatness of their Exigencies. The same is to be said as to the transmitting of
Religion to Posterity inviolate, however that may seem peculiar to the free
Exercise of Public Worship; it being not at all improbable, that our Constancy
in suffering for it, may induce our Posterity to look upon it as so much the
more worthy their embracing. To all which, if we add the story of the Primitive
times, so we shall not need to doubt of Religion's being more than secured by a
Patient submitting to persecuting Princes; it being manifest from thence, that
Christianity was so far from being destroyed by the blood of its many Martyrs,
that on the contrary it thrived and propagated it self by it.

Having thus taken off the plea of Religion, which seems of all others to be
the most plausible ground of making resistance, I proceed to that which is made
in the behalf of Inferior Magistrates, to whom some men have been willing to
indulge it, though they have denied it to private Persons; as because they are
public Persons, as well as the Supreme, so, because by the Supreme Magistrate
himself obliged to draw the Sword of Justice against Offenders. But first of
all, as in Logic Grot. de Jure Belli ac pacis. l. 1. c. 4. s. 6.
, though the intermediate species be a Genus in respect of those species that
are subjected to it, yet it is but a species if considered with relation to a
superior one; so, though inferior Magistrates are public Persons in respect
of their Fellow Subjects, yet they are private Persons only, if considered with
relation to the Supreme. For all the power of governing, that is in inferior
Magistrates, being derived to them from the Supreme, and consequently
subordinate to his, whatsoever is done by them contrary to his Will, must be
supposed to want that Power, and consequently, they so far to be looked upon as
private Persons. Whence it is, that, though St. Peter oblige all men to be
subject to these, as well as to the Higher Powers; yet with this difference, as
you may see 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. To the King as Supreme, but unto Governors as
them that are sent by him: Making the Authority of inferior Magistrates to
result from the will of the Supreme; and consequently not to be made use of
against it. Neither will it avail to say, that the constitution of our Nation
bears witness to the contrary; as by which the Sentence of a Judge, in matters
of Estate, shall be of force, not only against any private Order of the
Princes, but even where his own property is concerned. For, as on the one side
that Constitution neither reaches any farther than matter of Estate, neither
has any farther power to pass it, than the Posse comitatus will afford it,
which at the most extends no farther than the County where the Sentence is to
be executed; so the reason why a Decree of the Judge shall prevail against any
private Order of the Kings, is not because our Law allows the inferior
Magistrate to oppose the Supreme; but because, the Judge being commissionated
by the King himself, to judge between Him and his Subjects in matters of
Estate, what is so sentenced by him is rather to be presumed to be the will of
the Prince, than any private Order against it. As little of force is there, as
to what is pleaded for inferior Magistrates resisting the exorbitant power of
the Prince, because commissionated by him to draw the Sword of Justice against
Offenders. For as St. Paul, after he had affirmed that God had put all things
under our Savior's feet, yet ceased not to add, as a limitation of that
affirmation, that it was manifest he is excepted which did put all things under
him, so we may, that when the Prince commissionates the inferior Magistrates
to punish Offenders, it is no less manifest, that he is excepted who did so
commissionate him; it being not to be presumed, that he, who by the Laws of God
and Man is constituted as supreme, will commissionate any person against
himself. As for that saying of Trajan the Emperor when he delivered a Dagger to
the Praefectus Praetorio, Use this for me, if I govern rightly, but if ill,
against me; it is but agreeable (as Grotius De Jure Belli ac Pacis. l. 1. c. 4.
Sect. 6.
has observed) to that Princes other demeanor, who made show of behaving
himself not so much as an Emperor, but as the Servant of the Senate and the
people; In which case there is no doubt, but it might have been lawful for the
Prefect to oppose him, if the Senate and people should upon the Emperors
default have so commanded him: Because so the Emperor should not be the
Supreme, but that Senate and people, to whose judgment he professed to subject
himself. But as it does not follow that the like may be done to Sovereign
Princes, whose Supremacy is a bar to all attempts of the inferior Magistrate;
so if Sovereign Princes should give such a Power, they should neither consult
their own honor, nor the welfare of that Kingdom which is committed to their
trust: He who gives another a power against himself if he govern ill, not only
making him the judge, whether he govern so or no, but giving him a power
against the Commonwealth, which depends on the well-being of him that
administers it.

From that second plea pass we to a third, which is taken from those Oaths
which Kings do commonly make (before they are solemnly crowned) of governing
the people by the Laws; the government (as some think) seeming thereby to arise
from a compact between them and their Subjects; upon the breach whereof on the
Kings part, it may be lawful for the Subject to depart from their Allegiance,
and resist him in the execution of his Power. For answer to which, not to tell
you what intolerable mischiefs would ensue from such a Tenent, as often as any
seditious man should go about to persuade the people, they were not so well
governed as they ought; I will allege in behalf of our own Princes (farther
than which we shall not need to look) that which will cut the throat of this
objection; to wit, that our Kings are to as full purpose such before their
Coronation as after: Witness, not only their peforming all the Acts of a King,
but that known Maxim in our Laws, that the King of England never dies. From
whence as it will follow, that the Kings of this Nation owe not their being
such to any compact between them and their people, that upon any supposed
breach thereof it might be lawful for the Subject to resist them; so also that
the Oaths taken by them at their Coronation, are not to procure them that
Power, which otherwise they could not have; but for the encouraging the people
to yield the more ready obedience to them, which they may very well do, when
they, who are to govern, plight their Faith and Reputation, to govern them
according to their own Laws.

There is but one Objection behind, that is any thing considerable, which
alleges that there are many Kings in Title, which are not so in Reality, as
being not Supreme in their several Dominions: In which case, nothing hinders,
they may be resisted, because the command of every Soul's being subject to the
higher powers, is by St. Paul himself limited to those that are Supreme, that
being the true notion of the word (...). But neither will this plea be of any
avail, if considered with relation to our own Princes, beyond which we shall
not be concerned to enquire. Because it is certain from the Laws and Customs of
this Realm, that they are both the Supreme and the only Supreme. Witness, not
only the several Titles See Lord Chief Baron Bridgman's Speech at the Trial of
the Kings Judges.
that are given them, such as that beforementioned, The Lieutenants of God,
immediate from God, and the heads of the Commonwealth, as to their Crown of
being an Imperial Crown, and immediately subject to God and to no other Power,
but also that Power wherewith they are Invested. All Laws are made by them,
(their Le Roy le Veult inscribed upon all Acts of Parliament evidently showing
it) all Proceedings in Law run in their name; To them it belongs to Treat of
War and Peace; By them Parliaments are at Pleasure called, and dissolved again
when they think good to do it: In fine, all jurisdiction flows from them, and
is bestowed as they are pleased to appoint. All which put together make it
evident that the Kings of England are Supreme, and therefore to be reckoned
among those higher Powers, to whom St. Paul has commanded every Soul to be
subject. And indeed, as so to be is the interest of the People, whatsoever the
Prince is, it having been happily observed, that, how bloody soever Nero was,
yet there was not so much Blood spilt in his fourteen years Reign, as there was
in a few months after his death; so by resisting the Supreme Powers they make
God their enemy (I speak as to the present world) whom otherwise they might
experiment as their friend. For, as on the one hand there is no doubt but he
will avenge the contempt of his Vicegerents, because it is his Authority, and
his alone by which they shine, so there is as little doubt on the other hand;
but if men would submit their Necks to the Yoke, God Almighty himself would
sooner or later ease them of it: It being not to be thought but that he, who is
no respecter of Persons, would be as ready to avenge the Exorbitances of
Princes, as of those who are subjected to their commands.

4. Having thus shown what Honor is due from us to the Higher Powers, and
moreover removed those Objections which are commonly made against submitting to
their Censures, nothing remains upon this head, but to enquire into the honor
of Inferior Magistrates, what are the grounds of it, the kinds, and in what
measure it is to be exhibited. For that these also are to have our honor, St.
Peter shows in the place by me so often quoted, where he requires not only that
we should submit our selves to the King as Supreme, but to Governors, as those
that are sent by him. Now, though it be not to be denied, that these also are
Gods Ministers, and as such to be revered by us; yet, because it is certain
that these are neither Gods immediate Ministers, nor immediately appointed by
himself, therefore to make out the grounds of their Honor, we must take
another course, than what we before did in that of Sovereign Princes. Now there
are two things upon which the honor of Inferior Magistrates is grounded, and
into which therefore it is to be resolved by us; The Authority Princes have to
constitute Inferior Magistrates, and their actual constitution of them. Of the
former of these we need no other proof than that the ends of Government are not
to be attained without. For it being impossible for any one man, especially
where his Dominions are any thing large, to distribute justice to all those
that are committed to his charge; there arises a necessity of conferring part
of the care upon other men, as without which it is impossible to be discharged.
In conformity whereto, as we find Jethro, the Father-in-Law of Moses, advising
him for his own ease, and the benefit of the people to set such inferior
Rulers over them, Exodus 18.21. and so on; so we find the same Moses
constituting such Rulers over them, from Rulers of Thousands to Rulers of
Fifties and of Tens, verse. 25. of that Chapter. Now, forasmuch as the ends of
Government are not possible to be attained, unless there be Inferior Rulers as
well as others, it is to be looked upon as the intention of God, who does
nothing in vain, that such Rulers are to appointed, and where they are, to be
revered and obeyed. As little doubt is to be made of Princes constituting the
Persons that are to be so, to procure them that honor which is due unto them.
For being appointed by God as his Ministers in solidum, in those places where
they are authorized to preside, witness St. Paul's both commanding every Soul
to be subject to them, and representing them as Gods Ministers, for Reward and
Vengeance, which comprehend within them the whole of all Civil jurisdiction;
whatsoever other Powers there are, must derive their Authority from them, whom
he has entrusted with that command. Whence it is that St. Peter himself, where
he speaks of submission to them, requires it upon this score, even because they
are sent, or rather commissionated by the Supreme. It is true indeed, that
designation is not always apparent, not only the Election of Inferior
Magistrates being permitted to several Societies, but those Magistrates
formally Invested in that Authority by some of the members of it: But as the
Election or Constitution of such is indulged to those several Societies by the
Laws or Charters of Princes, so being such, they who are so Elected or
Constituted, are to be looked upon as the Ministers of the Prince, and
appointed by his Authority and Command: He who is appointed by those, who are
comissionated by the Prince, being to be looked upon, as appointed by himself.

Having thus shown the ground of honoring Inferior Magistrates to be, that
they are with the approbation of God constituted by him whom he has
immediately appointed, and consequently that they are Gods Ministers in a
secondary manner,; the next thing to be inquired into, is, what kind of Honors
are to be afforded them: Which we shall find to be much the same with those we
are to pay unto the Supreme, because, though in an inferior manner partaking
of that Authority with which the Prince himself is vested. Of this nature is
first esteeming of them according to their several places, demeaning our selves
respectfully toward them, and speaking honorably to and of them, so far I
mean, as their respective Dignities do exact, no Authority being likely to have
its due force and efficacy where these are not duly paid. Of the same nature
is, secondly, yielding Obedience to their Commands, and submitting our selves
unto their Censures; otherwise we do in effect oppose our selves to the
Authority of the Prince, from whom they have their Commission, and consequently
also to that of God. Add hereunto, where any such thing is made their due, the
ministering to them of our substance; as being but a just reward for their
attending upon the affairs of the Republic, and a just regard to him by whom
they are appointed over us. The only thing of difficulty is, in what measure
these Honors are to be paid, which accordingly I come now to resolve.

In order whereunto, the first thing that I shall offer, is, that it ought
always to be with subordination to the Divine Majesty. For if we are to obey
God rather than Princes, how much more ought we to do so, rather than those who
are but their Ministers? As little doubt is to be made, in the second place,
but that the Honor which is to be paid to Inferior Magistrates, is to be with
subordination to the Supreme. For being, as St. Peter instructs us, to be
submitted to, and honored as Persons that are sent by him, that Honor is in
reason to be subordinate to his, by whom they are so sent or commissionated:
That, by which any thing is such, being much more such it self, and
consequently to be preferred before it. Excellent to this purpose is that of
St. Augustine, as I find him quoted by the late Reverend Primate of Armagh
Power Communicated by God to the Prince, and the Obedience required of the
Subject. page 116.
. If thy Curator command thee any thing, must it not be done? (yes
questionless.) And yet if the Proconsul countermand (and thou obey him) thou
despisest not the power of thy Curator, but servest a greater. Neither ought
the lesser to be angry, if the greater be preferred before it. Again, If the
Proconsul does command one thing, and the Emperor does command another, is
there any doubt, but that contemning the one, we are to serve the other? I
observe thirdly, That as the Honor of Inferior Magistrates is to be with
subordination to that of the Supreme; so also, as was before noted out of St.
Augustine, with subordination to such Powers as are in higher place than the
other; the lesser being in reason to give place to the greater, and
consequently the honor of the former to be limited by that of the other.
Lastly, (which will upon the matter acquaint us with the full measure of our
duty) We are to honor Inferior Magistrates according to the measure of that
Authority which is imparted to them, and according to the pleasure of him by
whom it is so imparted. For, inasmuch as they are to be honored as persons
that are sent by the Prince, they are consequently to receive honor from us
according to that Authority which they receive from him, and according to his
pleasure from whom they do. But from hence it will follow, First, That if the
Inferior Magistrate command us any thing which is not within the power of his
Commission to do, in that case I may, without sin, withdraw my obedience from
him; because, so far he has no Authority to command. It will follow, Secondly,
That, if I think I have received hard measure from the Inferior Magistrate, I
may, without breach of submission, appeal from him unto the Superior, even as
we find St. Paul to have done from the Provincial Governor to Caesar: Because
he, by whom those Inferior Magistrates are commissionated, does not ordinarily
commissionate them so far, as not to leave an appeal from them unto himself.
Care only would be taken, that we appeal not from them but upon just cause, and
where it appears to us they exceed the bounds of their Commission and the Law.
For, otherwise we show our selves refractory to that supreme Authority by which
they are constituted, and consequently also unto God. Lastly, it will follow
from the premises, That as they, who are invested with a greater Authority, are
to have a greater honor; and they, who are invested with a less Authority, a
less: so the precise measures both of the one and others honor will be best
learned from the Laws, because most evidently declaring the pleasure of the
Prince that constituted them. And more than this I shall not need to say
concerning the honor of Princes, or of those who are commissionated by them.

5. The order of my Discourse now leads me to enquire of the duty of Princes
toward their Subjects, and of Inferior Magistrates toward those, over whom
they are appointed to preside; the Commandment as was before shown, being
intended no less for their regulation, than of those who are subjected to their
commands. But because I have to do, not with Princes, but with Subjects, and
but little with Inferior Magistrates, and, because too, for the most part they
are too intelligent to stand in need of an Instructour, and have more than
enough of Monitors, even among those who ought rather to obey than to advise:
it shall suffice me to address this general exhortation to all those who have
any Authority in the Commonwealth; That they would remember themselves to be
Gods Ministers, and act with respect to his glory, the Princes Ministers, and
make use of their Authority, for and with him. That they would remember they
are the Ministers of both, for the encouragement of the good, and not make use
of their Authority to vex and worry those that are so, the Ministers of both
for the punishing of evildoers, and therefore neither to connive at, or protect
them. That they would remember the Oath they have taken, which binds their duty
so much the faster on them, and for the violation whereof, if the Prince does
not, God whose name is invoked in it, will call them to a severe account.
Lastly, That they would remember that all profanation of Gods day by Tippling
and Idleness, all profanations of his Name by vain Oaths and Execrations; In
fine, That much of the violation of the Laws of God and Man will lie at their
doors, if they suffer them to go unpunished. For, inasmuch as all that the
Prince can do, is to look after the great affairs of State, and the appointing
of Inferior Magistrates for the punishing of Offenders; the whole of the guilt
of private men's Offenses must be chargeable upon them, who are appointed to
take cognizance thereof. Which however those men may now make light of,
because, considering not to what judgment it does expose them, yet will appear
to be of more importance, when God shall render to every man according to his
works, and particularly to those to whom he has committed the Sword of
Justice. For where shall they appear, who, beside their own personal
miscarriages, shall have to answer for so many and great miscarriages of other
men?

PART VIII.
Of the honor of Spiritual Parents, which is shown to be their due from Reason
and Scripture. The Grounds of that Honor, their begetting us unto God, and
being appointed by God as his Ministers in things pertaining to the Conscience.
All power in Spirituals vested in our Savior, and from him therefore to be
derived, through those to whom he transmitted it. The kinds of Honors, either
such as are more peculiar to their Function, or such as are common to them with
other Parents. Of the former sort are, 1. The resorting to the place where they
Teach, and attending both to them and to their Doctrine. 2. The yiedling
Obedience to their Commands, so far as the nature of their Function, and the
measure of their Office does require. This evidenced from Scripture, and from
the nature of their Authority, which is shown at large to be Imperative as well
as Doctrinal. That that Authority of theirs extends no firther than to matters
of Religion, and is bounded as to them also, within the discipline of our
Savior, and the edification of the Church. 3. The deferring to them in their
Decrees concerning matters of Faith; whether it be by aquieseing in them, so
far as to make no public opposition to them, which is the duty of all; or by
contenting our selves to be debarred any public employment in it, unless we
declare our cordial assent to such Articles of Religion as they shall judge
expedient to be publicly Professed and Taught. 4. Submission to their
respective Censures, where the Churches power of inflicting such is also shown.
An enquiry concerning such Honors as are common to them, with other Parents,
which also are shown from Scripture to be their due, and particularly an
honorable maintenance. The like evidenced from the impossibility of their
being otherwise in any esteem with the generality of men, and from the
improbability of drawing Men of Worth and Parts into that Function. The whole
concluded with a short Prayer to God, to direct those that are our spiritual
Parents in the discharge of their respective duties.

FROM our Natural and Civil Parents, pass we to our Spiritual ones, under which
name I comprehend the several Governors and Ministers of the Church; because,
however the Title of Fathers may belong more peculiarly to some of them, yet
all of them do in their measure contribute to our Spiritual birth, which is the
proper foundation of their Paternity. Now concerning these, I shall show, 1.
That they ought to be honored by us. 2. Enquire into the grounds of that
Honor we are to pay them. 3. And Lastly, what Honors we are to afford them.


I. That our Spiritual Parents are to have a share of our Honor, much need not
be said, to show, whether we do consider the necessity of Honoring our Earthly
Parents, or the ample Testimony the Scripture gives to the Honoring of our
Spiritual ones. For, as, if our Earthly Parents be to be honored, Reason would
that they should much rather be so, who beget us to an infinitely better Being;
so especially if the Scripture has added her Suffrage to it, and not only
given Testimony to that their Paternity, but expressly required an honorable
Acknowledgment of it. Now, that so it has, is evident from 1 Timothy 5.17. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. In the former whereof, St. Paul gives in charge, that the
Elders that rule well, be accounted worthy of double honor, especially they
who labor in the Word and Doctrine: In the latter, that the Brethren should
know them which labored among them, and were over them in the Lord, and
admonished them; and esteem them very highly in love, for their Works sake. To
both which, if we add that of Heb. 13.17. so the proof will be full and cogent;
St. Paul, or whoever was the Author of that Epistle, obliging those he wrote
to, to obey them that had the rule over them, and to submit themselves; which
are the Highest Expressions of Honor we can give.

II. The necessity of Honoring our Spiritual Parents, being thus evinced from
clear and express Places of Scripture; proceed we now, according to the Method
before laid down, to inquire into the Grounds of it: which we shall find to
have something common with the Grounds of honoring our Natural Parents, and
something with those of honoring of our Civil ones. With the former, because
by these it is we are begotten unto God through the Laver of Regeneration, and
nourished afterward by the Word of Truth: With the latter, because appointed
by God as his Ministers and Vicegerents in things pertaining to the Conscience:
Not indeed immediately; for so none but Christ, the Apostles, and other the
Primitive Doctors of the Church were: but by those who were their lawful
Successors, and to whom they had delegated their Spiritual Power: Which
Particular is necessarily to be added, because without one or the other
Designation, we can have no Title to that Honor. For however some may think
that Honor due unto themselves, for traveling together with us in the
Dispensation of the Word and Sacraments, and other such like Offices, by which
Men are to be begotten and conserved unto God; yet inasmuch as all Power in
Spirituals was vested in our Savior, and by him transmitted to his Apostles
(our Savior not only affirming, that as the Father sent him, so he sent them;
but appointing them for the Teaching and Discipling of the World) no Man can
ordinarily assume to himself that Honor, without an immediate Call from God,
or from those whom he has entrusted with the Management thereof. Which said,
nothing remains to do, but to inquire what kind of Honors we are to give to
these our Spiritual Parents.

III. For the resolution whereof, I will instance, 1. In such Honors as are
more peculiar to their Function; and after that, 2. In those that are common to
them with other Parents.


I. Of the former sort is,

1. The resorting to the Place where they teach, and attending diligently to
them when we do; the laying up what we so learn from them in our Memories, and
in our Hearts, and copying them out in our Lives and Conversations. For, being
appointed by God the Teachers of his People, as their Teaching, for the
instructing and bettering of those that are; he that does any thing to the
prejudice of either, must consequently deny them the Honor of Teachers, and so
far therefore offend against this Commandment. Of the same nature is,

2. The yielding Obedience to their Commands, so far as the nature of their
Function and the measure of their Office does require. For being appointed by
God, not only as Teachers, but as Rulers; and, as you saw but now, out of the
Author to the Hebrews, we obliged to obey them; (for, Obey, says that Apostle,
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for
your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and
not with grief.) Being therefore, I say, appointed by God, not only as
Teachers, but as Rulers, and the People obliged to obey them; he that refuses
so to do, denies them the Honor of Rulers, because that implies Obedience to
their Commands. The only thing that has with any show of Reason been objected
(if yet that it self may be allowed to have any show of Reason) is, that the
Rule whereof the Scripture speaks is only doctrinal and declarative, and
consequently, no necessity of Obedience, properly so called. But beside that
such violence is not lightly to be offered to the Signification of Words,
because, if it might, there could be nothing certain, either in the Scriptures,
or other Authors; Beside that these our Spiritual Parents are more often
represented under such Titles that imply Authority, than in those that imply
Teaching only; witness the Title of (...), and the like, which are usual
Titles of Authority: Beside, lastly, that in the place before quoted out of St.
Paul, a difference is made between those that rule well, and those which labor
in the Word and Doctrine; which what were it but a mockery, if all their Ruling
were laboring in the Word and Doctrine? Beside these, I say, and a great many
other things that might be produced, which I pass the rather over, because I
think the Objection deserves no farther Confutation out of the Scripture; the
very Being of the Church implies that Power of Commanding, which those
Novellists are so willing to discard. For the New Testament prescribing nothing
particularly, or at least very imperfectly, as to the Time, or Place, or Manner
of holding Assemblies, which, for the orderly management thereof, are of
necessity to be determined; either Christian Assemblies are not to be held,
which is directly contrary to the Precept of our Religion; or there must be a
Power in the Church to determine them, and consequently, a necessity of
yielding Obedience to them. The only thing that can admit of a Dispute, is,
What are the Limits of their Power? Which it will not be hard for him to
discern, who comes to it with an unprejudiced Mind. For, inasmuch as that
Society whereof they are Governors, is instituted by God, for the Conservation
of Religion; it will follow, that the only Authority to which they can
pretend, is to extend no farther than to Matters of Religion, or what is
necessary to the Conservation of it. Which makes a strange, that the Church of
Rome should pretend to a Power of taking away the Civil Rights of Princes, or
their Subjects; especially when he, who is Head even of their Head, has so
frankly declared, that his kingdom is not of this world. If the Governors of
the Church claim any Power of that nature, it must be by the Indulgence of
Princes, and to it they are to ascribe it. Again, Forasmuch as the Governors
of the Church are but the Ministers of him who is the Great Shepherd and Bishop
of our Souls; whatever Authority they have, must be within the Limits of his
Discipline, who is the Author no less of their Power than it. Lastly, Forasmuch
as that Power which the Governors of the Church have, was given for the
edification, and not for the destruction of those that are to be ruled by it, 2
Cor. 10.8. it will follow, that that ought to be the Limit of their Commands,
and consequently also of our Obedience. Care only would be taken, that we do
not rashly, nor indeed without great and manifest reason, pronounce of any
thing they enjoin, as either not for edification, or to the destruction of the
Church; partly because what is for edification of the Public, is not easily to
be judged of by Private Persons; and partly, because there are few things more
destructive to the Being of the Church, than the dissolution of that Discipline
by which it is tied together.

3. From the Commands of the Governors of the Church, as which do for the most
part respect things to be done, pass we to their Decrees in such Controversies
as do arise concerning th^se ^^ings which are to be believed; where at the same
time I shall set down what Authority those our Spiritual Parents may pretend
to, and what kind of Honor is to be paid by us to it. For the resolution
whereof, I shall no way doubt to affirm, first, That it is in the Power of
those Governors to come to a decision in them, and oblige the several Members
of the Church not to make any Public Opposition to them. For, the Peace of the
Church being broken, not so much by any thing, as by Controversies which may
arise concerning those things that are to be believed; the Governors of the
Church, to whom the preservation of the Peace thereof is committed, must
consequently be supposed to be furnished with such a Power of Decision, as
shall bind up the several Members thereof from making any Public Opposition to
what they do so decide. Which is so reasonable a thing, that there is no formed
Church in the World, which does not claim such a Power; nor any reasonable Man
in them, which does not think himself to be so far bound up by it: provided the
Decision do not entrench upon an Article of Faith, nor be imposed upon ours,
but recommended as such only, to which Men shall not openly oppose themselves.
For, though it be not lawful for any Man to abjure that which he does believe
to be a Truth; yet it may be lawful, and sometime necessary, not to make
profession of some Truths, if the Peace of the Church be like to be broken by
it. But beside that the Honor of the Governors of the Church may require an
Acquiescence in their Decisions, where those Decisions, though it may be not
exact, do not entrench upon an Article of Faith, nor are imposed upon our
Belief; I do no way doubt, but it may also require the exacting a cordial
Acknowledgment of them from those that are the Ministers thereof. For, it being
of great importance to the Welfare of the Church, that those which are its
Teachers should be well persuaded themselves, lest (as is but too frequent)
they disperse their Errors among the People; it cannot but be thought
requisite for those who are the Governors, to exact of those Teachers, before
they be approved, a cordial Acknowledgment of such Articles of Religion, as
they shall deem expedient to be publicly professed and taught: For, how shall
they otherwise provide for the Welfare of that Church which is committed to
their Charge, and for which they shall be accountable to Almighty God? or those
Candidates of the Ministry provide for the Honor of their Governors, who
shall not be content to make such an Acknowledgment, if they do heartily
believe the things proposed; or to be excluded from the Office of Teachers, if
they do not? Honor implying an Acknowledgment of all such Power and Authority
as is requisite in a Governor, for the conservation of that Society, over
which he is appointed to preside.

4. One only Species of Honor remains, of those which are more peculiar to
their Function; and that is, Submission to th Censures of these our Spiritual
Parents. Of which, beside the Admonition of the Author to the Hebrews, where he
requires us not only to obey those that have the Rule over us, but also to
submit our selves, a Proof may be fetched from the Authority those Governors
are invested with, of excluding them from the Communion of the Church, who
shall not show themselves faithful Members of it. For, beside that every Member
of the Church covenants in Baptism to show himself a faithful Soldier of Christ
Jesus, and consequently cannot be thought to have any injury done him, if he be
debarred the Communion of the Church, upon the breach of that his Covenant;
beside that the Scripture does so far enjoin it upon particular Persons, as to
oblige them to withdraw themselves from every Brother that walks disorderly;
beside, lastly, that God has committed to the Governors of the Church the
power of binding and losing, and promised that what they do so bind and loose
on earth, shall be bound and loosed in heaven, which the Church of God has
ever understood with reference to the Power of Excommunication and Absolution;
that Power is no more than necessary, for the conservation of the Church in
obedience to God, and to the wholesome Commands of their Superiors. For, who
will generally be very careful of keeping the Covenants they have made in
Baptism, if it be not in the Power of the Governors thereof, to debar them the
Privileges of that Communion which the more sound Members of the Church enjoy?
Now forasmuch as it is in the Power of these our Spiritual Parents, not only
to command such things as are salutary, but to exclude from the Communion of
the Church all such as are disorderly walkers; if we will give them that Honor
which is due to them, we must of necessity acquiesce in that their Censure, if
justly inflicted, so long as they shall think fit to continue it; and, because
that their Censure is in order to our Amendment, give them such Proofs of our
Sorrow and Repentance, as may oblige them to receive us again into the Bosom of
that Church, out of which we have been ejected for our disorderliness.

2. Now, though it were to be wished, that even these kinds of Honor were paid
unto the Clergy; partly because they are more proper to their Function, and
partly because the welfare of Religion is more immediately concerned in them:
yet forasmuch as by the Consent of the World, they have been thought worthy of
other Honors, even such as in themselves savor more of Earth than Heaven; I
think it not amiss to make these also the Subject of my Inquiry; and the
rather, because they have been of late denied them. In order whereunto, I shall
lay for my Foundation, that which, if it had been heeded, would perhaps have
made this Question unnecessary; I mean, the Behavior of those of Melita to St.
Paul, and them that traveled with him, Acts 28.20. concerning whom, St. Luke
there tells us, that they honored them with many Honors; and when they
departed, laded them with such things as were necessary. For, there appearing
not any the least intimation of those Islanders conversion to the Faith, that
we should think the Honors they bestowed upon St. Paul were other than Civil
ones; and St. Luke, who writes the Story, and had a share in those Honors,
remembering this Act of theirs with Commendation and Applause, it is evident
that Civil Honors are not only not disagreeable to their Function, but also
(because we are indefinitely commanded to honor them) in the number of those
that are to be paid. For, how should we think those other than due, which we
find both St. Paul and St. Luke to have willingly received, and the latter
moreover to have transmitted the Cognizance of to the World, as it were by
their Example to incite others to the like. And though it be true, the Text
particularizeth not the Honors that were bestowed upon them, and leaves us to
collect, that they were, for the kind, Civil ones; yet forasmuch as it makes
mention of their honoring them with many Honors, and moreover expresses in
the same Period, their furnishing them with such things as were necessary at
their departure; I think it but reasonable to collect, that whilst the Apostle
and his Company were with them, they treated them with all kind of Respect, in
Gesture, Language, and Entertainment; and when they departed, no less
officiously than courteously accompanied them to their Ship. But because, in
this particular, we have to do with envious Men, who will not easily be
convinced of what they are unwilling to believe; and because the thing whereof
we speak, is a matter of Interest, in which (whatever professions we may make)
Men will be apt to think, we will be partial to our selves; therefore, to make
our Cause so much the more plausible, I will both instance in one kind of Civil
Honor, and show from Reason the Equity of others. Now the Honor that I shall
instance in, is that of Maintenance; because St. Paul has so expressly asserted
the paying of it to the Ministers of Religion. Witness, first of all, that
Affirmation of his, 1 Cor. 9.14. Where having premised many Arguments
concerning this Affair, and inquired in particular, whether the Corinthians
were not very well satisfied, that they who ministered about Holy Things in the
Temple, were Partakers with it; he subjoyns, in the next Words, Even so has
the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel. In which place, not only affirming the necessity of a Maintenance, but
arguing that necessity from what God had established among the Jews, he gives
us plainly enough to understand, that he meant an Honorable one, because the
Priests among the Jews were so provided for. But so the same Apostle gives us
yet more clearly to understand, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. where he exhorts, that the
Elders that rule well, be accounted worthy of double honor, especially they
who labor in the Word and Doctrine; because (as he there subjoyns) the
Scripture has said, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads
out the Corn, and the Labourer is worthy of his Reward. From which Reason, as
it is manifest, that the thing whereof he entreats, is the Maintenance of those
who labor in the Word and Doctrine; so it is no less manifest, from his before
expressing it under the Title of Honor, and a double one, that he meant such a
Maintenance as should not only afford them a Subsistence, but above the common
Condition of Ordinary Men. Of which, even some of those, who were otherwise no
great Friends to the Clergy, were so sensible, that one of them did not stick
to affirm in the late Long Parliament, That they were Scandalous Livings, that
made so many Scandalous Ministers in the Church.

Now though from this one Topic, because the Reason is the same of all, it
were easy to infer, that those of whom we speak, are susceptible of other
Civil Honors; yet I think it not amiss, especially having before promised it,
to add the Suffrage of Reason also. Now there are two things which Reason
offers toward the confirmation of those outward Marks of Honor, which this
Church, and almost all others, have set upon the Ministers of Religion; whereof
the former respects the generality of those that are under their respective
Charges; the other, the Invitation of such as are to be admitted into them. For
though (to begin with the former) there be enough in that Sacred Function, to
engage Men's Esteem; though it had nothing to commend those who were of it,
beside the Dignity of their Office, and the Honourableness of their Work: yet
forasmuch as the Common sort judge rather by their Eyes, than by their
Understandings, and indeed cannot well do otherwise, unless they had more
exalted ones; how is it possible to think, they should ever hold such in
reputation, upon whom they discern no outward Marks of Honor? Especially when
they see all other Governors adorned with the like, and appearing outwardly as
Specious, as they are inwardly Great and Glorious? For by how much the more
their Eyes are dazzled with that outward Pomp and Splendour which they do every
day behold those Ministers of God in the State to be compassed with, so much
the less regard must they be supposed to have for his Ministers in the Church,
upon whom they discern none of the same Greatness: Unless (as it happened in the
Apostles times) they could bear themselves above the Condition of Men, and
outshine the Laity as much by the miraculousness of their Works, as they do
them by the outward Marks of Majesty and Greatness. There is the same, or far
greater reason for the Confirmation of those outward Marks of Honor, if we
consider the necessity there is of them to invite Men of Worth and Parts to
enter themselves into the Sacred Function. For, though that which ought chiefly
to draw Men, be the Nobleness of the Work, and the Honor they may thereby do
both to God, and to his Church; yet inasmuch as the Candidates of this Function
carry about them the Infirmities of Men, by means of which it is not impossible
they may stand in need of other Motives, it is not easy to believe, that,
quitting those Worldly Employments, for which they are equally fitted, and to
which they are tempted by the pleasing Baits of Advantage and Honor, they will
betake themselves to a Function, in which they shall live poorly and
contemptibly, and not only miss of the former Rewards, but be trampled upon,
and despised. Of which, what can any Man imagine to be the consequence, but
that the Office of the Priesthood become a Prey to the meanest both in Parts
and Quality, and both That, and Religion it self, thereby fall into the
contempt of all.

I have done with the Honor of our Spiritual Parents, and shown both upon what
Grounds it stands, and to what Expressions it is to extend: It remains, were
the generality of Men so proper for it, or indeed I proper for the Work, that I
should entreat of the Duty of those Spiritual Parents, toward such whom they
beget unto their Maker. But because I have to do, not with those Parents, but
with the Children; and beside that, am more fitted to learn of them, than to
instruct them; I shall choose rather to turn my Discourse into a Prayer, and
call in your Devotion to assist me in it; Beseeching God, whose the Clergy are,
and from whom every good and perfect gift comes, That he would give them
Abilities answerable to the weight of their Employment, and Grace and
Tenderness proportionable to their Abilities; That he would incline the
Governors of the Church to lay Hands upon such, and such only, as may give
their Children their Meat in due season, and both teach and prompt the
Inferior Clergy rightly to divide it; That he would inspire both the one and
the other to go before them by their Example, as well as by their Doctrine; and
show them how to live virtuously, as well as instruct them what it is to do so.
So doing, however they may be contemned by the ignorant and the disobedient,
they shall see of the travel of their soul upon the truly Religious, and (which
will be an ample Reward of all their Labors, and an abundant Compensation of
their Contempt) be admitted to the participation of their Master's Joy and
Crown.

PART IX.
An Appendix to the Honor of our Spiritual Parents, in an Inquiry concerning
the deference that is to be used to the Doctrine of them and others, in the
framing of our Conceits about Religious Matters. Of the Ancient Fathers, and
particularly of such of them as had any Eminent Place in the Church of God:
Where is shown, that much is to be deferred to them, even in our Belief, where
they deliver what they do, as Apostolical Tradition; and that too, either
unanimously, or without any material difference: This being but due to the Rank
they held in that Purer Church, and the Opportunity they had, by their nearness
to the Apostles Times, to know the Sense both of them, and of our Savior. Of
what consequence this is in the Question concerning the Government of the
Church by Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Where those Fathers speak their own
Sense only, yet, caeteris paribus, to be preferred before those of later date
for the same Reasons. Of the Judgment of Learned Men in general, and what
deference is to be given to it in our own: Where is shown, first, That it ought
not to prescribe against the clear and express Dictates of Reason and
Scripture; as neither, secondly, against a strong and very probable one. Where
there is no such Evidence or Probability, it is but reasonable to incline to
the Judgments of Learned Men, as being but a just Respect to their Learning,
and to God, who is the Donor of it. This acknowledged by all, in Matters of
Health and Estate; and no doubt equally due in Things relating to the
Discipline and outward Economy of the Church. Where Learned Men are found to
differ, as they often do, regard is to be had, in the first place, to the
Judgments of those whom we apprehend to be right in the main; as, secondly,
where there is no difference, there to the Judgments of those, upon whom we can
discern the clearest Footsteps of Peaceableness, Humility, and Obedience; and,
thirdly, to that Party which has the most and best Learned -- Of the Honor of
the Aged, and what the Grounds thereof are: Which are shown to be, first, That
Wisdom which does generally adorn them. 2. That Testimony which God gives by
their Age, of his approbation of their Actions, or at least of his Forbearance.
3. Their freedom from those Lusts wherewith younger Years are agitated: And, 4.
Their being, by the similitude of Years and Dispositions, the usual Companions
of our Parents; and who, as such, cannot be despised, without the dishonor of
the other. Of the Kinds of Honor that are to be given to the Aged: Where is
shown, That we ought to rise up before them; to withhold from speaking, till
they have delivered their Sense, and speak to them, when we do, with submission
and respect; to afford them that Relief and Assistance, which either their
Necessities or Weaknesses require; and, in fine, to submit to their Reproofs
with all patience and meekness -- Of the Honor of those who are Superior to
us in Dignity; whether it be, 1. Upon the account of their Parts and
Endowments: Where is shown, what the Ground of their Honor is, even those
Gifts of God that are in them; and in what order such Dignified Men ought to be
honored by us. 2. Upon the account of the Nobility of their Birth, as which
cannot be despised, without an Injury to the Merits of their Ancestors, yea to
Virtue it self. 3. Because of the Amplitude of their Fortunes, as which
bespeaks the Favor of the Divine Providence, and the Virtues either of them or
of their Ancestors. 4. Upon the account of those Marks of Honor which are
bestowed upon them by the Prince, and to which therefore, though they had no
Personal Merits, a just Respect is due. A short Paraenesis to those who have
any of the former Dignities to commend them; where also their respective Duties
are not obscurely intimated.

THE Business of my last Discourse being to show what Honor is due from us to
our Spiritual Parents, I think it not amiss, by way of Appendix, to show what
deference is to be used to the Doctrine of them and others, in the framing of
our Conceits concerning the Matters of Religion. For though, when the Authority
of Men opposes our particular Interests, it is with contempt enough rejected
and despised; yet is there none who thinks not the better of his Cause, if he
can confirm it by the Suffrages of those who have been eminent for their
Learning or Piety in the World.

I begin with the Ancient Fathers, both because the first in Time, and because
they have been most unanimously esteemed: For the judging of whose Authority,
and consequently of the Honor that is to be given by us to them, I will first
of all consider them as Witnesses of Ecclesiastical Tradition, and then as
delivering their own Sense in Matters of Religion. If we consider them in the
former notion, so little doubt can be made of their Authority; especially if we
understand by Fathers, such of them as had eminent Places in the Hierarchy of
the Church, as Mr. Thorndike Socrates Hist. Eccl. li. 2. c. 40. (...) Vid.
eundem, lib. 2. cap. 10. and Hilar, in fine libr. de Synodis, cum observat.
Thorndic. lib. de ratione ac jure finiendi controversias, cap. 25. page 489,
etc.
has shown out of Socrates Hist. Eccl. li. 2. c. 40. (...) Vid. eundem, lib.
2. cap. 10. and Hilar, in fine libr. de Synodis, cum observat. Thorndic. lib.
de ratione ac jure finiendi controversias, cap. 25. page 489, etc.
Ancient Writers, that we ought to understand the Name of Fathers, For, living
so near as they did to the Times of the Apostles, by which means they had
opportunity to know what things had been delivered by Christ and his Apostles;
and being moreover thought worthy in those purer Times to be set in the highest
Places of Dignity and Authority in the Church; the Prerogative of that their
Rank, and their nearness to the Apostles Times, is in reason to oblige us to
look upon them as competent Witnesses of the Tradition of the Apostles, and
consequently, to give up our Belief to what they shall so testify; especially
if we find them to have so testified with one consent, or with no material
difference in it. Whence it is, that all reasonable Men must look upon the
Government of the Church by Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, as instituted by the
Apostles; because, with one consent, so declared by the Ancient Fathers. And
though the same Authority be not to be given to them, where they pretend to
speak rather their own Sense, than the Tradition of the Church, which is the
second Notion under which I promised to look upon them; yet even there they
are, caeteris paribus, to be preferred in their Opinions, before those of later
date: both because, as was before said, they were of eminent account in the
Church, and because of the opportunity they had, by their neerness to the
Apostles times, to know the sense both of them and of our Lord and Savior.

Of the Fathers of the Church, what has been said may suffice, at least, as to
those who are most like to be my Readers, proceed we now to consider how far
the judgment of Learned men in general is to prevail with us in the squaring of
our own in matters of Religion. In order whereunto,

1. The first thing I shall represent, is, that whatever Authority the judgment
of Learned men ought to have with us, yet ought it not to be of any account,
against the clear and express Dictates of Reason and Scripture. Because,
whatever their judgment is, it is but the judgment of men, whereas the voice of
Reason and Scripture is no other than the Voice of God. To which therefore,
there is but reason the other should yield, because it is but fallible, whereas
Reason and Scripture is the voice of him whose property it is, not to be in a
capacity to be deceived. Again, forasmuch as, whatever force the judgment of
Learned men may be of, it is upon the presumption of the concurrency of their
judgments with Reason and Scripture which they have such ability to discern;
the voice of Reason and Scripture must consequently be of more force it self,
as, which gives all the force it has to the judgment of Learned men. Against
the clear and express dictates of Reason and Scripture, therefore the judgment
of Learned men can be of no avail, and consequently in that case, no Honor to
be given to it.

2. But neither, secondly, is any such Honor to be given to the judgment of
Learned Men, where there is a strong, or very probable reason against it. For,
besides that, Learned Men may be biast by Interest, and other such like
considerations which serve rather to corrupt than inform their judgments, a
reason (as a Learned Man Taylor's Ductor Dubit. l. 1. c. 4. Rule 9.
observes) is an intrinsecal, proper, and apportion'd Motive to the Conscience;
but humane Authority, or citation of consenting Authors, is but an extrinsecal,
accidental, and presumptive Inducement, and a mere suppletory in the
destitution of Reason; Truth (as the forenamed Person observes from Socrates)
being not to be weighed by Witnesses, but by Argument; not by the Authority of
Authors, but by the Reasons they allege.

3. But because, what the voice of Scripture or Reason is, is not always
apparent of it self, nor yet with any great probability to be collected, or at
least not by men of ordinary Capacities; hence there arises a necessity of
having recourse to the judgment of the Learned, and a reasonableness of things
of that nature, of being bound up by it. For, as it is but reasonable to yield
to the judgments of others, where our own will not serve to extricate our
selves; so it is but a just respect which we owe to their Learning, and indeed
to God himself, who is the Author of it. For, what other is it than a contempt
of their Gifts, and of God who is the Donor of them, not to submit to their
judgments, whom God has so well furnished with an ability to inform us? Whence
it is, That, though in matters of Religion, men are generally more headstrong,
yet in matters relating to their Health or Estate, there are none of Common
Understanding, which do not square their Opinions and Actions by the advice of
those who are the Sages, either of the Law or Physic. But, so the same Reason
will oblige us to proceed in things relating to the discipline and outward
economy of Religion. For, what can be more reasonable (especially in things of
that nature) than to square our judgments by theirs whom God has blessed with
an ability to discern? The only scruple in this Affair, is, what is to be done,
where we find Learned Men to differ. Where, first, little doubt is to be made,
but we are to follow the judgments of those whom we apprehend to be in the
right, as to the main. Thus, for example, Though there be as much Learning
among the Papists, as the Protestants, in all sorts of knowledge relating to
Religion; yet, inasmuch as, I believe the latter to be in the right, as to the
main, and the other not, I think it but reasonable to defer to their judgment,
whom I am so well persuaded of: There being more reason to believe them to be
in the right, as to the particular whereof I enquire, who are so in the main,
than those who show their Ignorance or Prejudice in matters of the greatest
weight. Again, If the difference be between men of the same Protestant
Profession, and of the same Belief in the main matters, wherein we have
separated from the Papists, I think it but reasonable to incline to the
judgment of those upon whom I can discern the clearest Testimonies of
Peaceableness, Humility, and Obedience: It being but just to presume, that God,
who promises his Grace to the humble, will bestow the light of his Truth
there, where that Grace, and other such like, do most prevail. Lastly,
Forasmuch as, in any difference between Learned Men there is a greater
presumption of Truth, where there are the most and best, than among the fewer
and the worse; Reason would, that we should pay them so much respect, as to
choose to opine with them, rather than with others that are both fewer in
number, and less Learned than they. All which I say, not to invite you to have
the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons, which I know that
very Faith does forbid, but that, where that Faith or Reason is not apparent,
we should choose rather to follow the conduct of those whom God has blessed
with an ability of discerning, than our own groundless Fancies, or the Fancies
of those whom God has not endu'd with the like Abilities: That being but a
necessary result of an humble opinion of our selves, and an Honor, which we
owe to the abilities of those, whom God has blessed with a more exalted
Understanding.

To go on now to show the Honor that is due from us to other Superiors, to
which I told you in my entrance upon this Commandment, that the Precept is to
be thought to extend; Where, first I shall enquire, what Honor is due from us
to the Aged, as, because by a general consent they have acquired to themselves
the name of Fathers, so also because St. Paul has commanded us to treat them
as such: His Injunction to Timothy being, not only that he should not rebuke an
Elder, or a man of Years, but that he should entreat him as a Father, and the
elder Women as Mothers, 1 Timothy 5.1, 2. Now concerning these, following my usual
Method, I will enquire, 1. Upon what grounds the Honor of these Fathers is
built, and 2. What kind of Honors we are to afford them.


1. It is the affirmation of Solomon, Prove. 16.31. That the hoary head is a
crown of glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness; and so indeed it
is, because, beside the Honor of its Gray Hairs, it does also connote a long
continuance in Piety, which is of all other things the justest ground of
Honor. But because, as Old Age is sometime found without this attendant; so
the precept of rising up before it, is without any such limitation, as you may
see, Lev. 19.32. therefore it may not be amiss to enquire after such grounds as
are separate from the way of Righteousness, or at least as do not necessarily
involve a perfect one. Of which number is,

1. That Wisdom which does generally adorn it, and is indeed one of the fairest
Jewels of its Crown. For, as, according to the saying of Elihu in Job, it is
but reasonable that Days should speak, and multitude of Years teach Wisdom; so
experience shows, that Wisdom is no where found more perfect, nor any where
else a more clear and solid Understanding: Partly through the manifold
experience they have had of those things that fall under Consideration, and
partly through the advantage of their Temper; Old Men having neither any of
that heat which is natural to younger Persons, and by which they are
precipitated to act, before they have sufficiently considered, nor yet of those
Lusts by which their judgments are either perfectly debauched, or at least very
much clouded in their perceptions. Which by the way (as Tully Tullius de
Senectute. Nihil igitur afferunt, qui in re gerenda versari senectutem negant:
similesque sunt, ut siquis gubernatorem in navigando nihil agere dicat, cum
alii malos scandant, alii per foros cursent, alii sentinam exhauriant: ille
autem clavem tenent quietus sedeat in puppi.
observes) may make amends for that weakness of body wherewith the Hoary Head
is commonly attended, and for which it is so often despised as useless. For, who
(as the same Author Tullius de Senectute. Nihil igitur afferunt, qui in re
gerenda versari senectutem negant: similesque sunt, ut siquis gubernatorem in
navigando nihil agere dicat, cum alii malos scandant, alii per foros cursent,
alii sentinam exhauriant: ille autem clavem tenent quietus sedeat in puppi.
there speaks) will say the Master of the Ship does nothing, because younger
Men perhaps climb the Mast, run over the Decks, or empty the Pump? whilst in
the mean time the good Old Man sits at the Helm, and directs both the Ship, and
all that manage it. And accordingly, as in all Nations, Men have generally made
choice of the Elder sort for the managing of the most Important Affairs of
State, so the Custom has so prevailed, that in all Nations almost, the word
Elder has been set to denote a Counselor or a Governor, and they have born
the Name who have not had Years to answer it, nor any thing but their Place and
Wisdom. As if Wisdom were so peculiar to the Ancient, that Young Men must
become Old to learn it, and not be admitted to govern, till either Time had
planted Hoary Hairs upon their Head, or the Elder Ones made them a Periwig of
theirs.

2. But beside the wisdom of the Hoary Head, which yet is no contemptible
ground of that Honor which we are to afford them; the Hoary Head has also to
commend it, the favor of God toward it, above and beside, what greener Ones
have: Those Hoary Heads betokening Gods Approbation of their Persons and
Actions, or at least his Compassion and Forbearance. For, as that Crown of
theirs generally shows them to be free from those enormous Vices, concerning
which, God has said, that they which do them, shall not live out half their
days, Psalm. 55.23. So where it does not, yet at least that God has a favor to
them, and desires their Conversion and Amendment: In order thereunto, whilst he
cuts off younger Persons in the midst of their Years and Sins, yet continuing
them to Gray Hairs, that so they may have opportunity to return. And it brings
to my Mind what is to be seen in a Medal of Theophylactus a Christian Emperor,
even a Hand betokening that of Heaven, putting a Crown upon his Head. For, if
this Crown of Glory on the Hoary Head be a mark of the favor of the Almighty,
it may very well have the same device, because planted on the Ancient head by
the hand of God, no less than that of time. Which as it ought in reason to call
for our regard, (for, how should we not honor those, whom God has so signally
vouchsafed to do so?) to excite the gratitude of such who have the honor, as
well as the happiness to wear it.

3. From the favor of God, wherewith we have said the Hoary Head to be no less
encircled than with its Gray Hairs, pass we in the third place, to that which
is no less a ground of Honor, even its freedom from those Lusts wherewith
younger years are agitated: That however among some Persons passing for a
reproach, yet being indeed its Privilege and Honor; or, that I may speak with
Solomon, in the place so often alluded to, its Crown of Glory. For, is there
any thing in the world more dishonorable than Vice? nay, does not the World it
self confess so much, by making some Vice or other always the matter of its
reproach? or any Age which is more freed by Nature from the temptations to it,
or more instructed by it to abhor it? It has either none, or very languid
inclinations to the pleasures of Sense; it has no perception of them, or such
as is easily corrected. It is dead to the World even before it is so, it is a
stranger to its delights and recreations. As if it had already passed from
Earth to Heaven, where all those Earthly delights perish, and that Crown of
Glory, which it wears, were a Crown of Glory indeed; that is to say, an
Immortal and Immarcessible one. But then, if to the no inclinations of that age
to sensual pleasures, we add its experience of the vanity of them all; its
knowledge how little of satisfaction there is in them, and with how many and
how great evils they are commonly attended; so we may very well pronounce it to
be a very glorious age, and to carry away the Crown from all the rest. For,
where there is not only no gust of sensual pleasures, but an experimental
Knowledge of their Vanity and Vexation, how can such persons but despise them,
and pursue those which are more spiritual and heavenly? Not but that the
contrary may, and sometimes does happen (for God knows there are Boys of above
Threescore years of Age) but that that is the usual attendant of Old Age, and
that their Gray Hairs do always dispose them to it.

4. Add hereunto (and more I shall not need to add, to show the ground of
honoring the face of the Old Man) such persons by the similitude of their
years, and likeness of disposition, are the usual Companions of our Natural
Parents; and being such cannot be despised without a dishonor to our Parents,
into whose society they are assumed.

2. Having thus shown the grounds of honoring the face of the Old Man,
according as the Scripture prescribes, enquire we in the next place, what kind
of honors we are to afford them. And, here not to tell you, that they are to
have a share in our inward esteem, because without that (as has been often
said) all expressions of Honor are but a mockery; I shall without more ado
descend to those expressions of Honor, which either the Scripture or Reason do
prescribe. But such is.

1. The honoring them with our outward gesture, rising up, or falling down
before them; the injunction of God in the place before quoted out of Leviticus
being, Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old
man, and fear thy God, I am the Lord. In which place we have, not only an
express command for rising up before the hoary head, but what is of much more
importance, the so doing joined in the same period with the reverence of God
himself.

2. To respectfulness in our outward behavior, subjoin we the reverencing them
with our Tongues; whether it be (for that is no small sign of honor) by
suspending the expressions of it, at least till Elder men have delivered their
sentence, or speaking with submission and respect. For so (that I may begin
with the former) we find Elihu in Job to have proceeded, Job. 32.7. he there
telling us that, because he was young, and those other Friends of Job very old,
he was at first afraid, and durst not show them his opinion; and not without
reason, because (as he afterward intimates) Wisdom is the privilege of Old
Age; in consideration whereof, it is but reasonable that the Younger and less
wise should give them leave to speak before them. But neither is it less
evident, or rather much more, that when we do speak, we are to speak with
Submission and respect; St. Paul in the place before quoted, admonishing
Timothy a Governor of the Church, (and how much more then inferior Persons?)
that he should not rebuke an Elder, but entreat him as a Father, and the elder
Women as Mothers, 1 Timothy 5.1, 2. and though there be no obedience due to Aged
Persons as such, because their Superiority implies rather a preeminence than
Authority, yet inasmuch

3. As they are capable of Honor in Deed, as well, as in Gesture and Language,
we are in reason to make our Actions to bespeak our Esteem of them no less than
our behavior and words; to that end giving them that assistance which their
bodily weaknesses, and that relief which both their weaknesses and necessities
may require: St. Paul in the forequoted Epistle, commanding the thus honoring
of Widows, and particularly the elder ones.

4. The only Species of Honor to be spoken of, is that of submission to their
censures, which we shall find to have a place here, no less than in other
Fathers. For though these Fathers, as such, have no Authority to command, and
therefore neither to punish; yet their great Wisdom and Experience privilege
them to rebuke the disorders of younger persons, to which therefore if we give
them that Honor which is required, we must submit with all patience and
meekness. Care only would be taken (that I may not leave those elder ones
without an exhortation) that they behave themselves with that Wisdom, and
Gravity, and Sobriety which becomes them. For much of the Honor that is due to
them, being founded upon the presumption of their Wisdom, Gravity, and
Sobriety; Reason would, if they expect Honor from the younger sort, that they
should give proof of those in their behavior, and not, as too often happens,
pursue their youthful Lusts, or fall into their Follies and Indecencies.

Of the Honor of Parents, whether properly or improperly so styled, what has
been said may suffice, and, because that is principally intended, of the main
concernments of this Commandment. But, because (as was before said) it was also
intended to comprehend the honor of all that are in any Dignity or Authority,
therefore, for the fuller explication thereof, it will be requisite to subjoin
somewhat concerning both the one and the other, and first of all of those that
have any thing of Dignity to commend them.

Now there are Four things, that procure dignity to Men, as that is set to
denote a preeminence without Authority, 1. Their Parts and Endowments. 2. Their
Birth. 3. Their Fortunes, 4. And Lastly, The Titles and Characters that are
bestowed upon them by Princes and Societies.


1. The the first of these ought to have our Honor, and consequently the
Persons that are endu'd with them, needs no other proof than that they are the
Gifts of God. For, being so, they are in reason to be respected by all those
who think God a due object of it. The only thing worthy our enquiry, is, in
what order they are to be honored, and what kind of Honors we are to afford
them: the former whereof, will best be judged of by the Honor they bring to
God, or the use they are of unto the World. For thus, because Piety does most
immediately tend to the honor of God, as being nothing else than an immediate
regard, both of him and of his Laws; the Parties in whom it is, are, caeteris
paribus, to be honored before those that are Masters of any other Endowments.
In like manner, because Divinity ministers more directly to that end, than any
other kind of Learning or qualification in the World, Reason would that those
who are eminent in it should be preferred before the Learned of other
Professions. Lastly, because Learning contributes more to Religion than Courage
or Strength, and is generally more useful to the World, hence it comes to pass,
that by the consent of Nations Arms yield to the Gown, and the Laurel of the
Conqueror to the Eloquence of the Tongue. All therefore that remains to
enquire, is, what kind of Honors we are to afford them, which in general is,
the giving them that Respect and Encouragement which their several Endowments
and Usefulness in the World does require; in particular, the attending to their
particular Excellencies, and demeaning our selves answerably thereunto. Which
we shall do, if we imitate the Virtues of the Pious, follow the directions of
the Learned in their several Faculties, and as much as in us lies, promote the
welfare of those who hazard their Lives for the safeguard of the Public.

2. From Men's Parts and Endowments, pass we to the nobility of their Birth,
which we shall find to be another ground of Honor; this being but a just
tribute to the merits of their Ancestors, and a necessary means to promote
Virtue and Piety in the World. For who would willingly Travel for the Public
good, if the reward thereof should reach no farther than himself? or think
himself well apaid, if the Children of less deserving Persons should enjoy the
same Privileges with his: especially when it often happens that they who
deserve so well of the World, are either by the suddenness of their death, or
the constancy of their Travels, debarred the enjoyment of them in their own
persons.

3. To the Nobility of Men's Birth, subjoin we, the amplitude of their Fortunes,
as which, next to that, is a just ground of Honor. Not that it is simply
Noble, to be Rich; but that it bespeaks, on the one hand, the Virtues of them,
or of their Ancestors; and on the other hand, the Favor of the Divine
Providence. For, though Men do sometimes acquire Wealth by evil means, and such
as therefore make their Wealth rather a Reproach, than a Mark of Honor; yet
ordinarily it is by Industry and Wisdom, by the Eminency of their Learning, and
the Greatness of their Valor: things which are so Honorable, that they may
very well cast a Luster upon those very Fortunes that are acquired by them. And
though Grace and Virtue be undoubtedly a greater Mark of God's Favor, than any
outward Acquisitions whatsoever; yet inasmuch as even these happen not to Men
without the Divine Providence, they cannot but be looked upon, as Testimonies
of his Favor, where they are honestly acquired; and those that have them, upon
that score to be reverenced and esteemed. Lastly,

4. As Men's Parts, or Birth, or Fortunes, do call for that Honor which is here
required; so the same Honor is due to those Dignities that are conferred upon
Men by the Favor of the Prince; or under him, by the indulgence of those
Societies or Corporations which are by the Prince priviledg'd to bestow them:
Such as are for the former, the Dignities of Dukes, Marquesses, and the like;
as for the latter, the Degrees that are bestowed in Universities. For, as these
are generally the Rewards of their Virtue upon whom they are bestowed; so they
are, in all, the Marks of the Favor of those whom God has commanded us to
honor. In consideration whereof, as it cannot but be thought reasonable to
honor them, because otherwise, through their Sides wounding the Honor of the
Prince; so all fear is removed of paying Respect to their Worthlesness whom
Princes do sometime promote: He who pays a Man respect for the Dignity which
the Prince bestows upon him, doing it not so much to him, as to the Prince by
whom it is conferred. In the mean time, though that may be some satisfaction to
the Honourer, and, where Men are wise, take off from those Prejudices which the
Vices of Noble Persons give; yet, as it can afford little satisfaction to the
Honored, who thus sees himself made only an Instrument of another Honor; so
we are not to expect, that he should signify so much with those who have not
the like faculty of discerning. For, inasmuch as Excellency is the proper
ground of Honor, it will not be easy to procure them any perfect Honor, who
have not some Personal Excellency to deserve it. What remains then, but that
they who are thus dignified, show themselves worthy of their several Titles,
and be no less glorious in their Actions, than in the Characters that they
bear? That the Learned and the Valiant, employ their Learning and Valor for
the Public Weal; and the Man of high Birth, do Things worthy of those
Ancestors from whom he sprang? That the Man who is truly Pious, continue, and
add to it, and not make it a pretext for a future slothfulness, or to be able
so much the more securely to deceive? In fine, That he who is rich in this
World, show himself rich in good Works, and be as virtuous in the dispensation
of his Wealth, as he or his Ancestors have been happy in acquiring it? So
doing, they shall not only have Honor among Men, but be respected by the
Almighty; and when all their Earthly Honor shall be laid in the dust, be
advanced to a Crown, and such a one, whose Luster no Time or Malice shall be
able to impair.

PART X.
Of the Honor of those who are Superior to us in any Private Authority or
Dominion, whether it be that of a Lord of a Manor over his Tenants, or of a
Master over his Servants. The Ground of the Honor of the former, that
Emolument the Tenants receive by him, and their own Oath and Compact, as the
Honors they are to pay, those Rents, Services, and Homages by which they hold
their respective Emoluments. The Duty of the Lord, to afford them again that
Protection, Assistance, and Redress which the Laws of the Land, the Custom of
the Place, or the Nature of their Dominion does require. Of the Honor of
Masters, and what the Grounds thereof are. In order whereunto, inquiry is first
made concerning such of their Servants as become so by Constraint, and
particularly by Conquest, by Sentence, or by Purchase. Where the Servants
become such, either by Conquest, or a Condemnatory Sentence, those to whom they
do belong, have for the Ground of their Honor, their giving them that Life,
which it was in their power to have taken away. Where Servants become such by
Purchase, there is the Title of those, whether Conquerors, or Princes, to whom
they did originally belong; and that Valuable Consideration which the Purchaser
paid for it. If the Servant become such by his own free Consent, as it is in
Days-men, Menial Servants, and Apprentices; there is not only his own free
Consent, to entitle his Master to Honor from him, but those Wages and
Nourishment which the two former receive, and that Skill or Craft which the
latter is instructed in. An Address to the Declaration of what Honors are due
from Servants to their Masters, and in what measure and proportion: Where
entrance is made with the Consideration of such Servants as become so by
constraint; and all sort of Honor shown to be due from them, which they are in
a capacity to pay. This evidenced both from Scripture, and the Life which they
receive from their Masters. A Digression concerning the Abolition of Servitude
in the Christian World; where is shown, That it was neither founded upon any
just Reason, nor is much for the Commodity of it. Of the Honors that are due
from such as become Servants by Consent, which are shown to be in a great
measure determinable by their own Compacts. Certain Rules laid down for the
more certain investigation of them, such as are, That they show respect to
their several Masters in Gesture and Language; That they yield Obedience to
their Commands, and particularly, in all such things as are expressly
covenanted, or are by Law or Custom imposed upon them; yea, even when the
matter of the Command is harsh, provided it be not eminently such. An Account
of the Qualifications wherewith this Obedience of theirs is to be attended;
which are Singleness of Heart, and a Cheerful Mind. Submission to the Censures
of the Master, another part of the Servants Duty, even where they are rather
frowardly than justly inflicted; provided they be not often repeated, nor prove
intolerable. An Appeal to the Magistrate, in that case allowable; but no
violent Resistance, in that, or any other. Of the Duty of Masters to their
Servants, and particularly to such as are Servants by Constraint, or Slaves:
Where is shown, first, That they ought to furnish them with Food and Raiment,
in such a proportion as may suffice the Necessities of Nature: Secondly, That
they impose such Tasks upon them, as are not above their Strength to undergo:
Thirdly, Not to punish them above the demerit of their Crime, or above what
their Strength will bear: And, in sine, That neither their Commands nor
Punishments be extended any farther than the Laws of the Place give leave, or
Equity and Christian Charity permit. It is however necessary for such Servants,
to submit to whatever is imposed, provided it be not above the proportion of
their Strength; partly upon the account of St. Paul's commanding Subjection to
the Froward, and partly upon the Account of that Life which is indulged them.
Of the Duty of Masters to Servants by Consent, which, to be sure, comprehends,
1. All things that are owing from them to Slaves. 2. What they expressly
covenant to afford them, whether that be Wages or Instruction. 3. To treat them
agreeably to the Nature of that Service into which they are admitted. 4. The
exacting of due Labor from them; and, where they fail, Chastisement. 5. The
restraining them from Vicious Courses, and both prompting and obliging them to
the Practice of Religious Duties: Where both the Ground and Usefulness of the
Master's so doing is declared.

WHAT Honor is due from us to those that have any thing of Dignity to commend
them, has been already declared; together with the Grounds upon which it
stands. It remains only, that we entreat of the Honor of such as are also in
Authority, and may command our Obedience, as well as Respect: I do not mean, by
virtue of any Public Employment (for what Honor is due to such, has been
before sufficiently declared), but by virtue of some Private Dominion, such as
is that of a Lord of a Manor over his Tenants, or of a Master of a Family over
his Servants.

Of the former of these much need not be said, whether as to the Necessity or
the Kinds of Honor that are to be paid. For, holding their Lands from them,
upon condition of certain Rents, Services, and Homages, to which they do
moreover by Promise and Oath oblige themselves, at their several Admissions to
them; the Benefit they enjoy by them, and their own Compact, shows the
necessity of honoring them: as the latter, because particularly expressing
them, the Kinds of Honor they are to pay. In consideration whereof, as no Man
of Conscience can pretend to withhold them, were it only for the Oath of God,
by which the Payment thereof is bound upon them; so those who challenge this
Honor from them, are in reason to afford them that Protection, Assistance, and
Redress, which the Laws of the Land, the Custom of the Place, or the Nature of
their Dominion does require.

From this first Dominion, pass we to that which is more general; I mean, that
of the Master over his Servants: Where, first of all, 1. I shall show the Duty
of Servants honoring their Masters. 2. The Grounds upon which the Honor of
them is built. 3. What Kinds, and Measure, and Quality of Honor, is due unto
them. 4. And lastly, What is due from them again to their Servants.


1. I begin with the first of these, even the Duty of Servants honoring their
Masters; concerning which, the Scriptures of the New Testament speak much and
often, as to that part of Honor which consists in Obedience and Submission.
But because, when I descend to show the Kinds of Honor they are to give them,
there will be a necessity of producing those Texts anew, I shall content my
self at present with that general Proof which St. Paul gives us in his First to
Timothy, and with that which this Commandment, if well considered, will be
found to do. For, though the Letter of it specify only the Honor of Parents,
yet it sufficiently implies the Honor of other Superiors, and particularly
that Honor which is due from Servants to their Masters; there being certainly
a far greater Preeminence of a Master over his Servant, than there is of a
Father over his Child. But so, that I may strengthen this Inference with the
Doctrine of Christianity, St. Paul does expressly enjoin, willing as many
Servants as are under the yoke, to count their Masters worthy of all Honor, 1 Timothy 6.1.

2. The necessity of Servants honoring their Masters being thus evinced, both
from St. Paul, and the general Reason of the Commandment; my proposed Method
obliges me to inquire into the Grounds of it, which are different, according
to the different sorts of Servants: For, either they are such as become so, 1.
By their own free consent: or, 2. Such as become Servants by constraint.


The latter of these are again of three sorts, according to the different means
whereby a Man may come to have Dominion. For, either he may acquire it, 1. By
the means of Conquest; or, 2. By Sentence; or, 3. And lastly, By Purchase from
those who have either the one or the other Title to their Service.


If the Question be concerning the first, that is to say, of such as become
Servants by Conquest; so the Ground of Honoring their Masters, is the giving
them their Life, when it was in their power to have taken it away. For, being
by the Law of Nations priviledg'd to take away the Life of those which should
be taken by them in the Wars, it seemed but reasonable, and indeed is no other,
that, if the Conqueror give them their Life, they should, for so great a
Benefit, dedicate that Life unto his Service. Whence it is, as Institut. lib.
1. tit. 3. sect. 3.
Justinian observes, that Servants, among the Romans, had the Name of Mancipia,
and Servi; the former importing their being taken by the Hand of the Enemy; the
latter, the saving of them by those that took them, when it was in their Power
to have destroyed them. In like manner, if the Magistrate, when for any Offense
he might take away the Malefactor's Life, condemns him to a perpetual Slavery;
that Indulgence of his is a sufficient Ground to oblige the Malefactor to
submit his Neck unto the Yoke. The Tie is much the same, though with the
addition of a farther one, upon such Servants as become so by Purchase: For the
Conqueror and the Magistrate transferring their Title unto another, and
moreover taking a Valuable Consideration for it, Reason and Equity would, that
he who is so passed over, should look upon himself as obliged to serve the
Purchaser, because succeeding into their Rights, and moreover paying a Valuable
Consideration for that Honor and Service which he exacts.

From such Servants as are made so by constraint, pass we to those which are
made so with their own free consent; such as are Days-men, Menial Servants, and
Apprentices: Concerning whom, it will be no hard matter to show, that there is
a just Ground of giving Honor to their Masters; nor yet, what those Grounds
are: The two former having for the Ground of their Honor, those Wages and
Nourishment which they receive; the latter, moreover, that Skill or Craft which
their Masters profess; all of them, the Astipulation of their own Consent and
Compact, by which that Honor and Service is bound so much the faster on them.
For, what can be more reasonable, than the paying them Honor and Service, who
give them a Valuable Consideration for it? especially when they do moreover
oblige themselves thereto, and covenant for the paying of it? It being a known
and undoubted Maxim, That there can be no Injury there, where that which is
exacted is with the free Consent of him that is to pay it.

3. Having thus shown the Grounds of that Honor which Servants owe unto their
Masters, and thereby evinced the Reasonableness, as well as Necessity thereof;
nothing remains, on the part of Servants, but to inquire, what kinds of Honor
they are to pay, and in what measure and proportion. For the resolution
whereof, we must recall the forementioned Distinction of Servants by
Constraint, and such as are made so by their own Consent and Compact. If the
Question be concerning the former, that is to say, of such as become Servants
by right of Conquest, by the Condemnation of them for some notorious
Wickedness, or by Purchase; so, little doubt can be made, but all Honor is due
from them to their several Masters, which they are in a capacity to pay. For,
beside that St. Paul, in the place before-quoted, commands such Servants to
think their Masters worthy of all Honor; it is no more than is due from them,
for the Benefit they enjoy from those to whom they are subjected: I speak not
only as to their constant Sustenance, but the granting them that Life which it
was in their power to have taken away. And though, since Christianity took
place in the World, such kind of Servitude or Slavery has been more rare,
especially in such Persons as are of the same Profession with their Masters;
yet I think so general an Abolition of it was neither founded upon any just
Reason, nor has proved much for the Convenience of the World. Not the former,
because (as Busbequius Busbeq. Tut) cic. Epist. 3.
well observes) neither can all Men bear a Liberty that is attended with
Poverty; neither are all Men so fitted by Nature, as to know how to govern
themselves, without the Conduct and Command of others; being herein not unlike
to certain Beasts, whose Fierceness would be always to be dreaded, unless they
were restrained by Bonds. Which supposed, what can be more reasonable, where a
just Cause precedes, than the introducing of such a Servitude as we speak of;
as by means of which, the Master may live by the Servants Labor; and the
Servant, on the other side, not only be maintained by it, but be restrained
from those Exorbitances, to which either his Ignorance, or the Pravity of his
Nature may incline him? But neither has so general an Abolition of Servitude
been much for the Convenience of the World: For, as the same Busbequius Busbeq.
ubi supra.
observes, if it had still continued, neither would the Wars nor the Gallows
take off so many Men, which might otherwise be of great use unto the World;
that Profit which might arise from the Use or Sale of them, being likely to
make the Conqueror less cruel, and the Magistrate less severe in his
Executions. To say nothing at all, that through the fear of that, some Men
might be more effectually restrained from those Exorbitances which the World
labors under; a constant Slavery being undoubtedly more terrible to the idle
Gallant, than either a Gibbet, or an Ax. Add hereunto (and more I shall not
need to add) that St. Paul himself does not only no where disallow this
Servitude, but commands those that are under it, to think their Masters worthy
of all Honor; such Servants as are under the yoke, being no other than
Bondslaves, as you may see, if you compare that Phrase with Lev. 26.13. and
Isa. 9.4.

But because, at least in this corner of the World, there is but little of such
kind of Servitude; and because, when I come to entreat of the Duties of Masters
to their Servants, I shall have occasion to say somewhat of the Measure of
those Servants Subjection and Obedience; therefore supersedeing any farther
consideration of it for the present, I will go on to show, what Kind, or
Measure, or Quality of Honor is due to their Masters, who are Servants not by
Constraint, but by Consent and Compact. For the resolution whereof, though much
need not be said, because what Kinds or Measure of Honor is due from them, is
in a great measure determinable by those Compacts by which they become their
Servants; yet because those Compacts do sometimes run in more general Terms,
and because Servants are generally backward enough in the apprehending of their
Duty, I think it not amiss to be a little more particular in describing the
several Portions of it. In order whereunto, the first thing I shall offer, is,
the showing Respect to them in Gesture and Language; because, as that is the
primary Notion of that Honor which Servants are obliged to think their several
Masters worthy of; so, without that, much would be taken off from the readiness
of that Submission and Obedience, which are the principal and undoubted parts
of their Duties: Men being not over-forward to submit themselves to those, whom
they have not an honorable Esteem of; nor to entertain such an Esteem long,
where they are suffered either to bear themselves as their Masters Fellows, or
talk to them as to their Equals. From Respect in Gesture and Language, pass we
to Obedience; concerning which Duty, the Scriptures speak much, and often:
Witness, to omit others, Ephesians. 6.5. and Col. 3.22. In the former whereof, St.
Paul commands Servants to be obedient unto them that are their Masters
according to the flesh: In the latter, to obey them in all things, and that too
with such Qualifications as are there subjoined. The only thing of difficulty
is, what ought to be the Measure of their Obedience, and with what
Qualifications to be attended. And here, not to tell you concerning the former,
that it ought to be in things lawful, and possible; because to other than such,
there can be no Obligation: that supposed, I shall affirm, 1. That their
Obedience ought to extend to all those things that are expressly covenanted
between their Master and them; there being nothing more reasonable or
necessary, than to pay their Masters that Service, which they expressly promise
to afford them. But from hence it will follow, that there can be no pretense
for withholding their Obedience in the Matters of that Employment or Trade for
which they are more particularly hired; because, however other things may be
set down in more general Terms, these are always expressly covenanted by them.
There is the same necessity, secondly, of yielding Obedience in all those
things which, though not particularly expressed in the Agreement, yet are by
Law or Custom imposed upon them; partly because of that Obedience we all owe
unto the Law, and partly because their Masters stipulating with them in the
general, to be obedient to their Commands, it is in reason to be understood of
all such Commands as either the Law or Custom privilege them to impose: It
being but reasonable to suppose that to be understood, which is not only too
long to express, but is by the generality of the World presumed as due. But
from hence it will follow, not only that Servants are to obey their Masters in
such things as relate to that Employment, for which they are more particularly
covenanted with; but also, that, if they be required, they are to tend upon
them, and do other such like Offices about them; after the same manner that we
find those Servants in the Gospel, after they were come out of the Field,
obliged by their Master to make ready first for him, and gird themselves and
serve him, before they sat down themselves, Luke 17.8. Which is the rather to
be taken notice of, because ordinary Servants now adays look upon their
Employment rather as an Office, than a Service, and consequently, do but in
part give obedience to their Masters Commands. Thirdly, As Servants are to
yield obedience in such things as are expressly covenanted for, and in such as
are by Law or Custom imposed upon them; so they are to do the like even where
the Matter of the Command is harsh, provided it be not eminently such; the
Precept of St. Peter being, That Servants should be subject, not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward, 1 Pet. 2.18. Which said, nothing
remains to account for, but the Qualifications of that Obedience which both
Nature and Scripture exacts of them; which is either, first, the doing it with
singleness of Heart; or, secondly, with a ready and a cheerful Mind: The former
whereof excludes all Eye-service, and such as studies rather to avoid the
Masters displeasure, than to do him true and faithful Service; the latter, all
obeying with murmuring and repining. Both which Vices, as they are plainly
enough condemned by St. Paul, Col. 3.22, 23. and the contrary Qualifications
enjoined; so the latter (as the same St. Paul Verse. 23, 24. and Ephesians. 6.6, 7.
observes) have this farther Reason to bind them upon Servants, that that
Obedience which is required of them, is imposed upon them by God and Christ, as
well as by their Earthly Masters. Which latter, however Servants may think to
put off with a deceitful or repining Service, yet they cannot hope so to
satisfy God, who both sees them, when their Masters do not, and requires
nothing more than a willing and a cheerful Mind. Lastly, As Servants are to be
obedient to their Masters, so also to submit unto their censures, yea such as
are rather frowardly than justly inflicted, the command of St. Peter being,
that Servants should be so subject to the froward, as the Reason he subjoins,
shows, even because, as he there goes on, That and that only is thank-worthy
with God, if a man for Conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, This only would be added, that though Servants are
by the command of God to submit even to unjust Censures; yet it ought to be
understood, provided they be not often repeated, nor prove intolerable, when
they are. For in that case, though the Servant may not violently resist, yet
there is no doubt he may endeavor to avoid them, by making his appeal to the
Magistrate, to whom the redressing, even of Servants unjust sufferings does
appertain. Whence it is, that by the Rescript Vid. Justinian Institut. l. 1.
tit. 8. s. 2.
of Marcus Antoninus, even Slaves had the privilege of flying to the Temple,
or the Statues of the Prince, and the Presidents of the Provinces were
commanded to take cognizance of their Complaints, and deliver them from their
Masters cruelties. But, as where the Chastisement is neither intolerable, nor
often repeated, it cannot be thought reasonable, when St. Peter commands
Submission to the Froward, for Servants to oppose themselves, so, if they
should be allowed to do so, it would introduce a greater confusion in Families,
than either the Peace of them, or of the State would be consistent with.

4. What Honor is due from Servants to their Masters, has been at large
declared, and thereby, so far as this particular is concerned, the main
intendment of the Commandment discharged; But because I have often said, that
the Commandment which is now before us, was intended also to comprehend the
duty of Superiors toward Inferiors, as well as of Inferiors toward them: I
think it not amiss to speak somewhat of the duty of Masters toward their
Servants, and the rather, because oftentimes they stand as much in need of an
admonition as the other. In order whereunto, following the division before laid
down, I will consider the duties of Masters toward their Slaves, and and then
of their duties toward such, as though their Servants, yet are so in a more
ingenuous way.

Now, though the Authority of Masters over Slaves be undoubtedly much greater
than that over other Servants, though anciently, as Justinian Institut.
tells us, they had the power of Life and Death, and were not accountable for
it, though they put them to death unjustly; yet as the Roman Laws Lib. 1. tit.
8. sect. 2, 3.
set bounds to that exorbitant Power of theirs, and our own has yet more
retrenched it; so if we consult the Laws of Nature and Christianity, we shall
find there is more owing from them unto their Slaves, than is ordinarily
thought fit to be paid. Of this Nature is, first, Furnishing them with Food and
Raiment, in such a proportion as may suffice the necessities of Nature; this
being absolutely necessary to enable them to the performance of that Service
and Labor which they exact. Of the same nature is, secondly, The imposing such
Tasks upon them as is not above their strength to perform; this being no more
than common humanity requires, of which Slaves are equally partakers with our
selves. But such also is it, thirdly, Not to punish them above the demerit of
their Crime, nor above what their Strength will bear; Justice requiring that
the Punishment do not exceed the Proportion of the Offense, and common humanity
that it pass not the bounds of their Natural Abilities. In fine, for so St.
Paul plainly intimates, where he commands Masters to give unto their Servants
that which is just and equal; their Commands and Punishments ought to extend no
farther than the Laws of the place give leave, or Equity and Christian Charity
permit; which to be sure will not only exclude all Cruelty and Injustice toward
them, but impose a necessity upon the Master, of showing such Compassion to
them, as their Weakness or Necessities may at any time require. In the mean
time, though I no way doubt but Masters are to give unto their Slaves that
which is just and equal, and consequently to abstain from all Cruelty, either
in their Commands or Censures, yet I think it necessary for them, to submit
both to the one and the other, where the burden which is imposed, is not above
the proportion of their strength: partly, because St. Peter commands subjection
to the froward and difficult, and partly, because that they have so much as
their life is, owing either to the mercy of their present Masters, or of those
from whom they were purchased.

From the duties of Masters to their Slaves, pass we to the duties of the same
to their Servants, such I mean, as are so in a more ingenuous way. Where, first
of all, I shall make no difficulty to affirm, as I suppose, neither will any
man so grant, that all those things are undoubtedly owing to Servants, which
are from a Master to his Slave; the condition of Servants being much better
than that of Slaves, and therefore, to be sure, not to require less of their
Masters than the other. As little difficulty can be made, that all that is
owing to them from their Masters, which at the entrance upon their service,
they do expressly covenant to afford them, a Promise, even where there is no
other Obligation, making the party promising a Debtor; and how much more then,
where there is a valuable consideration to engage him? But from hence it will
follow, first, Where there is any such thing covenanted, that they are to give
them the promised reward or wages, and that too, at or near the time wherein
they become due to them; he paying less than he ought, who pays not at or near
the the time, because depriving the party to whom he owes it, of that use and
advantage which he might, and which, because it is his own, it is fit he should
receive by it. It will follow, secondly, where that is a part of the Contract,
that Masters carefully and faithfully teach their Servants that Trade, for the
Learning whereof they become Servants to them; which is the rather to be
observed, because it is oftentimes through sloathfulness omitted, or basely and
invidiously concealed, at least as to the chiefest Mysteries thereof; as if a
Contract could be satisfied by paying one half the thing contracted for, and it
may be too, the less considerable one. I observe, thirdly, That in such
Servants as are by Contract to receive their whole maintenance from their
Masters, a regard is to be had, not only of what necessity, but what the
condition of that Service, into which they are assumed, requires. For by how
much the more Ingenuous the Service is, so much the more free in reason ought
to be the entertainment of those that are in it; especially, when as it mostly
happens, paying accordingly to their Masters for it. Whence it is, that no Man
of reason doubts but that the Apprentice of a Merchant, or other such more
liberal Profession, should be treated in a better fashion, than one of a man of
a more inferior one, or an ordinary Serving Man to the same. I observe,
fourthly, That as care is to be taken on the one hand, that they afflict not
their Servants with immoderate Labors or Punishments, so also on the other
hand, that they suffer them not to be Idle, nor be sparing of just
Chastisements, when they deserve them; the omission of that not only proving
the bane of their Servants, but being a falsification of that Trust which is
reposed in them by their Servants Parents, and an injury to the Commonwealth,
which by their slothfulness or cowardice is like to have so much the worse
Subjects. Fifthly and Lastly, (more than which I shall not need to say, unless
it be to exhort them to the practice of what they are thus bound to) It is
incumbent upon all Masters of Families to restrain their Servants from all
Vicious Courses, and both prompt and oblige them to the practice of Religious
Duties; not indeed by any direct obligation upon them from their Authority,
which reaches, rather to Temporal than Spiritual matters; (whence it is that
they are called Masters according to the Flesh) but by virtue of that Great Law
of Christianity, which commands Men, as much as in them lies, to promote the
business of Religion: Which lying more in Masters powers than in other Men's, by
means of that Authority they have over them; there does from thence arise an
Obligation upon them to promote Religion by their commands in all those which
are subjected to their Dominion. And indeed, as that which is honest will very
rarely be found to be separate from profitable, if Men would estimate the
advantageousness of a thing by that which is most certainly and lastingly so;
so there cannot be a more compendious way to promote our Interest in the World,
than by endeavoring as much as in us lies, to make those Religious whom we
employ: Because, as what such do is most faithfully and diligently done, so it
is most likely to be prosper'd by the Divine Providence, from whom, as all
other good Gifts, so this Worlds Wealth will be found to come.

PART XI.
Of the Promise wherewith the Duty of this Commandment is enforced, and what
the due importance of it is. Where is shown, 1. That the Blessing here
promised, is a long and happy Life, and particularly in the Land of Canaan. 2.
That that Blessing is to be expected from our Parents as well as from God;
partly by that sustenance and encouragement which our Honor will prompt them
to afford, and partly by their Intercession with God for us. Upon occasion
whereof, the efficacy of a Parent's blessing is declared, and the
reasonableness of Children's desiring it of them is asserted. 3. That the
Blessing here promised, implies a contrary Curse to the Violators of the
Commandment, as is evident both from the ineffectualness of a single Promise to
persuade, and the denunciations of God elsewhere. Whether or no, and how far
the promise belongs to us Christians. Evidence of its belonging to us from the
obligation of that Duty, to which it is annexed, and from St. Paul's making use
of it to persuade the Ephesians to the performance of the other. An Essay
toward the showing in what manner and measure it appertains to us. Where,
first, is made appear, that it appertains not to us in the same manner and
measure wherein it did unto the Jews. Evidence hereof from its referring to the
Land of Canaan, which was the proper Portion of the Jews, and from the nature
of those earthly promises that were made to them; those, as they were not
clogged with the same exceptions wherewith they are now, so intended in a great
measure, as shadows of more substantial Blessings. That this and other such
like Promises appertain to us, First and chiefly, in the Mystery or Substance;
where withal is shown, what the Mystery here adumbrated is, even a Happy and
Immortal Life in Heaven. That they appertain to us also in the Letter, but not
without the exception of Persecutions, nor yet any farther than they shall be
found to be subservient to our Spiritual welfare, and the Glory of God and of
his Gospel. Enquiry is next made, whether or no, and in what proportion the
present Promise does belong to the Observers of the several Duties of this
Commandment. That it belongs in some measure to all, is evidenced from the
extensiveness of the Duty, which the Promise is in reason to answer; But first,
and principally, to the Honourers of Parents, because that is the only Duty
expressed, and because that tie, which Parents have upon us, approaches
nearest unto that, whereby the Honor of God is bound upon us. The honourers of
other Superiors more or less entitled to it, according as those Superiors
approach nearer to, or are farther removed from our Natural Parents. The
consequence whereof is, that it belongs more to the honourers of our Civil and
Spiritual Parents, than to other Superiors; as again, more to the honourers of
our Civil than Spiritual ones, because the former have a greater Interest in
our Temporal Being. The Explication concludes with enquiring, what appearance
there is of the literal completion of this promise. Evidence hereof in the
Honourers of our Natural Parents from the observations both of Greeks and Jews;
As in the Honourers of other Superiors, and particularly of our Civil or
Spiritual Parents, partly from the orderliness of their behavior, which is
more likely to be successful than Turbulent and Seditious ones, and and partly
from their preventing those Wars and Confusions, which do principally occasion
the shortning of Men's days.

II. HAVING entreated at large in several Discourses, of the Duty here
enjoined, as well that which we owe to our Civil and Spiritual Parents,
together with all other kinds of Superiors, as that which we owe unto our
Natural ones; it remains that we proceed to the Promise, wherewith it is
enforced, of the prolongation of our days. For though the words wherein it is
expressed, look rather like a Motive drawn from the Consequents of our Honor,
than a Promise of what God will bestow upon it; yet, as that Lawgiver, who
proposes any thing under the Notion of a Motive, must, if he Act like a
Lawgiver, both represent that which is advantageous, and moreover, if the
thing depend upon his Will, an assurance of his own readiness to contribute
toward it, which is the very formality of a Promise; so that that which God
proposes under that Notion, was intended as a Promise, St. Paul gives us to
understand, Ephesians. 6.2. He there stiling this Commandment, a Commandment with a
Promise, and the first of that Nature, meaning thereby, the first of the
Decalogue, to which there was any express and special one. Taking it therefore
for granted, that the words now before us have the nature of a Promise to the
due observers of this Commandment, I will make it my business to enquire, 1.
What is the due importance of it, and 2. Whether or no, and how far it
appertains to us Christians upon the performance of the duty enjoined. 3.
Whether, and in what proportion it belongs to the several duties therein
contained.


I. Now there are three things, within the resolution whereof, the answer to
the first of these will be comprehended.

1. What the Blessing here promised is, 2. From whom it is to be expected. And
3. Whether it implies any thing of a Curse to the violators of the Commandment.
1. What the Blessing promised is, we shall not be long to seek, because so
particularly expressed in this place, and in the parallel one of Deuteronomy,
chap. 5. 6. it being evident from them both, that a long life is promised, from
that of Deuteronomy And that it may go well with thee.
, that that life shall be happy as well as long; and from both, again, that
that long and happy life should be spent in their own Country, and
particularly, in the Land of Canaan: that being the Land promised by God unto
the Israelites, and to which this Promise, and in a manner all the Promises in
the Old Testament do refer.

2. From the Blessing promised, pass we to the Persons from whom we are to
expect it, which is no doubt, first and chiefly God; both the Commandment and
the Promise being perfectly his, and therefore the completion of the latter to
be expected from him. But because, even in those things, of which God is the
first and principal Author, there are other less principal and subordinate
causes, and, because, though our Translation and others read only that thy days
may be long, or be prolonged; in the mean time taking no notice of the means by
which it is to be conveyed, yet the Hebrew, which is in reason to give measure
to them all, reads (...)
that they, even thy Father and Mother may prolong them, therefore I think it
but reasonable to collect from thence, that that long and happy Life, is next
under God, to be expected from our Parents; partly by means of that Sustenance
and Encouragement which our Honor will invite them to afford us, but more
especially, (because every good and perfect Gift comes from above) by their
Intercession to God for us, from whom they receive such Honor. For, though (as
Grotius Explicat. Decal^gi. Not. ad Praec. 5.
has observed) it be not unusual for Verbs of an Active Form, to be taken in a
Passive or Reciprocal Sense, in which Sense, both the Septuagint and most other
Translaters understood the Hebrew Verb here; yet, inasmuch as it is certain
from the Scriptures, and particularly from the Story of Jacob and Esau, that
the Blessing of the Child depended much upon the Prayers of the Father,
inasmuch as that wise Author of the Book of Ecclesiasticus Eccl. 3.9.
represents it as a known truth, That the Fathers Blessing establishes the
Houses of Children, but the Curse of the Mother rooteth out Foundations, I
think it no way improper to understand the Hebrew in its literal sense, and
upon that account, though in a secondary sense, to ascribe the prolongation of
Childrens days to the blessing, or devout Prayers of their Parents. But be
there sufficient ground or not, in this particular place, for the influence the
Parents Prayers may have upon the happiness of the Child, and particularly upon
his length of days; yet as it is not without ground, if we take the practice of
the Patriarchs for one, and the observation both of Jews and Gentiles, so it
wants not that, the force whereof will be more hard to resist, I mean the
astipulation of Reason, the Prayers of Parents for their obedient Children,
being not only, through the affection from which they proceed, likely to be
more than ordinarily intense, and therefore so much the more likely to prevail;
but the clearest attestations that can be of that respectful behavior of the
Child, to which a long and happy Life is promised. Which attestations, however,
God stands in no need of, and much less can the want of them be thought to be
able to divert him from his purposes, yet may very well be presumed, when
concurring with them, to quicken the execution of them, and press him to
perform what he himself has promised. Upon which account, I cannot but wonder
that Children should now be taught not to beg those Prayers which have such
visible advantages, especially when the so doing has had the general
approbation of Christendom, and is moreover no contemptible testimony of that
Honor which they are to pay; The Author to the Hebrews having told us, That
without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the better, and consequently,
that the begging of a Fathers Blessing is a testimony of Honor, because
implying a confession of his Superiority from whom they desire it.

3. The only thing to be accounted for, is, whether the Promise annexed to this
Commandment, implies any thing of a Curse to the violators of it. Which, that
it does, will evidently appear, if we mean no other by a Curse than the
shortning of those Children's Lives that disobey. For, as that naturally
follows, from the sole withdrawing the Influence of the Divine Providence; so,
that God will withdraw that Influence from disobedient Children, needs no other
proof, than that he has particularly promised to continue it to obedient ones.
For, what great encouragement could it be to honor our Parents, to have the
Promise of that, which those who do not honor them may be alike Partakers of
with our selves? Neither will it suffice to say, (as perhaps it may be) That
the certainty which a Promise infers, makes it reasonable to perform that to
which it is annexed, rather than run the hazard of failing of it. For, how
reasonable soever it may be to prefer a Certainty before an Uncertainty, where
no other Considerations intervene; yet is it not to such a degree, as to be
likely to prevail, where there are any present Temptations to the contrary:
Experience showing it a hard matter to resist such, even where there is an
assurance of our Loss; and how much more hard then (that I say not, the
weakness of Humane Nature considered, impossible) where there is a possibility
of avoiding it? To all whlch, if we add the many Expressions of God's
displeasure against the Violators of his Laws, and particularly of that Law
which is now before us; so, no doubt can remain, but that at the same time God
promises a long and happy Life to the dutiful, he meant the contrary to
disrespectful and disobedient Children. For, how can we think otherwise, when
there is a Command to the Magistrate to put him to death who curses his Father
or Mother? Exodus 21.17. and the People, Deuteronomy. 27.16. are taught to invocate the
Curse of God upon them that set light either by the one or the other?

II. The second Question follows, to wit, Whether or no, and how far the
Promise that now is before us appertains to us Christians. That it does
appertain to us, much need not be said to show, because I have already See the
Discourse of the Measures whereby we are to proceed in the Interpretation of
the Decalogue.
prevented my self in that Argument: It may suffice here to say, That as it is
reasonable enough to believe the Promise does, because that Precept, to which
it is annexed, is bound upon us by our Blessed Savior; so it is no less
reasonable to believe so, because St. Paul, where he inculcates the Precept,
forgets not to add, that it is a Commandment with a Promise, and the first.
For, what would it have signified to Christians, to have told them of its being
a Commandment with a Promise, if that Promise which belongs to it had been none
of their Concernment? Taking it therefore for granted, or rather as
sufficiently proved, that the Promise now before us appertains to us, we will
proceed to inquire, (as in which the main difficulty lies) Whether it
appertains to us in the same manner and measure it did unto the Jews; and if
not, in what.

That it appertains not to us in the same manner and measure, is evident,
first, from hence, that it particularly refers to the Land of Canaan; the
Promise being not only of a long and happy Life, but of a long and happy Life
in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee; which we know to have been the
Land of Canaan. Whence it is, that the Septuagint, which oftentimes act the
part rather of Paraphrasts, than strict Translators, add to the Name of Land,
the Title of Good; which we know, from Deuteronomy. 8.7. to have been the peculiar
Elogie of the Land of Canaan. Now forasmuch as the Land of Canaan was
particularly promised to the Jews; forasmuch as it does not appear, that it was
ever intended for Christians, nor was capable of containing the thousandth part
of those who have or do give obedience to this Commandment; it follows, that so
far at least we have no concernment in the Promise, and must therefore look out
for other ways of the completion of it. But so St. Paul gives us plainly enough
to understand, in the place before quoted out of the Ephesians; that Apostle,
though he represent the Promise, yet Ephesians. 6.3. (...).
leaving out that Clause of it, which the Lord thy God gives thee. But neither
is it less evident, but that, abstracting from the Land of Canaan, the Jews to
whom it was first made, had a far greater Title to it, if it be strictly and
literally understood: partly because those earthly Promises which were made
unto the Jews, were not clogged with those Exceptions which we find those of
the New Testament to be, and partly because they are represented by the Writers
of it, and particularly by St. Paul, as the Shadows of those things to come,
which the Gospel exhibited. Which reason alone, if well considered, will be
found to make a great difference between the Times of the Law and the Gospel.
For, the Substance being come, it was but reasonable to think the Shadow was to
disappear, or at least not so to prevail, as it did before the appearing of it.
All therefore that remains to inquire, is, in what manner and measure this, and
other such Promises, are to be construed to appertain to us, and what kind of
Completion we are to expect. Where, first, no doubt can be made, that this, and
other such like Promises, appertain to us in the Mystery or Substance. For, the
Gospel proposing to exhibit that of which the Law was a Type or Shadow, those
Temporal Promises which the Law proposed, must consequently be supposed to be
fulfilled in the Mystery or Substance, to all those which are under its
Economy: Which, by the way, will not only confirm the truth of those Promises
belonging to us, but moreover take off from those discontents we are apt to
conceive upon the difference there often is between us and the Jews, as to
Temporal Promises. The former, because the main Intendment of all Symbolical
things, is the Mystery which is represented under them: the latter, because
exhibiting a more substantial Good, though less apparent, than that which the
Law does. For, what just ground of complaint can there be, if the Gospel,
though it provide not alike for our Temporal welfare, yet provides much more
for our Spiritual one, and exhibits the Substance of that of which the other
had but the Shadow? Which said, nothing remains to do, but to point out the
Mystery or Substance of those Earthly Promises which were by God in this
Commandment made to the Honourers of their Parents. But such is, first, Heaven,
in respect of that Land which was to be the Seat of their Life, who among the
Jews were due Observers of this Commandment; the Author to the Hebrews not
only stiling it a better and a heavenly Country, in respect of the Land of
Promise; but affirming moreover, that Abraham and Sarah looked through that
Land of Promise, to the Heavenly Country, and set up their Rest in it, and in
that City which God has there prepared; which shows, that this Heavenly
Country was figured in the Land of Promise, and consequently, to be bestowed
upon all such, under the Gospel, who should show themselves faithful Observers
of this Commandment. The Mystery will be yet more easy to be discovered, as to
the residue of that Promise which is here made to the Religious Honourers of
their Parents. For, as, in order to that, nothing more can be necessary, than
to instance in such Evangelical Blessings, as bear a perfect resemblance to the
promised ones (an Antitype being nothing else, either in the Literal or
Christian sense, than that which bears the same Signatures with its Type) so it
will be no hard matter to point out such of the Evangelical Blessings, as do
exactly accord with those which the Law promised. For, as that Heavenly Country
which the Gospel promises, has not only the Name of (...), or Patria; but
our (...), or Citizenship affirmed to be there, Phil. 3.20. because (as is
elsewhere affirmed) that New Birth, which we have, is from thence, and our
Original is not Earthly, but Heavenly; so, correspondently to that long and
happy Life which the Law proposes, we have the promise of a Life which does
infinitely surpass it in both, because devoid of any thing which may interrupt
our Happiness; and, beside that, not only simply long, but of such a duration
as shall never have an end.

From the Blessings typified by Earthly Promises, pass we to those Earthly ones
themselves, and inquire, whether or no, and how far they appertain to us
Christians. For the resolution of the former whereof, we shall not be long to
seek, because so distinctly stated by St. Paul; he expressly affirming, 1 Timothy
4.8. That Godliness has the promise of the Life that now is, and of that which
is to come. The only thing of difficulty is, in what measure they belong to
us; which accordingly I come now to resolve. In order whereunto, the first
thing I shall offer, is, That however the Jews might expect a perfect
Completion of them, upon the performance of their Duty, yet the like is not to
be expected by us, as being proposed with an exception of Persecution: Our
Savior, where he makes the largest Promise of things of that nature, yet
forgetting not to add that Allay to it. It Is in Mark 10.29, 30. And Jesus
answered and said, Verily I say unto you, there is no man that has lest house,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands,
for my sake, and the Gospels; but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this
time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands,
with persecutions; and in the world to come, eternal life. From which place, as
it is manifest, that a Christian may be sometime obliged to part with all
Earthly Blessings; so, that though he may hope to retrive them with advantage,
yet not without Persecutions for the sake of that Religion which he professes.
But beside that what Promises soever there may be of Earthly Happiness, yet it
is not to be expected we should enjoy an uninterrupted one; so neither any
portion of it, any farther than may be subservient to our Spiritual and Eternal
one, which is that which the Gospel chiefly promises. For, as otherwise
Earthly Blessings should be rather an Infelicity, than a Happiness, and
therefore not to be looked for from him who professes a more than ordinary
Kindness for us; so being less principally intended by the Gospel, which is
said to be built upon better Promises, they are in reason to give place, where
they cannot be performed without entrenching upon the Completion of those more
principal and better ones. Lastly, As whatsoever Earthly Happiness may be
thought to belong to us, yet it is of necessity to be understood with
subserviency to our Spiritual welfare; so also, to the Glory of God, and of his
Gospel, which may be sometime much more promoted by our Happiness. Upon which
account, I conceive, it was, that, in the Times near to our Savior and his
Apostles, the most faithful Disciples of our Lord did not only meet with
little of Earthly Happiness, but were moreover, beyond measure, persecuted and
destroyed; God Almighty, by their exemplary Patience and Humility, giving the
Heathen to understand, how admirable a Religion they had espoused. But, as
where the Glory of God, or our own Eternal Welfare is consistent with it, I see
not how we can avoid the thinking of Earthly Promises to be our Portion, when
St. Paul has so distinctly affirmed it; so I cannot forbear to say, that the
want of Earthly Happiness is in a measure imputable to our neglect of that
Piety to which it is even now promised: Partly, because I see the generality of
Christians falling short of that Piety which they profess; and partly, because
of that ill use which they generally make of that Plenty and Prosperity which
God often heaps upon them. Upon which account, there is a necessity upon God,
if he will provide for our Eternal Welfare, to withdraw those Earthly
Blessings, which otherwise we might have quietly enjoyed.

III. The third Question follows, to wit, Whether or no, and in what proportion
the Promise of a long and happy Life belongs to the Observers of the several
Duties of this Commandment. That it belongs to all, much need not be said to
prove, after what has been said to show their several Concernments in the
Precept of Honor: For, it appearing from the former Discourses, that the
Commandment is to be extended as well to the Honor of our Civil and Spiritual
Parents, together with all other Superiors, as to the Honor of our Natural
ones; the Promise which is annexed to it, is in reason to be extended to all
the Observers of it, in their several measures and proportions. The only thing
of difficulty is, what those Measures and Proportions are; which yet will not
cost either much Time or Pains to void. For, as the Promise is in reason to be
thought principally and especially to belong to the Honourers of their Natural
Parents, partly because the Honor of our Natural Parents is the only thing
expressed, and partly because that Tie which they have upon us, approaches
nearest to that whereby the Honor of God is bound upon us: so, the same Reason
obliges us to think it to belong more or less to the Honourers of other
Superiors, as those Superiors approach nearer to, or are farther removed from
our Natural Parents. Upon which account, the Promise of a long and happy Life
must be thought to belong more to the Honourers of our Civil and Spiritual
Parents, than to those of other Superiors; as again, more to the Honourers of
our Civil, than Spiritual ones: Because, though our Spiritual Parents give us a
much better Being than any of the former, yet our Civil ones have a greater
Interest in our Temporal Being, and consequently, the Honor of them more
likely to partake of the Promise of Earthly Happiness, as being more
commensurate to it.

IV. One only Question remains, of those before proposed; with the resolution
whereof, I will put an end both to this Argument, and the Commandment: and that
is, What appearance there is of the Literal performance of that Promise which
is here made to the Honor of our Superiors. For my more orderly solution of
which, I will instance, first, in the Honor of our Natural Parents, because
the Promise of a long and happy Life is expressly annexed to it. Now though it
be not to be doubted, but even good Children have been sometime unfortunate,
and have found their Days either few or evil; yet, that generally it has
happened otherwise, we have the Experience of the World to attest, as well of
that part of it which was most removed from the true Religion, as of that which
had the clearest sense of it. Witness, for the former, those Sentences of the
Greeks remembered by Grotius, in his Notes upon the second Verse of the sixth to
the Ephesians. (...) Thou shall live long enough, if thou nourish thy Parents
in their Old age: And, (...) Assure thy self, that it shall be well with thee,
if thou honor thy Natural Parents: Than which, what could be said more
agreeably to the Commandment? though, for ought appears, they had nothing but
their own Experience to prompt them to the affirmation of it. The same is to be
said for the People of the Jews, among whom the same Prosperity of obedient
Children was observed: Witness the Saying before remembered, out of
Ecclesiasticus, with others that precede and follow it; For the blessing of the
father establishes the houses of children, and the curse of the mother rooteth
out foundations. And though among Christians there is not the like certainty to
be expected, because our Religion leads us to Promises of a higher nature; yet
I doubt not, but they who either have or shall observe the World, may find
Instances enough to justify the generality of the Completion of the long and
happy Life of obedient Children; as, on the other side, of the misfortunes and
shortlivedness of the disobedient and unnatural: According to that ancient
Observation of Homer, concerning Simoisius, in the fourth Book of his Iliads.
-- (...)
(...)
He did not afford Sustenance to his Parents, and therefore he had but a short
Life.

From the Honourers of Natural Parents, pass we to the Honourers of Civil and
Religious ones, and all such as are in Dignity and Authority; for whom, that
God Almighty is not without thoughts of kindness, even as to the present Life,
may appear from hence, that he has so constituted the World, that Men cannot
reasonably expect either a long or happy Life, without giving Honor to them:
Disrespect of Superiors not only introducing Confusion and Sedition, from
whence naturally arise Wars, and all the Mischiefs that attend them; but
obliging Superiors, for their own safety, and that of the Commonwealth, to cut
those off which shall be found to withdraw Obedience from them. And though it
sometime happen, that the Peaceable and Obedient meet with a Fate no way
answerable to their Merit; yet as, generally speaking, they are more likely to
be successful, than turbulent and seditious Men; so, where they are not, they
have the Conscience of their own Goodness to support them, and the certain
expectation of a Reward in another World: That being a Blessing which, as no
Violence of Men can obstruct, so God has, without any Exceptions, obliged
himself to bestow.

THE SIXTH COMMANDMENT.
THE SIXTH COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall or, not kill.
do no murder.

PART I.
The Contents.
Of the Duty we owe to each other as Men, and particularly to each others
Persons and Lives, the violation whereof, this Commandment forbids. The
Affirmative part of the Commandment, the showing Humanity or Benevolence unto
all; the Grounds whereof are also declared. Those either, first, our descending
originally from the same Common Parents, the ignorance whereof was probably the
cause of the Heathens not extending their Humanity usually beyond their own
Nation: Or, secondly, our descending from the same Celestial Parent, God; and
being created by him in his own Image: Or, thirdly, that Natural Compassion
which God has implanted in all our Hearts, that necessity we stand in of one
another Help, and that Ability which we have, by means of Reason and Speech,
to afford it. The particular Duties this Humanity includes, an inward Affection
to, Praying for, and doing all those things which may promote each others
Happiness: Of which nature, are the assisting one another with our Advice,
lending one another the Assistance either of our Persons or Fortunes; and,
where there is a necessity of punishing, using moderation in it. This Humanity
to extend in some measure to all, unless where there is a Command of God to the
contrary; which is not to be supposed under the Gospel. Of the Measure wherein
this Humanity is to be extended; where is shown, first, That it ought to be
extended even to evil and unjust Persons, so far as is consistent with the
Glory of God, the Public Good, and the Good of our own Souls. What the Result
of that Determination is, and that it no way hinders, but Offenders may be
brought to condign Punishment; because Glemency to them, is Cruelty to the
Innocent. Inquiry is next made in what proportion this Humanity is to be
extended to the several sorts and degrees of Men; where is shown, That where it
cannot, or not alike, be afforded unto all, those of the same True Religion
with us, are to be preferred before those of a False; as those who are nearly
related to us, before those who are more remote. Our selves, caeteris paribus,
to be preferred before other Men; but not so, where there is an Inequality: our
own Pleasure being to be postpos'd to the necessary Support of a Neighbor; and
our own Welfare, as well as Pleasure, to that of the Society whereof we are.

WHAT is owing from us to each other upon the account of any near Relation, was
the Business of that Commandment to show, which entreats of the Honor of
Parents: It remains, that we inquire what we owe to one another as Men, which
is the purport of the following ones. In the investigation whereof, following
the Order of the Decalogue and Nature, we will inquire, first of all, what is
owing from us to each others Persons and Lives.

Now, though, if we look no farther than the Letter of the Commandment that is
now before us, the Whole of what is required of us may seem to be no other,
than the not invading each others Lives, or at least offering no violence to
them; yet because it is certain, from the Laws of God and Nature, that a
positive Benevolence is also required; and because both our Savior, and St.
Paul, reduce the whole of the Law to Love, which could not be done with any
congruity, if Benevolence had not a portion in it; therefore I think it not
amiss to allot it a place in my Discourse, and inquire, 1. Upon what Grounds it
stands. 2. What Duties it contains. 3. To whom; and, 4. In what measure it is
to be extended.


1. And here not to tell you that Benevolence to all Mankind is so confessedly
a Duty, that it has obtained the name of Humanity; because though that be a
proof of the Worlds believing it to be such, and consequently, that it has a
foundation in Nature; yet it gives no account of the Grounds upon which it
stands: I shall, without more ado, apply my self to the investigation of those
Principles, from which both so general a Persuasion, and the Obligation thereof
does arise.

Now the first Obligation we have of showing Humanity to each other, arises
from hence, that all of us, though at at a greater distance, descend from the
same Common Parents, For, being by the former Precept obliged to give Honor to
our Parents, as well those which are farther removed from us, as those which
are more immediate to us; See Explicat. of the Fifth Commandm. Part 1. in the
beginning of it; and Part 3. toward the end --.
being also (as was there observed) we cannot give Honor to them, unless we
have a regard to those that are alike descended from them; it follows, that if
we are all descended from the same Common Parents, we are to look upon one
another as of the same Family, and consequently, to afford one another a share
in our Affections. And though, in tract of Time, the Tradition of our Descent
from the same Common Parents was in a manner quite forgotten among the Heathen,
which is probably the reason why they showed so little Humanity out of their
own Nation: yet, as, where there was a persuasion of descending from the same
Common Stock, there was always a Religious Friendship between them, yea, though
Necessity, or some other Cause had separated them, as to the place of their
abode; so Josephus Antiqu. Judaic. lib. 12. c. 5. -- (...), etc.
tells us, That, when the Lacedaemonians found by a certain Writing, that they
and the Jews descended from the same Stock, as being both of the Posterity of
Abraham, they did, in a Letter of their Kings to Onias the High Priest, both
offer and require a mutual Friendship, as the result of that Cognation that was
between them: It being but just (as the Words (...). Joseph. ibid.
of their Letter are) that since you are our Brethren, you should send to us
for such things as you desire, as in like manner we shall do, and both look
upon your Possessions as our own, and have our own in common with you. From
which Ratiocination of theirs, it is apparent, that, though the Heathen had not
the knowledge of all Men's descending from the same Common Stock, yet they
judged it, so far as it could be proved, a just Foundation of Humanity; and
accordingly, where they discerned any such, looked upon themselves as obliged
to afford it. In the mean time, you may see, with what reason God premiseth the
Precept of Honoring our Parents, before those others of showing Kindness to
the generality of Mankind; that being not only a straiter Obligation, but the
Fountain and Foundation of the other.

But because, as was now intimated, how rational soever it may seem to be, to
show Humanity to each other, upon the account of our descending from the same
Common Stock; yet that Reason could not appear to all who were persuaded of the
Obligation of it, because the Tradition of that Descent was almost obliterated
among the Gentiles: Therefore it may not be amiss to inquire, whether there be
not some other ground of it, and such too as was more discernable to the
Heathen: Of which nature I reckon, our descending from the same Celestial
Parent, God; and being created by him in his own Image. Which Ground is the
more to be stood upon, because God himself assigns it for the Reason of the
Prohibition that is now before us: For thus, after the signification of his
displeasure against the shedding the Blood of Man, he assigns for the Reason of
it, and of that Vengeance which he inculcates, that in the image of God made he
man, Genesis 9.6. Neither will it suffice to say, That this is a sufficient ground
of Humanity to those to whom the Scripture, where it is recorded, was made
known; the Honor, and much less Love of God, being by no means to be salv'd,
where a Regard is not had to those that are both of his Offspring and his
Image. For, as the same Truth is deducible from Natural Principles, even from
those which evince God to be the Creator of the World, and the worth of those
Souls of ours in which his Image does most shine forth; so, that the Heathen
were not without the knowledge of it, is evident from several Passages of their
Writings Aristides dixit, (...). -- Manilim.
An quoqu im genites nisi coelo credere far est
Esse homines? -- Idem de anima humana. -- Coelo scrutatur in alto
Cognatumque sequens corpus se quaerit in aliris.
Vid. plura apud Pricaeum in Act. 17.28.
, and particularly from that which St. Paul quotes out of one of their own
Poets; For we are also his offspring. Now forasmuch as even by the confession
of the Heathen, we are all the Offspring of God; and that too to such a
Degree, as to have his Image plainly shining on us: it cannot but be looked
upon as a dishonor to Almighty God, not to have a regard to those, who are
both descended from him, and of the same glorious Image with him. But what
speak I of the Heathens acknowledging all to be the Sons of the same God, when
it is evident from Arrian, that they did no less acknowledge the conclusion we
have deduced from it, and the reasonableness of that Humanity which we commend?
For, what (says he, in the person of Epictetus, to a Master who was more than
ordinarily displeased with his Slave) wilt Arrian in Epictet. lib. 1. cap. 13.
-- (...). M. Antoninus. (...), l. 2. s. 1. (...).
thou not bear with him who is thy Brother, who has God, no less than thy self
for his Ancestor? who as a Son, is procreated of the same Seeds, of the same
Celestial Emission? But, what if thou were placed in the supremest dignity,
would thou therefore presently make thy self a Tyrant? and not rather
remember what thou art, and over whom thou rulest? that thou rulest over thy
Kinsmen, thy Brethren, and the Offspring of God. From all which it is evident,
both that the Heathen themselves looked upon all Mankind as the Offspring of
God, and upon that account the just object of their Humanity.

Add hereunto, that natural compassion which Nature has implanted in the
hearts of all men, that necessity which they stand in of one another help, and
that ability which they have, by means of their Reason and Speech, to afford
it. For, inasmuch as all those things must be acknowledged to be from God,
inasmuch as they naturally prompt men to the showing of that humanity, which it
is the design of my present Discourse to establish; it must be looked upon as
the intention of God, who makes nothing in vain, to oblige us to exert it to
all those, who are partakers of the same Nature and Infirmities with our
selves. And, though having established the former grounds, there lies no
necessity upon me, to reflect upon those other Hypotheses, upon which the
Ignorant and the Atheistical have thought fit to erect the frame of Humane
Society, and those actions that tend to the conservation of it; yet, even so,
we should not find our selves without a proof of that humanity which this
Commandment was intended to suggest. For, be it, that at first Men lived a
wandering and a savage Life, and had no Bond, either of Laws or Speech to
conjoin them; Be it, that their own danger, whether from Wild Beasts, or as
Wild Men, obliged them to have recourse to others, and by dumb Signs at first,
and afterward by Speech, which necessity put them upon the invention of, both
to implore the assistance of others, and promise them their own: Yet, even so,
as Lactantius Lactant. l. 6. c. 10.
observes, no contemptible proof might be found of showing kindness and
humanity to one another. For if, according to that hypothesis, men entered into,
and established a Society with one another for their mutual assistance and
support, it must be looked upon as the highest wickedness, either to violate or
not observe those compacts, whereby, from the beginning of their Being, Mankind
was so linked together.

2. Having thus shown upon what grounds that Benevolence or Humanity stands,
which we are obliged to show to all mankind, proceed we to enquire what duties
it contains, so far at least as this Commandment is concerned in it. Where,
first of all, no doubt can be made but we are to have an inward affection for
them, and to begin our benevolence to them in our souls; not only the word
Benevolence so persuading, but that abstract of the second Table which we learn
both from our Savior and St. Paul; for, both the one and the other summing up
the duties of that Table in the loving of our Neighbor as our selves; it is
apparent we cannot satisfy the several precepts of it, unless we have an
inward affection for those who are the objects of them. As little doubt can be
made, but we are to wish well to them, and employ our Prayers to God on their
behalf; this being not only a natural result of Love, but a duty which is
particularly bound upon us by Christianity, by which we, at least, are to take
our measures of the Commandments. In fine, because the lives and persons of
Men, are the things this Commandment aims at the felicitating of, we are in
reason to do all that may any way tend to the promoting of their welfare and
happiness. Now, though, what those things are, is not hard to be discovered,
and much less by those, who will make their Neighbors case their own,
according as Christianity obliges; yet because all men will not use that
advertency which is requisite, and much less be so just as to suppose their
Neighbors case their own, lest they should be forced to love them as
themselves, I think it not amiss to instance in some of those things which tend
to the happiness of Mankind. Of this nature is, first, the giving them the
assistance of our advice in all those straits and exigencies, into which they
may often fall; this being not only an useful part of Humanity, but of the
nature of those offices of it, which bring not the least prejudice to the Doer;
Such as are the suffering a man to drink of the Waters of our Fountain, or to
light his Candle at ours: ^^omo qui erranti comiter monstrat viam,
Quasi lumen de suo lumine accendat, facit.
Vr nihilominus ipsi luceat, cum illi accenaerit.
Ennius apud Tull. de Officiis l. 1.
He who courteously shows an erring person his way, or gives him faithful
counsel, being like him who suffers his Neighbor to light his Candle at his,
which shines never the less to him for what the other borrowed. Again,
forasmuch as, though our advice may be of signal use to promote the happiness
of our Neighbor: yet, it may so happen sometime, that it may be of no more
force, than Be warmed and filled, and other such like wishes to distressed
persons, the inability of their persons requiring the assistance of our bodies,
as the slenderness of their fortunes, an addition to them from our own, hence
it comes to pass, that our benevolence is to extend to the lending them our
personal assistance, where their distresses do so require, as the assistance of
our Fortunes where their necessities do. Lastly, forasmuch as Justice and the
necessities of the Public may require the inflicting of punishment upon
Offenders; hence it comes to pass, that our Humanity is to express it self in
such a moderate infliction, as may suit with the ability of the sufferer.

3. The order of my Discourse, now leads me to enquire to whom the Humanity
here spoken of is to be extended, a question which may seem at first sight
unncecessary, because the title of Humanity extends it to all those, who are
partakers of the same nature and infirmities with our selves. And indeed,
simply speaking, no doubt can be made, but all men whatsoever are to have a
share of it, because, as was before shown, all men are descended from the same
common Parents, and are no less the Offspring and Image of God than our
selves. But as Benevolence to Men is in reason to yield to the Commands and
Glory of God, by whom even that Benevolence is made a duty; so it may sometime
happen that they may interfere in some persons, in which case there is no doubt
our Humanity is to be so far suspended. Thus for example, There being a command
of God to the Jews, not only, that they should generally abstain from Commerce
with other Nations, but that they should show no pity to some of them, and
particularly to those who Inhabited the Land of Canaan before them, there is no
doubt but such Persons were out of the compass of that Humanity, which this
Precept is supposed to enjoin. But, because, however the Jews might be
forbidden the expressions of Humanity to some persons; yet there appears not
the like interdict to the Christians; yea, because the like Interdict is so far
from appearing, that Christ has commanded us to look, even, upon a Samaritan
as a Neighbor; therefore, if we speak of Humanity in the general, there is no
doubt but all men whatsoever are to be allowed to have a share of it, and that,
not only because of the foregoing Precept of our Savior, but because (which
is a far greater endearment) he laid down his life for all, yea, even for those
that deny him. All therefore that can be said, as to us Christians, is, that
there may be some Offices of Humanity, which may be denied at some times, and
to some persons, which will best be considered in the resolution of that
question.

4. In what measure our humanity is to be extended, the fourth and last thing
proposed to be entreated of. Now there are three things, within the resolution
whereof, I suppose, all that is necessary upon this Head will be comprehended.

1. What Humanity is to be shown to evil and unjust persons. 2. In what
proportion it is to be extended to the several sorts and degrees of Men. And 3.
Lastly, what the measure thereof ought to be in comparison with that love which
we owe unto our selves.
1. I begin with the first of these, to wit, what Humanity is to be extended to
evil and unjust persons, concerning which, I shall not doubt to affirm, that
all such is to be afforded them, as shall be found to be consistent with the
glory of God, the public good, and the good of our own souls. For Humanity
being bound upon us, not only by the Laws of Nature, but by the Laws of
Christ, and of his Religion, nothing can be supposed to conceal its obligation,
which is not some way superior to it, such as are those before mentioned. But
from hence it will follow, that we are to wish well to, and pray for them, to
give them our assistance where they are unjustly oppressed, to relieve them in
their wants and necessities; in fine, to converse with them so far, as that may
be done without danger of infection to our selves, or scandal to others, and
our Religion; none of these in any measure thwarting the Glory of God, or our
own, or others welfare, but on the contrary, very much promoting both: Partly
because a means to work upon those evil ones, and partly because an innocent
compliance with that Humanity which Nature and Christianity has bound upon us;
He who thus shows mercy to an Evil man, as Aristotle (...). Laertius in vita
Aristor. l. 5. p. 118. and p. 119. de eodem (...).
sometime answered an importunate Caviller, having a regard, not to his
Manners, but to the Man, or, as it is expressed by some others, not to the Man,
but to Humanity. But as, where the offices of Humanity are inconsistent with a
higher good, there is no doubt, the obligation thereof does so far cease; so
nothing hinders, but they, who have Authority, both may and ought to draw the
Sword of Justice against Offenders, and not only cut them off, but with
severity; Clemency to Offenders being Cruelty to the Innocent, who ought in all
reason to be preferred. Only as Humanity may be shown in punishing, as well as
in redress or relief, care would be taken, where either the enormity of the
Crime, or the deterring of others does not so require, that the punishment,
which is inflicted, be not attended with that cruelty wherewith it too often is.

2. Having thus shown in what measure our Humanity is to extend to evil and
unjust persons, proceed we to enquire with what proportion it is to be
exhibited to the several sorts and degrees of Men. For, though it be not to be
doubted, but that it is to be extended unto all, in as great a proportion as we
are able to afford, yet, inasmuch as, according De Officiis Lib. 1. Loco post
citato.
to Tully, our stock is but mean, and the multitude of those that want,
infinite; hence it comes to pass, that our Humanity must be with some variety,
and though all are to have it, yet all must not have it in the same proportion.
Thus for example, Though I can wish well to, and pray for all men whatsoever,
yet it is impossible for me, either to be liberal or assistant to all that may
stand in need of my support, hence it comes to pass, (because otherwise my
benevolence would be ineffectual to any) that ^^e stream thereof must pass more
fully to some, than it can be supposed to do to others. The only thing worthy
an enquiry, is, where the excess of it is to go, which yet will not cost much
pains to resolve. For, inasmuch as, caeteris paribus, those are a juster object
of our benevolence, who are of the same true Religion with us, than those who
are of another, and of a false; it will follow, as St. Paul has taught us,
that though we are to do good to all, yet, especially to those that are of the
household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. In like manner, though I can wish well to, and
pray for all Mankind, as well such of them, as are farthest removed from me in
Conversation and Nature, as those that are nearest to me in any, or all, yet,
inasmuch as I cannot Sed quoniam copiae parvae sineulorum sunt: eorum autem,
qui his egeant, infinita est multitudo, vulgaris liberalitas referenda est ad
illum Ennii finem, Nihilominus ut ipsi luceat, ut facultas sit, qua in nostros
simus liberales. Gradus autem plures sunt societatis hominum. Vt enim ab illa
discedatur infinitate, propior est ejusdem gentis, nationis, linguae, qua
maxim homines conjunguntur, interius etiam est ejusdem esse civitatis, multa
sunt enim civibus inter se communia -- Arctior vero colligatio est, societas
propinquorum: ab illa enim immensa societate humani generis in exiguum
angustumque concluditur. Tull. de Officiis, Lib. 1.
transmit the outward effects of my benevolence to all, or at least not in the
like proportion, Reason would that the preference be given to those of my own
Kindred, and Country, and Converse, because, having a straiter tie upon me than
the other. For, if all men are to have a share in my benevolence upon the
account of their descending from the common Parents of Mankind, to be sure, if
a difference be to be made, it ought to be to the advantage of those, who,
beside that general cognation, have a straiter and more particular one to us.

3. One only Question remains, relating to the measure of our benevolence, and
that is, what proportion it is to bear to that which we owe unto our selves,
concerning which, no doubt can be made, but that it ought to go less, than that
which we owe unto our selves. For though the Commandment be, that we should
love our Neighbor as our selves, according as Moses first, and after him our
Savior enjoins, which may seem to import an equality, yet as nothing more can
be inferred therefrom than a similitude in our benevolence, which may be, where
there is not an equality; so every man according to the usual saying, being
nearest to himself, is in reason to give himself the preference, and love
himself both before and above another. This only would be added, that when we
speak of giving our selves the preference, it is to be understood where the
comparison is ad idem, both in respect of the thing, and the Person. For who
either doubts, or can doubt but that a man should foregoe his own pleasure,
rather than suffer a Neighbor to want necessaries. For, as it were a strange
kind of Humanity that would not postpose a pleasure to the sustentation of a
Neighbor; so it is, in truth, no better than an injustice, which no love of
our selves can warrant; he, who gave the earth to the Children of Men, by that
act of his, entitling all that are so, to some portion in it, and consequently,
where they are not actually enstated in it, obliging those that are, to
communicate so much of their enjoyments to them, as may serve them for their
support. In like manner, though I say, that in the matter of Benevolence, a Man
is, caeteris paribus, to prefer himself before any other, yet, I say not the
same, where the comparison is made between Us and those Societies, of which we
are, either by Compact or the Institution of God, Members. For, as it is
impossible for any Society to subsist, where they, who are the Members of i^^
subject not their particular Interests to it, so, to do so is no more, than
what upon due consideration will be found to be owing from particular men to
it; whatsoever we are, or have, being next under God owing to those Societies
whereof we are Members.

PART II.
An Address to the Explication of the Negative Part of the Commandment; where
is shown, That that which is literally and expressly forbidden, is the
Murdering of our Neighbor. The Criminalness thereof evinced from the Affront
it offers to God, whose Image it thus violates; from the Injury it does to
Humane Society, but especially to the Party murdered. The like Criminalness
evidenced from the Consequences thereof, and particularly from its
clamorousness in the Ears of God, and of our own Conscience. An Inquiry what
Killing is to be looked upon as Murder; where is shown, first, That all
killing is not; and particularly, that that is not which is inflicted by the
Magistrate, where the Authority is competent, the Manner legal, and the Party
that is killed deserves it. All other designed Killing, even by him, to be
looked upon as Murder, whether accomplished by the Hands of the Executioner,
or in War. An Exception in the behalf of those who serve Princes in War; where
is shown, That it is not necessary that they should know the Quarrel wherein
they engage to be just; it being enough to them, that they know it not to be
Unjust, that they are commanded by the Prince to serve him in it, and that they
pass not the Bounds of his Commands. All designed killing by Private Persons,
to be looked upon as Murder, unless what a Man is put upon in his own
necessary Defense. A brief Censure of Duels.

THIS Commandment, with those that follow, rather pointing at such things as we
are to avoid, than at those which we are obliged to pursue; Reason would that
we should employ the main of our Endeavors in the discovery of those Sins
which this and the other Commandments do forbid. Having therefore in my last
set before you what regard we ought to have for one another Persons and Lives,
I think it not amiss to consider by what means they may be prejudiced, as from
which the present Precept aims especially to secure us. In order whereunto,
because that seems to me to be the most natural way of procedure, I will, 1.
First of all, entreat of that which is literally and expressly forbidden: and,
2. When I have done so, proceed to inquire, Whether any other Sins are included
in it, and what those Sins are.


1. To begin with that which is literally and expressly forbidden; concerning
which, no doubt can be made but it is the killing of our Neighbor: because,
however the Commandment expresses no more than Thou shall not kill, yet this,
and those that follow, are resolved by St. Paul to be comprehended in loving
our Neighbor as our selves. Which Resolution of his could not have truth in
it, if the Crimes that are forbidden, had not our Neighbor for the Object of
them. Taking it therefore for granted, that the killing of a Neighbor is the
thing here forbidden, I will inquire,

1. Wherein the Criminalness thereof does consist. 2. What Killing is to be
supposed to be understood: And, 3. And lastly, What is to be thought of
Self-murder, and how that is reducible to this Commandment.
1. Now though, for the Criminalness of Murder, it might be enough to allege,
that it is a violation of this Commandment; and, which is more, of one of those
which were given to Noah, which I have shown to be in themselves of Universal
obligation: yet because I have undertaken to show, that this, as well as the
rest, is a Violation of the Law of Reason and Nature, as well as of God's
Positive ones, waving the consideration of the other, I will betake my self to
such Topics as the Light of Nature will afford us. Whereof, the first that I
shall assign, is, the particular Affront it offers to the Divine Nature: For
though Man, as such, be the immediate Object of its Injuriousness, and
accordingly so resolved by us; yet inasmuch as Man is no other than the Image
of God, and acknowledged so to be, no less by the Heathen, than by our selves;
what is thus done to Man, must be looked upon as an Affront to God, whose Image
is thus defaced in him. Excellent to this purpose is that of Philo (...). De
spec. legibus. --
in the entrance of his Discourse upon this Commandment: Murder has indeed
the name of Manslaughter, because Man is the Person slain; but it is in truth
Sacrilege, and the greatest of Sacrileges, because than Man there is not any
thing more Sacred, or which is a more express Image of the Divine Reason and
Perfection. And indeed, if even the Images of Emperors have had such a
Veneration, that it has been looked upon as a violation of their Majesty, to
draw those from them who had fled thither for Succor, or (which is an Instance
better known to us) to deface them in their Coins; it is easy to suppose, it
ought to be looked upon as no mean Crime, to deface the Image of God in Man:
not only because of the Eminency of the Person represented, but of the
Representation it self, which is of the same nature with its Archetype. But let
us suppose, for once, that Murder reached no further than the Man, and that,
as it is properly a breach of the Second Table, so it had no evil Aspect at all
upon the First; yet even so we should find it to be criminal enough for all
considering Men to stand aghast at; because of that Injury which it offers to
Humane Society, which is the Band and Cement of the World. For, beside that
Murder robs it of one of its Members, and consequently does so far weaken it;
it does by its evil Example tempt others to do the like, and by its noxiousness
beget a diffidency in Men toward each other: Upon which, what can any Man
imagine, but that others should be drawn to offer the like injury to it; or, if
all cannot be prevailed upon so far, yet to avoid each others Converse, and
treat with Men, not as their Brethren, but as their Enemies? Which, what is it,
but to bring in that State of War, which some, though fondly, have imagined to
be the State of Nature? Lastly, (more than which I shall not need to allege
from the Law of Reason and Nature) As Murder offers a great injury to Humane
Society, so it offers an irreparable one to the Party murdered; there being no
return from the State of Death to Life, and much less (if the Person have been
taken away in his Sins) to a possibility of obtaining Pardon from God, which is
a thing not to be thought of without horror. For, though an Italian, it may
be, may hug himself so much the more in it, concerning one of whom it is
reported, that he made his Enemy abjure his God before he murdered him, that
so he might at the same time destroy both Soul and Body; yet none that has the
Bowels of a Man, can think of it without regret, that by his means Men have not
only been deprived of the present Life without remedy, but condemned to an
endless Torment.

Now though this alone might suffice to deter Men from the commission of it,
which is the reason I have taken no notice at all of the Consequences of
Murder, in the general Scheme of my Discourse; yet I think it not amiss,
(...), to represent some of them also to the Consciences of those that are not
yet infected with it. Whereof, the first that I shall assign, is, the
clamorousness thereof, in calling for vengeance upon the Murderer. For,
however it may be with other Sins, none of which yet is without a Voice, this
is importunate for Vengeance; and, if God will not descend to Earth, that will
ascend to him, and fill his Ears with the News of the Crime, and Prayers for a
Judgment on the Committer of it. 'Twas thus (as we learn from Moses, Genesis
4.10.) when Cain had killed his Brother Abel; Heaven it self was filled with
the Outcries of the Murder, and the many loud Anthems that are sung by those
thousands of Angels that inhabit there, were drowned by that single Voice; God
himself there telling him, that the voice of his brothers blood cried unto him
from the ground. It is true indeed (For what should hinder me from making an
Objection which it is so easy to assoil?) It is true, I say, that the Subject
of that Voice is not expressed, and much less is it affirmed, that it called
for Vengeance: But, as it is not to be imagined, that that should call for any
thing else, when we find God himself subjoyning so severe a Curse against him
that had been the Shedder of it; so, that it did not, will be made more than
probable by the cry of the souls under the Altar, even the Souls of those
Persons that were slain for the Word of God, and the Testimony that they held,
Rev. 6.9, 10. the Subject of their Cry being no other than How long, holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood upon them that dwell on the
earth? But so we find also (which may serve for a farther confirmation) that
because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrha was very great, or rather, of the Sins of
their Inhabitants, as you may see Genesis 18.20. therefore the Lord sent Angels to
destroy them, Genesis 19.13. For, as it is apparent from thence, that the Subject
of their Cry was no other than the Vengeance of the Sinners; so, that the Cry
of foul Crimes is so loud and earnest, that God cannot be at rest, till he has
dispatched the Instruments of his displeasure. The result of the Premises is
this, That all heinous Sins are in Scripture said to have a Voice, and that
that of Murder is as loud as any; and then we may have leave to conclude it to
be one of the first Magnitude, because it is so importunate for Vengeance.

(...).
But Murder is not more clamorous in the Ears of the Almighty, than it is in
his who is guilty of it; which though intended only to represent the Horrors
it creates in the Conscience of the Man of blood, was yet literally true in him
of whom Plutarch speaks in his Book De sera Numinis vindicta. For, passing one
day by a Nest of chattering Swallows, he thought he heard them upbraiding him
with the Murder he had committed; and his Ears were no less filled with the
noise of his own horrid Act, than his guilty Conscience was. And indeed, if, as
the Scripture speaks, Sin lies at any Persons doors, the Sin of the Murderer
does, being ever ready to fly in his Face, and afflict him with the remembrance
of it. Of which, though it were easy to allege other convincing Proofs, and
particularly those Spectra, or Representations of the murdered Party, which
they themselves have often complained to have disturbed their Repose; yet I
shall choose rather to represent, as being both more apparent and more
convincing, their own easy discovery of the Murders they have been guilty of.
For, well may we think the disquiets of those Men's Consciences to be great, who
choose rather by such a Discovery to expose themselves to the Severity of the
Law, than lie any longer under the secret Lashes of the other. What should I
tell you of the inquisition God is said in Scripture to make after it, of the
strange and unusual ways he makes use of to discover it, of the discovery that
has been sometime made by the Corpse Thuan Hist. l. 32. page 159.
of the Murdered Party, of the sure and certain Vengeance that attends it?
For, as these are so known, both from History, and our own Experience, as not
to admit of any the least doubt; so all of them do sufficiently proclaim Gods
detestation of the Crime, and what dread it ought to be held in by us.

2. The Criminalness of Murder being thus explained, proceed we to inquire,
what killing is to be accounted such. In order whereunto,

1. The first thing I shall observe is, That all killing is not so to be
esteemed; because, where God first of all forbids the shedding of Blood, he
does not only except the shedding of the Blood of the Murderer, but enjoins
the effusion of it. For thus, Genesis 9.5. not contented to affirm, that he
himself would require the life of man at the hand of that, whether man or
beast, that should invade it; he subjoyns in the next words, that whosoever
sheddeth man's blood, by man should his blood be shed. Neither will it avail to
say, That, if any Limitation be admitted, we must find out other Reasons for
the prohibition of Murder, than those we have before laid down. For, beside
that the killing of the Murderer is not only not injurious to Humane Society,
but, on the contrary, a great Safeguard to it, as by means of which other Men
may be deterred from offering the like Injury to it; beside that the slaying of
the Murderer, though it take away his Life, yet does it not without just
cause, and cannot therefore be said to offer an irreparable Injury to him; it
offers no Affront to the Divine Nature, by the violation of that Image of God
which is supposed to be upon him: Partly, because the Murderer has in a great
measure defaced that Image, as well upon himself, as the Party slain; and
partly, because the slaying the Murderer conduces to the Glory of God himself,
which is in reason to be preferred before the preservation of his Image. The
Murderer has indeed the Image of God upon him, though much defaced; and, upon
that account, ought to be looked upon with a proportionable Respect; but as an
Image is in reason to yield to the Honor of that of which it is so, because
deriving all its Luster from it; so it ceases to be Sacred, where it cannot be
preserved without the violation of his Honor whom it was designed to represent.

2. That all Killing is not Murder, or the Killing here forbidden, enough has
been said to show: Proceed we now to inquire, what is, or is not to be
accounted such. For my more orderly resolution whereof, I will consider the Act
of Killing, 1. As purposely effected; or, 2. As casual, and beside the
Intention of the Doer. The former again will require a double Consideration,
according to the different sort of Persons by whom it may be effected; which
are either such as are invested with Public Authority, or such as are only
Private Persons. If the Question be concerning the former, killing by such as
are invested with Public Authority, so it is not to be looked upon as Murder,
or as the Killing here forbidden, where the Authority is competent, the manner
legal, and the Party that is killed deserves it. For, beside that where God
first forbids the shedding of Blood, he commands the shedding of the
Murderers, to wit, as the Chaldee Paraphrase well interprets it, upon proof
made by witnesses, and by the Sentence of the Judge; beside that under the Law,
of which this Commandment was a part, there was both leave and command to those
that were in Authority, to take away the Lives of Offenders, which shows, that
that Killing was not here intended; we are told for Christianity by St. Paul,
that the Powers that are, have the Sword of Justice committed to them; for what
reason, think we, but to make use of it upon occasion, and, as it follows in
that Apostle, to execute vengeance with it upon all those that do evil. Neither
will it avail to object, That the same St. Paul forbids Christians the avenging
of themselves, and, which is more, upon the account of Vengeance belonging to
the Lord. For, as immediately after that, he admonishes Magistrates to execute
Vengeance; which shows, that so far they were not intended in the former
Prohibition; so, the Reason that is alleged does not only not include
Magistrates, but, on the contrary, show them not to be intended. For, though
Magistrates are not Gods, unless in a secondary sense, and as the Images and
Substitutes of the True; yet being his Ministers, and Ministers to execute
Vengeance, what is inflicted by the Magistrate does not only not cease to be
God's, but is, on the contrary, to be looked upon as one of the ways of God's
repaying it, which shows it rather to be their Duty, than their Offense. Care
only would be taken, that as it is God's Vengeance which they execute, so they
do it with regard to the Command of God, and not to gratify their own Malice;
otherwise they avenge not God, but themselves, which is a thing no where
permitted to them. What Killing is lawful on the Magistrates part, has been
shown already: proceed we to inquire, what killing is forbidden; which will not
be hard to judge, after the explication of the other. For, it appearing from
the Premises, that no other Killing is lawful to them, than what is annexed to
their Authority; it will follow, that all that is forbidden, which either
proceeds from an incompetent Authority, or is illegally and undeservedly
executed. The same is to be said of killing in War, as is of that which is
effected by the Hand of the Executioner, For, as no doubt can be made, but that
it is lawful for Princes to make War, and consequently to kill, where the State
which is under their inspection cannot otherwise be secured; so it is no less
unquestionable, that War is not, where they who make it have either not
Authority so to do, or levy it without a just provocation. For, Vengeance (as
St. Paul tells us) belonging unto God, and to those whom he has entrusted with
the Execution thereof; it can be no farther lawful for the Magistrate to
execute it, than is within the power of his Commission to do. Upon which
account, all unprejudiced Men must condemn the War of the late Long Parliament,
because it is sufficiently known, the Power of War was not in them, till they
did in an unlawful manner assume it unto themselves. In like manner, the
Execution of Vengeance being entrusted to Princes, to make use of against those
that do evil; that, and the Actions that attend it, must be looked upon as
unlawful, where it is directed against those who have done nothing to deserve
it. This only would be added, for the sake of those who are by Princes
appointed to draw the Sword in War, That it is not necessary for them to know
the Justness of that Quarrel in which they do so kill and slay: For, inasmuch
as Private Persons neither do nor can well understand the Justness of any
Public Quarrel, because, to the understanding thereof, it is requisite they
should be acquainted with the great Transactions of their own State, and of
that against which they make War, (which it is not to be supposed Private
Persons should be able certainly to attain) either it shall be lawful for them
to withdraw their Assistance from the Prince, which must prove the bane of the
State; or they must be content to serve him in his Wars, without any such
knowledge of the Justness of his Quarrel. Again, Forasmuch as the making of
Wars, and other such Public Matters, belong properly to him, to whom God has
committed the Sovereign Power, it must be left to him to judge, whether that
Quarrel wherein he engages, be such as is just and warrantable. It may be
enough to the Subject, that he does not know it to be unjust, and that he is
commanded by the Prince to serve him in it: For, however he may thereby be
sometimes engaged in an unjust Quarrel, yet the blame thereof shall fall not
upon him, who is neither concerned nor qualified to judge of it; but upon the
Prince, who is both, and by whose Authority the War is levied. This only would
be added, That, as the Commission Tull de Officiis, lib. ^. Pampilius Imperator
tenebat provinciam in cujus exer^i^u Catonis filius tiro militabat. Cum autem
Pompi to videretur unam legionem d^mittere, Catonis quoque filium, qui in eadem
legione militabat, dimisit. Sed cum amore pugnandi in exercitu remansisser,
Cato ad Pompilium scripsit, ut si eum pateretur in exercitu remanere, secundo
cum obligaret militiae sacramento: quia, priore amisso, jure pugnare cum
hostibus non poterat. See also Sanderson's Case of a Military Life.
of the Prince is the only Warrant the Subject has to interest himself in
War; so it will become him, for that reason, to take care, that private Revenge
do not push him on to do further mischief, than it is the intention of the
Prince he should. Upon which account, I cannot but highly commend the Carriage
of one of Cyrus his Soldiers, as which is a noble Instance both of his
Humanity, and observation of Discipline. For, having (as Xenophon informs us)
in the time of Battle lift up his Hand to strike his Enemy, when he heard the
Trumpet begin to sound the Retreat, he let fall his Arm, and willingly lost his
Blow, because he thought the time of striking past.

Of killing by Public Persons, I have spoken at large, and both shown what is,
and what is not to be accounted Murder: It remains, that we inquire concerning
killing by Private Persons; which will require no great pains to resolve. For,
the Execution of Vengeance being challenged by God to himself, and to those to
whom he has committed the Sword of Justice, it will follow, that the Execution
of it belongs not to private Persons, and consequently, that generally all
Killing by them is Murder. If there be any Case wherein it may be lawful for a
Private Person to kill another, it must be when a Man is set upon by another,
and forced to it in his own defense: In which Case, as we have the Warrant of
the Law of God in part to secure us, which acquits that Person from Murder,
who should slay a Thief that was found breaking in upon him in the Night, Exodus
22.2, 3. so it will be found not to be without License from the Law of Reason
and Nature; partly, because in the Case of a sudden Onset, we can have no
recourse to the ordinary Means of Defense, I mean, the Patronage of the
Magistrate; and partly, because those whom God has entrusted with the Power of
Vengeance, do empower Private Persons to slay the Invader, where there is no
other Means to secure themselves. But as, setting aside the Instance of a Man's
own necessary Defense, it will be hard to find any wherein it may be lawful to
kill a Man; so the pretense of Honor, upon which Duels are commonly grounded,
is so pitiful a one, that I wonder it should so long abuse the World. For,
beside that, as one has well observed John Hales Sermon of Duels, page 95. of
his Remains.
, Drinking, Gaming, and Whores are those rotten Bones that do, for the most
part, lie hid under this painted Sepulcher and Title of Honor; beside that
there are other ways to recover Men's Honor, than by killing them that do
affront them, which makes it different from the Case of killing a Man in his
own defense; it is a part of our Profession, as we are Christians, to suffer
that wrong and disgrace, which these Men are so hasty to revenge. From whence,
as it will follow, that disgrace is so far from being a just ground of killing,
that, on the contrary, an easier Revenge will hardly be found to be allowable;
so it would be considered, by those especially who stand so much upon their
Reputation, whether it be any Honor to them, to bid open defiance to that
peaceable and gentle Religion which they have so often and so solemnly made
profession to embrace.

PART III.
Of Casual Homicide; and, first of all, of that which is Casual only as to the
Effect; which is also shown to have the nature of Murder, though a less
criminal one. The like inquired concerning that Homicide which is perfectly
Casual; where, if the Act from which it proceeded were conversant about
something ludicrous, the Party killing is in some measure declared to be guilty
of it; as, on the other side, if it were conversant about serious or necessary
Business, to be chargeable, or not chargeable with it, as he either neglected
or used all requisite Means for the preventing of it. Of Self-murder, and how
it is reducible to this Commandment. The Criminalness thereof evinced from its
contrariety to that Natural Inclination there is in us to preserve our selves;
from its Usurpation upon the Prerogative of God, at whose disposal we are; from
the Injury that is thereby done to the Commonwealth, which is deprived of a
Member; and, in fine, from the dissatisfaction it implies with the present
Dispensations of the Divine Providence, or despair of a Redress from future
ones. (...) an Account is given of the Doctrine of the Stoics in this Affair;
and of the Weakness, as well as Criminalness, of those that lay violent Hands
upon themselves. Inquiry is also made, whether all killing of our selves be to
be looked upon as Self-murder; where is shown, That all such Killing is, which
we have not a Call from God to; but that there wants not such a Call
oftentimes, or at least not to that which is interpretatively a killing of our
selves: Amongst which Calls, I reckon the Preservation either of our Friend or
Country, a secret Impulse from God's Spirit (which was the Case of Samson, and
some of the Primitive Martyrs) and the asserting the Honor of God, and of our
Religion.

OF such Killing as is done purposely and with Design, I have spoken hitherto,
and shown both what is, and what is not to be accounted the Killing here
forbidden: Proceed we to inquire as much of Casual Homicide, or such as, though
effected by the Slayer, yet is beside his intention. Where again we are to
consider, 1. Whether it be Casual only as to the Effect; or, 2. Perfectly and
entirely such.


If the Question be concerning the former, even concerning that Homicide which
is Casual only as to the Effect, so no doubt can remain, but that though
inferior in Guilt to that Killing which is designed, yet it is to be looked
upon as one of the Killings here forbidden; because, by the Law of the same
God, if a man, only in his haste, struck another with a weapon or a stone, so
that he died, though the Striker intended only to hurt, he was to die for it,
as you may see Numb. 35.16, 17, 18. It is true indeed, it is not there added,
though he intended only to hurt; which may give occasion to some Men to
understand it of designed Murder: But as the Text speaks only of smiting so
that he die, in the mean time taking no notice of an intention of killing; and
beside laying the stress of the Threat upon the Death that did ensue: so, both
here, and elsewhere, the Scripture distinguishes See Namb. 25.20 and Deuteronomy 19.1,
2. Exodus 21.14.
it from presumptuous and designed Killing, which shows, that Casual Homicide
was intended. That the Person who slew his Neighbor did it in his anger, that
he did it in his drink, that he did it provoked, or in defense of his Honor
and Reputation, none of all these Pretenses (as a Learned Man John Hales Sermon.
of Duels, p. 83. of his Remains.
has observed) might excuse him from that Death which God had denounced
against the Murderer. For, though the Effect that ensued were not voluntary,
because beside the intention of the Slayer; yet the Cause of it was; which is
enough to make a Man guilty before God: Men being justly chargeable with those
Effects which are but the natural Results of those Inordinacies from whence
they proceeded.

From such Homicides as are Casual only as to the Effect, proceed we to those
that are perfectly such; that is to say, where neither Homicide, nor any the
least Hurt was intended. Where again we are to consider, whether the Act from
which the Homicide proceeded were conversant about any serious or necessary
Business, or only about something ludicrous and vain. If the Question be
concerning the latter, as, for example, if a Man should rashly shoot of a Gun,
not considering whither the Bullet might flee, or not knowing whether it were
charged or no; in this Case, if Murder follow, there is no doubt, but the
Party doing it is in some measure guilty of the Offense; because, as in things
of such consequence Men ought to be well advised, so it is the less excusable,
because it proceeds from such an Act as is perfectly ludicrous and vain. From
such Homicides as ensue from ludicrous Actions, pass we to those which follow
upon more serious ones, such as are the Actions of Men's Vocations: Where again
we are to consider, whether Men have used all requisite diligence for the
preventing of Mischief, or whether something have been neglected by them. Thus,
for instance, if a Man who is either building or repairing a House, should make
use of unsound Materials to make up his Scaffolds with; in this Case, there is
no doubt, if any Mischief should ensue by their fall, the Party by whom it is
occasioned is chargeable with it, because it is through his neglect, that they
who passed by have come to those untimely Ends to which they did. The same is
not to be said, if the Workman have made use of sound Materials, or at least
such as were not easily to be discerned to be other; nothing having the nature
of a Sin, which is not some way voluntary in him who is the Committer of it.
Upon which account, we find God himself excusing him from the guilt of Murder,
who, fetching a stroke with his Ax to cut down a Tree, had the ill luck to have
the Head of it fall off from the Helve, and so slay his Neighbor unawares,
Deuteronomy. 19.5. In the mean time, as it is not to be denied, but even such a one
might be slain by the Avenger of Blood, if he could not first recover one of
the Cities of Refuge, or afterward, if he were found out of it before the
death of the High Priest, (God thereby declaring, how precious the Life of Man
was with him, and that it ought to be no less with us) so even Casual Homicide
has been looked upon with so evil an eye, that in the days of our Fathers,
Archb. Abbot.
an Archbishop of this Nation was sometime suspended from his Charge, for
having only unfortunately killed a Man, as he was shooting at a Deer.

3. Being now to enter upon my third Inquiry, to wit, what is to be thought of
Self-murder, and how that is reducible to this Commandment, I think it not
amiss to speak first unto the latter, because, till that be shown, my Discourse
upon the former must be looked upon as impertinent and unseasonable. And here
not to urge (what St. Augustine does De civitat. Dei, l.1. c. 20.
) that the Commandment says not, Thou shall not kill another, but, Thou shall
not kill; which does equally include the not killing of our selves: because (as
was before observed) this, and other the Commandments that follow, are to be
understood with relation to our Neighbor, in the Love of whom St. Paul
resolves the whole of them to be comprehended; I shall choose rather, with the
same Father Loco prius citato.
, to evidence the pertinency thereof to this Commandment, from that general
Rule of loving our Neighbor as our selves. For, inasmuch as we are to receive
the measure of loving our Neighbor from our selves; if we are not to kill our
Neighbor, much less are we to kill our selves, the Love whereof is the Measure
of the other. From all which, as it is easy to infer, that the not killing of
our selves has no direct place in this Commandment, because primarily intended
to deter us from invading the Lives of others; so also, that though it has no
place in it directly, yet it has by consequence; and such too, as, because
drawn a fortiori, shows it to be more criminal than the other. Taking it
therefore for granted, that Self-murder has a place here, I will proceed to
inquire, 1. Wherein the Criminalness thereof consists; and, 2. Whether all
killing of our selves is to be accounted such

Now though, for the resolution of the former, it might be enough to allege
those Reasons which I before produced for the Criminalness of the Murder of
our Neighbor; Self-murder being no less a Violation of the Image of God, a
great Injury to Humane Society, and an irreparable one unto our selves: yet I
shall choose rather to insist upon such as are more proper to this Affair,
whereof the first shall be taken from that natural inclination there is in
every one of us to the preservation of our selves. For that which is natural in
us, being, as such, the Work of God, who is the Author no less of Nature than
of Grace; it must be looked upon as an Act of opposition to God, not to comply
with it, and much more to act contradictorily to it. But beside that
Self-murder is a contradiction to our own Natural Inclination, and
consequently also to God, who is the Author of it, it is an Usurpation upon the
Prerogative of God, at whose disposal we are. A thing which even the Heathen,
how blind soever in other things, were not yet unacquainted with; it being a
Saying of Pythagoras, as I find him quoted by Cicero De Senecture. Vetarque
Pythagoras injussu Imperatoris, id est Dei, de praesidto and statione vitae
discedere.

Ad idem alludit Plato in Phoed. ubi haec habet verba (...), etc. Sect. 5.
edit. Cant.


, that no Man ought to depart from the Garrison and Station of Life, without
the Command of his Great General, God. And indeed, as a more apt Similitude
could not possibly be found out, to express the nature of Self-murder; so it
is no less convincing a Proof of the unlawfulness thereof, than an apt
Illustration of it. For, inasmuch as God has full Power and Authority over us,
as he is the Great Creator of the World; it will follow, that in what Station
soever he has set us, therein we are to abide, till we are discharged by him.
Since therefore he who has such Authority over us, has placed us in this
World, it will be necessary for us to abide in it, till he shall be pleased to
call us out of it. Add hereunto, because near of kin unto the other, that
Interest which the Commonwealth, whereof we are Members, has in every one of
us. For, being (as was shown in the entrance upon this Commandment) born for
others, as well as our selves, and particularly for those to whom we are
nearest conjoined in Nature, Habitation, and Laws; we cannot make away our
selves, without an Injury to those who have a Right to our Service and
Assistance. But to return to God, against whom (as all Offenses either
mediately or immediately are, so) this of Self-murder is in a more than
ordinary manner in both: For the evidencing whereof, I shall allege, in the
next place, the Affront this Sin of Self-murder offers to the Divine
Providence: Which will appear, if we consider the dissatisfaction it implies
with the present Dispensations of it, or the distrust and despair of a Redress
from a future one. For, are not the Evils Men either labor under, or fear, the
great cause of their laying violent Hands upon themselves? Nay, are they not
assigned by the Stoics (the great Patrons of Self-murder) among the Grounds
of that (...) which they so inculcate? I appeal to the Doctrine and Practice of
Zeno the Father of that sullen Sect: Concerning the former whereof, as Diogenes
Laertius Lib. 7. in vita Zenonis, p. 195. (...).
tells us, that it was his and his Followers Opinion, that a wise Man might
rationally quit the World, if he labored under any great Grief, mutilation of
Members, or an incurable Disease: So, for the latter, that having lived to a
very great Age, and without any the least of Sickness or Infirmity, it happened
^b. p. 171. (...).

(...).


that going out of his School, he stumbled, and broke his Finger: Whereupon
striking the Earth with his Hand, he used that out of Niobe, I come, why do you
call me? and accordingly went and strangled himself; or, as Menagius observes
out of Lucian, pined himself to death. But who, save a Stoic, could think so
small a matter a just Ground of making away ones self? Or what may be looked
upon as a disgust of the Divine Providence, if such a kind of departure is not?
But with much more reason did Marcus Antoninus (...), lib. 2 sect. 17. (...).
(though a Stoic, and one who in several places Lib. 3. sect. 1. -- lib. 5.
sect. 29.
propugns the same (...)) represent it as a part of Philosophy, to receive all
Accidents whatsoever, as coming from him from whom we our selves do; and Job
interrogate his querulous Wife, Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and
shall we not receive evil? chap. 10.20. For, beside the Ingratitude which the
contrary Practice involves, it is a manifest reluctance to the Dispensations of
his Providence, to whose Will the Authority he has over us, obliges us to
submit our selves. What should I tell you of the many Precepts Christianity
suggests concerning the bearing of Evils and Afflictions? For, as those
Precepts are no less obliging to us, than the Laws of Reason and Nature; so
they require us rather to maintain, than quit our Station; to bear up against
Evils, than endeavor to withdraw our selves from them. The same is to be said
of Self-murther's opposition to the Divine Providence, if you consider it as to
that distrust of it, which it involves. For, as it is apparent enough, that one
great occasion of Self-murder is Men's despair of a recovery from those Evils
they labor under; so, by that despair of theirs, they manifestly call in
question, if not the Justice, yet at least the Goodness of the Divine
Providence. For, what cause can there be of despair, where that has a place in
our Belief? or what necessity of making an escape at that door Arrian. in
Epict. li. 1. c. 24. (...).
which Self-murder opens, and which the Stoics do so often point us to?
Especially when, beside the Goodness of the Divine Nature, we have the
assurance of his Promise, that he will make another way for us to escape. For
thus, after St. Paul had told his Corinthians, that no temptation had taken
them, but such as was common to man, he subjoyns, in the very next Words, But
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able,
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it, whether it be by lessening of that Burden under which you groan, or
giving you proportionable Strength to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. And though, after
I have thus shown the unlawfulness of Self-murder, no necessity lies upon me
to consider of that Magnanimity which it is thought by some to involve; it
being rather to be considered (as St. Augustine De civit. Dei, l. 1. c 22.
insinuates) whether a thing be well done, than whether it be done
magnanimously; with soundness of Wisdom, than with greatness of Spirit: Yet as
many things appear otherwise than they will be found to be, if they be examined
as they ought; so, as the same Father Aug. loco citato. Quanquam si rationem
diligentius consulas, nec ipsa quidem animi magnitudo recle nominatur, ubi
quisque non valendo tolerare vel quaeque aspera, vel aliena peccata, seipsum
interemerit. Magis enim men's infirma deprehenditur, quae far non potest vel
duram sui corporis servitutem, vel stultam vulgi opinionem. Majorque animus
merito dicendus est, qui vitam aerumnosam magis potest far quam fugere, and
humanum judicium maxim vulgar, quod plerumque caligine erroris involvitur,
praeconscientiae luce ac puritate contemnere.

Rebus in angustis facile est contemnere vitam:
Fortiter ille facit qui miser esse potest.
Martial. Epigr. l. 11. ep. 57.
observes, if we look more narrowly into this, we shall find it rather to be
poorness than greatness of Spirit, to lay violent Hands upon our selves, to
avoid the pressure of Afflictions, or other Men's Offenses: That Mind being to
be looked upon as infirm, which cannot bear the hard Servitude of its Body, or
the foolish Opinion of the Vulgar; as, on the contrary, that truly great, which
can rather bear, than fly a miserable Life; and prefer the Light and Purity of
its own Conscience, before the Opinion of the Common sort, which is, for the
most part, clouded with Error. And though the Roman Stories are full of the
Commendations of Cato and Lucretia, the former whereof killed himself, that he
might not fall into Caesar's Power; the latter, that she might not be thought
in the least to have approved of that Rape which was committed upon her: yet as
there wanted Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 23.
not those of Cato's own Friends, who dissuaded him from the Attempt, as a sign
rather of a weak than a strong Mind; so he himself Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 1.
cap. 23.
gave sufficient Indications of it, by advising his Son to live, and to hope
well of the Mercy of the Emperor. For if (as the same Father Aug. de Civit.
Dei, lib. 1. cap. 23.
observes) he had thought it any thing of turpitude to live under the Power of
the Emperor, why did he not rather compel, or at least advise his Son to fall
under the same Fate with himself? especially when, as Ludovicus Vives Not. ad
loc. praed.
observes, no Persuasions of Cato could make his Son leave him before his
Death. The like Judgment is to be made (in the Opinion of the same Father De
Civit at. Dei, l. 1. c. 19.
) of that no less celebrated Fact of Lucretia; it being a weak bashfulness so
to fear the ill Opinion of Men, as to run upon an evil Action to avoid it;
especially when we have the Testimony of our own Conscience, and both the
Inspection and Approbation of God, to support us.

Of the Criminalness of Self-murder, what has been said may suffice: Proceed
we to inquire, whether all killing our selves be such. Where, first of all, I
shall make no scruple to grant, that all such killing of our selves is so,
where we have not a Call from God to it: Because (as was before said) we are
his, and not our own; and therefore not to depart from those Stations wherein
he has placed us, without his leave. The only difficulty is, whether we can
have any Call to it, beside what God's usual Messengers of Death give? which
yet is not so much a Call, as a Compulsion, because forcing us from these our
Earthly Tabernacles. For the solution whereof, not to bring again before you
those Evils and Calamities which the Stoics made a just ground of a voluntary
Departure, because Christianity and Nature both oblige us to the bearing of
them; I will choose rather to inquire, whether there be any thing of truth in
those other Grounds assigned by them, even the Profit of our Country or Friends
Vid. locum ante citatum ex Laertio de Dogmatibus Zenonis, etc.
; as also, in what they little dreamed of, the Instinct or Impulse of God's
Spirit, and the asserting of his Glory. This only would be premised, because
necessary so to be, inasmuch as all the Instances to be alleged do not reach
the killing of our selves in the strict and most obvious acception of the
Words, that when we speak concerning the killing of our selves, we mean not
only that wherein we are the immediate Instruments of our own Execution, but
where we expose our selves also to such dangers, from which nothing, in all
probability, but Death is to be expected. For though, in strictness of
speaking, this is not to be accounted the killing of our selves; yet it is
interpretatively as much, because putting our selves into such a Condition,
from which in all probability it will ensue. Now that one or other of these
ways, a Man may not only with the leave, but also with the approbation of God,
procure his own death, will appear, if we resume the former Grounds, and, first
of all, the Advantage of a Friend.

It is a known Story, and by all that I know of, whether Christians or
Heathens, remembered with applause, That there were two Pythagoreans of so fast
a Friendship Damonem and Pythiam Pythagoreos ferunt hoc animo inter se fuisse,
ut cum eorum alteri Dionysius tyrannus diem necis destinavisset, and is, qui
morti addictus esset paucos sibi dies commendandorum suorum causa petivisset,
vas factus sit alter ejus sistendi, ut si ille non revertisset ad diem,
morierdum esset ipsi, etc. Cicero de Offic. 3.
that when one of them had by Dionysius the Tyrant been condemned to die, and
begged only a few days respite to dispose of his Affairs, the other became
Surety to the Tyrant for his Friend, so that, in case he should not return at
the time appointed, he himself would die for him. What the Sequel of this Story
is, I will not now tell you, because not pertinent to our purpose, though it
was both to the one and the others glory: I demand only, whether he who thus
offered himself to be the others Surety, did that which was lawful and
commendable? If we say he did, we have what we desire, even an Instance wherein
it may be lawful to make our selves a Prey to Death, upon the account of
Friendship. For, beside that the Person beforementioned did expressly stipulate
to die for him, in case he did not return, which without doubt he ought not to
have done, if it had not been lawful to lay down his Life for him; he exposed
himself to such a hazard as was not common, and from which there was more
probability of Death, than of the contrary: Because, what considence soever he
might repose in his Friend's Justice and Kindness, yet as it was not impossible
some Accident might detain him beyond the time appointed, so there are few
Friendships so sacred, as to oblige Men to prefer Death before it; St. Paul
having told us, Romans 5.7. that scarcely for a righteous man will any one die,
and but peradventure, which must be also a great piece of Courage, for one who
is also good and benign. Which Words, as they are a manifest confirmation of
the danger that Person run, who made himself a Surety for a condemned Man; so
seem to me to declare such an Act to be, in the Opinion of the Apostle, an
Heroical one, and not only not deserve to be condemned, but to be applauded.
For, however the Rarity of such a Love among Men might serve in some sort to
commend the Love of Christ to us, who, as he had power to lay down his Life, as
well as take it up again, so laid it down for those that were Enemies; yet
would it have been some diminution to its Commendation, if it had not been
lawful for one Man to lay down his Life for another; because it might have been
objected, That the rarity of such an Accident proceeded not so much, or at
least not altogether, from the impossibility of a Love strong enough to do it;
but from the unlawfulness thereof. In the mean time, if the forementioned place
will not be looked upon as conclusive, I see not in the least how that of St.
John can be evaded, 1 John 3.16. where he tells us, that as Christ laid down
his life for us, so there may be Instances wherein it may be our Duty to lay
down our lives for one another. For, though (as Grotius Annot. in loc. and Joh.
10.11.
interprets it) nothing else should be there meant by laying down our lives for
the brethren, than exposing our selves to danger for them, (though, as he
himself observes, our Savior, who is proposed for our Example, must be
confessed to have done more than so) yet even that would not prejudice the
Conclusion I would commend, nor hinder it from being reputed a kind of
destroying of our selves: He being in truth a Felo de se, though no criminal
one, who shall, for the sake of another, object himself to a Danger from which,
in all probability, his Death may ensue. But let us instance, if you please, in
a Case which is more clearly one of the Stoics (...) and see whether it
contains any thing dissonant either to Reason or Religion: As suppose, for
example, that after a Shipwreck a Man light upon a piece of a Plank, which will
suffice only for the Security of one Person; and suppose withal, that, seeing
a dear Friend of his ready to perish, he should quit his Plank to him, and
commit himself, being moreover unable to swim, to the mercy of the Sea: Will
any Man now say, that such an Act is not properly enough a casting away of a
Man's self; or condemn him that does so, for it? nay, will he not rather look
upon it as a noble Act of Virtue and Friendship; especially, if we also suppose
the Friend for whom he does it, to be of more use to the Public than himself.
For, though a Man may, and perhaps ought, caeteris paribus, to prefer himself
before any other; yet nothing hinders him (as I have before shown) to prefer a
Public Good before a Private, and therefore also, another Man's Welfare before
his own, if that other be in a greater capacity to promote it. I will conclude
this Particular with a Saying of Seneca Succurram perituro, sed ut ipse non
peream, nisi si futurus ero magni hominis aut inagnae rei merces.
, as I find it cited by Grotius in his Notes upon the fore-quoted place to the
Romans: I will (says he) succor a perishing Man, but so, that I my self do
not perish, unless I may thereby purchase the security of a Great Man, or a
Great Thing. Then belike he thought, and so, I think, do all rational Men, that
he might without any Crime, lay down his Life for them.

From the Utility of a Friend, pass we to the Welfare of our Country, which, as
it is a more Public Good, so may therefore (if necessity require) command the
submitting our own to it, and even our own Life. Upon which account, I think,
no Man can do other than commend (so far is it from being to be looked upon as
a criminal slaying of ones self) if, as it sometimes happens in War, Men choose
rather to blow up or sink themselves, and the Ship they go in, than suffer it
to fall into the hand of the Enemy. For, where such a Loss may not more
prejudice our Country, than disadvantage the Enemy, I see not where the evil of
it consists; nay rather how it can be looked upon as other than a lawful, yea
honorable departure out of this World; there being nothing too dear for any
Man to part with for his Country, from which he had his Birth, and by which not
only he himself has been hitherto secured, but all his Relations both have
and must be. And indeed, though all that go Volunteers into the Wars do not
thus much, which may seem to make the Instance the less pertinent, yet as all
Men that do, expose themselves to mortal danger, and consequently make a step
toward a voluntary Death, or a killing of themselves; so those may well be
said to come up to it, who, to recover a Battle almost lost, do, though few in
number, rush in among the thickest of the Enemy. For, inasmuch as the foremost
of them can expect no other than to perish, they must upon that account be
looked upon as Felo's de se, or the Authors of their own death; there being no
material difference, as to this Affair, between running upon a Man's own Sword,
and running upon as mortal a one of an Enemy. For, if David were rightly
accused by the Prophet, for the death of Vriah the Hittite, though he were
slain by the sword of the children of Ammon, according as the Scripture Thou
have killed V^iah the Hittite with the Sword -- and have slain him with the
Sword of the children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 12.9.
it self expresses it, there is no doubt he may be as rightly said to be the
Author of his own, who rushes upon the Swords of those, from whom he cannot
rationally expect any other.

The Grounds of the Stoics being thus explained, proceed we to those, which as
we learn from far better Masters, so are more accommodable to the Facts of
Christians; who, if they have at all exceeded as to a voluntary Death, may seem
to have done it in the point of Martyrdom: For, not contented to suffer when
seized upon by their Enemies, and even to provoke those Beasts, to which,
according to the Custom of those days, they were cast; we find, that some
Pearson. Vindiciae Epistolar. S. Ignatii, Part posterior. cap. 9 p. 111.
of the Primitive Martyrs, unasked, unsought after, offered themselves to it,
with the general approbation of the Age they lived in; I will not say all
altogether without fault, (it being hard in Heroical Actions to keep a Mean)
but many of them certainly unblameably, and not only unblameably, but
commendably. For, as Holy Men of God heretofore acted, as well as spoke, as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost; so, no doubt can be made, but if that pushed
any of them on to do ought toward the destruction of themselves, that was
warrant enough to them for the doing of it. Upon which account, St. Augustine
Nec Samson aliter excusatur, quod seipsum cum hostibus ruina domns oppressit;
nisi quia spiritus latenter hoc jusserat, qui per illum miracula faciebat. De
Civitare Dei, l. 1. c. 21.
anciently, and most other Writers after him, have justified the Act of Samson,
in pulling down the House he was appointed to make sport in, upon the Head of
himself and the Philistines; it being easy to believe, that was not without an
intimation from God, which was accompanied with his miraculous Power in the
accomplishing of it. And though, I know, there is not the same consent among
Authors, for those Men's acting by a Divine Impulse, who, among the Primitive
Martyrs, rather sought than expected their Trial; yet am I not in the least
discouraged thereby from alleging it in their defense, because there appear to
me so just Grounds for the asserting of it. For, who can think they acted
without a Divine Impulse, who, as they had nothing to blemish them in their
Lives, so showed so much Christian Fortitude and Generosity in their Deaths?
especially when it is certain, not only that the extraordinary Illuminations
of the Spirit were not then ceased, but some of thoe Martyrs themselves have
alleged the immediate Call of that Spirit to them. For, thus Ignatius, than
whom no Man seems to have been more desirous of Martyrdom, in his Epistle to
the Romans Vivens enim scribo vobis, desiderans mori. Meum desiderium
crucifixum est, and non est in me ignis amans aliquam aquam: sed vivens and
loquens est in me, intus me dicit, Veni ad Patrem. Vetus Versio Armachana.
, tells us, that as his Love, even Christ, was crucified for him, so he was not
without the like ardent Affections, both for him, and a conformity to his
Death. Not that he run upon it of his own head, but that he was moved to it by
God's Spirit, who living and speaking in him, said unto him, Come unto the
Father. Though, setting that aside, I no way doubt, but many of the Martyrs
might be justified in their Zeal, from the necessity there was sometimes of it,
toward the asserting the Honor of God, and of their Religion. Witness the
Behavior of that Deacon Vid. Eusebius. li. de Martyribus Palaestinae, c. 2. cum
notrs Valesii ad locum.
of Caesarea, Romanus by Name; who seeing many of Christ's Soldiers forsaking
their Colors, and choosing rather to Sacrifice to the Heathen Gods, than to
bear witness to their own; out of zeal to the Worship of the True God, and
impatience of the Devil's Triumph, offered himself to the Judge, as a Soldier
whom he should not so easily overcome. For, what louder or more importunate
Call to a voluntary Death can we have, than when we do not only find in our
selves a readiness to undergo it, but may by it, as in the forementioned Case,
not only vindicate the Honor of God, and of our Religion, from contempt, but
make it conspicuous and illustrious? Especially when our Savior, who, to be
sure, laid down his Life voluntarily, is proposed to our example, and we called
upon to take up his Cross, and follow him.

PART IV.
That there are other Sins included in this of Murder; together with an
Account of what are so included: Whether they be such as are more near of kin
to it, or are farther removed from it. Of the former sort are, the commanding
or instigating Men to Murder, or assisting the Murderer in it; the using such
Means as are likely enough to produce it, or entertaining any murtherous
Intention or Desire. Of the latter, the procuring of Abortions, even where the
Child is not Quick; wounding or maiming; and, in fine, all Violences
whatsoever, unless in the case of a Man's own necessary Defense. All Violences
that are vindictive, perfectly unlawful, whether accomplished by our own Hands,
or sought at those of the Magistrate. The Passion of Hatred considered, as to
its lawfulness or unlawfulness; and shown to become unlawful only when it is
placed upon a wrong Object; such as is that Hatred which has Good Men for its
Object, or Evil Men any otherwise than as they are such. The same Hatred
considered with reference to this Commandment; where is shown, both its
opposition to that Love which the Commandment enjoins, and its cognation to
that Murder which it forbids. The like unlawfulness and murtherous cognation
evinced in the envying the Prosperity of another, in wishing ill to him, or
rejoicing at it; in fine, in causeless and immoderate Anger, and contumelious
or reproachful Speeches.

II. THAT the killing of another is the thing expressly forbidden in this
Commandment, you need not be told, because the place this Commandment has in
the Decalogue, sufficiently informs you; as neither, after my last Discourse,
that the killing of our selves has a place in it indirectly and by
consequence. It remains, that we inquire whether any other Sins are included in
them, and what those Sins are.

For the former of these, much need not be said, after what has been alleged
in the general, to show the Comprehensiveness of the Ten Commandments: Only,
that it may more clearly appear, that this particular Prohibition includes
others also, I will allege a Saying of our Savior, and another of his Beloved
Disciple St. John. From the former whereof we learn, that, however the Letter
of the Prohibition, or at least Ye have heard that it was said by them of old
time, Thou shall not kill, and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the
judgment.
the Notion of it in the Jews Courts of Judicature, extended only to the
killing of a Man; yet in the Spirit and Evangelical Sense, it reached to the
forbidding of Anger and Reproach, Mat. 5.21, 22. From the latter, that Hatred
is not only included in it, but a part of it; and that he who harbors it in
his Heart, is as truly a Murderer, as he who unjustly takes away a Man's Life,
1 John 3.15. Taking it therefore for granted, that the Prohibition now before
us includes that of other Sins, we will inquire, what those Sins are; and first
of all (because that is principally intended in the Prohibition) what Sins are
included in the Murder of another.

1. And here, in the first place, I shall not doubt to reckon, as forbidden,
the commanding or instigating other Men to do it: Because, as he who sets
another upon the doing of any thing, is to be looked upon as the principal
Cause of it; so, it is but reasonable to suppose, that he who forbids the doing
of any thing toward the taking away a Man's Life, which has only the nature of
an Instrumental Cause, does much more forbid the Efficacy of the Principal.
Whence it is, that we do not only find David praying to be delivered from
bloodguiltiness, though he only put another upon the setting Vriah so, that he
might die by a third Person or Persons; but the Prophet Nathan, in the Name of
God, charging him with the Murder, and affirming him to have slain Vriah with
the sword of the children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 12.9.

2. As little doubt is to be made, secondly, that it is alike unlawful by this
Commandment to assist the Murderer, either by our Counsel or Actions; he who
does so, contributing in part to that which it forbids, and consequently so far
chargeable with the violation of it.

3. I observe, thirdly, That though Killing be the only thing expressly
forbidden; yet inasmuch as he who forbids any Effect, is in reason to be
supposed to forbid the Means whereby it is apt to be procured; he that makes
use of destructive Means, whether they take effect or no, is chargeable with
the violation of this Commandment. By which way of reasoning, he shall be
concluded to be a Murderer in the sight of God, who should, after the corrupt
Custom of the Heathen, expose a helpless Infant in a Desert place, where it may
be in danger of perishing either by Wild Beasts or Famine.

4. In fine, Forasmuch as the Consent of the Will is the principal thing in all
Actions, and so estimated by God himself, both in the Old and New Testament; he
is in reason to be looked upon as a Violator of this Commandment, who shall
entertain any murtherous Intention or Desire; after the same manner that he who
only looks upon a woman to lust after her, is affirmed by our Savior to
commit Adultery with her in his heart.

Of such Sins as are more near of kin to that which is expressly forbidden, I
have spoken hitherto, and shown them to be included in it: Proceed we to
inquire the same of those which, though of the same cognation, yet are farther
removed from it. Where,

1. First of all, I shall reckon the procuring of Abortions: I do not mean,
where the Child is perfectly formed, and quick, (for then, if Death follow to
the Child, it is Murder properly so called) but before the Child is animated.
Concerning which, before I deliver my own Opinion, give me leave to give you
that of the Ancients, as it is set down by Tertullian. After the forbidding of
Murder (says he Nobis vero homicidio semel interdicto, etiam conceptum utero,
dum adhuc sanguis in hominem deliberatu, dissolvere non licet. Homicidii
festinatio est, prohibere nasci, nec refert natam quis eripiat animam, an
nasientem disturbet Homo est, and qui est futurus Etiam fructus omnis jam in
semine est. Apolog. c. 9.
) it is not lawful to us Christians to dissolve that Offspring which is
conceived in the Womb, even while Nature is only in consultation to make a Man
of it. It is a committing of Murder beforehand, to hinder any thing from
being born: neither matters it whether a Man take away a Soul that is already
born, or disturb it in its Birth. He is a Man, which is in a disposition to be
so; and the Fruit is already in the Seed which produces it. Now though, to
speak mine own Opinion freely, I cannot but look upon this of Tertullian as
somewhat hyperbolically expressed; there being no place for Murder there,
where there is not a Life to take away: yet, as what he says, is proof enough
of the Ancient Christians believing it to be included in this Prohibition,
because here, and all along, pretending not so much to deliver his own Sense,
as theirs; so the Reason by him insinuated, is a sufficient Argument, that they
were not out in their Belief. For, though that be not a Man, which is only in
a disposition to become so; yet it is the Rudiments of one, and consequently
also of the Image of God: To which therefore, whilst Violence is offered, a
Violence must be supposed to be so far offered to the Image of God, which is
the Fundamental Reason of the Prohibition. Now, forasmuch as the Fundamental
Reason of the Prohibition has place in Abortions, as well as in perfect
Murders; it is to be supposed, though not expressed, yet to be understood in
it; especially being one of those Preceps which were intended as General Heads
of Moral Duties. In like manner, because one great Reason of the Prohibition of
Murder, is the great Injury it does to Humane Society, by robbing it of one of
its Members; it is but just to think it to have been the same God's intention
to forbid those Abortions, by which Humane Society is, though in another way,
deprived of those which should help to maintain and propagate it.

2. But because, beside Murder, or what approaches very near to it, there are
other things pernicious to the Lives of Men, such as wounding, maiming, and the
like, which are commonly reduced to this Commandment; therefore inquire we, in
the second place, what ground there is to believe that these also are forbidden
by it. In order whereunto, I shall allege, first, That those do oftentimes
procure that very Murder which is here forbidden: In consideration whereof, as
they are to be looked upon as no other than Murder, where they have that
effect upon whom they fall; so, it is but reasonable to believe, that God, who
professes to hold Murder in such detestation himself, and forbids it so
severely to others, intended the Prohibition of such Violences by which they do
often ensue.

2. And though the same cannot be said of all Violences that are offered, which
will oblige us to look out for some other Reason of the Prohibition of them;
yet inasmuch as all Violences whatsoever are contrary to that Love which I have
before shown we ought to have for the Persons of Men, even by the force of this
Commandment, it will follow, that those also are to be thought to be forbidden
by it, and consequently, that it is our Duty to avoid them. Which Inference is
to be looked upon as of so much the more force, because he who in this
Commandment forbids only to kill, if we understand it strictly and literally,
does in the very next Chapter forbid the doing of lesser Mischiefs, such as
Burning, Wounding, Stripes, and Mutilating, and gives command, that they who
are guilty of them, should suffer the like in their own Persons, Exodus 21.24.
and so on.

Now though what has been said upon this Argument, may seem to suffice,
because showing lesser Violences to be equally forbidden with Mortal ones; yet
because, when we discoursed before concerning Killing, we excepted that from
the number of forbidden ones, which is done in a Man's own necessary defense;
therefore it may not be amiss to inquire, whether even in those lesser
Violences some exception be not to be made in the like case,; and whether or
no, because such Courses are commonly looked upon as lawful, it be lawful to
retaliate those Injuries we have before received.

Of the former of these much need not be said, I mean as to the Case of a Man's
own necessary defense. For, as where such Violences are not resisted, a Man's
Life may sometime come to be endangered by them; in which case no Man thinks it
unlawful to resist: so more encouragement would thereby be given to violent
Persons, than is consistent with the Peace and Advantage of Humane Society:
Because, however the Law have provided Punishments against such Violences, yet
they are long before they can be procured, and oftentimes are too weak to deter
Men from the like Practices. This only would be added, That, when we affirm it
to be lawful to use Violence to defend a Man's self from the Violences of
others, we are necessarily to understand, where no more is used on our part
than is necessary to defend our selves; because by this Rule made only lawful
in our own defense, and therefore not to proceed beyond what is necessary to
it. For, as for that Exception which may be made from out Savior's forbidding
us to resist evil, it is nothing at all to the present purpose, because, as
Grotius Annot. in Mat. 5.39.
has observed, the opposition being made between that, and Moses's his
Assertion, of an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, we are necessarily to
understand by the not resisting of Evil, the not returning of Evil by way of
Punishment, because that of Moses was manifestly such.

The Case of a Man's own necessary Defense being thus dispatched, proceed we to
inquire, whether it be lawful to retaliate by way of Punishment, and return
those Evils we have received. Concerning which, I say, first, That no question
can be made of the unlawfulness of retaliating with our own hands; partly,
because Vengeance is by God claimed to himself, and to the Magistrate; and
partly, because a private retaliating was not permitted even to the Jews; the
Law of an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, being left to the Execution
of the Judges, upon complaint made to them thereof, as you may see Exodus 21.22.
and so on, and Deuteronomy. 19.16. and the following Verses. The only thing of
difficulty is, whether a Man may seek a retaliation from the Magistrate;
because our Savior opposes his Doctrine to that of the Law, which gave such a
permission to the injured Party. And indeed, if we speak of a Retaliation
properly so called, that is to say, of seeking the avenging of our selves of
the injurious Party, by procuring to him the like Evils he has inflicted; so,
no doubt can remain, but that it is absolutely unlawful to a Christian; and
that not only because of the former Prohibition of our Savior, but because
the Scripture has forbid us the returning Evil for Evil, and enjoined us to be
patient under it, and ready to forgive; which that Man can in no sense be said
to do, who shall seek to avenge himself, either by himself, or the Magistrate.
The only thing that can be lawful to a Christian in this Affair, is, 1. To
seek a Reparation of the Damage he has sustained; which yet must be in greater
Instances, and such as cannot well be born: of which nature are those Injuries
which either disable the Body, or bring any considerable Pain to it. For, what
place can there be for Patience, where they who suffer Violence will have
Satisfaction made them for every the least that is offered? or how can he be
said to endure an Injury or Affront, who will not be content unless he have
amends made him for every one? But because it may sometime happen, that the
Violence which is offered may be such as may, to deter others from the like,
require the delating it to the Magistrate, and imploring the drawing of the
Sword of Justice against the Offender; therefore it must be added farther, That
where the Case is such, it is not only lawful, but necessary for the injured
Party to do it; provided, that Zeal of Justice and the Public Weal be the
thing that prompts him to it, and not either in whole or in part the gratifying
of his own Revenge; that being, in the highest sense, rendering evil for evil,
because not only returning Mischief for Mischief, but with the same malicious
purpose and intent: Which, as Seneca Immane verbum est ultio, and ab injuria
distans tantum ordine Qui ulciscitur, non nisi excusatius peccat.
well observes, differs only from an Injury in the order of its commission;
and is only a more excusable Sin, because provoked by, and following after the
other.

To go on now to show what other Sins are included in that of Murder, beside
those before rehearsed: Where,

1. First, I shall present you with that of Hatred, because it is the Parent of
all that follow. Now there are two things which will be necessary to be
inquired into, for the better explication of this Passion.

1. What Hatred is to be looked upon as sinful; and, 2. How that which is such,
is redneible to this Commandment.
That it is not unlawful simply to hate, is evident from hence, that it is a
Natural Passion of the Soul: it is no less evident, because evil is the proper
Object of it, that when it is employed about that, it is not only not
unlawful, but just and commendable. To make it therefore at any time a Sin, it
must be employed about a wrong Object; which how it may be, as to the present
Affair, I come now to show. And here, in the first place, I think no Man will
make any difficulty to grant, that it must necessarily be sinful to hate a Good
Man, as such: because, as Evil, and not Good, is the proper Object of Hatred;
so, much less that which is Good, as such. Now, that such a Hatred as this has
found place in the World, is evident from that of Wisdom, chap. 2. 12. and so
on; where he does not only represent it as the general Character of Evil Men,
to hate and persecute those which are better than themselves; but fortifies
that his Opinion with such a Reason, as puts it past all contradiction. For, it
being usual with Men to hate those which are not only of a contrary temper,
but do, by that temper of theirs, make the others to be the worse thought of;
it is easy to suppose, that Evil Men will hate Good, because (as the Wise Man
there speaks) they are not only contrary to Evil Men's doings, but tacitly
upbraid Sulpitius Severus Sacrae Hist. li. 2. p. 368. Hic primus [nempe Nero]
Christianum nomen tollere aggressus est. Quippe semper inimica virtutibus vitia
sunt, and optimi quique ab improbis quasi exprobrantes aspiciuntur.
them with their Impieties and Transgressions; that Virtue by which they shine,
at the same time it shows forth its own Worth, discovering the Deformity of the
other. From that first sort of Hatred, pass we to another, which has the Good
Man also for its Object: I do not say simply for his Goodness, and that
Reproach which it naturally casts upon the contrary Temper; but because, as the
same Wise Man speaks, he expressly objecteth, to their infamy, the
transgressions of their Education, and charge them with those Impieties they
are guilty of. Now, that even this Hatred is not without a Crime, is evident
from hence, that as he who tells them of their Faults, does it out of kindness;
so that very Act of theirs is the greatest Kindness in the World: because, by
such an Act they may not only come to know their own Errors, but be thereby
provoked to discard them. And indeed, so far is it from an Unkindness, however
commonly so interpreted, to reprove Men for their Errors and Extravagances,
that God himself reckons the neglect of it as a sign of Hatred, as you may see
Levit. 19.17. Forasmuch therefore as to rebuke is not only not evil, but the
greatest kindness a Man can do to a wicked Person; it must needs be looked upon
as a Sin, to make it the ground of our Hatred: which was the second thing to be
demonstrated. Next to the Hatred of Good Men, consider we that of the Evil and
Injurious, which may seem to have nothing Criminal in it: And indeed, neither
would it, if it had only their Injuriousness for its Object, or the Persons of
wicked Men merely for it; because every thing that is evil, either in it self,
or to us, is a just ground of hatred and aversation. But, as it would be
considered, that he who hates a Person for his Injuriousness, can be privileged
no farther by that hate, than to discountenance him in it; so also, that there
may be more in him to excite our Love, than there is to stir our Hatred: in
which case, there is no doubt, but that our Hatred is to be bounded by it, and
go no farther than is consistent with the other. Now, that this is the Case of
all evil and injurious Men, will appear, if we consider, that they are God's
Creatures, and adorned with his Image; that they are the Subjects of his
Providence, yea, for whom he sent his Son to die. For, having all these
Relations to God, who is the Supremest Good, both in himself, and to us, they
must needs be looked upon as a juster Object of our Love, than all their Evil
and Injuriousness can be a ground of Hate. Though therefore Evil Men, as such,
may and ought to be hated; though, so far as we can separate their
Injuriousness from their more lovely Qualities, they may lawfully enough become
the ground of our aversation: yet inasmuch as they have more to commend them to
our Love than Hatred, as we cannot hate them altogether, so neither any farther
than is consistent with those things which are the just Object of our Love. The
result of which Consideration will be, that though we may hate them as Sinners,
yet we may not hate them as Men, but, on the contrary, love, and pray for their
conversion, and prosperity in all their lawful Undertakings.

What Hatred is to be looked upon as sinful, we have seen already; inquire we
in the next place, how that which is so, is reducible to this Commandment. A
Task which will not be difficult to perform, if we consider this Sin of Hatred
either with relation to that Love which the Commandment enjoins, or to that Sin
of Murder which it forbids. For, if (as we learn from the Apostle) this, and
other the Commandments that follow, enjoin the loving of our Neighbor; they
must consequently be supposed to forbid the hatred of him, as being contrary
to, and inconsistent with it. And though it be true, that Hatred is not
Murder, or other the like Injuriousness, if we mean thereby those of the Hand;
yet it is either the murder and injuriousness of the Heart (which I have shown
to be equally forbidden) or at least the Producer of it: he who hates any
Person in the least, naturally wishing some ill or other to him; but he who
perfectly hates him, Death: According to that Saying of Ennius, remembered by
Tully Tull. de Offic li 2. Pra. clare Ennius, Quem metuunt oderunt, quem
quisque odit periisse expetit.
, Quem quisque odit periisse expetit; He who hates any Person, desires his
destruction. To all which, if we add, That St. John, in the place
before-quoted, affirms the hater of his Brother to be a Murderer, and that
Deuteronomy. 19.4. etc.
God absolved that Manslayer from the guilt of it, who hated him not in time
past; so, no doubt can remain, but that the same Commandment which forbids the
murdering of a Man, forbids also the hating of him: That being in reason to be
thought to be forbidden, to which the Scripture does not only give the Title
of Murder, but absolves even that Manslayer in whom it should be found not to
be.

2. That great Crime of Hatred being thus dispatched, proceed we to that of
Envy; which is, in short, nothing else than a Grief of Mind for that Good which
happens to another. I do not mean, as that Good may become the Instrument of
much Mischief, by the Possessors abuse; for in that case a good Man may be
grieved: but because he whom we envy is like to be advantaged by it. Now, that
this, no less than the former, has the nature of a Sin, and particularly
against the present Prohibition, will require no great pains to prove. For,
beside that such a Grief, Spider-like, sucks its Poison from the choicest
Flower, because, contrary to Nature, making that which is the proper Object of
Joy, the matter of its own Sadness and Discontent; beside that it is a manifest
reluctance to the Dispensations of the Divine Providence, from whence, as all
other Good proceeds, so that particular one which we so much envy; beside,
lastly, that it is a natural effect of Hatred, and consequently to be supposed
to be forbidden with that Hatred from which it arises; it is oftentimes the
cause of Murder, and other injurious Actions; but, to be sure, does always
dispose Men to it; The first Murder that was ever committed, proceeding from
hence, that the Sacrifice of the murdered Person was more accepted by God,
than that of the Murderer was.

3. The same is to be said of wishing any Evil, and particularly Death, to any
Person, or of rejoicing in it when it does befall him; of being angry with our
Brother without a cause, or above measure; of proceeding to contumelious or
reproachful Speeches to or of him: these, as they are but the fruits of Hatred,
so disposing Men to Murder, and consequently to be supposed to be forbidden
with it: He that forbids any Action, or at least with any severity, being in
reason to be thought to forbid that which disposes Men to it; because, where
that is not carefully avoided, it will be hard to avoid the other. Only
because Anger, and that reproachful Speaking which proceeds from it, is by our
Savior himself particularly referred to this Commandment, I think it but a
just respect to him, and to his Authority, to allot them a more distinct
Consideration. But of that, (...), in my next.

PART V.
Anger reduced by our Savior to the Commandment we are now upon; and therefore
the Consideration thereof resumed anew: Where is shown, first, what Anger is,
and that it is not absolutely sinful; as is made appear from its being a
natural Passion, from St. Paul's admonishing to be angry and sin not, from our
Savior's giving entertainment to it, and the unavoidableness thereof. The
Objections that are made against this Determination, proposed, and answered. An
Inquiry what Anger is to be looked upon as sinful; where is shown, first, That
no other Anger is, than what is avoidable by Deliberation; where the motus
primo-primi of that Passion are absolved. An Address to a more particular
discovery of sinful Anger, which becomes such, 1. When it is rash and
precipitate, the inordinacy whereof is at large declared. 2. When it is
causeless, or at least without a sufficient one; such as are those which arise
from things done casually, or inadvertently; from Provocations that bring with
them no considerable Detriment, or greater ones, provided they be not many,
from a Friend. 3. When our Anger exceeds the measure due to it: Of which sort
are those which exceed the Merit of the Cause, which transport Men beyond the
Bounds of Sobriety and Prudence, or continue longer than they ought; as they
do, when they continue after Satisfaction offered, after the Punishment of the
offending Person, or when they continue in their Heats to the usual times of
Prayer and Meditation. The Remedies of this disorderly Passion pointed at.

YE have heard (says our Savior) that it was said by them of old time, Thou
shall not kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment.
But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall say unto his brother,
Racha, shall be in danger of the Council; but whosoever shall say, Thou fool,
shall be in danger of hellfire, Mat. 5.21, 22. It seems, that however in the
forinsick sense this Commandment extended no farther than Killing, yet Anger
and Reproachful speaking had a place in it, as it was intended for a Rule of
Piety and Manners, or at least was so reckoned by our Savior: And not without
cause, if we consider the Nature either of the one or the other, and the
occasion which they minister to that Murder which is here forbidden; Anger
naturally inclining the Person in whom it is, to malicious, and sometimes
murtherous Purposes; as Reproachful speaking, those who are the Objects of it,
both to take them up, and prosecute them against the Reviler. Fro whence, as it
will follow, that both the one and the other have too much affinity with
Murder, to suffer us to doubt of their being forbidden by this Commandment;
so, that being supposed, I will go on to inquire into the Nature of them, and
show wherein the Criminalness thereof consists.

I begin with Anger, because our Savior does so, and because it is the
Fountain from which those bitter Streams of reproachful Words issue. Where, 1.
First of all, I shall inquire, what Anger is. 2. Whether all Anger be to be
looked upon as sinful: Or, 3. If not, what Anger is to be accounted such. And,
4. And lastly, What are the most proper Remedies thereof.


1. Of the first of these much need not be said, because Men are pretty well
agreed concerning the Nature of it; Anger being nothing else than a mixture of
Hatred Arist. Rhet. li. 2. c 1. in initio. (...). Idem fere apud Cartesium de
Passionibus, part 3 art 199. nisi quod (ut nos) definiat esse speciem odii aut
aversionis, quam habemus erga eos qui aliquid malum fecerunt, etc.
and Grief, arising from an Opinion of some injury done to us, or to those in
whom we have an interest, and accompanied with a desire of revenge. This only
would be added, That though any sort of Injury may serve to excite that
Passion, yet it arises mostly from Contempt, as which of all others we are
least able to bear, and most desirous to revenge.

2. The Nature of Anger being thus unfolded, proceed we to inquire, whether all
Anger is to be looked upon as sinful. A Question which, among Christians, might
perhaps be looked upon as needless, were it not, 1. That however we read in the
fore-quoted place, whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, others
anciently read it without any such limitation: And, 2. Because of that desire
of Revenge which we have affirmed all Anger to involve. For, who otherwise
could lightly condemn that Passion altogether, which is not only a Natural
Affection of the Mind, but supposed by St. Paul to be lawful, even where he
cautions Men against the excess of it? He who bids us be angry and sin not,
supposing it to be lawful in it self, because otherwise we could not be angry
without offending. To all which, if we add the Example of our Savior, so the
simple condemnation of Anger will appear yet more unreasonable. For, as it is
certain from the Scripture, not only that he did no Sin, but that he was in
himself of a most sedate temper; so, it is no less certain from thence, that
notwithstanding that, he was sometime provoked to Anger, and that Spirit of his
ruffled by it, which was generally smooth as the face of the Deep, when there
is not the least breath of Wind to discompose it: St. Mark telling us of him,
chap. 3. 5. that he looked upon the Pharisees with grief and anger, when he
considered the hardness of their hearts. But his Passion swole much higher,
when he found Men buying and selling in the Temple, and converting a Church
into a Den of Thieves: For then, like the troubled Sea, it overflowed its
Banks, and overwhelmed those Persons that had disturbed it; that Zeal or Fiery
Indignation wherewith he was then possessed, prompting him to overthrow the
Tables of the Money Changers, and scourge both them and others out of it, Joh.
2.13. and so on. And indeed, when the Love of any thing has taken possession
of the Soul, and insinuated it self into its Temper, it can no more brook any
the least Affront that is offered it, than the Eye, which is the tenderest part
of the Body, can the piercing of a Needle, or of a Thorn. Forasmuch therefore
as there is so much evidence, both from Scripture and Reason, concerning the
lawfulness of Anger in it self; nothing could be pretended for the simple
condemnation of it, or indeed so much as for the making a question of its
lawfulness, if it were not for the Exceptions before-remembred. Which, though
they are not so slight as to be despised, yet neither so strong as to overthrow
the contrary Evidences; as will appear upon a Survey of them. For, be it,
first, that the Word (...), or without cause, were wanting heretofore Vid.
Drusium in locum.
in several Greek Copies, as we learn both from St. Jerome and St. Augustine;
be it, that it is not to be found in a Greek Copy in the Vatican Library, as
Lucas Brugensis Notae ad varias Lectiones edit. Graec. novi Yest.
informs us; nor yet in the Vid. Biblia Polyglotta.
Arabic and Aethiopick Versions: nay, be it (which is more than either is, or
can with Justice be affirmed by any) that it were not even now to be found in
any one Greek Copy: yet even so it could not be reasonably concluded, that all
Anger is forbidden by our Savior; because, as there are few indefinite
Propositions which do not admit of an Exception, so Anger is only forbidden in
this place, as a step toward, or disposition to that Killing which is
forbidden by this Commandment: Which (as was before-shewn) being not all
Killing whatsoever, neither can all Anger be looked upon as unlawful, but only
that which is a disposition to that Killing which is forbidden by it. And
though I think it becomes not me to call in question the Sincerity or Diligence
of the Parties beforementioned, who have given so clear a Testimony concerning
the Ancient Readings; yet as I cannot forbear to say, that all Vid. Luc. Brug.
Notas ad varias Lect. edit. Graec. Novi Test.
our present Greek Copies have it, except that beforementioned, as also the
Vid. Bibl. Polygl.
Persian and Syriack Versions, the latter whereof thought the Word (...) so
proper and significant, that it chose rather to retain than interpret it; so
neither to add, that that, and other the Arguments alleged by Grotius Annot.
in loc.
, are much to be preferred before the other. For, as it is not lightly to be
thought, that the Word (...) should be so generally received, if they had not
found upon examination that it ought to have a place in the Greek Copies; so
both they and we have the more reason to suppose it to be the true Reading,
because (as the same Grotius has observed) the Greek Interpreters, who were
most likely to know the true Greek Reading, generally read it so themselves; as
also Irenaeus Adv. Haer. li. 2. c. 56. Et non solum qui occidit, reus erit
occisionis ad damnationem, sed and qui irascitur sine causa fratri suo. Li. 4.
c. 31. Et qui irascitur fratri suo sine causa, reus erit judicio.
, in two places of his Book Adversus Hereses, and Justin Martyr Just. in dict.
epist. (...).
in his Epistle to Zenas and Serenus, as I my self have found upon examination,
and as the Words themselves by me alleged show. If there lie any just
Exception against the lawfulness of Anger in it self, it must be from that
desire of Revenge which we have said it to involve, and which therefore I will
in the next place consider.

Now though it be not to be denied, that the desire of Revenge is generally
unlawful to a Christian; yet may it be so circumstantiated, as to have nothing
of Criminalness in it, yea moreover, to be good and commendable: as for
example, when we are angry to see God dishonored, or any of his Commandments
trangressed; he who desires the punishment of these, and in his Station
endeavors it also, where there is no hopes of amendment, doing no more than
what the Love of God will naturally prompt him to. For, how can we love God
with that ardency which becomes us, and not desire the punishment of those by
whom he is slighted and contemned? And though, especially since Christianity
came in place, we cannot so safely desire the punishment of those who have been
injurious to our selves; yet as nothing forbids us to desire that also, where
Zeal of Justice prompts us to it, so neither in respect of our selves, where we
seek no more by their Punishment, than the redressing of our own Wrongs: it
being not simply evil to desire the Punishment of Offenders, but to desire it
with a mischievous intent, that is to say, for the afflicting of our Brother;
or to desire the inflicting of it otherwise than God and Reason do allow: Which
is for the most part when we desire the inflicting of it with our own Hands;
because, as the Scripture has told us, God has challenged the Execution of it
to himself, and to those who have his Authority in the World. If (as I for my
own part neither can nor will deny) few angry Persons keep within these bounds;
for which cause, of all the Passions of the Soul, I think it ought the least to
be indulged: yet I no way doubt, a good and virtuous Man may so restrain his
Anger, as not to desire the Punishment of the injurious Party, any farther than
the Glory of God does require, or the Reparation of his own Losses Witness such
Persons easy admittance of a Satisfaction, and sometimes of a mere Verbal
Acknowledgment; whereas, on the other side, evil Men will not be appeased,
unless they see the injurious Person suffer as much, or more than they
themselves have, yea, though there does not thereby accrue to them any
Reparation of their own Losses. Now, forasmuch as Anger, generally speaking,
has not only the Verdict of Reason and Scripture to evince it to be lawful,
but is fairly defensible from those Exceptions which are made against it; I
think it but just to suppose, that all Anger is not sinful: and, upon that
account, go on to inquire,

3. What Anger is to be accounted such, the third thing proposed to be inquired
into. For the resolution whereof, we must distinguish between such Motions of
it as the Philosophers call motus primo-primi, or the first stirrings of Anger,
and the more deliberate efforts of it. If the Question be concerning the first
stirrings of Anger, which the same Philophers compare to the twinkling of the
Eyes, upon any sudden Violence that approaches them; so, no doubt can remain,
but that they are generally lawful, because no less necessary than that
twinkling of the Eyes before spoken of, and antecedent to any free Consent of
the Will: It being difficult Hieron. ep. ad Demetriadem. Difficile quin potius
impossible perturbationum initiis carere quempiam, quas significantius Graeci
(...) vocant. Vid. Grot. in Mat. 5.22.
, or rather impossible, to be without those beginnings of perturbation which
the Greeks call (...), when any thing is offered to excite them. Only, as
Custom, which is a second Nature, and Grace, which is above it, may contribute
not a little to the repressing of them; so, if we do not make use of the one,
and implore the other, in order to the restraining of them, they will be so far
looked upon as voluntary, and therefore also as sinful, if they pass the bounds
of Reason. But then, if the Question be concerning those efforts of Anger which
precede not the free Consent of the Will, but, on the contrary, are subject to
its control; these, as they are not purely natural, so they may be either
lawful, or unlawful, according as they shall be found to be circumstantiated.
Forasmuch therefore as these are capable of being vicious, we will now inquire
when they do become so: Which is,

1. When they are rash and precipitate. For, beside that that Anger which is
so, is a direct contradiction to the Scripture, which commands in one place Jam
1.19.
to be slow to wrath, and in another Eccl. 7.9.
, not to be hasty in our spirit, it lays us open, as Aristotle Nicomach. l. 4.
c. 5. (...).
observes, to the commission mission of all those irregularities whereof the
Anger of Man is capable. For, Anger naturally hurrying Men to the prosecution
of all those things which are grateful to its own Vindictive Humor, what
should hinder it, where it stays not to deliberate, from venting its own
Inordinacies, as well against whom, and for what, and after what measure it
does not become it to be severe, as where there is a just ground for it in all?
Neither is the Voice of Experience any whit different in this Affair from the
Voice of Reason and Discourse: For, who ever yet saw a hasty Person observe a
Mean in any thing, so long as his Passion continued? If we inquire concerning
those who are to be the Objects of our Anger, these make all Persons such, yea
even bruit Beasts, nay, inanimate Creatures: if concerning the Grounds of it,
they are angry for any thing, for nothing, for but coming in their way, or
speaking to them, though upon never so just and necessary an occasion: lastly,
if of the Measure, they are angry beyond Reason, and against it, they commit
all the Indecencies which it is possible for any rational Man to be guilty of,
they fall into absurd, reproachful, and sometimes blasphemous Speeches. If
there be any thing good in a hasty Spirit, it is, as the same Aristotle Arist.
ubi supra (...).
observes, that as as their Fury is very extravagant whilst it lasts, so it is
not of any long continuance: Which yet (as he Arist. ubi supra (...).
there goes on) is not so great a commendation of it, as is commonly both
thought and represented; it being not much to be wondered, that their Passion
should not be of long continuance, who retain not their Wrath at all, but do
immediately wreck its Fury upon their Opposites.

2. Next to the precipitateness of Anger, subjoyn we the causelesness thereof,
as in which our Blessed Savior particularly places its Inordinacy: by which I
do not mean its being without any cause at all (for who is there that is so
provoked?) but the being angry vainly and foolishly, as Hesychius Hesych. Lex.
(...), etc.
interprets the Word, and without any rational ground for such a Resentment; as
if a Man should be angry because another treads upon his Shadow, or it may be
throws Straws in his way; things which a wise Man would either take no notice
of, or pass by with contempt and pity. But such, though not of the same
trifling nature, is that Anger which is stirred by a great but casual Mischief,
or by Words that proceeded from the mere inadvertency of the Speaker; by Men's
differing from us in Opinion in matters of no great weight, or expressing their
Conceits after another manner: these things having nothing of real evil in
themselves, and much less of injuriousness to us. Of the same nature is,
secondly, that Anger which arises from slight provocations, such I mean as
bring no considerable detriment either to our Persons, or Reputations, or
Fortunes; from an unkind word let fall in the heat of Discourse; or, in fine,
from any thing else that is a common Infirmity of Humane Nature. Not but that
these things are evil in themselves, and to us; but that they are in a manner
unavoidable, and such as we our selves are sometime or other guilty of. The
former whereof, as it leaves no place for Anger, which supposes, that that
which stirred it, might have been avoided by the injurious Person; so the
latter carries its own Excuse in it, and such as will either exempt the
injurious Person from blame, or reflect it upon the angry one. For, if the
Error by which we are stirred, be a common Frailty, it ought in reason to have
a common and uniform reception, and we must either be contented to be condemned
Justin. Martyr. in ep. ad Zenam and Serenum. -- (...).
our selves, which we shall hardly think reasonable, considering the infirmity
of our own Nature; or acquit those that are but alike guilty. Add hereunto,
thirdly, (because though just enough in it self, yet is not so, if we consider
the Person by whom it is stirred) that Anger which arises from some one or two
greater provocations of a Friend, or of one by whom we have been much more
obliged. For, as Friendship and Beneficence are things of so great worth, that
whosoever is sensible of them, must think much ought to be pardoned to it; so
especially when the Errors are not many, and have been much outdone by the
Kindnesses we have received. For though the Injury, as such, may be apt to stir
us; yet surely not when there is so much more to restrain us, and for one real
Unkindness, we have received many signal Favors. From whence, as it will
appear, that it was not without great reason that Aristotle makes the Persons
with whom we are angry to be a necessary part of our consideration; so, that it
ought to be a very great provocation, which can license a deliberate Anger
against a kind and indulgent Parent, a gracious Prince, or one who has been
the Author of our Fortunes.

3. We are now arrived at the last Vice of Anger, which is when it exceeds the
measure due to it: For the understanding whereof, we are to consider it, 1.
With relation to the Cause. 2. To the Rules of Sobriety and Prudence: And, 3.
Lastly, To the Continuance: Because in each of these our Anger may exceed, and
so pass into unlawful and disorderly.


I begin with the first of these, because nearest of kin to the foregoing Vice,
and because we shall need no other Argument to evince our Anger to be unlawful,
when it exceeds the merit of the Cause. For, if we may not be angry without a
cause, neither may we be angry beyond it; all Anger being so far causeless,, as
it exceeds the Provocation which occasioned it. The only difficulty will be to
know when our Anger does so exceed; which must be left to every Man to
determine. This only may be said in the general, That as a lesser Provocation
must have a lesser Anger, and a greater Provocation a greater; so, whether the
Provocation be greater or lesser, will best be estimated by the consideration
of the Circumstances of the Time when it is given, of the Persons by whom, the
Place where, and the Mischiefs that accrue to us by it. But other determination
than that, as it will be impossible to give, amidst the variety of
Circumstances wherewith a Provocation may be attended; so I will not add any
thing more, save that Prudence, as well as Equity, will advise, rather to go
less in our Anger, than more, and to proportion it not so much by the Dictates
of our own distempered Breasts, which are for the most part very unfaithful
Counselors, as by the Advice of disinteressed Persons, and the Examples of
good and prudent Men.

From that Anger which exceeds the Merits of the Cause, pass we to that which
transports us beyond the bounds of Sobriety and Prudence, and makes us absurd
in our Behavior. Of which nature are all those actions which are before
observed in hasty men, but are common to other angry persons with them; such as
are the being angry with any man whatsoever that comes in our way, yea, even
with Inanimate Creatures themselves. Which, if not sins in themselves, yet are
infallible indications of one, inasmuch as they declare the mind within to be
more than ordinarily distempered, and to have passed those bounds which God and
Nature have set it. So true is that which the Heathen Poet has taught us, that
Anger is a short madness. Herein only they differ, that Madness is oftentimes
innocent, but both of them offer violence to our Reason.

One only excess of anger remains, by which we have said our anger to become
vicious, and that is, when it continues longer upon us than it ought. Which is
first, when it continues with us after a satisfaction is offered, or, where
that cannot be made, an humble and hearty acknowledgment is: The former in its
own nature, taking away the cause of our anger, the latter, by virtue of the
precepts of Christianity, which enjoins upon us the forgiving of injuries, if
they, who have committed them, return and repent. The same is to be said of
that anger which continues, even after it has procured the due punishment of
the injurious Person; such an anger being unjust, because importing a desire of
a farther revenge, than is due to the measure of the offense. And though I am
of opinion that Grotius spoke not amiss, when he interpreted that of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.26. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, by, let it not be
protracted longer than its due time, supposing the Apostle to allude to that of
Deuteronomy. 24.15. where command is given by God, not to let the Sun go down upon the
Hirelings wages, meaning thereby (as the foregoing words persuade) that it
should be given him at his day, and when it was due, lest for the want of it he
cry unto the Lord against his Master: Yet when I consider with my self, that
the former part of those words, Be ye angry and sin not, is taken out of the
4th. Verse of the 4th. Psalm, according to the Septuagint version, the latter
part whereof advises that men should commune with their own hearts upon their
bed and be still, I cannot but conclude with a Learned Gentleman D. Norton
Knatchbul in loc. Animadvers. in libros Novi Testamenti.
of our own Nation, that more than that is intended in it, even, that the heat
of our fury should pass over before the Even-tide, because that is a time of
Prayer and Meditation which require a sedate and well composed Soul, as also
that we should be by that time in a disposition to forgive, because, in those
and all our other prayers, taught to beg forgiveness of God upon no other
terms, than the forgiving of our Brethren.

4. The order of my Discourse now leads me to enquire into the remedies of this
disorderly passion; which are 1. As much as may be to forbid entrance,
especially in our own Concernments. For though anger be not in it self sinful,
yet it aproacheth so very near to it, and is so hardly to be kept from it, that
it were much better for the most part not to be at all, than to venture those
evils to which it exposes us. Now this we may in some measure procure by
reflecting upon the evils which usually follow where it is admitted; but more
especially by preventing that which may prove an incentive to it. After the
same manner that we find Pomponius to have done, who having intercepted the
letters of Sertorius, wherein he knew were the names of his chiefest enemies,
threw them into the fire, and would not read them, lest he should meet with
somewhat in them that might stir his indignation; Or he in Plutarch, who,
having several curious Glasses sent him, threw them presently against the
ground, lest (as he answered one who inquired the reason of it) he should be
afterward angry with his Servants who sometime or other would have done the
same. 2. But because, as was before said, it is both lawful to be angry, and
sometimes impossible not to be so, I shall choose rather to advise the
moderation of it by all those ways which Reason or Religion can suggest; Such
as are the representing to our selves how ill immoderate anger becomes others,
and into what indecencies it does ordinarily betray them; the weaning of our
selves from the love of earthly things, from which, as all other Wars, so this
of anger does proceed; the entertaining (as becomes us) a modest opinion of our
selves, because anger does mostly arise from an overweaning conceit of our own
excellencies. In fine, the reflecting upon our own errors, which are
oftentimes not inferior to theirs with whom we are displeased, and the both
great need we have of the pardon of the Almighty for them* and the
impossibility of attaining it, without affording the like to others. For
certainly that man must be more displeased with himself than others, if he can
be immoderately angry, when it is so much more to his own prejudice.


PART VI.
Of reproachful Speeches, where is shown from the Example of our Savior and
his Apostles, that all reproachful Speeches are not unlawful, as, from our
Savior's annexing the Prohibition of them to that of Anger, that such only are
so as arise from the Anger by him condemned. The ground of their Prohibition
here; their taking away that which is the life of Life it self, even Men's good
Name, and not seldom tending toward, if not actually procuring the destruction
of the other. The murder of the Soul to be reckoned to the present
Prohibition, as both properly enough such, and more pernicious than the other.
This effected by tempting men to destructive courses, by giving then an ill
Example, by Scandal, or forbearing of Reproofs. An address to the declaring of
what sins are included in Self-murder, which are, The neglect of our health,
The exposing our selves to unnecessary dangers, Intemperances and Debauches,
Eating or Drinking such things as are prejudicial to our health, Taking
immoderate Cares, or using immoderate Labors or Studies; In fine, the neglect
of such Remedies as Nature or Art have taught men for the removal of their
Distempers. The conclusion of the whole with the criminalness of Murder, in
order whereunto is alleged Gods requiring the life of Man, even of Beasts, and
the Athenians sitting in judgment upon that wall which should happen to be the
destruction of it.

HAVING entreated at large in my last of the passion of Anger, and both shown
it to have a place in the present prohibition, and discovered its Malady and
its Cure; it remains that we address our selves to the consideration of
reproachful language, as being alike reckoned by our Savior to it. For my more
orderly explication whereof, I will enquire, 1. Whether all reproachful
speaking be to be looked upon as forbidden by him, or 2. If not, what
reproachful speaking is, and 3. Lastly, How that which is forbidden by him,
becomes a violation of this Commandment.


1. That all reproachful Speeches are not to be looked upon as forbidden by our
Savior, the frequent use of those compellations in Scripture which he expressly
prescribes, may serve for an abundant evidence. For did not our Savior
himself, than whom no man ever spoke, either more calmly, or more
considerately, did not he (I say) bestow the titles of Fools and blind upon
those who accounted it something to swear by the gold of the Temple, but not so
by the Temple that sanctified it? Mat. 23.17. As in like manner upon those who
thought it of force to swear by the Gift, but of none at all by the Altar that
sanctified it, verse. 19. of the same. Nay did he not even after his
Resurrection, and when he may be supposed to have put off so much as their
innocent infirmities, call his Disciples themselves fools, for not believing
what the Prophets had spoken Luke? 24.15. But it will be said it may be, that
our Savior was an extraordinary person, and so not obnoxious himself to those
Rules which he prescribed to others. Yet certainly the like cannot be said for
his Disciples, and much less for those upon whom his commands were immediately
laid. Which notwithstanding, we shall find, that even these were not sparing
upon occasion of those reproachful compellations which were expressly forbidden
by their Master. I appeal for the proof hereof to that of St. James where he
gives the title of Rakah or empty Hesych. (...) seu potius (...) LXX. Jud.
11.3. (...) pro (...)
person to those who reli'd upon a naked Faith. For will thou know (says he)
(...), that Faith without Works is dead, chap. 2. 20. Nay I appeal to St. Paul
who gives the Galatians the title of Fools, that much more reproachful term,
and threatened with a severer penalty. For, O Foolish Galatians (says he) who
has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth? Gal. 3.1. And again,
verse. 3. Are ye so foolish and unreasonable, as having begun in the Spirit, to
think to be made perfect by the Flesh? For though the Apostle does not make use
of the same word that our Savior, or at least the Evangelist did, yet he uses
one (...) Hesych. Lex. (...). sen potius (...).
that is tantamount, if yet it be not more piquant than the other. Add
hereunto, which are alike, or more contumelious, our Saviors calling the
Scribes and Pharisees by the name of Hypocrites, and a generation of Vipers, as
St. Peter by the name of Satan, his Apostle St. Paul's stiling Elymas a child
of the Devil, and an enemy of all righteousness; all which, with the like
expressions, show plainly enough, that neither did the Master himself mean to
adjudge all, calling Rakah or Fool, to the danger of the Council and Hell fire,
nor those that were his Scholars understood him so. Forasmuch therefore as all
reproachful speaking cannot be looked upon as forbidden, as having been
sometime used, both by our Savior himself and his Apostles; proceed we to
enquire what is to be looked upon as such, the second thing proposed to be
discoursed of.

2. For the resolution whereof, we shall need to go no farther than the words
immediately preceding the prohibition of it. For, forbidding not simply and
absolutely that Anger from which reproachful Speeches flow (...). Ar^s^^. apud
Grot. A^not. in Mat. 5.22.
, but such only as was either rash, or causeless, or immoderate, he must
consequently be supposed to forbid no other reproachful speaking than which had
such an Anger for its Parent. Which by the way will not only show what
reproachful speaking we are to understand, when we find our Savior condemning
it to the danger of the Council and of Hellfire, and St. Paul 1 Cor. 5.11. --
6.9.
excluding those that are guilty of it from the Society of Christians and
Heaven, but with how little reason also the Examples of our Savior and his
Apostles are sometime alleged in patronage of our own excesses in this
particular. For, beside that, our Savior and his Apostles were public
Persons, and to whom therefore it appertained, as well to chastise Offenders
with reproaches, as to execute other severities upon them; those reproaches of
theirs were far from being the issue of that Anger which we have shown to be
forbidden by our Savior. Not of a rash and precipitate one, because many of
them let fall by them in their writings; but all of them when they were
employed about Sacred matters, wherein it is hard to conceive but that they had
their wits about them; Not of a causeless anger, because having some notorious
crime for their ground See Mat. 23. throughout.
, or some opinion See the forealledged places out of St. James and the Epistle
to the Galathians.
which was destructive of that Religion which our Savior came to commend.
Lastly, not of an immoderate Anger, because at the same time giving no
contemptible testimonies of the love they bear to the reproached parties.
Witness our Saviors admonishing the Pharisees in that very Chapter, where he
calls them Fools, and Blind, and Hypocrites, and a Generation of Vipers, to
cast off their hypocrisy, to Mat. 23.26. compared with Luke 11.41, etc.
cleanse the inside as well as the outside of the Platter; Witness St. John
Baptist's calling upon the same Pharisees, and with the very same breath, he
gives them the title of Generation of Vipers, to bring forth fruits meet for
Repentance, Mat. 3.7, 8. Lastly, witness St. James and St. Paul's instructing
those Fools they wrote to, to deposite those their distempers, and become wise
unto God and unto Salvation. Which shows that their anger, and consequently
reproachful speaking, was not without a mixture of kindness, or rather that it
had that in part for the fountain of it. And indeed, as Origin Philocal. c. 27.
sometime spoke concerning God, that those whom he is not angry with when they
sin, he is therefore not angry with them because he is extremely such, (...);
So may we of our Savior and his Apostles: If they had not applied those Goads
of Racha and Fool to the dull and drowsy sinner, they had showed themselves
much more displeased with them, because suffering them so to continue
unmolested in those Errors and Impieties, which would have infallibly exposed
them to the danger of the Council and of Hell fire. The result of the premises
is this, that as there is not the least appearance of the lawfulness of those
Reproaches, even to public Persons, which are the issues of a rash, or
causeless, or immoderate Anger, so there is far less appearance of their being
lawful to private Persons, who are generally to leave the chastising of
Offenders to the other.

3. What reproachful Speeches are forbidden, you have seen already, even those
which proceed from a rash, or causeless, or immoderate Anger; enquire we
therefore in the next place, how those, which are so, become violations of this
Commandment. Where not again to tell you, that they incline the Person against
whom they are directed, to take up murtherous purposes against the Reviler,
because, though that may be enough to reduce it to the Commandment, yet it
makes rather the reviled, than Revilers the direct violatours of it, as neither
to insist upon our Saviors making the prohibition of Rakah and Fool an
Appendix to it, because that rather proves it to be a violation, than shows how
it does become so; I shall consider, 1. The nature of that good name which
reproachful Speeches blast. For, though a Good Name be not the life of the
possessour of it, yet is it so necessary to the well Being of it, that he, who
endeavors to take it away, may be looked upon as a Murderer for so doing;
because robbing a man of that which is the life of life it self, and without
which whosoever is, is dead to all happiness, and to the world. Again, 2.
Though the Sword of the reproachful person (I mean his reviling tongue) be not
ordinarily of force enough to cut that knot which God and Nature has knit
between the Soul and Body; yet as instances might be produced where it has
actually done it, and where men have died of no other wounds than what a
malicious Tongue gave them; so, where it has not that effect upon the
reproached Party, it is rather for want of ability than will, so to wreck their
fury upon the Enemy: It being not so much, because they are otherwise resolved,
but because they either cannot, or dare not show their fury in effects, that
they revenge themselves of their Enemies with their tongues. Whence it is, that
no persons have been observed to be of more intemperate tongues than those of
the Female Sex, or weak and pusillanimous men. The sequel of which discourse
will be, that though the reviler be not always a Murderer in fact, yet he is
in heart, which is enough to bring him within the compass of the Commandment.

Of Murder, properly so called, and of the Sins included in it, what has been
said may suffice, and therefore I will supersede all farther consideration of
it. But because the Scripture makes mention of another Murder, even the
murder of the Soul, by which, though it be not altogether deprived of Life,
yet it is of the comforts of it, and thereby made much more miserable than if
it were not at all, therefore it may not be amiss to enquire, whether that also
have not a place in the prohibition, and how men become guilty of it.

Now there are two things which persuade the Murder whereof we speak to come
within the compass of the prohibition now before us. 1. That what we call the
murder of the Soul, is properly enough such, and 2. That it is a more
pernicious one, than the other. That the Murder whereof we speak, is properly
enough such, is evident, not only from the Scriptures giving that State the
name of death into which this Murder brings men, but also from the very nature
of it. For, as Murder properly so called, becomes such, not by the taking away
of all Life; for the Soul, which is the chiefest part of Man, lives no less
after that than before, but by the destruction of that natural Life, which he,
from whom we take it, enjoyed as to the present World; so the murder of the
Soul, as we commonly express it, though it introduce not a perfect
insensibility, yet it despoils it of that spiritual Life which it enioys in
this present state, and which is more, of that also of which it is capable in
the next. It is no less evident, Secondly, That, supposing what we speak of to
be a Murder, it is a much more pernicious one than the other, because, as that
Life which it takes away is a much better one than the other, so it draws after
it an eternity of torment. Now, forasmuch as the Murder whereof we speak, is
not only properly enough such, but a much more pernicious one than the other,
it is easy to suppose, or rather impossible to suppose otherwise, than that
he, who forbad the one, intended also the avoiding of the other; especially
having before shown, that the Commandments, of which this is one, were intended
as a summary of the whole Duty of Man. All therefore that remains to enquire
into, upon this head, is, how men become guilty of it, which will require no
very accurate consideration to resolve.

For to say nothing of those who have the cure of Souls (though of all others
the most obnoxious to it) partly, because they are not under mine, and partly,
because they are better able to inform themselves, I shall content my self at
present with pointing out those ways whereby private persons may come to be
guilty of it, which is 1. By prompting men to, or encouraging them in those
sinful courses which draw after them the destruction of the Soul: That which
gave the Devil the title of a murderer from the beginning (as he is called Joh.
8.44.) being no other, than that, as the story of Genesis informs us, he
solicited our first Parents to eat of that Fruit from which both their
temporal and spiritual Death ensued. 2. The same is to be said of giving an ill
example, and thereby drawing other Men into the commission of the like Crimes:
an evil Example not only having the Nature of a Temptation, but being also of
greater force than any other; inasmuch as it does more undiscernably instill
its Poison, and finds Men more ready to receive it: It being a known and
undoubted Truth, that Men regard not so much what they ought, or what they are
advised to, as what they see others do before them. 3. Add hereunto, because of
near affinity with the other, the doing any thing, how innocent soever, whereby
our weak brother may be tempted to do the like against his own Conscience: Such
as was, for example, the eating of Meats sacrificed to Idols, in the presence
of those who were not so well informed of their Christian Liberty. For though,
as St. Paul spoke concerning it, 1 Cor. 8.4. there was no unlawfulness in the
thing it self; and consequently therefore nothing in it, but the Conscience of
the Idol to unhallow it: yet might the doing thereof by a strong Christian, be
a temptation to a weak one to do the like, if not against, yet without a due
assurance of his own Conscience: Which as St. Paul has elsewhere Romans 14.23.
pronounced to be damnable, and so destructive of that Soul which is guilty of
it; so both there Romans ver. 15.20.
, and here 1 Cor. 8.11.
, he charge the guilt of its destruction upon those who should so embolden it
to offend. 4. And though the like care of other Men be not incumbent upon
private Christians, as is upon those Persons whom God has more particularly
entrusted with the inspection of them; yet inasmuch as by the Laws both of
Nature and Christianity, they are commanded to reprove an offending Brother,
and not suffer sin to be upon him; he that shall suffer such a one to perish
for want of a seasonable and just admonition, shall be so far chargeable with
his destruction, whom he did not endeavor to reclaim.


What is meant by Thou shall not kill, as that is to be understood of the
killing another, has been at large declared, together with the several Sins
that are included in it: Nothing remains toward the completing of my
Discourse, but to show what Sins are included in the killing of our selves.
Where,

1. First of all, I shall reckon the neglect of our Health, because a step to
that Self-murder which is here forbidden. For, though that for the most part
be looked upon as an Imprudence, rather than any violation of the Commandments
of our Maker; yet it is because Men consider not that there is a Duty owing by
them to themselves, or rather unto God concerning them. They are (as I have
before remarked) placed in this World by God; they are put into a capacity of,
and enjoined the serving of their Maker in it; and being so, are in reason to
intend the performance of it, and (because that cannot otherwise be procured)
to intend also the preservation of themselves: the neglect of that not only
making Men more unapt for it whilst they live, but cutting them off before
their time.

2. To the neglect of our Health, subjoyn we the exposing our selves to
unnecessary dangers, and where nothing but vainglory, or the desire of filthy
Lucre, prompts us to it: such as are many of those Dangers which they who
profess Feats of Activity, do without the least scruple involve themselves in.
For, as it is rare for such Persons (to what Agility soever they may have
attained) not to procure their own destruction in the end; so, many of the
Dangers to which they expose themselves, are so imminent, that they must always
be thought to run the hazard of their own destruction: Which, though it be not
a Self-murder, yet is in a disposition to it, and consequently to be thought
to be forbidden with the other: He who forbids any Action, at least with any
severity, being in reason to be thought to forbid that which has a natural
tendency to it; because where that is not carefully avoided, it will be hard to
avoid the other.

3. The same is to be said, and with far greater reason, of all great
Intemperances and Debauches. For, beside that the intemperate Man, no less than
the former, runs the hazard of his Life oftentimes, partly by that
Quarrelsomness to which his Intemperances do incline him, and partly by that
Stupidity and Insensibleness which he does thereby contract, his Intemperance
does of its own nature help to shorten his Life, and so make him more literally
a Murderer of himself: Witness the Consumptions, and other fatal Diseases,
which such Persons do often fall into, through the mere force of their
Intemperances and Debauches: Of which, as Death is sure to be the consequent,
so it matters not much, as to the Crime of Self-murder, whether it happen
sooner or later: He being no less truly a Murderer who (after the manner of
some Italians) gives a Poison which shall not have its effect till after many
Months, than he who gives one which shall kill within an Hour.

4. Add hereunto all eating or drinking such things as are prejudicial to our
Health, however not such either in themselves, or to other Men; and (which is
not so often thought of) but ought equally to be considered, the taking of
immoderate Cares, or using of immoderate Labors or Studies. For, beside the
other Irregularities wherewith these things are commonly attended, they do all
of them confer to the destruction of those by whom they are used, and
consequently become Violations of this Commandment. And I cannot but upon this
occasion call to mind a Saying The Life of Father Paul, etc. p. 169.
of a Venetian Gentleman to the famous Father Paul, with whom he had contracted
a Religious Friendship: For, observing that most excellent Person always
confining himself to his Cell, and there wearing away himself with perpetual
Study, he ^^uck not to tell him in plain Terms ( as he was never wont to speak
to him in a Mask Lodato iddio, che ho pur trovato uno che mi parla non in
maschera. Ib.
, as the same Father Paul was wont to express it) That that unintermitted
course of reading and writing was a kind of Intemperance, as was heretofore his
Amorettes and Wantonnesses. Here only was the difference, that Opinion gave a
Title of Lewdness to the one, but to the other Names of Honor. And indeed, as
that more sober Intemperance shows a Man the Indulger of his Affections, no
less than they who addict themselves to more ignoble Pleasures; so it
contributes alike to the shortning of our Lives, and consequently to the
violation of the Commandment. This only would be added, That as there may be
some Works of great importance to Religion, which require a more than ordinary
dispatch; so, if those whom God has fitted with proportionable Abilities,
shall shorten their Lives in the composing of them, as it is said of the
Judicious Hooker, as to his Books of Ecclesiastical Polity, they shall be so
far from being to be looked upon as Felo's de se, that they ought to be had in
the reputation of Martyrs.

5. There is but one Sin remaining of those that are included in Self murder,
and that is, the neglect of such Remedies as Nature and Art have taught Men,
for the removal of those Distempers into which we fall: He who honors not
the Physician in such a Case, being a kind of Murderer of himself, because
neglecting those Remedies whereby he might be preserved. And though the Book of
Ecclesiasticus be no Canonical one, nor as such represented by that Church
whereof we are Members; yet I cannot forbear to say, that it contains in it
many Canonical Truths, and particularly, as to this matter whereof we are
entreating. For, inasmuch as St. James tells us, Every good and perfect gift is
from above, what should hinder us from concluding, as that Author does, that
Ecclus. 38.14.
God has created both the Medicine and him that prescribes it; that Ecclus.
ver. 6.
he has given Men Skill, that both they and he may be honored in those happy
Effects which it produces, and Ecclus. ver. 7.
those which stand in need of it, may be preserved by it? Care only would be
taken, as the same Ecclus. ve. 9, etc.
Wiseman advises, that we neglect not to seek unto God by ardent Prayer for
our Recovery; to which I shall add, neither the imploring of theirs whom God
has appointed to mediate on our behalf; that we leave off from sin, and order
our hands aright, and cleanse our heart from all wickedness. For, as these are
both the primary and most sovereign Remedies of our Distempers, because it is
from God that both those Distempers and the Redress thereof comes; so, the
neglect of them must therefore be looked upon as the pulling of Death upon us
with our own Hands, and (which is more to be dreaded) of Eternal Ruin.

Being now to put an end to my Discourse upon this Commandment, and those Sins
which I have shown it to forbid, Reason would that, since I cannot do the like
for all, I should endeavor to stir up in you a just abhorrency of that Crime
which this Commandment does especially condemn. Now, though that might be
competently procured by the repetition of those Arguments whereby I have before
evinced the Criminalness thereof; yet because I am unwilling to present you
with the same things again, and thereby rather nauseate than invite your
Attention; and because there is yet an Argument of the Criminalness of Murder,
beside what I have before insisted on; I think it not amiss to set it now
before you, and leave you to guess at the hainousness of that Sin by it: Which
is, That however unreasonable Creatures cannot be said to sin, because
whatsoever they do, they do by the force of that Natural Instinct by which they
are guided in all their Actions; yet if at any time they happened to kill a Man,
they were by the Law of God to fall no less under the Hand of Justice, than
those who had both Reason and Religion to restrain them from it. For, to say
nothing at all of the Law of Moses, by virtue of which if an Ox gored a Man
that he died, the Ox it self was to be slain, and the Flesh thereof cast away
as an abomination, Exodus 21.28, 29. By that more Catholic Law given to Noah,
the Blood of Men's Lives was to be required of Beasts, no less than of the
Owners of them: For, Surely (says God, Genesis 9.5.) your Blood of your Lives
will I require: at the hand of every Beast will I require it, and at the hand
of Man; and at the hand of every Man's Brother will I require the Life of Man.
And though, after the Law of God, we need not make any farther Inquisition,
because we know all such not to have been without just Grounds; yet I think it
not amiss to add, if it were only for its affinity thereto, a like Law See
Hales Sermon of Duels, p. 82. of his Remains.
of the Commonwealth of Athens, the purport whereof was, That if only a Wall
had by chance fallen down and killed a Man, the Judges of that place were to
sit upon and arraign it, and, upon conviction, throw the Stones thereof out of
the Country. By which procedure of theirs, as they gave sufficient testimony
how sacred a thing they esteemed the Life of Man to be; so when we have a more
convincing testimony from the Laws of God, we must be strangely unreasonable,
if we allow our selves in offering violence to it.

THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT.
THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not commit adultery.

PART I.
The Contents.
The Crime here forbidden, the Violation of the Marriage Bed; for which cause,
as well as for the discovery of the Affirmative part of the Commandment,
inquiry is made into the Importance, Institution, and Laws of Marriage. That
defined to be A Compact between a Man and a Woman, of Cohabitation during Life,
for the comfort of Society, and the propagation of Children: And inquiry
thereupon made, Whether it be of Divine Institution. This resolved, by
considering that Institution, either with reference to all that are of years to
enter into that State, or to such only as intend a Cohabitation with the
Female Sex. In the former of which respects is made appear, That though in the
Infant-state of the World it was of universal concernment, yet it is not now;
as because there is not now the same reason for it, so because our Savior has
declared our absolution from it: In the latter is shown, That it originally
was, and now is of universal Obligation; as is evidenced at large in every
Branch of its Definition. Inquiry is next made into the Laws of Marriage, and
particularly into such as respect the due contracting of it: Where is shown,
first, in respect of the Persons contracting, That the Marriage ought to be
between one Male and one Female, and the Polygamy of the Patriarchs answered;
That it ought to be between those who are not too near of kin; where the
Degrees prohibiting Marriage, and the Grounds of that Prohibition are declared;
That the Persons contracting be of years sufficient to understand the Nature of
it, of ability of Body where there is a desire and expectation of Children, and
free and unconstrained in their Choice: In fine, That they be so far at least
of one Persuasion in Religion, that they may join both in Private and Public
Prayers; the general necessity whereof is at large exemplified and
demonstrated. A Consideration of those Laws that respect the Contract it self;
where is shown, That it ought to be made before one or more Witnesses, and
agreeably to the Constitutions of Church and State; That it is at least highly
expedient, that it be solemnized by a Priest, and with such significant Actions
as the joining of Hands, and the like.

THE Persons of Men being secured by the former Precept, from the attaque of
greater and lesser Violences, Reason would that this Law of Love should proceed
to secure them from any Injury in those who are joined to them by Marriage;
because, as in reputation of Law they are one with them, so they are naturally
tendered by them as themselves. In conformity whereto, as we find the Decalogne
proceeding, because subjoyning the Prohibition of Adultery to that of Murder,
(bearing witness thereby to its Author's Prudence, in the disposition, as well
as in the framing of his Laws); so having observed so much to you, I will
descend to the consideration of that Precept which intends the securing of us
in those our other selves.

In order whereunto, because that Crime which it forbids is nothing else than a
Violation of the Matrimonial Vow, I will, 1. First of all, entreat of the
Importance, Institution, and Laws of Marriage; which will discover to us the
Affirmative part of the Precept. 2. Show the Nature and Criminalness of
Adultery: And, 3. Lastly, inquire, Whether any other Sins are included in the
Prohibition of Adultery, and what those Sins are.


1. Of the Importance of Marriage much need not be said, at least as to that
sense wherein we are to take it in this whole Discourse; the general Notion of
Marriage, as well as our own private one, being, That it is a Compact between a
Man and a Woman, of Cohabitation during Life, for the comfort of Society, and
the Propagation of Children. The only thing which will require any large
Explication is, Whether such a Compact be of Divine Institution, and by what
Laws it ought to be governed.

2. For the resolution of the former whereof, these two things must be again
inquired into, because alike comprehended in it.

1. Whether or no it be of Divine Institution for all Persons to enter into it,
which are arrived to years of maturity: Or, 2. If not, Whether it be of Divine
Institution for them who intend any such Cohabitation with those of the other
Sex.
In the handling of both which (as in like manner of all that follows) I will
use all the cleanness of Expression imaginable, as judging it ill becoming
those who persuade Purity to other Men, to offend against it in their own
Discourses concerning it.

I begin with the first of the Questions proposed, to wit, Whether or no it be
of Divine Institution, for all Persons to enter into Marriage, which are
arrived to years of maturity. Which Question I the rather put, as because the
Jews Vid. Seldom. de Jure not. and Gent. l. 5. c. 3.
were generally persuaded that Marriage was of universal obligation, so also
because that Persuasion of theirs was not without some color, even from the
Scripture it self; he who made them Male and Female, bidding them be fruitful
and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it. And indeed, if we inquire
concerning the Infant-state of the World, and before it came to be Peopled as
it is, so no doubt can remain but Marriage was under command to those who were
in a capacity to enter into it, because otherwise they should have frustrated
the Design of God, who proposed by that means not only to continue a
Succession of Men, but to diffuse the Race of them throughout the World, that
they might enjoy those Blessings wherewith his most liberal Hand had furnished
it. But, as there is not the same reason, now that the World is Peopled, and
there are enough that have espoused that State to continue the Succession of
it; so, that it is not at present of universal obligation, whatsoever it before
was, is evident from that of St. Matthew, chap. 19.12. where we have it from
our Savior himself, in that very Chapter where he inculcates the Institution
of Marriage, That as there are some Persons who are incapacitated for it by
Nature, and others who have been made so by Men; so there are some who for the
Kingdom of God's sake have abridg'd themselves of the use of it, and those that
can receive it, permitted by our Savior to do it. When therefore the Question
is concerning the Institution of Marriage, it is requisite we understand it
with relation not to all Persons whatsoever, but to those who intend such a
Cohabitation with the other Sex, as Marriage does naturally involve.

Now that Marriage, so understood, is of Divine Institution, and all other
Cohabitations unlawful, will appear, if we consider either that Cohabitation we
have affirmed it to covenant for, or the Covenant it self. For, it being
evident from the Book of Genesis, that God at the beginning made Male and
Female for each others mutual help, and the propagation of Children by them;
and it being further evident, both from the Words of the Institution, and our
Savior's Explication of it in the place before-quoted, that God intended not
either a promiscuous or desultory Enjoyment of each other, but of Mat. 19.4, 5.
certain Persons, and such to which they should be obliged to cleave; it being
evident, thirdly, from our Savior, that that Adhesion is to be understood not
of one to more Persons, but of one to one, because he afterward subjoyns, Mat.
19.5.
And they twain shall be one flesh: lastly, it being evident that our Savior
does not only not rescind that first Institution, but confirm it Mat. 19.4.8,
etc.
and bind it upon the necks of his Disciples: it will follow, That the
individual Cohabitation of a Man with a Woman, for the purposes before spoken
of, is so of Divine Institution, that all others are utterly unlawful. Again,
Forasmuch as both the Scripture Pro. 2.17. Mal. 2.14.
every where supposes in Marriage the entering into covenant concerning it; and
that Adhesion which Marriage involves requires it; there being no assurance to
either Party of so long a Cohabitation, if they did not bind themselves to it
by promise: it is but just to suppose, however not expressed in the
Institution, that the same God who instituted such a Cohabitation, did also
appoint their entering into Covenant for it, to give each other an assurance of
it. Which Particular is the rather to be added, lest (as the Fashion is now
adays) Men should think it enough to assume a Mate, with intention, it may be,
if all things answer their expectation, to adhere to her during Life; but
without any Obligation upon themselves to do it. For, though such an Adhesion
should happen to continue, yet inasmuch as it is without any Tie upon the
Parties, it can be none of that which is appointed, and is rather a long
Fornication, than a Marriage.

3. Of the Importance, and Institution of Marriage, I have spoken hitherto, and
both shown what it is, and that it has God for the Author of it, it remains
that we enquire by what Laws it is to be governed, which, after the explication
of the former, will be so much the more easy to resolve. In order whereunto I
will enquire, 1. What is required to the due contracting of it. 2. What is
requisite to the maintaining of it when it is so: And 3. Lastly, Whether or no,
and by what means, it may be dissolved.


I. Now there are two things, within the resolution whereof, all that is
necessary to be known, concerning the first of these, may be comprehended.

1. What Persons may contract Matrimony. 2. What is requisite to a legitimate
contracting of it, where there is no irregularity in the Persons.
And here in the first place I shall not scruple to affirm, that to make the
Marriage lawful in respect of the Persons, it ought to be not between one and
more, whether Males or Females, but between one Male and one Female. For beside
that that Law which enjoins the cleaving to the Married party, implies it to be
the cleaving of one to one, because affirming not in the general, that the
Married parties shall be one flesh, but they twain shall be one flesh; beside
that the assuming of another Husband or Wife to the former must divide that
Unity, and make him or her that Contracts, a new Relation to separate in part
from the former, whereby they can no longer be one flesh but more; our Savior,
in the close of his Discourse concerning the Institution of Marriage, adds such
an assertion as shows evidently the unlawfulness of Marrying more than one:
That I mean, which says, that whosoever shall put away his Wife, except it be
for Fornication, and shall marry another, commits Adultery, and who so
marries her that is put away commits Adultery, Mat. 19.9. For how could it
be Adultery in him, who put away his Wife to marry another, if it were lawful
to assume another to her, even before she was so; but what shadow of Adultery
in him who should only marry her that was so put away? That being not to be
looked upon as a violation of Marriage, and consequently not Adultery, which
might be done even when the Marriage was entire. To all which, if we add that
of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.4. that the Wife has not power over her own body, but
the Husband, nor again, the Husband over his, but the Wife, so the marrying of
more than one will appear yet more unlawful. For it being not ordinarily to be
thought, that either the Wife or the Husband will consent to the admission of a
Copartner, it must upon that account be looked upon as unlawful to assume a new
Relation, because, beside those persons consent who have the power over them.
And indeed so clear is the Divine Institution for the marrying of only one,
especially after our Saviors explication of it, that I persuade my self there
had not arisen the least scruple concerning it, were it not that we find
Polygamy frequently practiced by the Fathers of the Old Testament, and, which
is more, multitude of Wives reckoned to David as a blessing. But beside that,
in the infancy of the world such a practice might be more allowable, because
necessary to the peopling of it; beside, that God might dispense with his own
Institution afterward, if not for the hardness of men's hearts, as he did in
the matter of Divorce, yet in regard to that infancy of Grace, which was under
the paedagogy of the Law; the question is not, whether polygamy were sometimes
lawful, which I for mine own part do not in the least doubt of, but whether or
no it were lawful by the first Institution of Marriage, and whether it be at
all lawful now. The contrary of both which, as I have already demonstrated,
both from the words of the Institution, and those of our Blessed Savior, so
having done that, the former exception must be looked upon as trivial in
respect of that Gospel state under which we are; the Law of that both remitting
us to what Marriage was from the beginning, and adding its own suffrage to it.
I will conclude this particular with that of Malachy, because standing as it
were in the confines of the Law and Gospel. It Is in the 2. Chapter of his
Prophesies, Verse. 14. and so on, Where having alleged against the Jews, Gods
regarding not their Offering, nor receiving it with good will at their hands,
he not only assigns for the reason of it, their dealing treacherously with the
Wife of their Youth, but combats that with this following Argument. For did
not he, even God, make one, yea though he had the residue of the Spirit? that
is to say (as Drusius glosses on the words) did he not make one Male and one
Female, and when he had done so, make them one flesh? yea though, if he had
pleased, as wanting not breath to animate them, he might have made and given
more Wives to our Father Adam. And wherefore one? as the Prophet there goes on,
but that he might seek a godly seed, that is to say (as the forequoted Drusius
glosseth it) that from that one flesh, into which those two were combined, a
lawful progeny might descend.

The second Law of Marriage relating to the persons, is that those between whom
it is contracted, be not too near of kin to each other. For the understanding
whereof, we will first of all entreat of such as are to one another in the
place of Parents and Children: As if a Father, for example, should marry his
Daughter, or his Sons, or Daughters Daughter, or a Mother her Son, or her Sons,
or Daughters Son. For that such Matches are unlawful, even by the Law of
Nature, is evident from hence, that they destroy that reverence, which we have
before shown to be due from their Children to them. Thus for instance, When a
Mother marries her own Son, or Grandson, from whom, by the Laws of Nature,
there is the highest reverence due, inasmuch as, by virtue of her marriage she
subjects her self to him, she leaves no place for that reverence which was
before due unto her as a Mother. And though the like seem not to happen, where
a Father marries his Daughter, or Granddaughter, because he, who was before
Superior, continues so still, inasmuch as he is the head of her whom he so
takes unto his Wife, yet does it in part destroy that reverence, which was due
unto him as a Father: Because, though as Husband he be still head of his Child,
yet he is not in the same measure as a Father, because Marriage induces a kind
of parity between those who enter themselves into that State. The same is to be
said in some measure, where the Son marries his Fathers Wife, or the Niece and
Nephew their Uncle and Aunt; because (as was heretofore shown) they are unto
the former in the place of Parents, and consequently must needs loose the
reverence of such by being assumed into such a State as induces such a Society
that excludes it. Whence it is, that we find St. Paul not only declaiming
against that person who had Married his Fathers Wife, and representing it as a
Fornication that was not so much as named among the Gentiles, but, in
prosecution of that power wherewith he was armed, to chastise Offenders,
commanding the Church of the Corinthians to cut him off from their Society, and
so deliver him into the power of Satan for his Chastisement, 1 Cor. 5.1, 5. As
for those other degrees, whether of Consanguinity or Affinity that are
forbidden in the 18th. of Leviticus, such as are the Marrying of a whole or
half Sister, a Brothers Wife, or a former Wives Daughter, which are all,
besides those before mentioned, that are expressly forbidden by it; though the
two former, at least, have not the same exception to be made against them,
inasmuch as they seem to contain nothing contrary to natural equity, yet
because they are forbidden by that Law of God, which our Savior professes to
have come not to destroy but to fulfill, and that too (as appears by his
injunction concerning divorces) in the business of Marriage; and because the
ground of the prohibition is not peculiar to the Jewish Policy or Religion, but
the nearness of Kindred, which holds as much among us as among them. Lastly,
because if such Marriages were permitted, there might be danger of Fornication,
by reason of the free and perpetual converse that such Persons have with each
other, therefore I think no man of Conscience but must account such Marriages
as unlawful to him, as if the prohibition thereof had been entered into the
Christian Law. But other degrees than those, or at least such as are in the
same order with them as the Law of God condemns not, so neither does our Church
or State do, and therefore they, who keep within those bounds, are so far
secure from offending, as to that Marriage which they contract. One only thing
would be added concerning marrying the Brothers Wife, because it relates to a
famous instance of one of our own Kings, and that is, that as the Law of Moses
did not only permit, but command, the taking of the Brothers Wife, where there
was no Child left behind; so it seems hard to suppose among Christians, that it
should not be lawful to do the like, where not only the case is the same, as
to that particular, but (as it was in the forementioned instance) it was
inconvenient to the Kingdom to let the Brothers Wifes Dowry, either be spent
out of it, or at least go away from the Crown.

The third Law of Marriage relating to the Persons that enter into it, is, that
they be of years sufficient to understand the nature of that compact which they
make, and to estimate the humor of those Persons with whom they are to
associate: lest otherwise, that, which was intended for a help, prove a snare,
and an encumbrance, and Marriage become not only a yoke but an insupportable
one. Whence it is, that though Custom and the Laws do sometime give way to the
joining of Children in Marriage, especially of the Nobler sort, yet the same
Laws give leave to the Persons afterward to rescind their formmer Contract, if
they find not themselves in a disposition to confirm it.

Add hereunto hability of Body, where there is a desire and expectation of
Children, and a freedom of consent in those that are so to be conjoined. Which
latter is the rather to be inculcated, because of those fatal inconveniences
which arise from constrained Matches; it being very rare to find a tolerable
accord in those Matches, to which young Persons are rather compelled than
invited.

But of all the qualifications relating to the Married persons, the want
whereof does not null the Contract between them; I think there is none more
considerable than that they who Marry, be so far, at least, of one persuasion
in Religion, that they may join together both in public and private Prayers.
For though (as a Learned Man has observed See the Case of Marrying with a
Recusant, by Dr. Sanderson.
) it would be hard to condemn the contrary Matches (how distant soever their
Religions are) as simply evil and unlawful, inasmuch as there may be causes
imaginable, wherein they may seem not only lawful but expedient; such as is,
for Example, The Marrying of a Christian with a Pagan, where there is none
other to adjoin himself self to, or of a Protestant Prince with a Popish
Princess, where the good of the State does necessarily require it; yet I think
it would be as hard to free such Matches from the imputation of sinfulness,
where there is not something of necessity to prompt the Persons to it: Because,
beside the perpetual Tert. ad Vxorem, lib. 2. Quis enim dubitet obliterari
quotidie fidem commercio infideli? Bonos corrumpunt mores, confabulationes
malae: quanto magis and convictus, and individuus usus? ib. cap. 3.
danger the Orthodox party is in, of being enticed from the true Religion,
there is little probability of that entire affection and accord which the tie
of Marriage does require. For to say nothing at all of that alienation of
affection, which difference in Religion is apt of it self to produce, there is
a necessity upon the differing parties (if they will be faithful to their
several ways of Worship) to frequent different Companies, to resort to
different Assemblies, and in fine, to place their Charity upon different
Objects. Upon which, as Jealousies and Suspicions must needs arise, whether of
their fidelity to each others Beds, or of their justice in the dispensing of
the common Goods; it is impossible to think, but that those Jealousies will
also prompt them to give a check to each other in their several courses, which
will be the parent of farther differences between them. For who (as Tertull. ad
Vxorem lib. 2. p. 189. Quis autem sinat conjugem suam, visitandorum fratrum
gratia, vicatim aliena and quidem pauperior a quaeque tuguria circuire? Quis
nocturnis convocationibus, si ita oportuerit, a latere suo adimi libenter
feret? Quis denique solennibus Paschae abnoctantem securus sustinebit? Quis ad
convivium illud Domin cum quod infamant, sine sua suspicione dimittet? Quis in
carcerem ad osculanda vinculae martyris reptare patietur?
Tertullian speaks) would suffer his Wife upon pretense of visiting the
Brethren, to run up and down from house to house, and particularly to those of
the poorer sort? Who will willingly bear her being taken from his side, to be
present at nightly meetings, if occasion do so require? Who will suffer her to
lie from him at the Solemnities of Easter, or be present at that Banquet of our
Lord, which the Heathen do so defame? In fine, Who will suffer her to creep
into Prison, there to kiss the Bonds of the Martyrs? Rather than so (as the
same Father immediately before discourses) if he do not restrain her by his
Authority, yet he shall find out some means or other whereby to divert her from
her purposes. If a Station Yertull. ib. Vt si statio facienda est, maritus de
die condicat ad balneas: si jejunia observanda sunt, maritus eadem die
convrvium exerceat: si procedendum erit, nunquam magis familiae occupatio
obveniat.
, or more solemn Assembly for Prayer, be to be held, it is ten to one but the
Husband will appoint her that day to accompany him to the Bath. If a Fast be to
be observed, but that he will hold a Feast upon it. Lastly, If she be to go
abroad, whether to visit the sick, or for other such like purpose, but that
there shall then be somewhat more than ordinary to busy her about at home. On
the other side, when Husband and Wife are of the same persuasion in matters of
Religion, when they are one as well in Spirit as in Flesh, then there is not
only no dissent as to Civil matters, but a perfect accord as to Spiritual
ones, they think, and speak, and act the same things. As Tertullian expresses
it in the place before quoted, They Pray, they roll themselves in Ashes and
Fast together, they Teach, Exhort, and bear alike with each other Simul orant,
simul volutantur, and simul jejunia transigunt, alterutro docentes, alterutro
hortantes, alterutro sustinentes. In Ecclesia Dei pariter utrique, partier in
convivio Dei, pariter in angustiis, in persecutionibus, in refrigeriis. Neuter
alterum celat, neuter alterum vitat, neuter alteri gravis est. Libere aeger
visitatur, indigent sustentatur. Eleemosynae sine tormento, sacrificia sine
scrupulo, quoti diana diligentia sine impedimento. Non furtiva signatio, non
trepida gratulatio, non muta benedictio. Sonant inter duos Psalmi and Hymni,
and mutuo provocant quis melius Deo suo canter. Talia Christus videns and
audiens gaudet. His pacem suam mittit. Vbi duo, ibi and ipse: ubi and ipse, ibi
Malus non est. Tertull. ad Vxor. lib. 2. in fine.
. They are both alike in the Church, and at the Feasts of the Almighty, they
are alike in straights, in persecutions, and resreshments. Neither goes about
to conceal ought from other, neither avoids the others converse, nor is
burdensome to the other, when they afford their own. The sick is visited
freely, and without the least hinderance from the other, and the indigent
person relieved. Alms are given without any fear of the others displeasure, the
Christian Sacrifices resorted to, without giving the other the least scruple of
their unfaithfulness, the daily Prayers attended without any impediment. There
is no need of crossing ones self by stealth, of a fearful salutation, or a dumb
benediction. Psalms and Hymns sound between them two, and they provoke each
other who shall sing best unto his God. The result of which blessed harmony is,
That Christ who sees and hears all this rejoiceth at it, and forasmuch as he is
a lover of Peace and Unity, adds his Peace and Society to theirs, and both
excludes the company of the evil one, and makes up a kind of Trinity in Unity
with them.

Having thus shown what Persons may contract Matrimony, and with whom, proceed
we to enquire what is requisite to the contract it self. And, here to say
nothing at all how far the consent of Parents is required, because I have
sufficiently accounted for that, where I entreated of Childrens duties to them,
I shall first of all represent, as necessary to the legitimateness thereof,
that the compact be made before one or more witnesses. For beside that,
otherwise a way might be opened to either Party to withdraw themselves, and to
dissolve that Contract which God would have to be inviolable, occasion of
Scandal would thereby be given to those with whom they converse, because
ignorant of the grounds of that freedom of Commerce which they observe to be
between the Parties. And accordingly, as all civil Nations have provided that
Marriages should be solemnized in public, thereby both to cut off from the
Married Persons all pretexts of withdrawing from each other, and all scandal
from those with whom they converse, so I see not how they can be so legitimate
as they ought, where they are less public than the Law requires. For though
the presence of one or two Witnesses may be of force enough to oblige the
parties to a Cohabitation, yet they cannot take of the scandal, which may arise
from the clandestineness thereof.

But neither is it less requisite, that Marriages should be made agreeably to
the constitutions both of that Church and State whereof the married Persons are
Members. The latter, because the welfare of the State may depend much upon
them, as particularly in those that are Heirs or Heiresses to great Estates,
and as it sometimes happens, to a Kingdom: by the former whereof, great Estates
may come to be embezzled, by the latter, a Kingdom to be prostituted to the
arbitrament of those, who are no way in a capacity to manage it. The same is to
be said of the necessity of their being made, agreeably to the constitutions of
the Church. For the Law which God has given concerning Marriage being general,
or at least not so particular as to determine all questions that may arise
concerning it, there is a necessity of referring them to the determination of
those who are by God and the Church entrusted with the welfare of it, and
consequently, in particular Persons, of acquiescing in it.

I observe, Thirdly, that though the solemnization of Marriage by a Priest, be
not absolutely necessary to make it good and valid, upon which account we find
all those to have been confirmed See the Stat. of 12 Car. 2. c. 33.
, which in the late miserable confusions had been made another way, yet is it
of so great expediency, that I see not how any Christian State can introduce
any other, and much less how private Persons can. For beside that the
consunction of Marriage is the act of God Mat. 19.6.
and not of the Contractors, and therefore most meet to be dispensed by those
who are the Ministers of God to us in things pertaining to God, the thing it
self is of so great importance, as to our whole life, that it cannot but be
thought to require the blessing of the Priest to make it happy to the
Contracters, and his exhortations to make it holy and unblameable. For, if so
sacred a tie as Marriage be so lightly regarded, even when it has the
Solemnities of Religion to procure it respect and veneration, how may we think
it would be contemned, if it were only looked upon as a civil one, as there is
no doubt it would be, if it had not the Ministeries of Religion to accompany
it. And accordingly as in this, and I think all other Christian Nations, the
Solemnization thereof is committed to the Ministers of Religion, so that it was
so in the first and purest times of Christianity, is too evident from Ancient
Records to admit of any the least doubt. For thus Ignatius, that most holy Man,
and a Disciple of the Apostles, in his Epistle to Polycarp (...). page 13.
edit. Voss.
, another Apostolical Person, tells him. It becomes those Men and Women that
Marry, to enter into that conjunction with the consent of the Bishop, that the
Marriage may be according to God, and not according to lust. And Tertullian
another Ancient Writer, and one of great Authority in the Church, in more
places than one declares the same usage and belief. For not contented to say in
his Book de Pudicitia G. 4. Ideo penes nos occultae quoque conjunctiones, id
est, non prius apud Ecclesiam professae juxta more hiam and for nicationem
judicari periclitantur.
, That among them, even Clandestine Marriages, that is to say, those that were
not professed before the Church were in danger to be censured next to Adultery
and Fornication: in another Tract of his, he speaks yet more plainly, both as
to the usage and the reason of it. How Ad Vxor. lib. 2. c. ult. Vnde
sufficiamus ad enarrandam felicitatem ejus matrimonii, quod Ecclesia conciliat,
and confirmat oblatio, and obsignat benediclio, angeli renunciant, pater rato
habet.
may we be able to declare the happiness of that Marriage, which the Church
joins, and the Oblation or Sacrament consirms, and the Blessing seals; in sine,
which the Angels (those he means which are present at, and behold our
Devotions) proclaim, and our Father which is in Heaven ratifies. For neither
upon earth do Children rightly and lawfully Marry, without the consent of their
Parents.

I observe, Fourthly, that as it is expedient, and in a more than ordinary
manner, for Marriage to be celebrated by a Priest, so it is also expedient,
and, where Authority has commanded it, necessary to be solemnized with such
significant Actions, or Ceremonies, as the joining of Hands, and the giving and
receiving of a Ring. Because, though Marriage, and all other Contracts, may be
made by Words only; yet they neither do, nor can make so firm an Impression
upon the Minds either of the Parties or the Witnesses, as those visible
Declarations do. Whence it is, that in all Civil Contracts almost such Actions
as those have place, and Men think not themselves well assured, unless, beside
a Declaration by Word or Writing from those with whom they have to do, they
have also a Turf of that Land which they contract for, put into their Hands by
the Seller, or at least those Deeds whereby it is conveyed. But what speak I of
other Contracts, when even in this particular one they who professed themselves
the Churches Adversaries, showed themselves to be at an Accord with it? For
however that Convention which banished Marriage by a Priest, did also discard
the Ring; yet they retained Joining of Hands, which is no less a significant
Ceremony than the other.

PART II.
Of such Laws of Marriage as concern the preserving it inviolable, after it is
contracted: and first of all, of such as respect both the Parties. Where is
shown, first, That there is a Tie of Love upon both; and the Grounds of that
Love declared: which are, first and chiefly, that Unity which Marriage
conciliates; and secondly, its being intended as a Figure of that Affection
which is between Christ and his Church. Of the Importance of that Love, and
what the due Effects thereof are; which are shown to be, 1. The doing all
things that may any way contribute to each others contentment; as, on the other
side, the avoiding all things that may displease. 2. The seeking one another
Profit; the Means whereof are also declared. 3. The endeavoring each others
Spiritual Welfare. 4. A mutual forgiving and forbearing, where Differences do
arise. That there is a Tie of Fidelity, as well as of Love; the purport whereof
is also declared. That the Married Parties are to give each other Honor; and
particularly, what that Honor is which is due from the Husband to the Wife. In
fine, That in respect to God, whose Institution Marriage is, they ought to
possess their Vessels in Sanctification and Honor, as well between themselves,
as toward others. An Address to the declaration of such Laws as concern the
Married Parties severally; where is shown, upon the part of the Husband, that
the Authority he has over the Wife, is not coercive, but directive; that
accordingly it ought to proceed rather by the way of Love than Empire; as
lastly, to restrain it self to such things as are within the Bounds of
Religion, and to such as are suitable to that Fellowship whereinto she is
admitted; where the Management of Household Affairs is shown to be the Woman's
Province. On the part of the Wife is shown, That she ought not in any measure
to usurp Authority over the Man, but endeavor rather to gain him by Meekness
and Compliance; That she ought to do him Honor both in Language and Gesture,
and obey him in all things that are not contrary to Religion, or to that
Condition of Life into which she is admitted by him. A more particular
Declaration of the Duty of the Wife in the matter of Obedience; where is shown,
That though she has no Tie upon her as to such things as are contrary to
Religion, yet she ought to be directed by her Husband in judging of Religious
Matters, and, where they are not manifestly contrary to the Scriptute, to
submit to, and follow his Advices; That though she be not under obedience, as
to such things as are sitter for a Servant than a Wife; yet what is fit, or not
fit for a Wife to do, ought not to be judged of by the Deportment of the most,
and much less by the Caprichio's of her own Brain; but by the Example of Godly
Matrons; That though the Management of Household Affairs be the Wifes peculiar
Province, and therefore no proper matter generally for the Husband to interpose
his Commands in; yet she ought to comply with him even there, where there is
any just fear of his being discredited or undone by her evil Management. An
Exhortation to the Married Parties, to perform their respective Duties.

II. IT being so rare for Popular Discourses to entreat of the Duties of
Married Persons, that it is almost become an Absurdity to mention them, I may
perhaps fall under the Censure of Indiscretion, for going about to make them
the Subject of mine, though the Design I am now upon do naturally lead me to
it. But because I cannot give a satisfactory Account of the Nature of Adultery,
and much less of the due Importance of that Commandment which forbids it,
without entreating of the Laws of Marriage, which Adultery is a Violation of;
and because, how nice soever Men are now grown, and how fearful soever of
incurring the Censure of Indiscretion, St. Paul made no difficulty of
interlacing almost all his Epistles with Discourses of it; lastly, because
there is neither that Fidelity between some Married Persons, which the Divine
Institution and their own Covenants, nor that Accord between others, which so
intimate a Relation does require; I hope it will not be looked upon by sober
Persons as any Imprudence, if (as I have in the former Discourse shown what is
necessary to the legitimate Contracting of Marriage, so) I make it the business
of this to demonstrate, what is requisite to preserve it inviolable, after it
is so contracted. In order whereunto, I will represent, 1. Such Duties as are
common to the Married Parties: And, after that, descend to 2. Those which are
peculiar to each of them.


Now though what both the one and the other are, be competently evident from
those Covenants into which the Parties enter, at the Solemnization of Matrimony
between them; yet because it is not impossible some Duties may be more
obscurely expressed there, than will be requisite to give each of them a due
understanding of them; and because those which are more clearly set down, will
be looked upon as more forcible, if it can be made appear, that they have the
Obligation of the Divine Command, as well as of their own Contract, to bind
them on them; therefore I think it but necessary to investigate them by the
purport of the Divine Commands, as well as by the tenor of their own Compacts.

1. To begin with those which are common to the Married Parties, because the
most natural Results of that intimate Conjunction into which they enter. Where,

1. First, I shall represent the Parties loving of each other, as both their
own Compacts, and the Divine Commands bind them. For, though Love be most
usually made the Duty of the Husband to the Wife, as, on the other side,
Obedience and Reverence that of the Wife toward the Husband; yet, as it is
evident from St. Paul's enjoining the aged Women to teach the younger to love
their Husbands, that Love is no less due from them, than it is from the Husband
to them, Tit. 2.4. so the ground which he elsewhere assigns for the Husbands
loving of the Wife, inferrs equally the returning of it by her. For, the Love
of the Husband to the Wife being founded by him in that Unity, or Identity
rather, which Marriage conciliates between the Parties, Ephesians. 5.28. and so on;
if the Wife be one with him, as well as he with her, there must be the same tie
of Love upon her, as there is upon the Husband to her. Here only is the
difference, that whereas the Husband, by the Prerogative of his Sex, has no
other tie than that of Love, which is the reason why the Duty of Love is in a
manner appropriated to him; the Wife, because subjected to the Husband, is to
temper hers with Reverence and Obedience: for which cause we hear so little of
any Love to be paid by her, and so much of Reverence and Obedience.

It being thus evident, that Love, how peculiar soever it may seem unto the
Man, is yet alike the Duty of them both; proceed we to inquire, what is the due
Importance of it. Where, first, no doubt can be made, but that it implies an
inward Affection; as because Love, in propriety of Speech, denotes the
Affection of the Heart; so, because all Effects, without it, are but Hypocrisy
and Dissimulation. As little doubt is to be made, secondly, but that that
inward Affection of Love is to exert it self in suitable Effects; partly
because Love is naturally operative, and partly because St. Paul, where he
exhorts Husbands to love their Wives, proposes Christ's Love to the Church for
the Pattern of it; which, as it was not without an inward Affection, so showed
it self in effect; because, as the same St. Paul observes, prompting him to
give himself for it. The only thing of difficulty in this matter, is, What is
the Ground of that mutual Love, and what Effects it ought to manifest it self
by.

As to the former of these, much need not be said, especially if we have an eye
to the principal Ground of it; the Words of St. Paul in the place
before-quoted, no less than those of the Institution of Marriage, showing the
ground of the Parties Love to be no other than that Unity into which the Divine
Institution has conjoined them. Only, as so much was necessary to be observed
here, because the proper place for it; so, the rather to take them off from
laying the main stress of their Love upon the Aimiableness, or other Qualities
of those with whom they are so conjoined. For, as though these, and other such
like, are a just ground of Love between them; yet they are neither the only,
nor the principal ones: so, he who makes them such, is in danger of
overthrowing that Love which God would have to be firm and stable: Because,
however the Word of God may endure for ever, yet Beauty, and other such like
Qualities, perish, and come to naught, and consequently draw after them the
destruction of that Love which has no other ground to stand upon. I say not
the same of that Affection which is between Christ and his Church, of which St.
Paul tells us Marriage was intended for a Figure; because, though that be not
the principal Ground of Love, yet it is a necessary and a lasting one. For,
inasmuch as Marriage was intended to represent that Affection and Unity which
is betwixt Christ and his Church, that Affection and Unity ought in reason to
be an inducement to ours, as without which we shall but profane the other.

The Grounds of our mutual Love being thus declared, inquire we, in the next
place, into the due Effects of it: Which are, first, the doing of all things
that may any way contribute to each others contentment; as, on the other side,
the avoiding of all things which may displease. Both the one and the other of
which, as they are so easy to be understood, that it will be unnecessary to
explain them; so they are, for the most part, such, that it will be much better
to leave them to the Consciences of the Parties to inform themselves in, than
to give any distinct explication of. It may suffice here to say, 1. That as
Marriage was intended for such a Society as the Parties that enter into are by
Nature most fitted for; so it cannot but be looked upon as a Violation of
Marriage, and of that Love which it involves, to refuse that Society to each
other. Again, Forasmuch as all Love, and particularly the Conjugal one,
excludes the doing of any thing that may displease the Party loved; it will
follow, that they who are entered into that State, are to avoid all unkind or
contumelious Words, all contemptuous and injurious Actions, but more especially
all such as may minister an occasion of suspicion to each other, of their
having a greater Affection for a Stranger.

Next to the Contentation of each other, subjoyn we the seeking one another
Profit, as being a no less necessary Effect of Love, and of that Union that is
between the Parties. For, as Love, where it is, naturally seeks the good of
those whom it makes the Object of its Affection; so, by so much the more, by
how much the nearer they are to it: but how much rather then, when they are in
a manner one with it. Which, as it is the case of the Married Couple, who, by
the Institution of the Almighty, are no more twain, but one flesh; so, being
such, it must be looked upon as unnatural, not to have the same care for each
other, not to seek each others Profit and Advantage. Because, however Men may
sometimes have little regard to Strangers, yet (as the Apostle argues in the
place before-quoted) no man yet ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church. Which place, as it is a convincing
Argument of the Love they ought to have for each other, and, which is more, of
seeking each othert advantage; so directs us withal to the Means they are to
make use of, in order to the procuring of it: that is to say, providing for
each others Welfare, whilst it is yet entire, by Food, and Raiment, and all
other things that are necessary for their support; as, when it is any way
impaired by Sickness or Trouble of Mind, endeavoring to restore it, by the
application of inward and outward Remedies, by Advice, and Comfort, and
Assistance. Both the one (...), enutrit, educat, sic Lexicographi.
and (...), Hesych (...). Idem. (...), etc.
the other of these, as they are the purport of those Words by which St. Paul
illustrates the Effects of the Husbands Love; so being alike common to each, as
both the Union that is between them shows, and the aptitude that is in either
to promote them. For, though the Care of Provision lies especially upon the
Man, as being best fitted for it by ability both of Mind and Body; yet as the
Woman oftentimes is in some measure fitted for it, and consequently under a
proportionable Obligation to intend it; so there is a Provision within-doors,
which is her peculiar Province, and without which the Provision of the Man will
be of little or no avail, either for himself or her.

But because the Married Parties are Spirit as well as Flesh, and no Provision
can secure the Welfare of that, but that which Religion furnishes; therefore
it may not be amiss to inquire, whether that Love which ought to be between
them, be not to extend it self also to the seeking each others Spiritual
Welfare. For, though Marriage, in its own nature, look no farther than a
Temporal one, as for the promoting whereof it was first ordained; yet, as
nothing hinders, but it may be carried much higher, by the Precepts of
Religion, and particularly of that which we have the Honor to profess; so,
that it is so, we have not only the general Commands of procuring each others
eternal Welfare, (and how much more then theirs who are so nearly conjoined to
us?) but such as do more particularly direct the procuring of theirs who are
united to us by the Band of Marriage. For, wherefore should St. Paul, 1 Cor.
14.15. direct the Wife, if she understood not what she had learned in the
Public Assemblies, to ask her Husband at home concerning it; but that (as
Bishop Davenant well argues) it is the Duty of the Husband to direct his Wife
in Spiritual as well as Temporal Matters? Or the same St. Paul oblige the
believing Wife to cohabite with an unbelieving Husband, upon the hopes of
gaining him over to her Religion, 1 Cor. 7.13. but that he supposed it to be
the Duty of the Wife, so far as in her lies, to procure her Husbands Spiritual
Welfare? And indeed, as it is scarcely possible for those who have any great
love for each other, not to desire and endeavor each others Welfare, in that
which most especially concerns them; so they who remember Marriage to have been
intended as a Figure of that Mystical Union that is between Christ and his
Church, will not think they have paid a just Respect to that Mystery which it
adumbrates, unless they endeavor to their power to make the Conversation of
each other approach as near as may be to it.

Lastly, Forasmuch as there is nothing more contrary to Love, or to that Union
from which it results, than Strife and Contention between the Married Parties;
it will follow, that it is their Duty, as well as Interest, to prevent them
what they may, or, if they happen at any time to break out, to suppress them:
The former whereof will be done by avoiding all occasion of Offense; the
latter, by a mutual forgiving and forbearance, where such Offenses do arise.
Which whilst some Persons have imprudently neglected, they have but helped to
make themselves miserable, and made the Yoke of Marriage as uneasy to
themselves, as to those whom they designed to revenge themselves upon. It being
not to be thought, they should reap any advantage to themselves, who either
kindle or maintain a War within their own House and Bowels?

2. To the Duty of Love, subjoyn we that of Fidelity, which is another
necessary Result of that Union which Marriage conciliates; he or she no less
violating that Unity, who bestow their Affections upon a Stranger, than they
who deny it to the proper Object of it. Upon which account, as Adultery must
needs be looked upon as highly criminal, because violating it in that
particular for which it was especially ordained; so also, though in a lower
degree, the frequenting the Company of others, more than their own Consorts, or
using more familiarity with them, than the Laws of Decency and Modesty do
allow; in fine, the spending upon others any considerable part of their
Estates, to the prejudice, or without the consent of the other Party; he who
joined them so closely to one another, as to make them one Flesh, consequently
forbidding all Commerce with Strangers, which either exceeds, or rivals, or
prejudiceth that Commerce which the Society into which they enter obliges the
Married Persons to.

3. Thirdly, As Love and Fidelity to each other are the indispensible Duties of
the Married Parties; so also, though in a different measure, the giving each
other Honor, according as they expressly stipulate. For the evidencing whereof,
we shall need only to instance in the Deportment of the Husband to the Wife,
because (as I shall afterward show) there cannot be the least doubt of Honors
being to be paid to the Husband by her. Now, that the Husband is to give Honor
to his Wife, is evident from that of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.17. where he exhorts
the Husband not only to dwell with his Wife according to knowledge, but to
give honor to her as to the weaker vessel. Which Words, as they are a
convincing proof of that Honor which we have affirmed to be due to her from
her Husband; so show the Honor that is to be given her, because the Honor of
the weaker Vessel, to be such as is proper to that State in which God has
placed her under her Husband. The purport whereof is, not that the Husband
should subject himself to her, who is but in some respects his Equal, and much
less his Superior; but that, inasmuch as she is assumed into a Copartnership
with him, he should treat her not as a Servant, but a Companion; and not only
so neither, but as the Companion of such a Person, and according to his own
Quality or Dignity; that he should permit her (as in reason he ought) to bear
her self as a Mother over his Family, and not either subject her to, or abridge
her the exercise of her Authority over it; in fine, that he should permit her,
whilst she lives, to partake of his Worldly Goods, and after her and his
Decease, to permit her Children to succeed into them. For, though I know, even
among us, there are other kind of Bargains made, and such as do in truth make
the Woman rather a Concubine than a Wife, as shall hereafter be more at large
declared; though I know also, that in Germany there is a sort of Marriage
wherein the Husband gives the Wife the Left Hand in stead of the Right; that is
to say, expressly stipulates with her, not to take her as a Wife of equal
Condition: by means of which, as Vid Mylerum in Gamologia seu de matrimonio
Personarum Imperii illustrium, etc citat. in le Journal de Scavans, part 1.
Mylerus observes, neither has she all the Rights of a Wife, neither do her
Children succeed either to the Fathers Name, or Arms, or full Inheritance: Yet
as I cannot but look upon such Matches among us, as a contradiction in adjecto,
because the Husband in Marriage endows her with all his Worldly Goods; so, upon
all such, whether here or elsewhere, as contrary to the Divine Institution of
Marriage, and particularly to that Honor which St. Peter requires Men to
exhibit to them. For, how are they either one with their Husbands, or in the
esteem of Wives, which are set at so great a distance from them?

I will conclude this part of my Discourse with a Duty, that is indeed alike
common with the former, to each of the Married parties, but which has not
themselves, but God for the object of it: And that is, that, forasmuch as God
is the Author of Marriage, they would, in respect to him, whose institution it
is, possess their Vessels in Sanctification and Honor, as well among
themselves as toward others. Which they shall do, if to give themselves to
Fasting and Prayer, they shall for a time defraud one another with consent, as
at all times use that moderation in their enjoyments, as may show them studious
of more refined ones, and that reservedness and modesty in their outward
deportment, which may neither tempt others to any impurity, nor censure the
Divine Institution because of them.

2. I have hitherto insisted upon such Duties as are common to the Married
parties, and which for that reason it is to be hoped will not be distasteful to
either of them. It remains that I entreat of those that are peculiar to each of
them, and where, if any where, I must expect a censure from my Readers. But as
that rarely happens to a Teacher, from the Sober and the Virtuous, where his
own indiscrete managery thereof gives not occasion to it: so he must very much
forget his own duty, and the dignity of his Employment, who shall value any
thing of that nature, when coming from the Ignorant and Profane. Setting aside
therefore any farther discourse concerning that, I will betake my self to my
Task, and first of all to

1. Those Duties which are peculiar to the Husband. I have heretofore shown,
and shall by and by have occasion to confirm it; that God has endu'd the
Husband with Authority over the Wife, and commanded her to pay Obedience to it.
But because it is not impossible Men may arrogate to themselves a greater
Authority than ever God intended them, or exercise it more fully, and with
greater rigor than they ought; therefore it may not be amiss in describing the
peculiar duties of the Husband, to show him what kind of Authority he has, how
it is to be exercised, and about what.

For answer to which, I say first, that the Authority of the Husband over the
Wife, is not coercive but directive, that is to say, an Authority which
privileges him to command, but not to constrain her to Obedience. For being
given by God to Man, as a Companion Malach. 2.14
and a helper, and, which is more, in such a degree as to become one with him;
it is unreasonable to think he should have such a power over her, as to
constrain her to a compliance by force and violence. A forcible Treatment
degrading her from the condition of a Mate, and ranking her among Subjects or
Servants. Neither will it suffice to say, that so also will the laying of
Commands, because according to the usual saying, par in parem non habet
potestatem, which is alike true as to Commands and Coercions. For beside that,
by the Divine Institution, the Man is priviledg'd to rule over her, as you may
see, Genesis 3.16. beside that, in this case there is not a perfect parity, as the
rule before spoken of shows; the power of Command is not only not destructive
of the conjugal Society, but absolutely necessary to the maintaining of it.
For, inasmuch as the Married parties may both entertain different apprehensions
concerning such things as are to be done, and also take up different
resolutions concerning them; if there were not a power of ruling somewhere, it
would be in the power of either party to obstruct the common good of both. But
as there is not the same necessity of a coercive Power, partly because the
Husband has the Law of God to back his Commands, and partly because not
without a sufficient Power, from the Laws of the place he lives in, to be able
to effect his own purposes: so it is perfectly inconsistent with that Society
and fellowship, into which the Wife is assumed by him. It may suffice the
Husband, that he has the power of Commanding, and in case of refusal, that of
Reproof and Admonition, as which, those of far less Authority are not excluded
from: but other coercion than that no Law of God gives him, and is not
therefore to be arrogated by him.

The Authority of the Husband over the Wife being thus explained, and shown to
consist in Commands, Admonitions, and Reproofs; proceed we to enquire how this
Authority is to be exercised, the second thing proposed to be discoursed of.
For the resolution whereof, though I might again take my measures from that
Partnership into which we have said the Wife to be admitted; yet I shall choose
rather to shape my Discourse by that Love, which the Husband is every where
commanded to show her who is so admitted by him. For Love, where it is either
finding, or making Persons equal, especially where there is not too great an
imparity between the Parties, it will follow that the Commands or Admonitions
of the Husband are not generally to be delivered in imperious terms, and such
as savor more of Authority than Kindness: St. Paul having taught us by his own
behavior toward Philemon, that though a Man may have power to Command, yet,
where that will serve the turn, for Love's sake he should rather entreat, and
not so much constrain, as invite them to a compliance. I say not the same,
where she whom God has commanded to obey, shows her self utterly averse from a
compliance. For in such a case, to be too officious were to make himself
contemptible; and not only so, but that Authority which God has vested in him:
Only (as we learn from St. Paul elsewhere Col. 3.19.
) even here also a mean is to be used: and though nothing hinders him to
express himself in terms suitable to his own Authority; yet no Law, either of
God or Man, allows him to be bitter against her.

The third and last particular comes now to be discoursed of, even about what
the Authority of a Husband is to be conversant, which, if we may judge of by
the obedience the Wife is required to pay, appears to be every thing, as you
may see, Ephesians. 5.24. But as the same Apostle elsewhere, where he entreats of
that very Argument, adds by way of limitation, as it is fit in the Lord, Col.
3.18. thereby manifestly restraining the Authority of the Husband to all such
things as are within the bounds of our Religion: so Reason requires the
limiting it to such things also as are suitable to that fellowship into which
she is admitted. From whence as it will follow, that the Husband ought not to
impose upon her such things as are more proper for a Servant, or Vassal, than a
Wife: so also that he is generally to leave the administration of Household
affairs, to her alone care and management: Because, as I have often said, she
is admitted into a Copartnership with him, which cannot well be salv'd, if that
should be taken from her; and because both St. Paul, 1 Timothy 5.14. and the Laws
of Nations appropriate the guiding of the house to her. According to that known
Proverb which the Roman Matrons were wont to use, when they were brought home
to their Husbands Houses; Vbi tu Caius, ibi ego Caia, Where you are a Master I
expect to be a Mistress, and enjoy the privileges of such.

2. Having thus shown the Duty of the Husband to the Wife, as to that Authority
wherewith he is invested over her, it remains that we enquire what is due from
her to him, as well in respect of his Authority, as her own necessary
subjection to it. Now though that be easy enough to infer from the foregoing
Discourse, and may therefore seem to require the less pains in the
investigating of it, yet I think it not amiss, if it were only to observe a due
proportion between them, to be as particular in the declaration of it, as I was
before in that of the Authority and Duty of the Husband. In order whereunto I
say,

1. That inasmuch as God has invested the Man with Authority over the Wife, it
must be looked upon as highly irreligious in her to be so far from submitting
to it, as, on the contrary, to usurp Authority over him: Such a Behavior
bidding defiance to the order of God and Nature, because not only thwarting,
but perverting it. And accordingly as St. Paul not only proscribes it as a
thing unlawful, but moreover represents it as a thing not to be suffered, 1 Timothy 2.12. So he has also given us there to understand, what is to be thought
of Women's laying Commands upon their Husbands, of entertaining them with
Reproofs, or offering violence to them. For if (as he there discourses) it is
not so much as lawful for them to take upon them to instruct their Husbands,
how much less may we suppose it to be to command or check them, or, in fine, to
offer violence to them; the two former being more apparent marks of Authority
than Instruction, the latter of so high a nature, that it is not lawful from
the Man to the Wife, though invested by God with Authority over her. It may
suffice the Wife, where the Husband behaves himself otherwise than he ought, to
expostulate with him in the most becoming terms, to exhort, entreat, and
persuade him to an amendment; in fine, to endeavor it by the piety and
winningness of her behavior, and particularly by a meek and quiet spirit. For
as other courses than such are not likely to prevail with Men that understand
themselves, so St. Peter not only represents it as the means they are to make
use of, to win those who obey not the word to yield obedience to it, but gives
hopes withal, by affirming it to be in the sight of God of great price, that it
is the most probable means to procure it.

2. Again, forasmuch as God has not only invested the man with Authority over
the Wife, but represented him as the head of her, even as Christ is the head of
the Church, Ephesians. 5.23. it will follow as St. Paul infers, verse. 33. that she
ought to reverence her Husband, and express it both in her behavior and
language; even as Sarah declared hers to Abraham, by calling him Lord, 1 Pet.
3.6. But from hence we may collect what is to be thought of those reproachful
titles, which Women of haughty spirits do oftentimes bestow upon them. For if
by the precept of the Scripture they are not to speak to their Husbands without
respect, how much less may we think it lawful for them, to use such
contumelious terms, as are scarcely fit to be given to a Slave?

3. Lastly, Forasmuch as God has not only invested the man with Authority, but
obliged the Woman to yield obedience to it, it will follow not only that she is
under a necessity of obedience, but of such an obedience also as is
proportionable to that Authority wherewith we have said him to be invested. The
result whereof is, that she is to obey him in all things that are not contrary
to Religion, or to that condition of life, into which she is admitted by him.
These three things only must be added to the former exceptions, as exceptions
of those exceptions, or rather necessary explications of them.

1. That though the Wife has no tie upon her to comply with him in such things
as are contrary to Religion, yet she is to be directed by him in judging of
Religious matters, and where they are not manifestly contrary to the Scripture,
to submit to, and follow his advices. For as there is not a more proper notion
of that headship Daven. in Vol. 3.18, 19.
which is attributed to the Man, than that which imports a power of direction,
so that that direction is to be understood with reference to Religious matters
also, St. Paul plainly shows, 1 Cor. 14.35. he there obliging the Wife, if she
doubted of the sense of any thing delivered in the public Assemblies, to ask
her Husband at home, and if so, to take directions from him in doubtful cases.
Which course (as a Learned Man Dr. Tail. Sermon on Ephesians. 5.32, 33. Part 2.
observes) has this farther to recommend it, that though if she be deceived
alone, she has no excuse, because not attending to her instructor, yet if she
should happen to be deceived with him, she has much pity, and some degrees of
warranty under protection of that humility and deference which she shows
toward him, who is by God appointed over her. 2. Secondly, Though it be true
that the Wife is not under any tie of Obedience, where the things commanded by
the Husband are more fit for a Servant than a Wife; yet as there may be a time
(particularly that of Sickness) wherein the Husband and Wife both may be
obliged by turns to be a kind of Servants to each other, so what is fit, or not
fit, for a Wife to do, is at all times to be judged, not by the deportment of
the most, which in each Sex are always the worst, and much less by the
caprichi'os of their own brain, but by the examples of godly Matrons, as which
are most likely to direct them best in judging of it. 3. Lastly, Though it be
true, that the management of Household Affairs is the proper Province of the
Wife, and therefore no proper matter generally for the Husband to interpose his
commands in; yet as no man is obliged to be imposed upon as to his own
particular, or discredited, or undone by her to whom he is appointed as a head;
so if there be any danger of either of these by her imprudent or wilful
management of Affairs, there is no doubt in such a Case he has Authority to
control her, and consequently she also a necessity of submitting to it.
Having thus shown at large the Duties of Married Persons, as well those which
are peculiar to each, as those which are common to them both, nothing remains
for me to do but to exhort them to a performance, and particularly of such
duties as are peculiar to each of them. For, beside that by so doing they shall
each of them comply with the Divine Commands, and (because that is a natural
consequent of the other) procure the peace of their own Consciences; beside
that they shall thereby consult the peace and welfare of themselves and
families, which for want of a just compliance are oftentimes torn in pieces,
and beggary and confusion introduced; the Married parties have this farther
inducement to it, that they shall thereby provide for their own reputation,
which is a thing that prevails often, where neither Interest nor Religion can.
For what credit can it be to the Husband to domineer over his Wife, who as well
by the weakness of her Sex, as by the Divine command, is obliged to subject her
self to him? or what credit to the Wife to detrect her Husbands just commands,
or usurp Authority over him? when she cannot do either, without proclaiming her
self to be proud and insolent, and her Husband to be a fool for permitting it.
Which last title, if such persons cannot with patience hear others affix unto
their Husbands, because of that strait tie which is between them; let them see
how they will absolve themselves in their own breasts, who by their imperious
carriage give occasion to the reproach of both. On the other side, when Man and
Wife perform their respective duties, and his will looks more like a desire
than a command, and her actions like the result of his will than of her own;
when the Man avoids as much as may be the interesting himself in her affairs,
and the Wife not only intermeddles not with such as are proper to his
cognizance, but endeavors to approve her self to him in the management of her
own: Lastly, when the Man treats the Wife as his associate, or rather as
himself, and the Wife demeans her self to him, as her directour and superior;
then there is not only a happy compliance with the Divine Institution, and with
one another, but a just foundation of universal applause: and all wise and good
persons think themselves obliged to honor the Man for knowing how to temper
his Authority so as to make it acceptable and pleasant, as the Wife for being
able by the obligingness of her behavior to transform him into an adorer of
her, and make him change his sovereignty into kindness and condescension.

PART III.
Whether or no, and by what means Marriage may be dissolved, which are resolved
to be no other than either the Death of one of the Parties, or Fornication. Of
that Liberty which our Law allows to Marry again, where the Parties have been
Seven Years absent from, and ignorant of each others being, which is shown to
proceed upon the presumption of the absent Parties death. That Fornication is a
just ground of dissolving the Marriage, and that nothing in Gods Law hinders
either the Innocent or Nocent Party to Marry again; but that the cognizance of
the cause belongs to those who are in Authority. An Essay toward the showing
that there is no other just ground of a Divorce than Fornication, or some
uncleanness that is equal thereunto. This evidenced, First, in that among the
Jews, where there was manifestly a greater Liberty, a Divorce proceeded not but
upon supposition of something of Uncleanness. The like evidenced more fully
from the words of our Lord in this affair. When other crimes appear, they ought
either to be born, or a separation made only for so long time, till Time or
Gods Grace shall bring the Parties to a better mind. The matter of Divorce,
rather of Permission than Command, and alike common to the Woman and the Man. A
Transition to the Negative part of the Commandment, where is entreated first of
all of that Adultery which lies on the side of the Married Parties, and the Man
that is false to his Wife, shown to be as truly guilty of Adultery, as the
Woman that is false to her Husband. The like evinced on the part of those by
whom the Married Parties are debauched, with a large account of the
criminalness both of the one and the other Adultery.

III. WHAT is requisite to the due contracting of Marriage, or the preserving
it inviolable, when it is so, enough has been said to show in my former
Discourses upon this Argument: it remains only that we enquire whether or no,
and by what means it may be dissolved, which will cost no great pains to
resolve. Not the former, because at the same time I point out the means by
which it may be dissolved, I shall also prove it to be capable of being so; as
neither the latter, because however men have been willing to find out others,
yet Christianity generally allows only two grounds of the dissolution of it,
the former whereof is the Death of one of the Parties, the latter Fornication
or Adultery.

1. Now that the Death of one of the Parties dissolves the Contract, and puts
the living one in the same condition they were in before, is evident first of
all from the expressed declaration of the Scripture. For not contented to say,
Romans 7.2. that the Woman which has an Husband, is bound by the Law to her
Husband, so long as he lives: but if the Husband be dead, she is loosed from
the Law of her Husband, which may be interpreted as to that relaxation which
the Law of Moses gave: we find the like affirmation elsewhere, and with such an
addition also, as shows it equally to hold under the dispensation of the
Gospel. For St. Paul affirming, as he does, 1 Cor. 7.33. that though the Wife
be bound by the Law as long as her Husband lives, yet if her Husband be dead
she is at liberty to be Married to whom she will, only in the Lord, he thereby
plainly intimates, because entreating of the Marriage of Christians, that
death dissolves the Contract, no less under the Gospel than the Law. The same
is no less evident from the end of Marrige, and the terms of the Contract, at
least as they are expressed among us. For both the end of its Institution being
for the comfort of this present life, and the terms upon which it is contracted
being expressly during the continuance of it; it follows unavoidably, that
where the Society is interrupted by death, the contract must also fall, because
intended only for the comfort of the present life, and covenanting for no more
than the time of the continuance of it. The only thing on this head that can
admit of any just scruple, is that liberty which our Law 1 Jac. 11.
allows to Marry again, where the Husband or Wife shall be continually
remaining beyond the Seas, by the space of Seven Years together, or where the
Husband or Wife shall absent him or herself the one from the other by the space
of Seven Years together in any part of his Majesty's Dominions, the one of them
not knowing the other to be living within that time. But even this also, if
duly examined, will not be found in the least to contradict the forementioned
Precepts. For as it is necessary, in many cases, and particularly in the
present one, to proceed by presumptions oftentimes, unless we would have very
material controversies to remain undecided, which is not for the peace or
interest of the world: so there is a just presumption of his or her death,
where during so long a time, the party, that is certainly alive, knows nothing
at all of the others being so.

2. It being thus evident that Death dissolves the Contract of Marriage, and
leaves the living Party to the liberty of a second Marriage, it remains that we
enquire concerning Fornication, which we have affirmed to be another just
ground of a Dissolution: where again we are to enquire, whether Fornication be
such a ground, and whether it be the only one; both the one and the other of
which will receive a solution from the words of our Blessed Savior. For
affirming (as he does) that whosoever shall put away his Wife, except it be for
Fornication, and shall marry another, commits Adultery, and whosoever Marieth
her which is put away, commits Adultery, he both implies that Fornication
is a just ground of a dissolution, and declares it to be the only one. The
only difficulty that has been made as to the first head, is, whether or no
after such a Divorce there be a liberty to Marry again at all, or if so,
whether for the Nocent as well as the Innocent. But beside that (to speak first
unto the former) there appears not any reason, why, if Fornication be a just
ground of dissolving the Marriage, it should not also leave a liberty of a
second Marriage, after the dissolution of the former; beside that Divorces,
both among the Jews and Heathen, were ever understood to have this effect, and
therefore in reason to be so taken by our Savior, unless he had otherwise
declared himself to have intended: we may as well question by the words of our
Lord, whether Fornication be a just ground of the dissolution of the former
Marriage, as whether it makes way for a second. For arguing the unlawfulness of
Divorces, except where they are for Fornication, from the Adultery which a
second Marriage involves the Parties in, he plainly implies liberty of
Marriage to be a proper consequent of Divorce, and consequently, that where the
Divorce is lawful (as it is for Fornication by the words of our Lord) the after
Marriage also is. And though there be not as much reason for the liberty of the
offending Party, because it is by their fault that the former Contract was
rescinded: yet as it is evident that among the Jews both Parties were at
liberty to Marry after a Divorce had passed; so I see not how by the Law of our
Lord the knot of Wedlock can be tied to the one Party, though the offending
one, and loose unto the other; the offending Party after a Divorce being no
more to look upon the other as a Husband or a Wife, than the innocent Husband
or Wife is upon the offending one as either. This only would be added, That
though it be not unlawful by the Law of our Lord for the Divorced Parties to
Marry, and much less for the innocent one; yet is the liberty of Marrying again
of such dangerous consequence, in respect of the Collusion that may be between
the Parties, where oftentimes they are alike weary of each other, that our
Church has thought fit to take sufficient Bond of them before Divorce, that
neither of them should Marry again whilst the other lives. But whatever be the
effect of a Divorce for Fornication, which is not so well agreed upon among
Divines; most certain it is, which is a thing that would be added to the former
Considerations, that not the Parties themselves, but they, who are entrusted
with the Authority of God in Affairs of this nature, are to pronounce the
Divorce between them; partly because it is God that joined them together, and
partly because neither together nor apart are they competent persons to make
that separation between themselves; It being not impossible, where the
separation is desired by one only Party, for that Party to pretend Adultery in
the other when there is no such thing, as, where it is desired by both Parties,
to agree together to offend, that so they may have the liberty to espouse new
and more desired loves.

But because the Question is not so much concerning a Divorce for Fornication
together with its effect or pronouncer, as whether there be any other just
ground of the dissolution of Marriage, therefore proceed we in the second
place, to make that also the subject of our enquiry, or rather to show that
there is not any just ground of doubting in it. In order whereunto, the first
thing I shall represent is, that though among the Jews there were a greater
liberty as to this matter by the permission of God himself, yet even there, as
appears from Deuteronomy. 24.1.
Deuteronomy, a Divorce was not allowable, save where there was some
Uncleanness in the Party Divorced. For how is it possible to think that Christ,
who pretends to so much more strictness in this matter than Moses did, should
allow of a Divorce for less than Fornication, when even Divorces among the Jews
were not allowable, save where some kind of turpitude preceeded? I observe
secondly, that as there is reason to believe, both from the purport of Moses
Law and our Saviors setting his own above it, that less than Fornication
cannot be looked upon as a ground of Divorce; so our Savior, in the place
before quoted, has proscribed all other causes, save that of Fornication only.
So that to make it out that there are other allowable causes of Divorce, it
must be said, either that the Greek word is not rightly rendered Fornication, or
that other sins are included in, or deducible from it. But beside that the
proper notion of the Greek word is no other than Fornication, as that imports
the highest act of Uncleanness, and consequently, where it is in a Married
Person, that which we call Adultery; See Hammond's Six Queries, and
particularly that concerning Divorces.
beside that the Christian Church have ever so understood it here, even by the
confession of those who have endeavored to oppugn it: where it is taken
otherwise, as I deny not but it sometimes is, it either imports that which is
above it, as unnatural Lusts, or is taken not strictly, but metaphorically; the
former whereof, as it will not at all avail those who would find out some lower
Causes of Divorces, so it is not to be imagined, that the latter should be of
any force here, because our Savior is discoursing of a Man's putting away his
Wife; for the Ground whereof it is certainly more proper to assign a literal
Fornication, as being an express Violation of the Marriage-Vow, than that which
is but metaphorical, and consequently of less affinity with it. All therefore
that remains to be said toward the evacuating the force of our Savior's
Testimony, is, That other Sins are to be supposed to be included in it, or
deducible from it; it being not unusual for one thing only to be named, where
others are intended to be understood. And indeed, if they who thus argue, mean
no other than Sins of the same kind, and such too as are of as foul or fouler a
nature than Fornication; so I think they should say nothing but what the Text
it self would well bear, and the Suffrage of Reason warrant. For, as a better
Reason cannot be rendered of our Savior's making use of the Word Fornication in
stead of Adultery, which is otherwise more proper, than that he intended under
that name to comprehend unnatural Lusts, as well as the Act of Adultery; so
Reason requires the looking upon such Sins rather as a ground of Divorce, which
are not only of the same kind, but of a much more criminal nature than the
other. But as the same is not to be said of lesser Sins, though of the same
Species, because it was manifestly our Savior's Design to set his Law above
that of Moses, which allowed not of Divorces, where lesser Uncleanness
preceded not; so, much less is it to be said of Sins of another Species, though
no way inferior in guilt to Fornication: because God, by whom the Married
Parties are joined, and who has commanded not to separate them without his
leave, has both in the Old Law and New restrained the making of Divorces to
greater or lesser Uncleanness. It may suffice, where other Crimes appear, for
the Married Parties to bear with each other, where they are of such a nature as
to be born; or endeavor by good advice the removal of them, Vxoris vitium
tollas opus est, aut feras
Qui tol lit vitium, uxorem commodrusculam
Stbi praestat; qui fert, sese meliorem facit.

which will be most for each others advantage: as in like manner, where they
are not to be born, as when they seek each others destruction, to separate from
each other, till Time and God's Grace have brought them to a better mind. But
other Course than that cannot be supposed to be lawful, because God has
restrained Divorces to the case of lesser Uncleanness among the Jews, as
among Christians to the greater ones. What should I tell you, that the Jewish
Divorces, by the Sentence of our Savior, were rather permitted than commanded;
and permitted too, not so much out of the kindness of the Grantor, as for the
hardness of the Jews Hearts, and for fear lest greater Mischiefs should ensue
to the hated Party? That God professes, by his Prophet Malachi, that he hates
putting away? and that our Savior made no other Answer to his Disciples, when
they inferred from this his Doctrine, that if the case of the Man were so with
his Wife, it was not good to marry, than all Men were not able to receive it?
These, and many other Arguments which might be alleged, showing an ill Choice,
whether of the Man or of the Woman, to be, as Nazianzen expresses it, (...),
an Evil which being got, is not to be let go, save where a far worse, even the
Violation of the Marriage Bed intervenes.

But because (as was before intimated) the Judgment of Divorces is not
permitted to the Parties concerned, but to the Governors of the Church, and I
have all along made it my business to speak only to Private Persons, as which
alone are under my inspection; therefore I shall add no more upon this Head,
than that as Divorce for Fornication (which is the only allowable one among
Christians) is not of command, but permission, and consequently left to the
Prudence of the Married Parties, either to endeavor it, or not, as they shall
judge most expedient; so the permission, whatever it is, is alike common to
either Party, though it appears not to have been so among the Jews; not only
the mutual Power which God has given them over each other, so persuading (for
how should a Divorce be more lawful to the one than the other, when by means of
that Power which they have over one another Bodies, the cause for which a
Divorce is allowed, must equally touch both Parties?) but also a Passage of St.
Paul, and the Practice of the Primitive Church, which is the best Comment both
upon that and other Texts. Of which latter, as we have an illustrious
Testimony, in the first Apology of Justin Martyr, who both tells of and
commends a certain Christian Noblewoman, who sent a Bill of Divorce to her
Adulterous Husband, after she had but in vain endeavored to wean him from his
Extravagances; so, that it was not without ground, even from the Principles of
our Religion, that of St. Paul shows, 1 Cor. 7.10. For, what place were there
for that Advice of his to believing Women, not to leave their Infidel Husbands,
if they were pleased to dwell with them, if it were not lawful by the Christian
Law, as well as by that of the World, for a Wife to part with her Husband at
all, yea though Fornication gave occasion to it? In the mean time, as it is not
to be denied, that those Matches shall be most happy, where a Separation shall
be neither occasioned nor desired; so they shall act most agreeably to the
Institution of Marriage, and the Laws of Christ, who shall know no other
Divorce than that which shall make a Separation between a Man and himself, as
well as between him and the Partner of his Bed.

II. Having thus entreated of the Importance, Institution, and Laws of
Marriage, and therein both given you an Account of the Affirmative part of the
Precept, and cleared my Way to the Explication of the Negative; proceed we now,
according to our proposed Method, to investigate the Nature, and show the
Criminalness of that Sin which the Negative does forbid.

Now though what Adultery is in the general, be not at all difficult to
explain, because it is agreed upon to be no other than the Violation of the
Marriage Bed; yet inasmuch as that Violation is not without some variety, in
respect of the several Actors in it, in order to a more particular knowledge of
it, it will be requisite to mark out the several ways whereby that Violation
may be perpetrated. To begin with that Adultery which lies on the side of the
Married Parties, as which is without doubt the most criminal, because all
Adultery receives its denomination from them. Now, though Custom, which is the
Master of Language, have in a manner appropriated the Title of Adultery to the
falseness of the Wife, and to him that should solicit her thereunto; though
the Roman Laws Lactant. li. 6. c. 23. Non enim ficut juris publici ratio est,
sola mulier adultera est, quae habet alium; maritus autem, etiamsi plures
habeat, a crimine adulterii solutus est. Sed divina lex ita duos in
matrimonium, quod est in corpus unum, pari jure conjungit, ut adulter habeatur,
quisquis compagem corporis in diversa distraxerit. Vid. Notas Anton. Thysii ad
locum.
have spoke the same Language, and absolved the Husband from the imputation of
it, where he did not defile another Bed; yet, as Lactant. li. 6. c. 23. Non
enim ficut juris publici ratio est, sola mulier adultera est, quae habet alium;
maritus autem, etiamsi plures habeat, a crimine adulterii solutus est. Sed
divina lex ita duos in matrimonium, quod est in corpus unum, pari jure
conjungit, ut adulter habeatur, quisquis compagem corporis in diversa
distraxerit. Vid. Notas Anton. Thysii ad locum.
Lactantius has well observed, Christianity and Reason both require the
charging it upon the offending Husband, no less than upon the offending Wife.
For, it appearing both from St. Paul, and that Unity which Marriage
conciliates, that the Woman has no less power over the Husbands Body, than he
over hers; and from the Terms of the Covenant into which they enter upon
Marriage, that the Husband does no less plight his Troth unto the Wife, than
she to him: that Husband which shall offend, shall be equally chargeable with
the violation of the Marriage Bed, and consequently with the Crime of Adultery.
And though it be not to be denied, for Reasons afterward to be declared, that
the Consequences of the Wifes Adultery are much more fatal than that of the
Husbands: yet, as it is evident from the Premises, that the Adultery is the
same in both, by reason of their mutual Interest in, and Obligation to each
other; so there is very little reason Lact. lib. 6. c. 23. Servanda igitur
fides ab utroque alteri est; imo exemplo continentiae docenda uxor, ut se cast
gerat. Iniquum est enim ut id exieas. quod praestare ipse non possis. Idem
paulo post. -- Cavendum igitur, ne occasionem vicits nostra intemper antia
demus; sed assuescant invicem mores duo^^^n, and jugum paribus (...) seront.
Nos ipsos in al^^^^ cog^^em^es, Nam fere in hoe (...) summa consist^^, ut non
(...) dieri, quicquid ipse ab al^^^^ (...) non possis.
for the Husband to exact that Fidelity of the Wife, which he himself is not
careful to observe: Partly, because Lact. lib. 6. c. 23. Servanda igitur fides
ab utroque alteri est; imo exemplo continentiae docenda uxor, ut se cast
gerat. Iniquum est enim ut id exieas. quod praestare ipse non possis. Idem
paulo post. -- Cavendum igitur, ne occasionem vicits nostra intemper antia
demus; sed assuescant invicem mores duo^^^n, and jugum paribus (...) seront.
Nos ipsos in al^^^^ cog^^em^es, Nam fere in hoe (...) summa consist^^, ut non
(...) dieri, quicquid ipse ab al^^^^ (...) non possis.
there is the same Tie upon them to each other, and ought therefore to proceed
by the same Measures; and partly, because the Husband has generally more
Reason to restrain his exorbitant Passions by. From that Adultery which lies on
the side of the Married Parties, pass we to that which lies on the side of
those by whom they are corrupted: For, that that also is Adultery, the general
use of the Word, and our Savior's Interpretation of this Commandment, shows.
For, subjoyning by way of Appendix to it, that whosoever looks upon a Woman,
or Wife, to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his
heart; he thereby plainly shows, that Adultery is no less on the part of him
that does so corrupt her, than on the Wife who is corrupted by him. Here only
is the difference, that though both violate the Marriage Bed, yet she does it
more criminally, because obliged by Promise to preserve it spotless, which the
other is not under the Obligation of.

The Nature of Adultery being thus unfolded, and shown wherein it does consist;
proceed we, in the next place, to show the Criminalness thereof, which I shall
do with respect to each of the Adulteries before spoken of.

And first of all, if the Question be concerning that Adultery which lies on
the side of the Married Parties, so we shall find Evils enough to sour all that
Happiness which the Adulterer or Adulteress promise themselves from it. For, is
it nothing, nay, is it not a Crime of a very high nature, to violate the
Institution of the Divine Majesty, and make a Separation there, where he has
enjoined a strict and indissoluble dissoluble Unity? Is it nothing to violate
that Faith which they have given each to other, and without the observation
whereof, not only the Peace of Families, but even Humane Society, could not
subsist? Is it nothing to rob each other of that Society which both the Divine
Institution, and their own Compact, have given them an undoubted Interest in,
and which is so inseparably theirs, that they cannot, even with consent,
transfer the Right thereof unto another? Is it nothing, where all the
tenderness imaginable is due, yea, such a one as a Man naturally has for his
own Flesh; is it nothing there, I say, to give the highest occasion of grief
and distaste, and fill each other with those discontents which do not only
destroy the Peace of the injured Party, but prompt them to Malice and Revenge?
Is it nothing, in stead of that Honor which they are obliged to exhibit to
each other, to repay one another with Reproach, and make their Partner, as well
as themselves, the scorn of their Rival, and all contumelious Persons? Is it
nothing, on the Man's part, to derive his Estate from his Wife and legitimate
issue, toward the maintaining of a strange Woman, and the Product of her Lust?
as, on the Woman's part, to bring a Bastard-brood to inherit the Estate of the
Legitimate; and not only so, but bring those Legitimate ones into the same
suspicion of Bastardy, and rob them of their Honor, as well as of their
Substance? Lastly, is it nothing to turn that which was designed by God as a
Figure of the Mystical Union that is between Christ and his Church, into the
unhallowed Rites of Venus; and not only profane the Divine Institution of
Marriage, but that much better Union which it was designed to represent? But if
any, or all of these be something, as undoubtedly they are, yea, Crimes of a
high Nature, I will leave you to guess, how foul that Falsehood is which is the
unhappy Parent of them all. The Adultery of the Married Parties being thus
dispatched, pass we to that of those by whom they are corrupted: which, as it
is equally criminal, where they themselves are under the same Band of Marriage;
so does not fall much short of it, where they are free from it. For, beside
that they give occasion to all those Evils which we have affirmed to be the
Consequents of the Falsehood of the Married Parties, they are not themselves
without a share of almost all those Impieties which they tempt the Married
Parties to. If we inquire concerning the Divine Institution of Marriage, it is
no less violated by them than by the other, because separating between those
whom God has made one: if concerning the injured Party, they are in a great
measure the Authors of his Sufferings, because invading his Bed, and bringing
his Person into reproach; in fine, because robbing his Children of their
Subsistence, and, which is more, oftentimes of their Father's Love and Care, as
well as of the Honor of their Birth. Lastly, If we inquire concerning that
Sacred Mystery which Marriage was designed to represent, their Impurity offers
an affront to it; and at the same time they solicit the Married Party to
profane it, they profane it themselves, by abusing them to Lust and
Intemperance: All which, whosoever shall consider, will find Adultery to have
somewhat more than the breach of one Commandment to make it odious, as being in
truth an Affront to God and to Humane Nature, to the greatest Mystery of our
Religion, and the chiefest Band of Humane Society. And accordingly, as among
the Heathen Sharrock. Judicia, seu legum censurae de variis incontinentiae
speciebus, c. 1. art. 2.
Adultery has been sometime time punished with Death, and that too with such
Circumstances as were more terrible than Death it self; as moreover Liberty
has been given to the injured Party Agelli. Noct. Attic. li. c. 10. c. 23.
to kill the Adulteress in the Act of her Uncleanness, and not to stay for the
Formalities of Justice to wreck his Revenge upon her; lastly, as by the Jewish
Law Capital Punishment was adjudg'd to it, and both the Adulterer and the
Adulteress commanded to be put to death, Deuteronomy. 22.22. so Christianity, though
in another way, has showed it self as severe against it, and those who are the
Committers of it; St. Paul having in more places 1 Cor. 6.9. etc. Gal. 5.21.
than one reckoned it among those Sins which they who do, shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. Which however to the generality of Men it may appear a light
Censure, because they rarely consider any thing which is not exposed to their
Eye or Touch; yet, as it cannot but be otherwise thought of by those who have a
Prospect of the World to come, and that Eternity of Weal or Woe which it
infers: so the Adulterer and the Adulteress will be forced to confess it, when
they shall not only find themselves shut out of that Kingdom, but, which
follows necessarily upon the former, have their unhallowed Fires punished with
a more scorching and continual one.

PART IV.
Of the Sins that are included in that which is here expresty forbidden; which
are shown to be, All preternatural Lusts, as being alike or rather more
contrary to the Institution of Marriage; All Incestuous Mixtures, the
unlawfulness whereof is further declared; The defiling of a Person betrothed,
Simple Fornication and Concubinacy, the unlawfulness of the former whereof is
evidenced from its contrariety to the Institution of Marriage, and to the
Positive Laws of God, both in the Old and New Testament: And, in fine, All
Excesses even in Lawful Mixtures. The like unlawfulness, even by the force of
this Commandment, evinced in lesser Uncleannesses. and in the Incentives either
to those or greater ones: Of the former of which sort are, The unclean Desires
of the Heart, All such Looks, Gestures, or Touches as result from them; as
also, All unclean Communications: Where moreover is shown, against Tully and
the Stoics, that there are such Expressions as are really dishonest, and their
Objection against it proposed and answered. Of the latter sort are Sloth and
Ease, Luxury or Excess in Meat and Drink, Converse with Persons of loose or
immodest Behavior; and, in fine, the reading of loose Books, listening to
impure Songs, or resorting to offensive Plays: Whereunto is subjoined, as an
Antidote against the ^emptations to Uncleanness, the rather fleeing from the
consideration of them, than going about to combat with them ^^ and the setting
before our Minds the excellency of the Pleasures of the Mind, above those of
the Flesh or Body.

IT being impossible, on the one hand, to discharge that Duty we owe to God,
without marking out all those Sins which this, as well as the other
Commandments, does forbid; and it being little less than impossible, on the
other, to enter into a just Discourse concerning them, without leaving some
kind of Pollution upon the Minds of those to whom it is directed; I have
thought it the most prudent, as well as most pious way of procedure, to hold a
middle course, and neither be altogether silent concerning them, nor very
particular in the handling of them. Which persuasion I am the more confirmed
in, as because Men may with less danger to the Public fetch the Resolution of
extraordinary Cases from the Mouth of those of whom they are commanded to seek
the Law, so because what is generally necessary to be known concerning the
Vices here forbidden, may be easily inferred from what we have before said
concerning the Nature, Institution, and Laws of Marriage. For, if the Divine
Laws do not only set Bounds to the Enjoyments of Marriage, but proscribe all
Enjoyments out of it; all those must be looked upon as unlawful, which shall be
found to be without it, or to pass those Bounds in it which the Divine Majesty
has set. Besides, having not only entreated at large of the Nature,
Institution, and Laws of Marriage; but, as occasion offered it self, pointed
out also several of the Violations of them: I have left little else for my self
to do, than to make a more exact and orderly enumeration, and to add such
farther Arguments against the Sins it forbids, as were not before taken notice
of by me.

III. Having snewn at large, in my last, the Nature and Criminalness of
Adultery; to which I know nothing to add, unless what was then also insinuated,
that Adultery has place, not only where the Marriage which is violated
continues undissolv'd, but also where it is dissolved for a less cause than
Fornication: it remains that we inquire, Whether any other Sins are included in
the Prohibition of Adultery, and what those Sins are.

Of the former part of this Quaerie much need not be said, after what has been
produced to show the Comprehensiveness of the Decalogue in the general. For, it
being evident from a former Discourse, that the Decalogue, or Law of the Ten
Commandments, was intended as a Summary of the several particular Laws set down
in the Book of God (as Philo De Decalogo. (...).
also has observed) we are in reason to understand the Prohibition of Adultery
to include in it all such Sins as are of the same kind with it, or leading to
it. The only thing which it will concern us to inquire, is, What those Sins
are; which therefore I come now to investigate.

1. And here, in the first place, I shall not doubt to reckon, as included, the
prohibition of all preternatural Lusts; such, I mean, as are transacted between
a Man and a Beast, or between those of the same Sex. For, beside that God has
provided against these by special Laws, and not only so, but condemned the
respective Offenders to suffer death, as you may see Lev. 20.30, etc. beside
that before the Law, he made Sodom and Gomorrha a desolation, for thus
following after strange flesh; and that too (as St. Jude has observed) to
deter us by their example, ver. 7. of that Epistle: the unlawfulness, or rather
prodigiousness thereof, is sufficiently evident from the Institution of
Marriage, and the prohibition of that violation of it, which is now before us.
For, God having not only at first appointed Man and Woman to be Associates to
each other, but forbidden also the adhering to any other Person than those
which we have joined our selves to in Marriage; he must consequently be thought
much more to forbid, because more contrary to his own Institution, the defiling
of our selves either with other Creatures, or those of our own Sex. But because
(God be thanked) how depraved soever we are in other Particulars, such Crimes
as these are rarely heard of among us, it shall suffice me to represent that of
St. Paul to the Romans, where he censures such Extravagances as these, as vile
and unnatural, and such as God suffered the Heathen to fall into, as a just
Punishment of their Idolatry. For, for this cause (says he) even because they
changed the Truth of God into a Lie, God also gave them up unto vile
affections: for even their Women did change the natural use into that which is
against nature: and likewise also the Men, leaving the natural use of the
Woman, burned in their lust one toward another, Men with Men working that
which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompense of their error
which was meet, Romans 1.26, 27.

2. But neither shall I say much of Incestuous Mixtures, that is to say, where
Persons assume to themselves, though in the Band of Wedlock, such as are too
near of kin to them, and particularly those that are to them in the place of
Parents, or stand upon the same level with them. For, beside that (as was
before observed) God has provided against such Uncleanness by special Laws,
and they therefore, by the Rule before laid down, to be reckoned to this
Prohibition; beside that (as was before also observed) they pervert the Order
of Nature, and destroy that Reverence which is due from Inferiors to
Superiors, by the Law of Nature, and this of Moses: that such Mixtures are no
less unlawful to Christians, St. Paul evidently declares, in the Case of the
Incestuous Corinthian; he, by virtue of Christ's Power, and his own Apostolical
one, commanding to deliver him up unto Satan, which undoubtedly he would not
have done, if it had not been a Transgression of the Christian Law. And though
it be true, that all that has the Name of Incest, is not of the same Nature;
as particularly, when the Man marries his own Sister, or Brothers Wife: yet as
there want not Instances among the Heathen Ocellus Luc. De natura Vniversi.
part pol. text. 10. (...), etc. Vid. not. Vizzanii ad locum.
of the dislike of such Matches, and particularly of that of Brothers and
Sisters; so they are sufficiently prejudiced by the Inconveniences they draw
after them, and such as the Light of Nature prompts us to avoid. For, beside
that if Marriage were permitted betwixt such as are so near of kin, that free
and continual Intercourse that is between them, would, in all probability, take
off that Shame which is the Guard of Chastity, and prompt them to unlawful
Desires and Enjoyments; it would also, as Philo De special. legibus. Ti (...).
expresses it, (from whom I have borrowed both the one and the other Reason)
shut up within the Walls of a Private Family, that Charity and Communion, which
might otherwise diffuse it self to Continents and Islands, and, in fine, to the
whole World: Marriage with Strangers (as the same Philo goes on) producing new
Relations and Kindred, and such as fall not short of that which nearness of
Blood produces.

3. From Unnatural and Incestuous Mixtures, pass we to that which is neither,
but comes up more close to the Crime that is expressly forbidden; I mean, the
defiling of a Person, which though not married, yet is betrothed to another.
For, beside that she and her Paramour, no less than the Adulterer and
Adulteress, are commanded by God to be put to death, Deuteronomy. 22.23, 24. which
shows, that their Crimes are of near affinity with each other; the Reason there
given of God's severity to the Defiler, is, because he had humbled his
Neighbors Wife; plainly intimating, that as when Persons are betrothed to each
other, though they have not passed the Solemnities of Marriage, yet they are in
the account of God as Man and Wife; so being such, both she and her Paramour
are by the same God looked upon as Adulterers, and consequently direct
Transgressors of this Commandment. This only would be added, (because what
Betrothing is, is not commonly understood, as being little used among us) that
by Betrothing we understand not a Promise of future Marriage, according as it
is vulgarly taken; but the actual passing over that Interest they have in
themselves, to those to whom they are so betrothed, and receiving back a Power
over them: As if a Man should say to the Woman, I take thee for my lawful Wife;
and the Woman to the Man, I take thee for my lawful Husband. For though a
promise of Marrriage may oblige to the performance, if it be not rescinded by
the joint consent of both Parties, yet it does not actually pass over to the
Party, to whom it is made, that Power which we have over our own Bodies, and
consequently neither makes the Parties promising to be in the Relation of Man
and Wife, nor is that Betrothing which we speak of.

4. How the sins before mentioned are reducible to this Commandment, has been
at large declared, together with such other Reasons from the light of Reason
and Nature, as show them to be really criminal: Enquire we therefore in the
next place what is to be thought of simple Fornication, that is to say, where
the Offenders are both single Persons. Where first of all I shall take it for
granted, that it is to be looked upon as here forbidden, if it can be otherwise
made appear to be an unlawful Lust, because as was before said, this, and other
the Commandments of each Table, were intended as Summaries of the Law of God,
and of its several both Precepts and Prohibitions. Now that simple Fornication
is an unlawful Lust, and as such to be avoided and abhorred, will appear first,
from what we have before said concerning the Institution of Marriage. For it
appearing from thence, that God has appointed that, as the means whereby both
to prevent the evils of Solitude, and to propagate the World, all other
Commerce must be looked upon as forbidden, and particularly that which simple
Fornication does involve; this (as Grotius observes) not only being distinct
from Marriage, but driving Men from it, because promising them the same
satisfaction at an easier rate. I observe secondly, that as simple Fornication
is inconsistent with the Institution of Marriage, and as such therefore to be
looked upon as unlawful, so it is directly contrary to the Laws of the same
God, by which the Decalogue was given; there being not only an express
prohibition that there should be no Whore of the Daughters of Israel, Deuteronomy.
23.17. but command given by God for the stoning of that Damsel, which should be
found to have been corrupted before Marriage; because, as there follows, she
had wrought folly in Israel to play the whore in her Fathers House, Deuteronomy.
22.21. And though I know it has been thought that there was not the like
prohibition of the use of stranger Women, which, if true, would have absolved
the Men from the imputation of Fornication, where an Israelitish Woman was not
their complice in it, yet as the Proverbs of Solomon set a Brand upon such
Persons, and upon all communication with them, so that such a Fornication was
no less interdicted than that with Israelitish Women, St. Paul plainly shows, 1
Cor. 10.8. he there ascribing that slaughter which we read of in the 25th. of
Numbers, to the Israelites committing Fornication with the Daughters of Moab,
and exhorting those he wrote to to take warning by their Example. But so that
the more sober Jews were also persuaded, is evident from Philo Philo. tractatu
(...), ubi sanctum illum virum introducit, sic importunitati herae suae
repugnantem. (...).
and Maimonid. More Nevochim, part. 3. c. 49. Ad impediendum itaque ista mala,
and e contra ut hoc bonum promoveatur, distinctio scil. familiarum, prohibitae
sunt meretrices and meritorii vel cyuadi, nec ullus concubitus per missus est,
nisi cum propria uxore, quae public in matrimonium ducitur.
Maimonides, both the one and the other representing all cohabitation as
unlawful, which was not within the state of Wedlock. Now though from the
unlawfulness of simple Fornication among the Jews, it be not difficult to
collect that it is much more unlawful among Christians, because our Savior
came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it, and particularly as you may see,
Mat. 5.27, 28. as to that Commandment we are now upon; yet because there want
not more direct proofs of the unlawfulness thereof among us, than any we have
before produced, I think it not amiss to add them unto the former, and so much
the rather because all we can allege will be little enough in this licentious
age to stop the progress of it. Now that there want not such proofs of the
unlawfulness of Fornication among Christians, is evident from several places of
the New Testament, such as are that of 1 Cor. 6.18. and Heb. 13.4. in the
former whereof St. Paul tells us, that neither Fornicatours, nor Adulterers,
shall inherit the Kingdom of God: in the latter, the same St. Paul, or whoever
was the Author of that Epistle, that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will
judge: For as the word which we render Fornicatours and Whoremonger, signifies
properly the former, and is not therefore to be construed in any other sense,
where there is not something in the Text to determine it otherwise; so, that it
is to be taken in that sense which our Translatours affix to it, is evident in
each of the places alleged; St. Paul both in the one and the other
distinguishing it from Adultery, as in the latter opposing it to the state of
Marriage, and consequently neither denoting any deviation from the worship of
the True God, which is sometimes, though Metaphorically, the sense of the word
Fornication, nor yet any irregularity in contracting Marriage, such as is an
Incestuous Match, which is at other times the signification of it. But neither
is there less force in that of the same St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6.18. where he does
not only command fleeing Fornication, which is in reason to be construed in the
proper sense of the word, because he speaks immediately before of a Man's
joining himself to an Harlot; but moreover represents it as a defiling of the
Temple of God, which whosoever does, God will be sure to destroy. All which
whosoever shall consider, will easily believe that simple Fornication is
unlawful, as well as Adultery, or any other act of Uncleanness: For what other
Fornication can be supposed to be intended, where an Harlot is made the object
of it, and Men are moreover, in the beginning of the next Chapter, commanded to
Marry to avoid it? And though it be true, that the Law of Nature affords not
such evident proofs of the unlawfulness thereof, as of Adultery; yet as they,
who had no other light to guide them, saw enough in it to make them detest it,
as the sinners themselves to oblige them to hide their wickedness; Chrysipp.
(...). Verba sunt, (...). Vid. Origin. adv. Celsum, li. 4. p. 206.
Chrysippus giving us to understand, that such kind of cattle at first
exercised their Trade out of Cities, and were wont to cover their Faces with a
Veil, that in process of time they threw away their Veils, but were not
suffered to enter into Cities till after the World came to be more depraved:
so, that the Light of Nature is not without some proof of its unlawfulness, is
evident from those inconveniences, which naturally arise from the permission
of it; the Children of such mixtures through the uncertainty of their Father,
being apt to be rejected by all her Paramours, or at least not to be provided
for by any, with that affection and care which is due from a Parent to a Child.
Neither will it avail to say that that inconvenience may be avoided, by
appropriating such a sinner to a Man's self. For though I deny not that such an
one may be faithful to her Paramour, and thereby give no real cause of the
uncertainty of his offspring: yet as there is little reason for any Man to
hope it of her, who has so little consideration of her own reputation, as to
take up so infamous a Trade; so it cannot at all be hoped for, unless there be
a Covenant between the Parties, which makes it little different from a
Marriage, but however rather a Concubinacy than a Fornication. Which, that I
may add that by the way, though it have not much from Nature to oppugn it, yet
is contrary to the Institution of the Almighty; that, as was before said, not
only requiring the union of the Man unto the Woman, but such an union also as
might procure her respect as well as fellowship, and a right of participation
in all he had. The former whereof as Concubines could not lay claim to, who are
made by the Civil Law L. Item legato, Sect. Parvi D. de legate. 3. Parvi autem
refert, uxori an concubinae quis leget, quae ejus causa empta parata sunt, sane
enim nisi dignitate nibil interest. Vid. and L. Donationes D. de donationibus.
to differ from a Wife in Dignity, according as the Judicious Hooker Eccl.
Polity, li. 5. Sect. 73.
has also observed; so, that they were devoid of the latter, the small
Portions their Children were put off with show; the Scripture telling us of
Abraham, Genesis 25.5, 6. that whereas he gave all that he had to Isaac the Son of
his lawful Wife, he gave only gifts to the Sons of his Concubines, and sent
them away from him.

5. Lastly, (for Adultery is a fruitful crime, and comprehends not only all
Deviations from the Institution of Marriage, such as Fornication and
Concubinacy, but also all Excesses in it) he who is immoderate Adulter est
uxoris amator acrior.
in his love toward a lawful Consort is no less an Offender against this
Commandment than he who places it upon an unlawful one; both the one and the
other arising from an intemperate Philo de special. leg. page 600 (...).
appetite, which converts even our Meat and Drink into a sin, and taking us off
from more spiritual pleasures.

Of the grosser sort of Uncleanness what has been said may suffice, and
therefore so far of the Commandment that forbids them. But because (as has
been more than once intimated) the lesser sort of sins are forbidden in this
Commandment, as well as the greater, and together with them, all Incentives to
them either in our selves or others; therefore, to make my Discourse complete,
I must make them also the subject of my enquiry, and both discover and censure
them. And here in the first place I shall make no difficulty to represent, that
the Unclean desires of the Heart are no less forbidden by the Commandment, than
any of the expressions of it; partly because the consent of the Heart is that
which corrupts even our outward actions, but more especially, because our
Savior himself has told us, that he who looks upon a Woman to lust after her,
has committed Adultery with her already in his heart, Mat. 5.28. But neither,
secondly, shall I make any difficulty, upon the score of the foresaid
affirmation, to represent as forbidden all such looks, gestures, and touches,
as result from such irregular desires. For if, as our Savior there intimates,
but St. Peter 2 Pet. 2.14.
does expressly affirm, the Eyes may be full of Adultery, there is no doubt the
same charge may fall upon the Lips or Hand, if they be guided by the same
inordinate passion. There is less doubt, thirdly, especially after the
Declaration of Christianity, of the prohibition of the Uncleanness of the
Tongue; St. Paul exhorting in one place to lay aside all filthy communication,
Col. 3.8. as in another, to wit Ephesians. 5.4. All filthiness, and foolish talking,
and jesting which are not convenient: in fine, that they should not suffer any
corrupt communication to proceed out of their mouth, Ephesians. 4.29. And though I
know the Stoics, who were otherwise a Grave and Sober Sect, made little, or
rather no account of such kind of expressions, they arguing (as Tully In Epist.
ad Papirium Paetum. li. 9. Ep. 22
tells us) that if there were any expressions really dishonest, they must
become such, either by the subject matter of them, or the words themselves; the
former whereof could not be, because the same thing might be honestly enough
expressed in other words, as neither the latter, because the very same
expressions might in another sense commendably be used, both which the same
Tully does at large exemplify: though therefore I say, the Stoics made no
account at all of such expressions, yea moreover represented the dislike of
them as foolish and unreasonable; yet as they could not for all their subtilty
draw the generality of Men into their opinion, nor I am persuaded satisfy
their own Consciences; so, that that Argument of theirs was vain and
fallacious, may appear from hence, that beside the principal Idea Vid. La
Logique, ou, L'Art de Penser. 1 Party. 13 Chap. --
or notion of words, there is oftentimes an accessory one, which does not only
much vary the signification of them, but give them a different estimate in the
World. Thus for example, though to say you lie, signifies no more in the
principal Idea of it, than to say you know the contrary to what you speak: yet
inasmuch as in the estimate of the World which gives Laws to Speech, it does
moreover connote the Speakers contempt of him he gives the lie to, it is justly
looked upon as a more reproachful expression, and accordingly so resented in
the World. In like manner, though unclean expressions contain no more in their
principal Idea, than what is or may be expressed in more civil ones; yet
inasmuch as together with that they do also connote that pleasure which they
give to our corrupt Nature, the Idea whereof will be apt to excite irregular
motions and desires in the Hearers, they are justly looked upon as vile and
abominable, and as such to be abhorred by all modest and civil Persons. Which
said, I shall answer more directly to that Dilemma of the Stoics, by which
they seem to themselves to have driven all Modesty out of the World. For be it,
which is the proof of their first allegation, that the thing couched under
unclean words may be honestly enough expressed in others; yet it will not
thence follow (which is the thing they desire to infer from it) that an
expression can receive no pollution from the subject matter of it, and
consequently, as to that particular, is not capable of being unclean. For
though that which is the matter of unclean words, may be honestly enough
expressed in other, if you consider it as to the substance or principal Idea of
it; yet can it not so, if you take in also the modus or accessory Idea, which
is that which makes an expression to be unclean. Again, though it be also true,
which is produced for the proof of the second Allegation, that that expression
which is looked upon as dishonest in one sense, may yet be commendably used in
another; yet will not that at all avail to show that no expression can be
dishonest, which is the thing for which the dilemma is produced; because we do
not pretend to evince the dishonesty of an expression from the sound it gives,
but from the sense which is couched in it, which therefore where it is
different, may give it a different estimate, and at the same time it makes it
dishonest in one sense, make it to be looked upon as commendable in another.

But not to insist any longer upon the forementioned Argument of the Stoics,
because however it may have amused some Persons, yet it has hardly convinced
so much as themselves, (so great a disgust is there in Nature against all
impure and immodest expressions) I will choose rather to go on to show the
incentives and occasions of Uncleanness, as which we are no less obliged to
avoid. Of this nature is Sloth and Ease, because disposing the Body to it, and
giving the Devil an opportunity to frame our Minds to the approbation of it: Of
the same nature is Luxury or Excess in Meat and Drink, because exciting,
nourishing, and corroborating our Natural Propensions to it. Of the same nature
again is converse with Persons of loose or immodest behavior, as by whose
Example or Communication it will be almost impossible not to be depraved: Of
the like, the reading of loose Books, or listening to impure Songs, or resorting
to offensive Plays: The two latter, by how much the more grateful they are to
our Sense, and Passion, and Understanding, becoming so much the more
pernicious, when instead of ministering to the ends of Virtue, and an innocent
Pleasure to which they are admirably fitted of themselves, they are forced to
serve the purposes of Ribaldry and Profaneness. And though that may perhaps be
thought to be no furtherer of Uncleanness, but on the contrary the repressor of
it; yet Reason as well as Experience shows, that to combat an impure
Temptation when it is strong and present, though with never so rational
Arguments, does rather irritate than extinguish it; because we cannot frame our
Minds to dispute against it, but we must bring its allurements into our view,
which under such circumstances will prevail above all our Reason and
Resolution. The most safe, as well as most easy method of Conquest is, to
fight as the Parthians do fleeing, and either to run from them into Company or
to other Thoughts; which if we do, we shall not only defeat theirs and the
Devils purposes, but be thereby better qualified to look them afterward in the
face, and not only avoid but subdue them. Such are the Incentives to that
Impurity which is here forbidden, and which therefore it will concern us as
much as in us lies to avoid; as it will also to take care, lest we draw upon us
the guilt of other Persons, by ministering these or other such like Incentives
to them. In which number, as there is no doubt an immodest attire is to be
reckoned, as by which Women of ill Fame seek to train unweary Persons into
their Snares; so what is modest or immodest is to be judged of by the custom of
the place, and by the example of Religious Persons in it.

I will conclude this Discourse, and my explication of the Commandment, with an
admonition to set before you the excellency of the pleasures of the Mind above
those of the Sense or Body. For as it is for want of this consideration, that
Men pursue the latter with so much earnestness, as if there were not only no
pleasures comparable to them, but none beside them; so they would be quickly
taken off both from that conceit and pursuit, if they adverted only to the
duration of the other. For whilst the pleasures of Sense by being repeated
become dull and insipid, that I say not also irksome and afflictive, the
pleasures of the Mind, and particularly that of Knowledge, increase with their
enjoyment, and do not only not satiate our appetite but intend it.

THE EIGHTH COMMANDMENT.
THE EIGHTH COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not steal.

PART I.
The Contents.
The Explication begins with a discourse concerning Property, which this
Commandment both supposes and professes to maintain. That defined to be such
a Right or Title, by which the thing enquired after does so become one either
Person's or Societies as to its use or emolument, as not to be common to them
with others: And is either with a power of Alienation, as all plenary
Properties are, or without, as the possessions of Vsufructuaries properly so
called. Enquiry is next made what foundation it has in Nature, which is shown
so far to enforce it as to persuade the introducing where it is not, and the
confirming and cherishing it where it is: As is made appear both as to those
things which are immediately instrumental to our support, and those which are
only mediately, and by virtue of what they do produce; the former being wholly
useless, where they are not impropriated, as the latter not likely to have
their due cultivation otherwise, or be peaceably enjoyed. Property more truly
resolved into the Divine Institution, and particularly into that grant of
Dominion which was made to Adam first, and then to Noah and his Sons. The
Properties of Men as they now stand resolved into those original Grants, The
disposition of the Divine Providence, and, where they have been before filled,
into the will also of the precedent Possessour. An Answer to such Objections as
are made, either against the being of Property, or our way of establishing it.
As to the former whereof is shown, that the Community which was in the
Primitive Church was neither of Divine Institution as to it, nor induces any
Obligation upon the present: As to the latter, that Dominion is not founded
either in Power or Grace. That Dominion is not founded in Power is evidenced
from its supposing Men at liberty to seize upon what they please, without
consideration of those who have the same Interest: Which is both contrary to
that love which Men ought to have for one another, and destructive of that
Community which it supposes. That Hypothesis which founds Dominion in Grace
evidenced to be alike unsound, from the dishonor it does to God who professes
himself to be kind to the unthankful and the evil; to our Religion, which is
thereby made to serve to evil and covetous purposes; and (because Grace is a
thing not easily to be known, or made out) to uncertainty, contention, and
confusion; in fine, from Gods subjecting the believing Servant to the
unbelieving Master, the believing Subject to the unbelieving Prince, yea,
obliging him to pay Tribute to him out of his own. An Inquiry whether the
Properties of Men are limited, and what those Limitations are. That they are
limited by God, is made appear, from that Original Grant of Dominion which God
made to Adam and Noah, and the Laws he has since made concerning the Use and
Disposition of them: such as are those which enjoin Sobriety, the honoring of
God and his Priests with our Substance, and the being charitable to the
Necessitous. The Properties of Men alike limitable by those that are in
Authority, so far as their own Necessities, and those of the Public do
require; but not so by private Persons, without their own consent.

THOUGH I am well aware I shall find work enough in explicating the Nature, and
investigating the Species of those Sins which are forbidden in this
Commandment; yet I foresee it necessary, even to the right stating of those, to
premise something concerning Property, which the Interdict of Stealing does
suppose. For, Stealing being nothing else but the clancular taking away of that
which is another Man's, neither can we suppose such a Sin as Stealing, unless
there be such a thing as Property; nor judge of the Quality of the Theft,
without respect had to that Property which it is an interversion of. Taking it
therefore for granted, that to the due knowledge of the Nature of Stealing, it
is necessary to have a competent one of Dominion or Property, I will allot this
Discourse to the Investigation of it, and accordingly inquire, 1. What Property
is. 2. What Foundation it has in Nature. 3. By what means it was at first
introduced. 4. By what ways Men do now come to attain it. To which I shall
subjoyn, in the 5. Fifth place, The Examination of those things which have been
alleged either against the Being of Property, or for the establishing it upon
other Principles. 6. And lastly, inquire, Whether the Properties of Men are
subject to Limitations, and what those Limitations are.


1. Of the Nature of Property much need not be said, at least as to that sense
wherein we are to take it in this whole Discourse: It may suffice therefore to
define it to be such a Right or Title, by virtue whereof, the thing inquired
after does so become one, either Persons, or Societies, as to its Use or
Emolument, as not to be common to them with others; and is either with a Power
of Alienation, as all plenary Dominions or Properties are; or without it, as
the Possessions of Usufructuaries, properly so called, and other such like
imperfect Properties. The only difficulty will be, as to the Foundation it
has in Nature, its Original, and the Means of acquiring of it, with other the
things before proposed.

2. For the resolution of the first whereof, we must distinguish of such things
as are immediately instrumental to our Support, and such as are only
mediately, and by virtue of those things which they produce or maintain. If the
Question be concerning the former, of which sort are Food, and Raiment; and the
like; so, no doubt, Reason and Nature do so far enforce a Propertyin them, as
the Necessities of Nature do require. For, the Life of Man being not to be
supported, without such an Application of them to our selves, as makes them
perfectly useless to others; there will arise a necessity of appropriating such
a Portion of them to every Person, as may suffice to the support of him. And
though I will not affirm as much concerning those things by which the former
are produced or maintained, of which nature are Trees to the Fruit, and the
Earth to those and all other the Supports of Humane Nature; yet I shall not
stick to maintain, that the same Nature dictates the expediency of a Property,
and persuades to the observation of it: Partly, because if Men had not distinct
proportion in the Earth, from whence all the Supports of Humane Lise receive
either their Being or Subsistence, they would not be over-forward to give it
that Cultivation which it requires, as fearing lest what they had so cultivated
should be reaped by others; and partly, because Men's Necessities and Desires
being in general the same, there would otherwise, especially since the Peopling
of the World, have arisen among Men perpetual and irreconcilable Discords,
concerning the enjoying of those Benefits which it affords. But other
Foundations in Nature, as it will be hard to find, so I think it extremely vain
to seek; because (as I shall by and by show) Property had its Orignal from
Divine Institution, and because those Principles which I have alleged from
Nature, may suffice to persuade those to whom the Divine Institution is
unknown, to introduce it where it is not already, and to confirm and cherish it
where it is.

3. It being thus evident what Foundation Property has in Nature, proceed we
to inquire, how it was at first introduced. For the resolution whereof, though
it be commonly alleged out of the Ancient Justinus historicus, li. 43. statim
ab initio. Italiae cultores primi Aborigines fuere, quorum Rex Saturnus tantae
justitiae fuisse traditur, ut neque servierit sub illo quisquam, neque quicquam
privatae rei habuerit, sed omnia communia and indivisa omnibus fuerint, veluti
unum cunctis patrimonium esset. Cicero de Officiis, lib. 1. Sunt autem privata
nulla natura: sed aut veteri occupatione, ut qui quondam in vacua venerunt: aut
ofctoria, ut qui bello potiti sunt: aut lege, aut pactione, condition, sort.
Virgilius Georgicorum lib. 1.

Ante Jovem nulli subigebant arva coloni,
Nec signare quidem aut partiri limite campum
Fas erat; in medium quaerebant -- De eodem saeculo Seneca, in Octavia. Act. 2.
-- Pervium cunctis iter,
Communis usus omnium rerum fuit.

Heathen, and particularly the Poets, that all things at first were common unto
all, and continued so to be, till either the Prevalence of some had
appropriated what they pleased to themselves, or the general Consent of
Mankind, led thereto by the former Considerations, put them upon a distribution
of them: yet, as Instit. Divin. li. 5. c. 5 Quod Poetae dictum [illud nempe
prius citatum ex Virgilio] sic accipi oportet, non ut existimemus nihil omnino
tum fuisse privati; sed more Poetico figuratum, ut intelligamus tam liberales
fuisse homines, ut natas sibi fruges non includerent; nec soli absconditis
incubarent, sed pauperes ad communionem proprii laboris admitterent.
Lactantius has well observed, that possibly nothing else was meant by that
ancient Community, than that the Men of elder Times were so liberal, as to
admit the Poorer sort to a participation of their Possessions and Labors, all
Expressions of Poets being not strictly to be understood; so, that there was
such a thing as Property from the beginning, even by the Institution of the
Divine Majesty, I doubt not to make appear from that first Grant of Dominion,
from which it may seem more rational to infer a Community. It Is in Genesis
1.28. and the Words these. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing that moves upon the earth, as well as over the Earth it self.
For, beside that Man and Woman are by the Institution of the Divine Majesty but
as one Person, and therefore that Dominion which God gave to Adam and Eve to be
looked upon rather as a Property, than a Community, (whence it is, that in the
repetition of this Grant to Noah and his Sons, there is not the least mention
either of Noah's Wife, or of theirs; which in all probability there would have
been, if they had had an equal Interest in it with their Husbands, or were to
be looked upon as distinct Persons from them) beside this, I say, the Woman
being by the condition of her Sex subjected to the Man, makes her rather an
Usufructuary, than a Proprietary strictly so called, or as an inferior
Proprietary under a Chief, by means whereof there is not so much a Community,
as distinct but subordinate Properties. Now, as that Property wherewith our
first Parents, or rather the one of them, was invested, gave them Authority,
under God, to dispose of it to their Children, according as they themselves
should judge expedient; so, that they did accordingly dispose of it, and that
too in distinct Properties, the Story of Cain and Abel shows; the former
whereof, as the Book of Genesis Chapter 4.2. etc. and Seld. Mare Claus. l. 1. c. 4.
informs us, had Cattle and Meadows for his Property; the latter, Tillage and
Corn. For, that these were not only their Employments under their Father, but
their Properties, appears by their bringing of each for an Offering, and
passing them away, as well as having an inspection of them. Now, though what
has been said concerning Adam, sufficiently shows what the Original of
Property was, and by whom and after what manner it was at first introduced; yet
because Humane Kind had as it were a second Beginning in Noah, all but him and
his Family being destroyed by the Flood, I think it not amiss to show the same
to have been the Original of Property, amidst this second Race of Mankind. To
the evidencing whereof, though that of Genesis may seem very repugnant, where
renewing the forementioned Charter of Dominion, God directs it to Noah and
his Sons, Genesis 9.1, 2. whereby this lower World may seem to have been given to
them in common; yet as it is not easy to suppose God would make Noah and his
Sons equal, because that would have taken off from that Reverence which was due
unto the Father; so, that Noah did not look upon himself as such, the Blessing
which he pronounced upon Japhet shows, Genesis 9.27. For, the Blessings of Fathers
being anciently with Authority, and conferring those Advantages which they
pronounced, Noah blessing Japhet with the enlarging of this Borders, shows him
not to have been without Authority of enlarging or confining them. Whence it
is, that though in the Old Testament there be no mention of Noah's interessing
himself in that Division of the Earth which was made between Noah's Sons, in
the tenth Chapter of Genesis; yet a Tradition has prevailed, (as Mr. Seldom
Mar. Claus. l. 1. c. 4.
observes out of Eusebius and Cedrenus) that Noah, by direction from the
Almighty, was the Author of it, and consigned it to them by his last Will and
Testament; admonishing them moreover, that no one should invade his Brothers
Territories, nor do any injury to him. Which is the more probable, because
otherwise Dissentions might have risen among them, which it is not to be
supposed but so good a Father as Noah would provide against; and much less is
it to be supposed, but the God of Peace and Order would. This only would be
added, though more than once before insinuated, that though God made those two
Heads of Mankind the Proprietors of this sublunary World, yet not so as to
license them to confine it wholly to themselves whilst alive, or to make any
other distribution of it after their Deaths, than the Laws of God and Reason
should allow. For, beside that this Charter of Dominion is by God directed to
Noah and his Sons, which cannot by any means be salv'd, unless they had a Title
in him; both in that and the former Grant, premising the Admonition of Increase
and multiply, and replenish the earth, to that Charter of Dominion which he
gave them over it, he thereby plainly intimated an Obligation in those two
great Heads of Mankind, to impart of that Dominion to their Posterity, and a
Right in that Posterity to enjoy it: As indeed without them neither could they
have subdued the Earth, nor exercised that Dominion over it which they had. The
Result of which Observation is, that all the Descendents of Adam and Noah have
a natural Right in it, as being given not only to them, but in and by them to
their Descendents, or (as the Psalmist has expressed it, Psalm. 115.16.) to the
children of men.

4. But because whatsoever Distribution was made in those elder Times, it is
certain that the Bounds of Men's Possessions have been often and greatly
confounded, by that Avarice and Injustice which have since overspread the whole
Earth; but however, there are no Records extant of Donations and Successions,
whereby Men might be assured of the Legitimateness of their several
Acquisitions: therefore it will be necessary to inquire, in order to our own
particular satisfactions, by what means Men do now come to have a Property in
their several Estates. For the discovery whereof, not to tell you, because that
is sufficiently apparent, that God being the Great Landlord of the World, Men's
Proprieties, and the Modifications thereof, must receive their Being from his
Will; as neither, because that is alike evident from the Premises, that the
distinction of Properties is of his own blessed Institution: I shall choose
rather to inquire, how this Will of his may appear, as to the several
Properties we either do or may enjoy. In order whereunto, I will inquire, 1.
Concerning such Lands or Goods as are without any present Possessor; or, 2.
Such as are already occupied. If the Question be concerning such Lands or Goods
as are without any present Possessor, so the common Consent of Mankind has
attributed the Right to those who should first possess themselves of them: And
not without reason, if we remember, that such Impropriations are not only not
displeasing to the Divine Majesty, but of his own Blessed Institution. For,
being so, it is but reasonable to think it to be the Will of God, that those
should have the Property of it, to whom he by his Providence has both made the
first Discovery, and given the opportunity of possessing themselves of them.
Whence it is, that things left, or thrown away, do by the same general Consent
of Mankind become the Property of the Finder; as in like manner things casually
lost; unless either the Owner thereof does appear, in which case it does not,
because (as the Lawyers speak) there was in the Owner a Purpose of retaining
it, which is by the same Law of Nations a kind of Possession; or it be
otherwise determined by the Laws of the Place we live in, by which, as I shall
afterward show, Men's several Properties are tempered and bounded. But because
the World is already so fully Peopled, that there is little room for such kind
of Acquisitions, especially in that Part of the World in which we inhabit;
therefore it may not be amiss to inquire rather concerning Property in those
things which are already possessed, both as to those that do possess them, or
desire the possession of them. Concerning the former whereof, as much need not
be said, after I have already shown you, that the seizing upon any thing that
is free, becomes the Property of him that seiseth it; so, much less of such
Possessions as are by the Lawyers called Bonae fidei, or such as do not appear
to have been acquired by any evil Arts: It being to be presumed to be the Will
of God, that those should have the Property of any thing, who are not only
without any evil Arts, but by the course of his Providence put into the
Possession of it. And though the same be not to be said of such Possessions as
are acquired by evil Arts, because, though the Providence of God may pass for a
Declaration of his Will and Approbation, where it is not contradicted; yet it
cannot be looked upon as such, where it crosses his Revelations, because those
are both the Primary and most direct Interpretations of it: yet there are two
things which may and must be said, as to the evidencing of that Property which
we have said to arise from them. 1. That Possession, of what sort soever, is to
be esteemed good against him that is not able to show a better; and
consequently, that the evil Arts whereby any Man has attained it, cannot
excuse him from Sin who shall either fraudulently, or violently, endeavor to
take it from him. 2. That Possessions which they call of Evil faith, if
corroborated by the continuance of some Ages, (but how many, must be left to
the Laws of the Place, or the Law of Nations, to determine) may give the
Possessor a Right or Property in them: As because otherwise there would be
little Security to the Consciences of Possessors, considering the great and
violent Alterations that have happened in all States and Kingdoms; (For, Majorum
primus quisquis fuit ille tuorum,
Aut pastor fuit, aut illud quod dicere nolo.)


so also because there would otherwise arise endless Controversies about
Possessions: both which Inconveniences it is to be supposed the God of Peace
and Order has provided against. To all which we may add, That as it is God
who sets up one and pulls down another, so it is in reason to be presumed to
be his Will to keep both the one and the other in their several Conditions,
when he gives him whom he has advanced so long a continuance in his Station,
and suffers not the other in all that while to be able to remove him from it.

From the Possessor of any thing, pass we to the Expectant of it, and inquire
by what means he may come to have the Property of it. In order whereunto, I
say, first, That it must be ordinarily by the Act of the present Possessor of
it. For, the Possessor of any Estate acquiring thereby a Property in it, that
is to say, a Right whereby the thing possessed is so his, as not to be common
to him with others; it is necessary to its becoming the Right and Property of
another, that he who has the present Property, transfer that Property of his
unto the other, whether it be by Gift, as all Deeds and Legacies; or by
Contract, whether explicit or implicit; the former whereof is, when Men either
sell or mortgage their Property for a Valuable Consideration; the latter, when
they oblige themselves to an Act, as for example, to the Payment of a certain
Sum of Money, which is not to be attained without the Alienation of the other,
either in whole or in part: he who so obliges himself, because otherwise the
Obligation would be null, tacitly contracting to part with so much of his
Property as will satisfy the Obligation he has taken upon him. Ordinarily
therefore no Man can acquire the Right and Property of another, without the Act
of the Possessor of it. But, as it may sometime happen, that the Party may pass
out of this World, without making any such Act, in which case it does not only
cease to be his, but naturally falls to the next of Kin, it being to be
presumed, that it was the will of the Person dying to have it so, as being most
obliged to gratify them; so it may also happen (as I shall afterward show)
that the Party may by some Misdemeanour forfeit that Property of his to the
State, of which he is both a Member and a Subject. In which Case, though
without, yea against his present will, the Property of the Delinquent may
accrue to the State, and by it be either preserved in its own power, or passed
over to another. This only would be added, That even such a Translation cannot
be said to be altogether without the will of the Person that offends: For,
every Man, either expressly or tacitly, binding himself to submit to the
Penalty of the Laws of that State of which he professes himself to be a
Subject, does, eo nomine, where the Penalty is the Forfeiture of his Property,
consent to the transferring of it, and consequently makes it the Property of
another.

5. Having thus shown as well that there is such a thing as Property, as by
what means it was at first Instituted, or comes now to be acquired; I think it
not amiss, for the clearing both of the one and the other, to examine those
things which have been alleged against the Being of Property, at least under
the Times of the Gospel, or for the establishing it upon other Principles.

There are who supersicially considering that place in the Acts of the
Apostles, where it is said, that the multitude of those that believed were not
only of one heart, but had all things common, have from thence made bold to
conclude, That the Law of Christianity obliges all Believers to have all
things common among themselves. In answer to which, not to tell you, that
Example is no Law, and consequently, that the Practice of those first Believers
does not induce an Obligation; as neither (though I might) that what may be of
force in a Society, which is but yet in its beginning, ought not to be drawn
into example in a settled one: I shall choose rather to allege a Passage in the
same place, which shows this Community of theirs to have been the Result of
their own free will, and not of necessary Obligation: That, I mean, which was
uttered by St. Peter to Ananias, who sold his Possessions upon a pretense to
make them common to other Believers. For St. Peter demanding, Acts 4.5. Whilst
it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine
own power? plainly shows, that Christianity did not oblige them to renounce
their Properties, but that they might, if they had so pleased, for any thing in
Christianity to the contrary, have kept their Lands as they were; or, after
they had sold them, kept the Prices of them.

But because that Dust which has been raised in this Argument, does not arise
so much from the questioning of a Property, as from the proper Bases upon which
it ought to be established; I will, without more ado, apply my self to consider
of two Hypotheses, which have been set up in opposition to my own; whereof the
former founds Dominion in Power, the latter in Grace and Piety. As to the
former of these, much need not be said, because it does not only proceed upon
the supposition of such a Community as never was, but does farther suppose Men
at liberty to seize upon what they please, without consideration had of those
that have the same Interest: Which is not only contrary to that Love and
Affection which the Sons of Men ought to have for one another, as the Product
of the same Common Stock; but destructive of that very Community which it
supposes. For, if all Men have an equal Right to all Things, they are in reason
to take such a course for the accommodation of Affairs between them, that all
Men may have their due proportion; which must be by permitting the
Determination to the Judgment of the major part, or to the more impartial
Arbitrament of a Lot. Otherwise, they do not only challenge an equal Right
with other Men, but suppose their own to be the best, which destroys that
Community which they suppose. And though it should so happen, as in such a
Community no doubt it may, that a Man should be constrained by force to assert
his own Proportion; yet as Reason and Nature forbids the use of such a Remedy,
till it do appear that more mild ones will not succeed; so it ought not to be
employed to the vindicating of any thing which is above the Proportion of him
that uses it. For, if all Men have an equal Right to every Thing, every Thing
is to continue in its Community; or, if that cannot be done without prejudice
to every one, they are of necessity to agree upon a Distribution, but however
not to challenge above their Proportion in it. But because this Hypothesis is
so wild and extravagant, that a Man must throw off his Reason, as well as his
Religion, before he can assent to it; I will proceed forthwith to the
consideration of the other, which founds Dominion in Grace and Piety.

Now though this Hypothesis looks more demurely than the other, because clad in
the Habit of that which of all others does most deserve our Respect; yet as it
has little countenance from that Religion which it dissembles, so it is
equally pernicious to it with the former, and particularly to the Christian
one. For the evidencing whereof, I will allege, first, the dishonor it does
to its Author, upon whose Honor the Reputation of Religion does depend. For,
whereas there is nothing which God more challenges to himself, or is indeed
more worthy of him, than the being kind to the unthankful and to the evil,
causing his Sun to shine upon the evil and the good, and sending his Rain upon
the just and the unjust; that Hypothesis which founds Dominion in Grace,
confines this Love of his to the Good and Just, and consequently spoils him of
that Noble Prerogative of his Nature, in being kind to the unthankful and
rebellious. But neither is it less dishonorable to that Religion which we
profess, if we consider either the Spirituality of its Motives, or the
Peaceableness of its Principles. For, whereas our Religion professes to allure
Men, not by the Bait of Earthly Pleasures, but by the more noble Pleasures of
the Mind, and that Spiritual Happiness which consists in the Sight and
Enjoyment of God; thereby removing all suspicion from it self, of seeking to
promote it self by mean Arts, or standing in need of them: that Hypothesis
which founds Dominion in Grace, subjects the Purity of Religion to the mean
Enjoyments of the World, and makes it look more like a Design upon Men's
Estates, than upon their Souls. Again, Whereas our Religion professes nothing
more than the procuring of Peace, as well of the Professors thereof with one
another, as with those that are Strangers or Enemies to it; that Hypothesis
which founds Dominion in Grace, is so far from contributing to it, that it
hardly leaves place for Peace even within our own Bosoms. For, true Peace being
so secret a thing, that we cannot certainly understand it in another, and not
without difficulty in our selves; if (as a Learned Prelate Bramhall's
Vindication of himself and Episcopal Clergy, from Mr. B's Charge of Popery, c.
1.
does well argue) Grace should give every one that pretends to it an Interest
in that which is another Man's lawful Possession, no Man's Title could be certain
to another, scarcely to himself: From whence must necessarily follow an
incredible Confusion, and an inevitable Perturbation in all Estates. To all
which, if we add, that God has expressly subjected the believing Subject to an
unbelieving Prince, and the believing Servant to the unbelieving Master; that
he has moreover enjoined the former to pay Tribute to his unbelieving Prince,
as an Acknowledgment of that Authority which God has given him over him: so we
shall not only be fully convinced, that Dominion is not founded in Grace; but
that somewhat else was intended in that, and such like Texts, which assure us
that the meek shall inherit the earth, which are the most plausible Grounds of
that Hypothesis. And indeed, as such like Promises are necessarily to be
understood with subordination to God's Glory, and the eternal Welfare of our
Souls, (both which are oftentimes more promoted by Poverty and Afflictions,
than by the affluence of Temporal Benefits) partly, because otherwise they
would be rather a Curse than a Blessing, and partly, because, in the strict
understanding of them, they are but rarely fulfilled to the Meek; which would
undoubtedly not have happened, if God, that cannot lie, had meant them in the
literal notion of the Words: so, whatever be the sense of them, they rather
show what the meek Person may promise himself from God's Providence, than any
Right in him to challenge it from the World, and much less possess himself of
by force. Such Actions as those being very inconsistent with that Meekness to
which the Inheritance of the Earth is promised.

6. But not to insist any longer on the subversion of an Hypothesis, which will
find little credit among any other than the Indigent and Discontented; as
neither among them, any longer than till those Indigences and Discontents be
removed; I will choose rather, following the Method before laid down, to inquire
whether the Properties of Men are subject to Limitations, and what those
Limitations are.

It is a common Opinion, at least amongst the Vulgar sort, that when they have
acquired a Property in any thing, it becomes so entirely theirs, that they
cannot at all be abridg'd in it without injury. Now, though I am willing to
believe, that those who are so persuaded, understand this Absoluteness of
theirs with reference only to Men; yet I think it not amiss, and so much the
rather, because all just Limitations of Men's Properties are originally from
God, to show, first, that they are limited by God, and how they are limited by
him.

That they are limited by God, needs no other Proof than that Original Grant of
Dominion which God made to Adam and Noah, and those Laws which he has since
given concerning the use or disposition of them. For, inasmuch as that Original
Grant was not to the Persons of Adam and Noah only, but to all that descended
from their Loins, as appears from the preceding Discourse; it will follow (as
was there also shown) that all the Sons of Men have a natural Right to a
Portion of it, and consequently, that particular Properties are limited by the
Necessities of those of the same Stock; whether it be by obliging the Owners to
impart of them to those their needy Brethren, or, as I shall afterward show,
by warranting the Necessitous, in the faileur of all other Means, to extort so
much from the other, as may serve to the Support of them. But neither is it
less clear from the Laws which God has since given, that Men's Properties are
limited by the Almighty. For, a Law, where it is imposed, retrenching Men's
Liberty, as to that particular which it enjoins; if God has prescribed Laws
concerning the use or disposition of them, our Property will be so far limited,
as the Laws which are imposed do direct. All therefore that will be requisite
to do, will be to instance in those Laws, which will at the same time acquaint
us how they are limited by him. Of this nature is, first, that Law which
enjoins Sobriety; a Law which is no less written in the Hearts of Men, than in
the Divine Scriptures. For, Sobriety being nothing else than a Moderation in
our Enjoyment of those Good Things which he has given us, he who prescribes
such a Moderation, does consequently so far retrench our Property, which
consists in a Right to use and enjoy them. Of the same nature are those Laws
which require the honoring of God with our Substance; whether as in the Old
Law, by offering part of it in Sacrifice; or as in the new, by imparting of
them to those who minister about Holy things: He who prescribes such a Law, so
far impairing Men's Properties, as the Service of Religion does require. Lastly,
Forasmuch as the same Law of God does enjoin ministering to the Poor out of
them, that Right which we have to use and enjoy them, must be so far
retrenched, as the Law of Charity does exact.

But because, how unwilling soever Men may be to have their Properties limited
by the Divine Majesty, yet they will be ashamed to speak it out; therefore
proceed we to inquire, whether or no, and how they may be limited by Men; which
is a Confinement Man can less patiently endure. In order whereunto, I will
entreat first of all of Princes, and then of less Public Persons.

Of the Authority of Princes in this Affair, no doubt can be made; as because
that Law of God which constitutes them, empowers them to lay a Tribute upon
their Subjects; so because every Man does, either expressly or tacitly,
stipulate to contribute toward the Support of that State whereof he professes
himself to be a Member: by means of which, though their Properties come to be
limited, yet it is in effect by themselves. Again, Forasmuch as the Public
Weal, as well as Charity, requires the Support of those who have not
wherewithal to maintain themselves, hence it comes to pass, that it is in the
power of those to whom the Care of the Public weal is committed, so far to
abridge the Properties of Private Persons, as the Necessities of those
distressed ones shall require, whether it be by permitting the loose Ears of
Corn to the gathering of the Poor, as the Custom of all Christian Nations does
prescribe; or by exacting a Contribution from their Purses, by means of which
such a part of their Properties passes over to the Poor, and the Proprietary
himself, and not they, becomes a Thief for detaining it. In fine, Wheresoever
the Public Good cannot be either procured or maintained as it ought, but by
setting Limits to, or serving it self of the Properties of particular Persons,
there, no doubt, it shall be lawful for those who have care of it, both to set
Bounds to, and serve themselves so far forth of them: He who prescribes any
End, consequently warranting the use of such Means as shall be found to be
conducing to it. Which said, nothing remains to be inquired into, but whether
the Properties of Men may receive a Limitation from more Private Persons. To
the Affirmative whereof, as no Man has or can pretend, save where he who
conferred them has affixed a Limitation, or the Proprictary himself has
consented to it; so, in each of those Cases no doubt a Limitation by Private
Persons is not only possible, but reasonable: It being but just (because the
natural Consequent of Property) that he who invests another Person with it,
should have the modelling of his own Grant; as, on the other side, that they
who consent to any such, should be bound up by it: He who consents to any
Limitation, making it his own Act, and consequently receiving no Injury by it.

PART II.
Of the Negative Part of the Commandment, which is shown to import the not
usurping upon, or any way diminishing of our Neighbor's Property. This
evidenced, not from the force of the Word Steal, which is acknowledged to
signify only the clancular taking away of that which is another; but from
the general Design of the Decalogue, the Comprehensiveness of the two foregoing
Precepts, and the Fundamental Reason of the Prohibition of Theft. An Address to
a Declaration of the Crimes that are included in it; which are such as are
distinguished from each other, either by the manner of their commission, or by
those Objects about which they are conversant. Of the former sort is, 1. The
Theft of the Heart, or that Covetousness whereby it is inclined to commit it;
as is made appear, both by God's having a principal regard to the Heart, and
the Analogy of the two former Commandments. 2. That Usurpation which the
Tongue is instrumental to, whether by its Silence in the concealing of Defects
(where is shown, what Defects may, or may not be concealed) or by its
Expressions; such as are those who put too fair a Gloss upon our own, or cast a
Disparagement upon the Commodities of others. 3. The Theft of the outward Work,
which again is made to consist in the taking away, or detaining, or corrupting
the Properties of our Neighbor. Under the first of these are ranked, all open
and violent Rapines, the using unequal or deceitful Measures, the making use of
false Lights, or other such like Artifices; the wearying a Man out of his own
with unjust Vexations, the exacting or taking of immoderate Use; where is shown
withal, that all Use is not unlawful: and, in fine, the monopolizing of
Commodities. The detaining or corrupting the Properties of our Neighbor, shown
to be, in like manner, Thefts; and the several Species thereof enumerated.

HAVING entreated at large in my last concerning Property, which this
Commandment both supposes, and (as I shall by and by show) professes to
maintain; it remains that we inquire, what it prescribes concerning it: which
may be reduced to two Heads.

1. The former whereof imports the not usurping upon, or any way diminishing
the Property of our Neighbor; which is the Negative part of the Commandment.
2. The latter, (which is the Affirmative) 1. The using of all due Means for the
procuring and maintaining of our own; and, 2. The contributing, what in us
lies, to the procuring, defending, or enlarging the Property of our Neighbor.

I. I begin with the former of these, even the Negative part of the
Commandment, affirmed by us to be the not usurping upon, or any way diminishing
of our Neighbor's Property: Where again these five things would be inquired
into.

1. How it does appear that the Negative part, or Prohibition, comprehends in
it all usurping upon, or any way diminishing of our Neighbor's Property. 2.
What particular Crimes are included in it. 3. What Actions are to be looked
upon as exempted. 4. Wherein the Criminalness of those things which are
included in it does consist. And, 5. And lastly, What Punishments may be
inflicted on them by the Civil Magistrate.
I. There being nothing more prejudicial to the strength of any Assertion, than
to suffer it to rest at all upon weak or fallacious Principles; I shall not
only wave the arguing the generality of the Prohibition from the Latitude
wherein the Word Stealing is sometimes taken, but profess my self to agree with
those who understand no other by Stealing, than the clancular taking away of
that which is another Man's; that being the proper signification of the Word,
and so understood by all the Translators of the Decalogue. And indeed, as I
shall by and by show, that there is no necessity at all of understanding it in
a more general sense; so, that we ought to take it in a more restrained one,
the Style of the Declalogue, and particularly of the two foregoing Precepts,
shows. For, making use of Murder and Adultery, which are only particular
Species of Injuriousness and Uncleanness, to denote all those which are of the
same Genus; it is but reasonable to think (especially when the Hebrew phrase
inclines us to it) that the Commandment we are now upon, made use of one
particular Crime in the matter of Injustice, to express all those that are of
the same nature with it. Which Observation, as it establishes the proper
Notion of the Word Steal, for which it was primarily produced; so withal
affords no contemptible Argument of Gods intention to forbid in it all
Usurpations whatsoever, or diminutions of the Properties of our Neighbors;
especially if we add thereto the general Design of the Precepts of the
Decalogue, and the Agreement of others with that which is here expressly
forbidden. For, with what shadow of Reason can any Man think God intended no
other Injustice than that which is expressed in the Commandment, when (beside
the general Design of the Decalogue, which I have shown to have been intended
as an Abstract of the whole Duty of Man, and the Comprehensiveness of the two
foregoing Prohibitions) those Injustices which are not mentioned are alike
Usurpations upon, or Diminutions of Men's Properties, which is the Fundamental
Reason of the Prohibition. I will conclude this Particular with that of Philo
(...) prope finem.
, in his Tract De Decalogo, where he makes this short Remarque upon the present
Precept. The Third Commandment, says he, (for so it is, in his account, of
those of the Second Table) is of not stealing, under which is to be ranked
whatsoever has the estimate of defrauding of Creditors, or denying those
things that have been deposited with us; of meddling with those things which
belong to the Public, and which consequently ought not to be shared between
Private Men; as also of shameless Rapines; in fine, of such Covetousnesses
whereby Men are induced, either openly or privily, to withdraw those things
which belong to others.

II. Now though what has been said, may give us a competent understanding of
those things which are forbidden by the Commandment; it appearing from the
Premises, that all such are, whereby the Properties of our Neighbors are any
way impaired: yet because Men are seldom so wise as to apply any general
Direction to their own particular Concernments, or at least are not over
faithful in the doing of it, I think it not amiss to draw it down to particular
Instances, and show the several Crimes which are here included: For my more
orderly enumeration whereof, I will represent, first of all, such Usurpations
or Diminutions of the Properties of Men, as are distinguished from each other
by the manner of their commission; and after that, proceed to those which
receive their denomination and distinction from those Objects about which they
are conversant.

And here, in

1. The first place, I shall not doubt to reckon, as included in the
Prohibition, that (...), or Covetousness, whereby (as Philo speaks) the Heart
of Man is inclined to usurp upon the Property of his Neighbor. For, though the
bare coveting of that which is another Man's be the Subject of another
Commandment, and shall accordingly be there considered by us; yet when it
includes in it a Desire or Resolution to get from another that which is his, by
any fraudulent, oppressive, or any other unjust Proceeding, it is in reason to
be reckoned to that Commandment which we are now upon; as because the Heart is
that which God principally looks after, and which strikes the greatest stroke
in absolving or condemning our outward Actions; so because our Savior has
reckoned to the Prohibitions of Murder and Adultery, those injurious or
unclean Purposes that are in it. For, by the same reason that a Man of
malicious or unclean Desires is to be looked upon as a Murderer or an
Adulterer; he who has either a desire, or purpose, to defraud his Neighbor,
is to be looked upon as a Thief, and consequently within the compass of the
Commandment. But so that they who were Strangers, yea Enemies to the Christian
Faith, were also persuaded, is evident from a Saying of Julian's (...). Grot.
d. l. Annot. ad c. 1.
, which is recorded by Grotius in his First Book de jure Belli ac Pacis. The
second Law (says he) and which is no less Divine than that which enjoins the
acknowledging and worshipping of a God, is that which commands wholly to
abstain from the Properties of other Men, and permits not to confound them
either in Word, or Work, or in the secret Operations of the Heart. Words worthy
of a better Mouth than that from which they proceeded; but however not rendered
unworthy of our regard by that blasphemous one from which they came: there
being nothing which the best of Religions, even our own, stands more commended
for, than the restraining of the Heart of Man from all irregular Purposes or
Desires.

2. But because (as Julian intimates in the place before-quoted) there is a
Theft or Usurpation which the Tongue is an Instrument in, therefore it may not
be amiss to show by what ways and means this little Member prejudiceth the
Properties of its Neighbor. For the more distinct explication whereof, I shall
consider, 1. First of all, of its Silence; and then, 2. Of its Words or
Expressions.


1. There is a famous Question in Tully's Book de Officiis Lib. 3.
, a Book indeed read by Boys, but worthy, if we may believe the Learned, of the
consideration of the wisest Men, yea of the gravest Theologues, as being styled
Le Journal des Scavans, vol. 1. p. 249.
by Monsieur le Fevre, Master to the late King of France, His Casuist; and by
Monsieur de Hayes, and eminent Advocate of that Kingdom, The Gospel of the Law
of Nature: But there, I say, there is a Question whether a Man be bound to
reveal the Faults of the thing he sells. On the one side, there is Profit, and
some show of Reason also: For what (says the same Tully) can be so absurd, as
for the Master of any House to make a public Proclamation by the Crier, that
he sells an infected one? On the other side, there is a greater appearance of
Ingenuity, and Clearness, and Simplicity, which are things not to be wanting in
him that pretends to Justice and Honesty, but however not to be wanting in
those who pretend to the Profession of Christianity. Where the Truth lies, is
not possible to determine all at once, because Circumstances may alter the
Case; and therefore I shall proceed to it by degrees, offering, first of all,
as an undeniable Maxim of Justice, That it is not lawful for any Person by his
concealment to screw more out of the Person he sells to, than the thing is
really worth; he who so does, undoubtedly stealing from him so much as the
things he sells are over-rated. But neither, secondly, can it be denied, that
it is equally unlawful to conceal such Defects as make the thing sold of little
use Tull. de Offic. lib. 3. Neque enim id est celare, quicquid reticeas; sed
cum, quod tu scias, id ignorare emolumenti tui causa velis eos, quorum intersit
id scire. Hoc autem celandi genus quale sit, and cujus hominis, quis non videt!
Certe non aperti, non simplicis est, non ingenui, non justi, non viri boni:
versuti potius, obscuri, astuti, fallacis, malitiosi, callidi, veteratoris,
vafri.
to him that buys it; because such a thing is really little worth to him, and
consequently the Buyer in a manner defrauded of the Money he paid. Upon which
account, if a Man should sell a Horse to him who buys him for this or that
particular use, whether of Saddle or otherwise, for which he knows him to be
unapt; in such a case I no way doubt the Seller is a Thief, because taking the
Buyers Money for that which is unuseful to him, and consequently not worth to
him what he gives for it. But as where the Defect neither makes the Thing worth
less in it self than it was sold for, nor unuseful to the Party that buys, I
see not what Obligation can lie upon the Seller to reveal the defects of his
Commodities; partly, because there are few things that have not some defect or
other, which makes it but reasonable that the Buyer should bear a share with
him; and partly because a revelation of all Defects would, by the Scruples
which it is apt to raise in the minds of Men, be an impediment to Commerce,
especially with conscientious Men; which it is for the interest of the general
Weal to keep up. This only would be added, That though it may be lawful to
conceal some Defects, yet it is not such to deny any; this being an injury to
Truth, as well as to our Neighbor; which (as I shall afterward show) ought to
be preserved inviolable.

2. And here a fair opportunity is ministered to me, to enter upon those
Usurpations or Thefts which are made by the mediation of the Expressions of the
Tongue. Whereof, the first that I shall assign is, when Men by their Tongues
set a fairer gloss upon a thing, than it has real worth to deserve. An
Illustrious Instance hereof we have in the fore-quoted Tully, which it may not
be amiss to transcribe. One C. Canius, a Roman Knight, having for his pleasure
retired to Syracuse, gave out that he would buy some Gardens, where he might
recreate himself with his Friends. Pythius, a Banker of that Place, hearing of
it, sent him word, that he had no Gardens to sell, but that those he had were
at Canius his service, if he pleased to make use of them; and accordingly the
next day invited him to Supper. Which Invitation as soon as he understood to
have been accepted, he appointed the Fishermen of that Town to fish the next
day before his Gardens. Canius comes at the time appointed, and is nobly
entertained: The Fishermen also come with their Boats, and lay down what they
had caught at Pythius his Feet. To him Canius; What, I pray, means this, so
many Fish about this place, and so many Boats? And what wonder, replied
Pythius? hereabouts are most of the Fish that are in the River of Syracuse,
this Place the Fishermen cannot be without. Canius being taken with the
supposed Commodity of the Place, importunes Pythius to sell it. He at first
seems unwilling, but at length sells it him at his own Rate. The next day
Canius invites his Friends, comes early himself to his Gardens, but sees no
Fisher-boat. He inquires of his next Neighbor, whether it were any Holyday,
that he saw no Fishermen there? Not, replied he, that I know of: but here none
are wont to fish, and therefore yesterday I wondered at what happened. Now who
sees not, that Pythius was as very a Thief with his Tongue, as those who with
their Hands take away their Neighbor's Goods? That Commendation which he gave
to his Gardens, drawing that Money from Canius, which he would not otherwise
have given, (Which what is it, in truth, but a Theft?) and that too, in all
probability, which was above the real Value of the Thing. Again, For that of
St. James is in nothing more true than in this, that the Tongue is a World of
Iniquity; as the Tongue may play the Thief by putting too fair a Gloss upon a
Man's own Commodities, so it may do also by casting a disparagement upon those
of other Men's. A thing too usual among the Men of Trade, but which cannot
certainly escape the Censure of this Commandment: He who disparageth his
Neighbor's Commodities, hindering him in the sale of them; which is in truth no
better than a Theft, because depriving him of that Advantage which he might
make of them, in the Right whereunto Men's Propriety consists. What should I
tell you of raising false Accusations against Men, whereby their Properties
come to be forfeited; of giving false Testimonies in Judgment; and, which is of
the same force, and is employed to supply the place of the Tongue, the forging
of Deeds and Wills, or being by our Subscriptions instrumental to the
authorizing of them? For, who sees not, that these are not only Thefts,
because depriving the true owners of their Properties; but generally of the
foulest nature, because stealing away whole Estates at once?

3. From the Usurpation or Theft of the Heart or Tongue, pass we to that of the
outward Work, as which is the only thing expressed in the Commandment: Where
again these three Species of Thefts offer themselves to our consideration; such
as consist in the taking away, or detaining, or corrupting the Properties of
our Neighbors. Under the first of these Species I reckon,

1. First, That Prejudice which is done to the Properties of Men by open and
violent Rapines. For, though this be not Theft in the proper Notion of the
Word, yet it agrees with it in that Injury which is offered to the Property of
our Neighbor, and has over and above the imputation of Impudence and
Violence, which serves so much the more to enhance it. But neither,

2. Secondly, shall I stick to reckon, as included, that Theft which is made by
unequal or deceitful Weights and Measures; as because it is not only a
withdrawing of so much as those Weights and Measures fall-short of their due
Proportion, but also a clancular one; so because such Courses as these are
represented as abominable in the Eyes of that God with whom we have to do:
Witness for the former that of Prove. 20.10. That diverse weights and diverse
Measures are an abomination to the Lord; meaning thereby, as Moses Deuteronomy.
25.13.14. Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small.
Thou shall not have in thine house diverse measures, a great and a small. But
thou, etc.
himself has interpreted it, a bigger and a less; and (as a Learned Baynus in
Prove. 20.10.
Man has farther observed) a bigger to buy by, and a less to sell by. By means
of which, as there is not that equality in our Commerce, which that most
excellent Rule of Doing as we would be done by, enjoins; so there is, if not a
prejudice to both Parties with whom we deal, yet at least to him of whom we
purchase; the bigger to be sure being greater than the just Standard, and
consequently taking more from him, than either Justice or our own Contract does
allow. The same is much more to be said of deceitful Weights and Measures, that
is to say, of those which are less than their due proportion: as because they
do manifestly withdraw as much from the Buyer, as the Weight or Measure which
it wants amounts to; so because the Scripture does frequently and earnestly
express its detestations of such Practices: For beside those Places in the
Proverbs, which though simply, yet roundly affirm, that a false Balance is an
abomination to the Lord, we find God expressing a more than ordinary
displeasure against his own People, for such like Injustices in their Dealings:
For, Hear this (says God, Amos 8.4.) O ye that swallow up the needy, even to
make the poor of the land to fail; saying, When will the New Mood be gone, that
we may sell corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat? making the
Ephah small, and the Shekel great, falsifying the Balances by deceit. The Lord
has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of their
works. Agreeable hereunto is that of Micah, and cuts off from such Persons all
pretenses of Purity, which yet many of them have the hardiness to lay claim to,
chap. 6.10. and so on. Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house
of the wicked, and the scant Measure, which is abominable? Shall I count them
pure with the wicked Balances, and with the bag of deceitful Weights? --
Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee desolate
because of thy sins. Add hereunto,

3. Thirdly, for the affinity it has with the former, the making use of false
Lights, or other such like Artifices, to disguise the thing they sell; they who
do so, picking the Pockets of those they deal with, because taking Money of
them for such Commodities as, were it not for their Disguises, they would not
have bought at all, or at least not have paid such Rates as they demand, as
being no way recompensed by their Purchases.

4. Of the same nature is, fourthly, though little considered by those that
practice it, The wearying a Man out of his own with unjust Vexations. For,
inasmuch as Theft, considered in its due Latitude, is nothing else than the
taking away of that which is another, without his will or consent; he that
shall by any vexation put a Man upon a necessity of parting with that which is
really his, is as verily a Thief, as he who sliely nims any thing out of his
House; yea though (as Ahab was) he should be disposed to give him a Valuable
Consideration for it, which yet few such Persons are inclined to do: The taking
of one thing for another, being then only a lawful Contract, when it is with
the free consent of the Party from whom we take it; which is not to be supposed
there, where a Man is compelled to it by force and violence. But so also is,

5. Fifthly, The exacting or taking of immoderate Use for Money lent: For, I
say not the same of taking Use in it self, howsoever heretofore Men have been
otherwise persuaded. For, beside that there is no more real Injustice in taking
Money for the Use of Money, than there is in taking it for the Use of a Man's
House or Land, during the time wherein another enjoys it; Money, though it
perish not in the Use, as House and Land does, yet, for so long time as it is
out of the Owners hands, perishing to him, who might otherwise have made an
advantage of it: Beside, secondly, that there appears not any the least shadow
of forbidding it in the Books of the New Testament, no not in those Places
where Avarice, and the like Crimes are censured: He that shall consult the Law
of Moses, where Usury is forbidden, and by the notion whereof we ought in
reason to judge of the nature of it in other places, will find no other Usury
forbidden, than that which is taken of a poor man, and whom a Man ought
therefore rather to give to, than take any thing from: as is evident from Exodus
22.25. and Lev. 25.36. For, as for that place in Deuteronomy. chapter 23.19. where it is
simply and plainly affirmed, Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother; it
is in reason, being only a Repetition of the former Laws, as that whole Book
of Deuteronomy is, to be limited by the former, and consequently the Poor to be
understood: He who repeats a thing, for the most part contenting himself with a
rude and imperfect Account, as supposing such an one enough to recall the thing
into Men's minds; but however leaving no place for doubt, but that that which he
models his Repetition by, especially if more full, is to be the Interpreter of
his Words. To say nothing at all at present, though it might be reasonably
enough insisted on, that our Case is not the same with that of the Jews, who
were forbidden all Commerce with other Nations, which we are not only no way
forbidden, but in a manner under a necessity of. For, such a Commerce being not
to be maintained without a proportionable Purse, which that of professed
Merchants cannot be supposed to be; there is a kind of necessity toward the
carrying of it on, that they should borrow of other Men; and of equity too,
because advantaging themselves with their Money, to make them a reasonable
Compensation for it. But as immoderate Use (which what it is, the Law of the
Place is the best Judge) has no such thing to plead for it self; so I doubt
not to reckon it among those Thefts which are forbidden by this Commandment:
That Usury which is above the due proportion, being the proper Right of the
Borrower, and consequently not to be taken by the Lender, without infringing of
his Property, or, that I may speak more intelligibly, without taking that which
is another Man's. Add hereunto,

6. Sixthly, The engrossing all the Commodities we can find of one kind, that
so we may have the peculiar Privilege of selling them; he who so does, not
only intending to rob all that have occasion of them, but actually robbing
those of his own Profession, of that Advantage which the Laws of the Land, and
their common Profession, give them an equal Interest in with himself. More, I
doubt not, might be added; but these, I suppose, may suffice to judge even of
the residue by: and therefore, in stead of heaping up any more, I shall content
my self with a place or two in St. Paul, where the Doctrine of this Commandment
is clearly enough delivered. The former whereof Ephesians. 4.28.
admonishes him that stole to steal no more, but rather to work with his
hands, to procure the Supply of his own Necessities; which shows all kind of
encroaching upon other Men's Possessions to be forbidden: the latter 1 These. 4.6.
, that we should not go beyond or defraud our brother in any matter, those
secret, and therefore less understood Thefts; adding moreover, that God is the
avenger of all such, as he himself, when he was with them, had forewarned them
and testified.

We have insisted hitherto upon such Thefts as are most visible, in the taking
away of that which is another Man's: it follows that we inquire, whether there
may not be a Theft in detaining, and what the several sorts of such kind of
Thefts are. For the resolution of the former whereof, we shall need only to
have recourse to the fundamental Reason of the Prohibition of Theft, properly
so called. For, that which makes Theft, properly so called, Criminal, being
nothing else but the infringing the Properties of other Men; if that may be
done by detaining, as well as taking away, there is no doubt it ought to be
reckoned to it, or at least as equally condemned with it. Now, that so it may,
will appear, if we consider the several Species of them, the second thing
proposed to be discoursed of. For, does not he infringe the Property of
another, who keeps that away from the Owner, which was by him only deposited
for a time, and till he should either call for, or satisfy that Obligation for
which he deposited it? Does not he do the like, who detains in his Hands the
Wages of the Hireling; and which the Promise of the Detainer, as well as the
Labor of the Hireling, has given him a Title to? Does not he do so in part,
who detains that, or any other Debt, beyond the time wherein it ought to be
paid; when it is a Maxim of Reason, as well as of the Civil Law Instit. lib. 4.
tit. 6. de Actonibus. Qua enim ratione qui tardius solvit quam solvere deberet
minus solvere intelligitur, etc.
, That he pays less than he ought, who pays not at his Day? Lastly, Does not he
do so more apparently, who having taken away any thing from his Neighbor,
either by fraud or violence, refuses to make Restitution? But if so, to be
sure they are to be accounted of as Thefts, or at least of near affinity with,
and under the like guilt and condemnation. And indeed, as the generality of
Casuists have looked upon this Theft as so Criminal, that it is become a Maxim
among them, That the Theft is not remitted, unless the Thing taken away be
restored; as God has moreover set a more than ordinary Brand upon it, by
punishing those Detainers who came to it only by the Injustice of their
Predecessors: so, if it be duly considered, there is no wonder at all in the
Dispensation of God, or yet in the Resolution of the Learned: He who restores
not, when he can, continuing in and approving the former Theft, and
consequently making himself unmeet for the Divine Grace, which requires at
least the disallowing of our former Wickednesses.

One only Species of the former Thefts remains, which consists in the
destroying or any way prejudicing the Things of our Neighbor; as when Men, out
of malice or envy, set fire to their Neighbors Houses or Corn, maim their
Cattle, or, by not observing due Seasons, wear out those Grounds they hire.
For, that this has the nature of Theft, and that too not of the lowest nature,
needs no other evidence than the consequence of our own Actions, as by means of
which the Proprietary is either deprived of his Goods altogether, or of that
Use and Advantage which might accrue to him, in the Right whereto (as has been
often said) the Nature of Propriety does consist: It mattering not at all,
toward the constituting a Man a Thief, whether he himself be benefited by those
things he steals; but whether he deprives his Neighbor of it. Otherwise St.
Augustine had been no Thief, who, when a Boy, robbed his Neighbor's Orchard;
because he threw away those Apples which he stole.

PART III.
An enumeration of such Thefts as are distinguished from each other by their
Objects; where is shown, 1. Both from the Fundamental Reason of the
Prohibition, and the Consequences of such kind of Usurpations, That there may
be a Theft of things immovable, as Lands and Houses, as well as of those that
may be clancularly carried away. 2. Of Public Goods, as well as of Private;
the several sorts whereof are also reckoned up. 3. Of Persons, as well as of
Things. 4. Of that which is not in our Neighbor's Possession, as well as of
that which is; as again, of the Use of a thing, as well as of the thing it
self. Inquiry is next made, what Actions are to be looked upon as exempt from
the present Prohibition; in which number are reckoned, the Israelites spoiling
the Egyptians, those Thefts which were permitted by the Lacedaemonians to their
Youths, and those which extreme necessity prompts Men to; the due Limitations
whereof are also carefully described. An Account of the Criminalness of the
Things here forbidden; which is shown to consist, first, in their contrariety
to the first Institution of Property, and the present Dispensations of the
Divine Providence: Secondly, in their being prejudicial to Humane Society: And,
thirdly, in the discouragement they give to Virtue and Industry. The Negative
part of the Commandment concluded with an Inquiry concerning the proper
Punishment of Theft; where is shown at large, That Capital Punishment is
neither unjust nor inconvenient.

THERE being nothing wanting to a just enumeration of the several Thefts that
are here forbidden, but to reckon up those which receive their denomination
from, and are distinguished from each other, by those Objects about which they
are conversant; I purpose to begin this Discourse with the Investigation of
them, and both show that they do, and how they come within the compass of this
Commandment.

In order whereunto, I observe,

1. That Theft may be as well of Things immovable, as Lands or Houses; as of
those which, as Gellius speaks, may be clancularly carried away and withdrawn.
For, though Theft, in the vulgar Notion of it, extend only to such things as
may be clancularly carried away and withdrawn; though that also be the Notion
of Theft in the Civil Law Dig. de Furtis, leg. Verum est, quod plerique
probant, fundi furti agi non posse.
(as we now have it) as is evident from the Law Verum est, in the Title De
Furtis: yet as there wanted not Men of Note, even in that Faculty, who had
another Notion of it, as is evident from Sabinus In quo [nempe Sabini libro,
cui titulus est, De Furtis] id quoque scriptum est, quod vulgo inopinatum est,
non hominum tantum neque rerum moventium, quae efferri occulte and surripi
possunt, sed fundi quoque and aedium fieri furtum. A. Gell. Noct. Attic. lib.
11. cap 18.
in Gellius; so, that in the Natural and Theological sense there may be a Theft
of immovable as well as moveable Things, will be evident to any Man, who shall
consider either the formal Reason of this Sin, or the consequence of Men's
usurping upon Things immovable. For that which makes any Theft, properly so
called, a Crime before God, being the Invasion of another Property; it were
extremity of Madness to think him a Thief, who should rob a Man either of his
Fruit, or Household Goods; and not him who should possess himself of that Ground
from whence the Fruit arises, or of that House wherein the other are
deposited. Again, Forasmuch as he who spoils a Man of his Land or House, does
consequently spoil him of the Fruit of the one, which is confessedly a thing
moveable; and of the Use of the other, which, even in the Notion of the Civil
Law Dig. de Furtis, leg. Furtum a Furvo, paragr. 3. Furtum est contrectatio rei
fraudulosa, lucri faciendi gratia, vel ipsius rei. vel etiam usus ejus, etc.
, may be the Object of Theft: he who does so, must for that reason also be
looked upon as a Thief, and consequently within the compass of the Commandment.
Upon which account, as the late Learned Dr. Answer to Fountain's Letter.
Stuart does not undeservedly deride that famous Lawyer, who at the same time
he owned the taking away a Communion-Cup to be Sacrilege, did yet deny it to be
such to take away the Lands of the Church, because they are not things
moveable; so I know not with what better to silence such frivolous Exceptions,
than with the Instance which the same Learned Man makes in Ahab's seizing on
Naboth's Vineyard. For, by the same way of arguing, we might have concluded
Ahab to have been a Thief, if he had robbed Naboth of his Grapes; but Elijah
was too harsh to that good King, for passing so severe a Censure on him,
because he only took away his Vineyard.

2. Of the Theft of things moveable and immovable, what has been said may
suffice; and consequently of the two first Species thereof: Proceed we
therefore to consider another pair, which are differenced from each other by
the publickness or privateness of the Things taken away. For, inasmuch as the
Public is capable of a Property, as well as Private Persons; inasmuch as it is
not only capable of a Property, but cannot subsist without it: hence it comes
to pass, that there may be a Theft of Public Goods, as well as of Private; and
consequently, that, as well as the other, to be concluded within the force of
the Prohibition. But from hence it will follow, that we are to reckon as such
the denying of just Tribute, or converting that which is already gathered to
our own private Uses; the taking away of those Lands which were given for the
Maintenance of Societies, clipping, or any other way impairing the Public
Money: these being Entrenchments upon the Goods of the Public, and
consequently proper Thefts of them. And though it be true, that all Thieves of
this nature do not reap the due Reward of their Desert; but, on the contrary,
some of them bear themselves high, even against that Public upon which they do
usurp, (it being an ancient Complaint of Cato Fures privatorum furtorum in
nervo atque in compedibus aetatem agunt: fures publici in auro atque in
purpura. A. Gell. loco pr. citato.
, That whilst the Thieves of private Men's Goods spend their days in Chains and
Fetters, the Public Thieves pass away theirs in Gold and Purple:) yet as the
Mischief which arises from Public Thefts, is much greater than that of
Private ones, and consequently renders them much more criminal; so they who
found lower Punishments for other Thefts, looked upon this as so heinous, as to
pronounce Instit. de publ. Judiciis, leg. Item lex Julia peculatus.
Capital Punishment upon its Authors or Abettors, if those Authors were Judges;
but if not, Deportation. I reckon not under this Head, though so reckoned by
the Civil Law Instit. ibid.
, as neither within any other of this Commandment, that Theft which is made of
Sacred Things; partly because the Property thereof is vested in God, and
consequently He, and not Man, robbed in it, as God himself complains Mal. 3.8.
and partly, because St. Paul, Romans 2.22. couples Sacrilege with Idolatry, which
shows it to be a Crime of a higher nature, as being an Usurpation upon the
Rights of the Divine Majesty.

3. From those second sort of Thefts, pass we to another, because the Injustice
of Men has done so; that, I mean, which brancheth it self into a Theft of
Persons and Things. The former so much the Concernment of this Commandment,
that many of the Hebrews (as Munster In Exodus 20.15.
tells us) have reckoned it to be the only Intendment of it. Wherein though I
can by no means concur with them, because the Tenth Commandment, to which they
refer the Theft of our Neighbor's Goods, is not to be understood of Theft; or,
if it were, were to be extended also to the Theft of Persons, because God
forbids alike the coveting of our Neighbor's Servants and Goods: yet I think
it but reasonable to reckon it among those Thefts which are forbidden in this
Commandment; partly, because God, in the very next Chapter to that which is the
Subject of my present Theme, forbids the stealing of a Man, and that too under
no less Penalty than that of Death, Exodus 21.16. and partly, because the
Persons of Men are no less a part of the Owners Property, than either his Lands
or Goods; as both yielding him the same Advantage which Goods do, and among the
Jews themselves, when a Man became insolvent, liable to a Sale See Exodus 22.3.
2 Kings 4.1. Mat. 18.25.
, to satisfy that Debt which he had contracted. Now forasmuch as Men, no less
than Things, may become a part of a Man's Property; forasmuch as by those, no
less than by Things, Men may attain that Vsusfructus, in the Right whereto
Propriety consists: it follows, that the stealing of Men's either Children
or Servants is to be looked upon as one of those Thefts which are by God
forbidden in this Commandment. All which I say, not only to obviate the evil
Trade of those Men, who by Toys, and other Artifices, train Men's Children and
Servants into Ships, and, when they have done so, sell them for Slaves in
Foreign Parts; but their Practice also, who by fair Words and Promises tempt
Men from their Masters, to become in the same Condition to themselves. For,
what other is this, than to rob a Man of his Servant, and it may be too, if
that Servant be an useful one, of one of the best parts of his possessions. Add
hereunto, because differing from the former only in circumstance, the Servants
withdrawing from his Master, whilst he is with him, that labor and service to
which his own Contract and the Masters Wages bind him; he who does so, becoming
a kind of Thief of himself, because robbing his Master of that advantage which
he might and ought to have by him.

4. Lastly (which I shall only name, because I have prevented my self in them,
and shown them both to be Thefts, and such as are forbidden in this
Commandment) there may be a Theft of a thing which is not in our Neighbors
possession, as well as of that which is, as again of the use of a thing, as
well as of the thing it self: Upon the account of the former whereof, he is a
Thief, who detains any thing in his hands which was either committed to him to
keep, or is otherwise due to his Neighbor from him; as upon the account of the
latter, he who makes the goods of his Neighbor unserviceable to him, or
deprives him of the use of them, whether it be by detaining them some time in
his hands, or hindering him from making use of them. All which having before at
large exemplified, I shall content my self with subjoining this one general
Remarque, which will serve as a (...) to judge of these and all other Thefts
by; to wit, That all that is to be looked upon as such, which does any way
impair the property of our Neighbor, where it is truly such, and not abridged
by some of those limitations which were before reckoned up by us: The
properties of men, as to those particulars wherein they are limited, being
rather equivocally than properly such, and consequently the entrenchments on
them not within the compass of this Commandment.

III. Now though that general Note might serve us for an answer to that third
question, which we before proposed to discourse of, that is to say, What
actions are to be looked upon as exempted from the prohibition now before us;
yet I think it not amiss to instance in two or three of that nature, because
there may seem to be some difficulty in exempting them from the imputation of
Thievery. I begin with that which is the most obvious to all, because recorded
in the Scripture, that I mean which the Israelites are found to have done, even
by the command of God himself: For what other can we make of the Children of
Israel's borrowing of the Egyptians those Jewels, which they did not only not
restore, for ought as we can learn, but are by that act of theirs said to have
spoiled or robbed the Egyptians? Exodus 12.36. But neither will this action of
theirs be found to be a Theft, if we understand thereby, as we ought to do, an
usurpation upon another property, where it is free from any limitation or
alienation: Because though those Jewels, which they borrowed, were the property
of the Egyptians, both before and at the time of the Israelites borrowing them;
yet were they, by the Command of God, to whom all men's properties are subject,
passed over to the Israelites, and consequently their detaining of them, though
in semblance a Theft (for which cause it is called a spoiling by Moses) yet
really and formally none. Next to this act of the Israelites, consider we
another of the Lacedaemonians, approved and encouraged by their Laws; it being
recorded of them by A. Gell. ubi supra, cum notis Ant. Thysii J. C.
Gellius out of Authors, neither few nor inconsiderable, that their young men
were allowed to steal certain things, and particularly, the Fruit of their
Orchards, and the Messes of their Feasts: Not, as the aforesaid Author
admonishes, to encourage them to the desire of filthy lucre, but to make them
crafty and watchful, and thereby the more apt to serve them in their Wars,
which was, upon the matter, that Commonwealths whole profession. Now though
for my own part I cannot approve of such practices, as by which unwary Youths
may be tempted to stealths of a more criminal nature, yet I am of opinion with
the learned Seldom De jure Nature. and Gent. l. 6. c. 2.
, that where such practices are countenanced by Law, the perpetrators of them
cannot in reason be charged with Theft properly so called, or usurping upon the
properties of their Neighbors; for the properties of particular men being
limitable by the public Laws, and more particularly by such to which each
Proprietor consents, if the public Laws make it lawful to withdraw certain
things from the owners, those things are so far common to those that can
withdraw them, and consequently their withdrawing of them not so much an
usurpation upon the property of the owners, as a just and lawful acquisition.
And it seems to me not altogether unlike the gleaning of Corn in a field, the
property whereof, as of the Fruit that arises of it, though invested in a
particular person, yet is not so entirely his, but that the loose Corns which
fall from the Reaper become the property of him that shall first seize upon
them. But because however such kind of Thefts might be countenanced by the Laws
of the Lacedaemonians, yet they are not, that I know of, received in any
Christian Nation, nor it may be at present in any unconverted one, therefore,
quitting the prosecution of that, I shall enquire into the nature of that
Stealth which extreme necessity prompts men to. In order whereunto, I will put
the case of a man traveling in a foreign Land, and there reduced to extremity
of hunger; for the providing against which, though he has not failed to use
earnest entreaties, nor yet to make a tender of his labor and service, yet he
has not for all that been able to procure himself so much repast, as might
satisfy the necessities of Nature. This supposed, I demand whether the taking
away of so much, as may serve for the purposes before specified, be to be
looked upon as a Theft, and consequently unlawful. Now though it be not to be
doubted, but such an act looks very like one, because differing nothing in the
matter from that which is really such, yet that it is not formally such, is
evident from what was heretofore said concerning Gods giving the Earth to Adam
and Noah, and in them, to all the Children of men; for this general Grant of
the Almighty being antecedent to any particular property, which any of the sons
of men is now possessed of, it is in reason so far to prevail above the present
properties of particular men, as to make it lawful to the extremely
necessitous, to withdraw so much from them, as may serve to satisfy these
necessities. This only would be added, That as those extremely necessitous
ought to premise both entreaties, and the tender of their service, partly
because the present properties of men stand by the divine Grant, and are not
lightly therefore to be derogated from; and partly because God obliges men for
the prevention of it, to work with their own hands the thing that is good, that
they may have wherewithal to support themselves, as well as to give to others:
so the case before remembered cannot lightly be supposed in any Christian
Nation, and much less in that wherein we live. As because of the multitude of
charitable persons wherewith the Land abounds, so because the Laws of our
Nation have made provision for those, who are not able by their own endeavors
to support themselves: They enjoining the Officers of the place, where they
shall be found to be, to relieve them and send them back to the place of their
last abode, as those, who are within the Precincts of it, to contribute to the
maintaining of them. Where therefore there is such a provision as this, there
cannot lightly be any place for such a necessity as we speak of, and
consequently neither for the serving of our selves, without the violation of
the Divine Command. And indeed, as those necessities, which we sometimes fall
under, do mostly arise from sloth and idleness, or a living above that
condition wherein God has placed us; so, that bare necessity can be no warrant
to us to invade our Neighbors Goods, the Prayer of Agur does abundantly
declare, Give me (says he) neither poverty nor riches: feed me with food
convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or
lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain; for grounding
his request against poverty, upon the fear he had lest he should thereby be
tempted to steal, and take the name of God in vain, he thereby sufficiently
intimated, that simple poverty does no more privilege a man to steal, than the
same poverty can to take Gods name in vain, or swear falsely, when examined upon
Oath concerning the fact; or fullness, to deny him, and say, Who is the Lord?

IV. Having thus shown the Prohibition now before us to comprehend in it all
usurping upon, or any way diminishing of our Neighbors property; having
moreover shown what particular Crimes are included in it, and what actions are
to be looked upon as exempted; we are in the next place to enquire, wherein the
criminalness of those things which are included in it, does consist, which will
cost no great pains to resolve. For, inasmuch as the Crime here forbidden is
nothing else than an interversion of property, which I have shown to stand both
by the Divine Institution at first, and the disposition of the Divine
Providence; he, who shall go about so to intervert it, must be thought to fight
against God, by whose appointment it was both instituted and continued. And
indeed, as there is no sin against man, which is not in some sense against God,
because forbidden by his Laws; so the sin we have now before us, is more
peculiarly such, because, over and above the violation of his Laws, destroying
that order which he appointed from the beginning in the world, and has
approved ever since by the disposition of his Divine Providence. But beside the
contrariety which this sin of Theft carries in it to the institution and
disposition of the Almighty, it is no less prejudicial to humane Society, which
next to the Divine Majesty ought to be accounted sacred; partly because it is
an interversion of those properties, for the preserving whereof it is that men
have been so willing to enter into Societies; and partly because it prompts the
injured party to endeavor a recovery by force and violence, which puts all
into confusion and disorder: The injurious, no less than the injured party,
being not like to want partners in his quarrel, 'till at length the whole
Society be of a flame. And though it may be some unjust persons would not be of
so exorbitant appetites, as to endeavor to attain a sovereignty over the
possessions of all their fellows, and much less over their persons, yet
inasmuch as the desire of this worlds goods increases with the acquisition of
them, as (because that acquisition is not otherwise to be maintained) a desire
of power also, it is not easy to be imagined, but that they who indulge
themselves in the invading of this or that particular man's property, would in
fine, if they had ability Grot. in Decal.
, invade the goods of all, and make even the Commonwealth their own;
injustice, where it has acquired a proportionable strength, easily passing
into tyranny, which is the bane of those Societies which it invades. Lastly,
for that also would be considered, where there is any respect for virtue and
industry; if either secret or open usurpations were permitted, men would for
the most part leave off to do virtuously, because without hope of enjoying the
rewards of it.

V. Now as every thing that is criminal does by its own nature, and the Decree
of God, bind over the Author to punishment, and that too in this world, if it
be prejudicial to humane society, which I have shown the Sin of Theft
sufficiently to be: so it may not be amiss to enquire, and the rather because
it has been a matter of controversy, what punishments may be inflicted on it
by the Civil Magistrate. For the resolution whereof, because there are
different sorts of Thefts, I will proceed by degrees, and consider first of all
of that Theft which is of Children or Men. Now though I know it be
questionable, whether other Thefts may be punished by death, and the rather,
because God in the old Law prescribed a more easy punishment; yet as to this
whereof we speak, no doubt at all can be made, but it may be censured with
death, because God, who observes exact justice, commanded such an one to be put
to death, Exodus 21.16. for he that steals a man (says God) and sells him,
or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death. And not without
reason, as because of the great value of the thing stolen, as being no other
than the Image of God, so because of that slavery and hardship, which he, who
steals a man, intends, which, as it is often managed, is not inferior to death
it self. From the Theft of Persons pass we to that of Things, as which is most
confessedly intended. Where again we are to distinguish of such things or goods
as belong to the Public, or such as belong to Private persons. If the question
be concerning the former, especially in any eminent instances, so I should not
doubt to affirm, that it may be justly sentenced with death; as because the
Roman Law, which draws nearest to that of Reason and Nature, inflicted capital
punishment upon Judges that should be found to do so, and upon all that were
instrumental to them in it; so because the public weal, wherein all private
men's is concerned, depends much upon the stock it has to maintain it. The
great matter of controversy is concerning the stealing of the goods of private
persons, which therefore I shall address my self to resolve. And here indeed
has been great variety, according to the inclinations or exigences of those
States wherein they have been committed, the quality of the Theft, or the
condition of the persons; some punishing Theft with restitution of the thing
stolen, and an overplus, as the Law of Moses, and that of Solon; some with
stripes and servitude; and some, in fine, with death, as Draco did all Thefts
whatsoever; which made Demades afterward say, that Draco wrote his Laws not
with Ink, but with Blood. My purpose is not at this time to give an exact
account of that variety, which whosoever list to be satisfied in, may read an
excellent Chapter in Aulus Gellius; as neither to scan the propriety of those
several punishments, and the proportion they bore to the Crime of Theft,
because all of them may be reasonable enough; according to the different
exigences of circumstances: the only thing which I pretend to enquire into, as
which indeed is the principal controversy, is, whether Theft may be punished
with death. For the resolution whereof, we will consider of such Thefts, as are
openly and violently committed, best known among us by the name of Robberies;
and then of clancular ones, or Thefts properly so called. If the question be
concerning the former, so I know not what any reasonable man can oppose against
the punishing them with death, as because of the boldness of the fact, which
requires a more than ordinary severity to repress it, so because those Thefts,
by the violence wherewith they are attended, strike no less at men's lives than
fortunes, which it is but reasonable to secure by the death of the Offender.
All the difficulty, to my seeming, is concerning clancular Thefts; where again
we are to distinguish of nocturnal and diurnal ones; that is to say, of those
that are committed in the night, or those that are committed in the day. That
the former of these, even such Thefts as are committed by night, may be
punished with death, will appear not to be unreasonable, if we consider with
our selves, the leave that was given by the Law of God first Exodus 22.2, 3.
, and afterward by that of the 12 Tables Vide A. Gell. l. 11. c. 18.
, to kill the Thief in the very act; for how should not that be much more
lawful to the Magistrate, upon a mature consideration of the fact, than to the
injured person in his heat? Neither will it avail to say, that that leave was
given to the party robbed, upon presumption of the Thiefs adding violence to
his Theft, and the likelihood of-securing himself and purchase by the death of
the injured party, which therefore where it is past all danger, the nocturnal
Theft ought in reason to be otherwise chastised; for inasmuch as in punishment
consideration ought to be had of what may probably happen hereafter by such
kind of Thieveries; if there be a just presumption of such persons adding
Murder to Theft, it is but reasonable, for the security of innocent persons
lives, to put those to death, who are likely to take away the lives of other
men. Which said, I will proceed to the consideration of diurnal Thefts, or such
as are committed in the day: Now though simply considered a fourfold
restitution may seem to be a proportionable punishment, because laid upon it by
the Law of God, who best understands the proportion of things; though, if that
will not do, the bringing in of servitude possibly may; Explication of the
Fifth Commandment, Part. 1^.
the abolition whereof (as I have elsewhere shown) has not been much for the
convenience of the world: yet I doubt not there may be instances wherein it may
be both lawful and necessary to punish such Offenders with death; as for
example, when such Thefts are frequently committed, and cannot lightly be
restrained with milder punishments: The quality of a Theft being not to be
judged of merely by the prejudice it does to the injured party, but by the harm
it does to humane society; which it is both the Magistrates interest and duty
to secure. Now forasmuch as it may sometime happen, that Humane Society cannot
be maintained without inflicting a punishment, which is above the measure of
the offense, if considered only as to that prejudice which it does to the
immediate object of it; in such a case I see no reason why the Magistrate may
not inflict it, and particularly the extreme punishment of death; that I say
not also, that I cannot see how he can avoid it, without a greater injury to
that Society which he is appointed to defend. Upon which account as it is but
reasonable to judge favorably of our own Laws, by which death is so often made
the punishment of Theft, respect and charity both obliging us to suppose, that
the Makers of those Laws, together with those that have succeeded them in their
Office, have found by experience, that a lesser punishment will not serve the
turn; so there is this farther inducement to make that supposition, that even
that severity which they have used has not deterred men from the commission of
it. But be that as it will (for such things as these must be left to the
determination of Public Persons, and not to Private ones, who are rather to
submit than dispute) most certain it is, that the matter of Theft is so
criminal before God, that the committers of it are by S. Paul 1 Cor. 6.10.
reckoned among those persons, who shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

PART IV.
Of the Affirmative part of the Commandment, which is declared to be, First,
The using all due means for the procuring and conserving to our selves a
Property: Secondly, The contributing what in us lies to the procuring,
defending, or enlarging the Properties of others. The former of these resumed,
and evidenced to be a part of the Commandment, from the necessity the omission
thereof puts us upon of invading the Property of our Neighbor. An address to
a more particular consideration of it, in an enumeration of the means we are to
use to procure or conserve to our selves a Property. Labor assigned the
principal place among them, and upon occasion thereof enquiry made I. From
whence our obligation thereto arises, which is shown to be that Command which
God laid upon Adam, to dress that Garden into which he was first put, more
especially that both Curse and Command, which was laid upon him after his fall,
of eating his bread in the sweat of his brows, and the necessity there is
generally of it toward the procuring of a subsistence. II. To what Persons the
obligation of Labor does extend; where is shown from the former grounds, that
it extends to all that are not unapt for it, and particularly to those of the
Female Sex. III. Whether the labor of the body be incumbent upon all, which is
answered in the Negative, and evidenced both from Reason and Scripture. IV.
About what things this labor of ours is to be conversant; which are shown in
the general to be such as have no moral obliquity in them, nor are any way
instrumental to those that have; as moreover such as are some way or other
useful to our selves or others; where the Trade of Fiddlers, and other such like
Persons, is considered: In particular, such things to which we have a call from
the Almighty, where both the necessity of such a call, and the means of knowing
it, is also declared.

II. OF the Negative part of the Precept what has been said may suffice,
proceed we now to the consideration of the Affirmative, which I have said to
consist in these two things:

1. The using all due Means for the procuring and conserving to our selves a
Property. 2. The contributing, what in us lies, to the procuring, defending, or
enlarging the Property of our Neighbor.
I. Touching the former of these, no doubt can be made of its being included in
this Commandment; because, without that, it would be morally impossible to keep
Men from stealing, which the Commandment does expressly forbid: he who uses not
all means requisite for the procuring or conserving to himself a Property,
being under a necessity of invading that of others. The only thing worth our
inquiry is, what those due Means are: which accordingly I come now to
investigate.

1. I begin with Labor, because laid upon all Mankind for this very end and
purpose, and because expressly prescribed by St. Paul, to procure to our selves
a Subsistence, and so keep us from the Sin here forbidden: At the same time he
exhorts him that stole to steal no more, exhorting rather to labor, and to
work with his hands the thing that is good, Ephesians. 4.28. For what reason, think
we, but that (as Grotius has well explained it) he may have wherewithal to
live himself, as well as to give to him that needs? that being ill to be
done, but however with little effect, as to the keeping of Men from stealing,
where they themselves are not first in some measure provided for. Now
concerning Labor, I will inquire, 1. From whence our Obligation thereto
arises. 2. Whether the Obligation to it extend to all Persons whatsoever. 3.
Whether the Labor of the Body be incumbent upon all. 4. About what this Labor
of ours is to be conversant. 5. And lastly, Whether it admit of a Relaxation,
and after what manner and proportion.


1. Now though in investigating the Grounds of this Obligation, it might
suffice to look no farther back, than that both Curse and Command which was
laid upon fallen Adam, of eating his bread in the sweat of his brows, Genesis
3.19. because, as I have before shown, that both Curse and Command is to be
looked upon, as of Universal concernment; yet I think it not amiss (to make the
Obligation appear so much the straiter) to look as far back as the time of
Man's Innocence, and when neither any Curse, nor any thing that could deserve
it, can be supposed. For, as it is evident from that short Account we have of
it, that that State of Pleasure and Innocence was not without an admixture of
Labor, he who put Adam into the Garden of Eden, obliging him to the dressing
of it, Genesis 2.15. so it is no less evident, that, if that State had continued,
all that descended from his Loins would have been under the same Tie; partly,
because Adam was the Representative of all Mankind; and partly, because such a
Cultivation would have been necessary for the preservation of those Fruits
which were given to Adam and his Posterity for their Support. But because that
Labor, whatsoever it was, would undoubtedly have been without that Toil which
the present Condition of Mankind does require; therefore quitting that first
Ground of our Obligation to labor, we will seek out such an one as is
proportionable to that Labor which is established on it. Now for this we shall
need look no farther than that Saying of God to fallen Adam, Genesis 3.19. In the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground. For,
that Saying (as I have before See the Discourse concerning the Positive Laws of
God.
shown) being no less a Precept than a Curse, and such a Precept too as
comprehended in it Adam's Posterity, as well as himself; we are in reason to
deduce from thence that obligation to Labor, which we have said to be
incumbent upon Mankind. Lastly, Forasmuch as Labor is more or less necessary
to the procuring or conserving to our selves the Means of our Support, hence
there arises another Tie, proportionable to that Supply which Men's respective
Necessities do require.

2. It being thus evident what the Grounds of Men's Obligation to Labor are,
inquire we, in the next place, to what Persons the Obligation does extend: A
Question which will receive an easy Solution, after the Solution of the
former. For, it appearing from thence, that that Obligation has no other
Grounds, than either the common Necessities of Humane Nature, or such Positive
Laws of God as were laid upon Adam and his Posterity; it is of necessity to be
looked upon as of equal extent, and consequently no Child of Adam to be
exempted from it. Only because it does not appear how the Female Sex comes to
be concerned, as having another and no less heavy Burden laid upon it, I think
it not amiss, before I proceed to any new Matter, both to show how it comes to
oblige them, and add farther Proofs for the confirmation of it. For, be it that
those of the Female Sex had another, and no less heavy Burden bound upon them,
for the Transgression of her that was the Original of their Sex; yet will it
not thence follow, that they are therefore to be exempted from that Burden
which was laid upon the other: partly, because that Sex, both in its Original
and Descendents, had its Being in part from the Man; and partly, because the
Transgression of her, who was the Original of it, was greater than that of the
Man's, as being both the first, and the Occasioner of the others. Upon which
account, as it is not to be wondered that God should add that Burden of Labor
to the other, as being but proportionable to their own Extraction, and the
Guilt of the Foundress of their Sex; so, much less, if we consider, that this
Burden of Labor had not only nothing in it peculiar to the Man (as that
which was laid upon the Female Sex had) but is of equal necessity to the
Support of both. And though they that shall but superficially consider the
Character that Solomon gives of a Virtuous Woman, Prove. 31.10. and so on,
where, among other things, he describes her as one that seeks wool and
flax, and works willingly with her hands; though they (I say) that shall but
superficially consider these and the like Passages, may imagine they hear that
grave King reading a Lecture of Oeconomicks, and rather admonishing what may
make for their Husbands Profit, than for the Interest of Religion, and the
Peace of their own Souls: yet as that Imagination will be in part removed, by
considering, that the Book of Proverbs is no less a part of Scripture than any
other; so also by adverting, that he pretends not to describe a Thrifty, but a
Virtuous Person, and, as it is in the thirtieth Verse, a woman that fears the
Lord. For, if so, such Works as those must be Works of Duty and Religion, and
concern the Consciences, as well as the Profits of those to whom they do
belong. And indeed, so far is the Industriousness of that Sex from being a part
of Oeconomicks only, that St. Paul, who certainly never dreamed of any thing
of that nature, insists upon the same thing, calling upon those whose Age gave
them Ability for it, to intend their Household Affairs; and reproving such as
were idle and negligent in it, 1 Timothy 5.13, 14 Which with what reason he could
do so earnestly as he does, if it were not of Divine Obligation, I am not able
to conjecture, and I suppose better Wits cannot. You will pardon me, you of the
Female Sex, if I have, beside my wont, thus seemed to trespass on your Affairs:
For, as I knew not how to avoid it, without giving countenance to the Practice
of those Women, who, amidst all their Pretensions to Religion, seem to have
little consideration of this Affair; so I have insisted the rather on it, to
encourage the Diligence, and establish the Consciences of those who are more
industrious in it. For, if St. Paul may be believed, it is not the idle, and
busie-body, and wanderer from house to house that is the Religious Person; but
she that diligently guides her own: and though there be other more immediate
Acts of Religion, yet they serve God in these also, if they do them with
respect to the Divine Command, and shall no doubt receive a Reward for them.
This only would be added, because understood in all Laws, That the Obligation
to Labor reaches no farther to either Sex, than where there is an Ability to
discharge it: Upon which account, all sick, and impotent, and aged Persons are
to be looked upon as exempted so far as their respective Indispositions make
them unapt for it. Which last Restriction I do therefore subjoyn, because even
those, though not apt for the severer sorts of Labor, are yet oftentimes well
enough qualified for casier ones. And I cannot but upon this occasion call to
mind a Story which Busbequius Turcic. Epist. 8.
tells us of a certain Spaniard, who had been a Commander among those of his
own Nation, and was by himself redeemed from a Turkish Master, to whom he was a
Slave. For though, by reason of the Wounds he had received, he was miserably
impotent in all his Limbs, and one who therefore seemed more proper for an
Hospital than an Employment; yet his Turkish Master found a way to set him on
work, and received a considerable Emolument by him. For, passing him over into
Asia, where great Flocks of Geese are kept, he made use of him (as the same
Busbequius tells us) for the feeding of them, and received no contemptible
Benefit by it. But be that as it will, because I hasten to other Matter, and
such as will more deserve our consideration: as other Persons than those before
remembered, it will be hard, or rather impossible to find, who can plead an
Exemption from the common condition of Mankind; so the search will be looked
upon as unprofitable by those who consider that of St. Paul, that if any man
would not labor, neither should he eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.

3. From the Persons therefore that are under this Obligation, pass we to the
Kinds of Labor to which they are obliged; or rather to inquire, whether that
of the Body be incumbent upon all. A Question which is not of so easy a
resolution as the former, if we consider either the several States and Degrees
of Men, or the Tenor of those Precepts by which Labor is bound upon us. For,
as on the one hand, to oblige all Men to the Labor of the Body, would
overthrow those several Orders which God has set in the World, and, which is
more, take off the better sort from intending the Labors of the Mind, which
are of no less necessity to the Support of Humane Society; so, on the other, to
exempt any from it, seems equally repugnant to that Primitive Law, by which we
have said Labor to be bound upon us, and the several Precepts of St. Paul: The
former importing, the eating of our bread in the sweat of our face; the latter,
working with our own hands for it. But as it would be considered, that it is no
way unreasonable for a Law to be expressed in such Terms as have a more
peculiar Aspect upon the major part (the major part as it is most to be
considered, so standing in need of a more particular direction); so the Law of
Labor, as it is worded both by God and St. Paul, though not holding in all
Particulars, is yet accommodable to the greater part of Humane Kind: The common
Supports of Nature being not to be procured, where the greater part of those
that are concerned do not contribute to it with the Work of their own Hands.
From whence as it will follow, that there is no necessity of understanding the
Laws beforementioned in that strictness of sense wherein they seem to be
delivered, so especially, if either Reason or Scripture do persuade an
Enlargement of it. Which that they do, will appear, if we consider them apart;
and first of all, that which Reason offers to us. For, inasmuch as all are not
qualified by Nature for Bodily Labor, or at least not so much as for the
Labor of the Mind; and they who are, are not yet at leisure to intend it, by
means of much more important Concerns: inasmuch as the Labor of the Mind is no
less necessary to the Support of Humane Society, nor less an Instance of that
Travel which God has laid as a Burden upon Humane Nature: it seems but
reasonable to infer, That the Command of God is no less satisfied with that
kind of Labor, than it is by the sweat of our face, or working with our hands.
Forasmuch, secondly, as even by God's appointment there are Men of High Degree,
as well as Low, and such whose Education and Birth seems not well to correspond
to those meaner Labors to which the greater part of Mankind are obliged; it
seems but reasonable to allot them such a Labor as is suitable to that better
State in which the Almighty has placed them. Lastly, Forasmuch as though both
the Curse and Precept of Labor be laid upon all Mankind, yet it is in the
power of God to release it; forasmuch as those Persons to whom God has given
more liberal Fortunes, are in reason to be looked upon as in part released,
because without those Necessities for the redress whereof Labor was
principally enjoined: it seems but reasonable to infer, that they are neither
obliged to the same degree of Labor with Persons of meaner Fortune, nor to the
same Species or Kind. And more than this, if those whom the old Saxon Tongue
styles ydlemen, but our present Dialect by a Name more suitable to their
Quality, did not challenge, I know not what any reasonable Man could oppose
against their way of living, or endeavor to reduce them to the Condition of
meaner Persons; consideration being always to be had of the Condition of the
Persons, in order to the adjustment of the Obligations that lie upon them. It
is a known Observation, and therefore I shall not fear to have the truth of it
called in Question, That among the Turks Persons Busbeq. Tursic. Epist.
of the Noblest Quality, and most ingenuous Education, are yet brought up to
some Manual Art, in which they ever after employ some portion of their Time;
the Great Turk himself, amidst his most important Affairs, yet allotting some
portion of his Time to the intending of it. I do not pretend to lay this
Burden upon any ingenious Person, and much less to represent him as unuseful
in the World, who should not think fit to follow their example; but certainly
it must be a great reproach to those who are far better instructed, so far to
forget either the Design of their Being, or Descent from Adam, as to think
themselves privileged to live in ease, and spend that Patrimony in Sloth and
Luxury, which their Renowned Ancestors acquired either by their Wits or by
their Swords. It may be enough to such, that they are freed from all servile
Labors, that they have an Education and Parts answerable to those glorious
Heroes, from whom they derive both their Fortunes and their Blood. And
certainly, where they are well employed, as they will be no less useful to the
World, so neither less acceptable to God, than the sweat of the others brows.
But because Scripture, no less than Reason, would be inquired into there, where
the Obligation, whose Relaxation we seek, has its principal Foundation in it;
therefore it may not be amiss, that I say not in some measure necessary, to
inquire whether the Scripture affords any ground for the qualifying of that
severer Precept which God laid upon Mankind for its disobedience. Now that it
does, will sufficiently appear from that Question which St. Paul put concerning
himself and Barnabas, 1 Cor. 9.6. For, demanding, as he does, whether he and
Barnabas only had not power to forbear working, as well as other Apostles, and
as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas, (for so the Word only, and the
connection of that Demand with the former Words oblige us to supply it) he both
supposes that other of the Apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas,
abstained from Manual Labors; and that it was alike in his power to do so, if
he pleased to make use of it, that so he might the better intend that more
noble Work of the Conversion of Souls. And indeed, as the Labor of the Brain,
whereby that is to be done, is no less useful to Humane Society, nor (which
makes it approach nearer to that Curse upon which it is founded) less wearisom
to the flesh, if we may give credit to Solomon Eccl. 12.12.
, who was more than ordinarily exercised in it; so they who would reduce us to
that toilsom estate of St. Paul, and others, who stuck not to addict themselves
even to the meanest Artifices, must also bring back again into the World those
miraculous Gifts and Graces whereby St. Paul, and other such like Persons, were
enabled to discharge their several Provinces; the Work of converting Souls (as
it is now to be managed) requiring all that Labor and Industry which the
Necessities of the World will suffer us to afford it. The same is to be said,
and upon the strength of the forementioned Demand, concerning all those whose
Brains are employed in the management of State Affairs, or are any other way
useful to the conservation of Men's Persons or Estates. For, St. Paul pleading
his Exemption from Bodily Labor, from his diligence in his Apostleship, and
the good he thereby did to those Persons who were under his inspection, to
which he thought it but just that at least a Maintenance should be allowed;
insinuating moreover, in the ninth and tenth Verses, by his comparing his
Labor to the oxes treading out the corn, and to plowing and reaping, that it
was not unfitly styled a Labor, and such a Labor which privileged him to
partake of carnal Things, no less than that which is attended with Sweat and
Toil: he thereby gave us sufficiently to understand, that as the Labors of the
Mind are no less properly such, than those which are exercised by the Hands;
so, where they are conducible to the Benefit of Humane Kind, they give a Man
the same Privilege to the enjoyment of this Worlds Goods, and consequently
satisfy the intent of the Commandment.

4. Being now, according to my proposed Method, to inquire about what things
this Labor of ours is to be conversant, I shall propose, first, such
Directions as concern the Labors of Men in general, and then those which
relate to the Labors of particular Persons.

As to the former of these, we shall need no other Instruction than that which
St. Paul gives in the fore-quoted place to the Ephesians, to wit, that it be
about those things that are good. By which I mean, first, such things as have
no moral obliquity in them, nor are instrumental to them. Of the former sort,
in particular, is the Trade of Harlots, who prostitute their Bodies to furnish
themselves with a Support; the Arts of Witches and Wizzards, who inquire into
things secret, and such as are not only knowable to God alone, but See Deuteronomy.
29.29.
challenged to himself: Of the latter, all those which are instrumental to
Uncleanness, or to any other Sin whatsoever; such as are to the former, the
Trade of Bauds and Panders; to Drunkenness, the keeping of Houses not for the
covenience of Travelers, or the moderate refreshment of others, but to invite
and cherish intemperance; in fine, to Idolatry, the making of those Images
which are to be the Object of it. Whence it is, that the Fathers inveigh so
much against it, and (as I have before shown Explicat. of the Second Commandm.
Part.
) reckon it little inferior to that it ministers to. But beside that those
things about which our Labor is to be conversant, ought to be free from all
Vice, or from being instrumental to it; I shall not doubt to reckon, in the
second place, that they ought to be some way or other useful to our selves or
others; partly, because this is the lowest Notion the Word Good, in the proper
acception of it, is capable of; and partly, because we find Labor instituted
for the Support of our selves and others. Among these I reckon first, because
undoubtedly Good, such Labors or Arts as conduce to the welfare of Men's Souls,
or Bodies, or Estates: such as are the Labor of the Brain, or Tongue, or Pen,
in converting or building Men up in Piety; the cure of their Bodies when
distempered, or the defending of their Properties; as, in like manner, those
which conduce to the producing of Food and Raiment, the protecting Men from
Hunger, or the injury of the Weather; in fine, all such as are any way
instrumental to them, or employed about the producing of them; and that too,
not only in such Instances whereby the Necessities of Nature may be served,
but the distinction of Degrees preserved and maintained. The only difficulty,
in my opinion, is concerning such Arts or Labors as are conversant about
Matters of Delight and Recreation; such as are, the making of Cards or Dice,
the Trade of Fiddlers, Tumblers, Stage Players, and other such like Persons,
whose Life consists wholly in gratifying the Eyes and Ears of other Men.
Concerning which, though I shall not be forward to pronounce of them as devoid
of all usefulness, because Recreation, to which they serve, is no less needful
to Humane Nature, than Labor; yet I cannot forbear to say, that Men of such
Professions, of all others, ought both to avoid the committing of any Sin in
the Exercise of their several Trades, and endeavor, what in them lies, and so
far as their own Necessities will permit, the doing of such things also as are
more useful to themselves and others; because, as if that about which their
Labor is conversant be good, it is in the lowest proportion such; so they are
very rarely managed without prejudice to their own Souls, or to theirs whom
they are intended to procure the gratification of.

Having thus shown, in the general, about what the Labors of Men are to be
conversant; inquire we, in the next place, about what the Labors of particular
Men are, and what choice they are to make to themselves out of the former Heap.
For the resolution whereof, as it is necessary to premise, that that, and that
only, is to be looked upon as the proper Subject of our Labor, to which the
Divine Majesty shall be pleased to call us; partly, because St. Paul, in the
seventh Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, presupposes See ver.
20. of that chap. as also ver. 24. with the Sermon of Dr. Sanderson upon the
latter.
such a call of God to every Man; and partly, because it is not to be thought,
that God, who superintends over the World, and particularly over Men, will be
wanting in directing them to such Courses as may make most for their good, and
his own Glory: so a compendious way is thereby opened for Men to judge of that
Subject about which their Labor is to be conversant: All that is left for Men
to do (supposing a Call of God to every one) being no other than to inquire,
which way the Divine Majesty calls them. For the investigation whereof,
forasmuch as extraordinary Inspirations are now ceased, but however are not
lightly to be expected in Matters of this nature, and where, for the most part,
if not always, lower Methods will serve the turn; recourse must be had to what
his Word, and our own Reason, (which is the Candle of the Lord) shall dictate
to us. Which if we do, we shall find (as a Sanderson ibid.
Learned Man has largely proved) that the best way to judge of the Divine
Calling, and consequently of the proper Subject of our Labor, is by our
Education, Abilities, and Propension; especially when we find them all to
concur. For, as we are to presume in reason, that he who commands us to honor
our Parents, does thereby oblige us to the making that the Subject of our
Labor, which they, out of their Prudence and Care, have trained us up for (the
detrecting of their Choice, being a questioning of their Wisdom, but to be sure
a derogation to their Authority); so we can much less think that Choice any
other than the Call of God, where a Man's own Inclination and Abilities do
concur, because both of them the Results of his Providence, and, where his
Revelations do not contravene, the Interpreters of his Will. Whatsoever
difficulty there is in this Affair, is undoubtedly where there is a contrariety
between them, and where Men are trained up to those Courses to which they have
not only a natural averseness, but it may be too, little aptitude or ability.
The resolution of which, though I had much rather Men should fetch from the
fore-quoted Sanders. ibid.
Learned Person, in whom it is distinct and full; yet I shall contribute so far
toward it, by affirming, That as the first place ought in reason to be given to
our Education, because the Act of those whom God has commanded us to obey; and
next to that, (because Parents may sometime command things unfitting) to our
Parts and Abilities, because pointing out, as it were with the Finger, what
Employments God designs us for: so that consideration ought to be had, in some
measure, of Men's Inclinations and Propensions, because both the Effects of the
Creator's Power where they are purely Natural; and, where they are also strong,
difficult to be overcome: I do not say, so far as to yield a perfect compliance
with them, where our Abilities and Education run counter to them; but a partial
one, and such as may make the Task imposed more easy to be born. Thus, for
example, if a Man's Abilities and Education should prompt him to the Study of
Sacred Things, at the same time his own Inclinations lead him to Humane
Literature; if those Inclinations cannot be overcome, though there is no doubt
they often may, the most prudent course, as well as most acceptable to God,
would be undoubtedly to apply a Man's self to the study of the Civil Law, which
is a rare Contexture of both. And more than this, as I shall not need to say
concerning the choice of that Subject about which our Labor is to be
conversant; so I shall conclude with an Exhortation, to be more than ordinarily
diligent in it; but so, as neither to suffer our diligence about the Meat that
perishes, to transport us into any Injustice, or thrust out our Endeavors
after that Meat which endures for ever. For, though it be not to be imagined,
that an ordinary diligence can satisfy that Precept which requires the
moulding our Bread with the Sweat of our own Brows; yet much less can it be
supposed, that that diligence of ours can license us in any Injustice, or the
neglect of our Eternal Welfare: Because, as Labor was imposed to procure to
our selves a Property, and thereby take away all temptation from entrenching
upon the Properties of others, which a diligence that is attended with
Injustice does very ill comport with; so Reason, as well as Scripture, advises
the postposing of those Commands which enjoin the pursuit of Earthly Blessings,
to those which are infinitely above them.

PART V.
The last question concerning Labor is, whether it admit of a relaxation, and
in what manner, and proportion. That it admits of a relaxation is made appear
from the necessity there is of it, both to the support of Humane Nature, and to
dispose men the better to continue it; as also, from the countenance that has
been given to it by Gods both Dispensations and Laws. That it admits of such
relaxations as have the name of Recreations, is in like manner evidenced from
the little refreshment that accrues from a mere rest from labor, and from the
both leave and approbation God has given to the other: From thence the
Explication descends to entreat more particularly concerning the due manner,
and proportion of our relaxation. In order whereunto, enquiry is made
concerning such Recreations as are conversant about Lots, as Cards and Dice,
the motion of the body, as Dancing, and particularly that which they call
mixed; and the imitation of other men's gestures and speeches, as Stage Plays.
Touching the first whereof is shown, that there is not that sacredness in a Lot
as is commonly deemed, and an answer returned to that of Solomon, Prove. 16.33.
Touching the second, That Dancing has both the leave and approbation of the
Almighty; and that that which they call mixed may not only be used
inoffensively by sober persons, but that there is more danger from the converse
of young persons out of it, than in it: Touching the third, That Stage Plays
are but a kind of Picture of Men's behavior and speeches, and therefore no more
unlawful than the depicting of their Faces. Consideration is next had of the
Time that may be employed in them, and of the Money that may be bestowed upon
them. In order to the former whereof is shown, 1. That they ought to have no
more of our Time, than may serve for a relief after labor, or to quicken us to
future ones. 2. That they ought not to entrench upon that Time which the Duties
of Religion, or those of our Employments, call for. 3. That ordinarily they
ought not to have the Morning at all, where they may be as well used at other
times. As to the latter is made appear, that more Money ought not to be either
expended or hazarded about them, than can well be spared from more important
occasions, such as are those of Charity, and the sustentation of our selves and
Families; and that it is much less lawful to acquire, or design to acquire, a
livelihood by them. The whole concluded with an Admonition, not to play at such
Games, or for such Sums of Money, under which men cannot ordinarily contain
themselves from heats of passion.

5. OF the Questions before proposed concerning Labor (which how it appertains
to this Commandment, needs not again be told you) the last, and only one
remaining to be resolved, is, whether it admit of a relaxation, and in what
manner and proportion. For the clearing whereof (how slight soever the matter
of it may appear to be) yet I think my self obliged to use as much care and
circumspection, as in matters of greater moment; Superstition on the one hand
having endeavored to abridge men of their lawful liberty, as Profaneness on
the other hand to convert it into licentiousness.

Now that our obligation to labor admits of a relaxation, (which is the first
thing in order to be discussed) will appear, if we consider the necessity there
is of it, or the countenance which has been given to it by him, by whom the
Obligation was imposed: For it being evident from Experience, that neither men's
brains, nor bodies, are of ability to undergo an uninterrupted travel, there
will arise from thence a necessity of remitting of our labor, as well as of
intending and prosecuting it; he who acts beyond his ability offering an injury
to his nature, and consequently, whilst he endeavors to keep one Commandment,
engaging himself in the violation of a much more important one. But neither is
there a less necessity of remitting some time of our labor, if we consider it
only with reference to that labor which is bound upon us; for the due
performance of that depending upon the hability and promptness of him that
labors, as that hability and promptness upon his giving himself, at due
times, rest and ease; he who would labor as he ought, must sometime remit of
it, and slacken his Bow as well as bend it. And it calls to my mind the fact of
Aesop, who, when twitted with playing among Children, contented himself for his
defense, to lay before him that did so, an unbended Bow. Of which, whilst he
and the spectators labored to find the meaning, Aesop himself gave this
rational account, as we learn from the most ingenious Phaedrus Lib. 3. fab. 14.
Cite rumpes arcum, semper si tensum habueris.
At si laxaris, cum voles, erit utilis.
Sic lusus animo debet aliquando dari,
Ad cogitandum melior ut redeat tibi.

; that as a Bow if it be always kept bent will be quickly broken, but if
sometime slackened, will be more useful to him that uses it; so, he that
sometimes gives recreation to his mind, will find it afterward better disposed
to exercise those operations, which it is by God and Nature both fitted and
intended for. And well then may Labor, though imposed upon man by the
straitest obligations, admit of a relaxation, if it rather gain than lose ought
by affording it. It being thus evident, that there is a necessity of a
relaxation, as well as labor, yea to the undergoing of that labor which we
are required to intend; proceed we to show what countenance it has from him,
by whom Labor was imposed. For the evidencing whereof, I will allege in the
first place, that relaxation which sleep gives: for sleep being manifestly the
work of God and Nature, because naturally flowing from that weariness which the
exercise of our natural faculties produces, and including moreover in it a
relaxation from labor, because binding up those faculties by which it is to be
intended; he who makes sleep a necessary adjunct of Humane Nature, must
consequently be thought to give countenance to that relaxation, which is the
natural and necessary effect of it. But neither has the Divine Majesty given
less countenance to it by his Laws, as will appear from that known one of the
observation of the Sabbath; for that day (as was before shown See Explic. of
the Fourth Com. Part.
) being appointed for the rest of the body, as well as for the intending of the
more important actions of Religion; he, who gave leave to, yea imposed such a
rest, shows it to be no less acceptable to himself, than those days of labor
which he required. I conclude therefore with the Author to the Hebrews, though
in another sense, that there remains a rest to the People of God, yea to all
who have no other title to that name, than their original from him, upon whom
the burden of Labor was imposed.

But because the question is not so much, even amongst the most scrupulous,
Whether our obligation to labor admit of a relaxation; as whether it admit of
such relaxations, as are best known by the names of Recreations or Plays:
therefore I think it not amiss (before I proceed any further) to show these to
have the same Authority with those other relaxations before spoken of. In the
doing whereof, I will make use of the same Topics, by which I before evinced
the lawfulness of the other. To begin with Nature, because that, which we speak
of, is but a refreshment of it; where who is there that sees not an equal
necessity of Recreation, with those other relaxations before spoken of? For, to
say nothing at all of Sleep, because what refreshment soever it may give, yet
it is perceived rather by its Effects, than by it self; a mere Rest from Labor
being not without its tediousness, considering the natural propension there is
in men to be always exercising their respective Faculties: were not Humane
Nature sometime indulged the use of more busy refreshments, it is impossible
to think but they would apply themselves to their Labors with less vigor and
cheerfulness, than is requisite to the due performance of them. And indeed,
however some more scrupulous than wise, yea even in those sacred things, to the
knowledge whereof they most pretend, though such (I say) have by their practice
and advice recommended a simple Rest, before those Refreshments which
Recreations give; yet has that recommendation of theirs proved as little to
the advantage of Religion, as to the encouragement of those Labors which it
was principally designed to promote: both themselves, and others who follow
their Example, employing the most part of their time of Rest in uncharitable
censures of other men, which are certainly more repugnant to Religion, than any
Recreation whatsoever. Beside, whilst he, who is busied about some innocent
Recreation or other, has his thoughts as well as hands employed, and
consequently is not obnoxious to those evil suggestions, which the Devil is apt
to instill into idle minds; he who contents himself with a simple Rest, makes
himself a prey to all those evil thoughts, which the advantage of a mind not
employed gives him the temptation to suggest. Thus whilst men, out of a vain
fear of those inconveniences which do sometime attend upon innocent
Recreations, avoid wholly the use of them, they do not infrequently run into
another, and a worse extreme. With how little countenance from Scripture as
well as Nature, that of Solomon in Ecclesiastes, as well as another of the
Prophet Zachary shows: The latter whereof represents it as the consequence of
Gods intended restoration of Jerusalem, that the streets of the City should be
full of young persons, of either Sex, playing in the streets thereof, Zach.
8.5. The former, that as there is a season for more sad and serious purposes,
so there is a time to laugh and dance Eccl. 3.4.
; and consequently, that such like Recreations, where they are separated from
the abuses thereof, are not without the leave, yea countenance of him, by whom
times and seasons are appointed.

Having thus returned an Answer to the first part of the Demand, and shown our
Obligation to Labor, not only to admit of a relaxation, but of such
relaxations in particular, as have the name of Recreations; we are in the next
place to enquire, in what manner and proportion it admits of them, which will
show the several limitations thereof. In order whereunto, I will first of all
consider of the matter of them, as without the due qualification of which they
cannot by any means be accounted lawful.

Now though, if question had not been made about the lawfulness of some
Recreations that are much in use, it might suffice for the resolution of the
conscience, to propose only some general Rules, such as are, that they be
conversant about such things, by which the mind or body or both may be better
disposed to Labor, and neither the one nor the other corrupted; he who keeps
within these bounds being out of danger of offending, as to the matter of his
Recreations: yet in regard of the weakness of some, and the peevishness of
others, I will proceed to more particular considerations, and enquire what is
to be thought of such Games as are conversant about Lots, as Cards or Dice; the
motion of the body, as Dancing, and particularly that which they call mixed,
and the imitation of other men's gestures and speeches, as Stage Plays:
Intending afterward (because it is not to be denied that all these both may
and are often abused) to subjoin such necessary Cautions, as may preserve men
from the several abuses thereof.

Of all the Recreations, wherewith the minds or bodies of men have been
exercised, I know of none which scrupulous persons have both more avoided, and
impugned, than those which are conversant about Lots, as conceiving that there
is something so sacred in a Lot, as not to be a proper matter of merriment.
What ground they have so to opine shall be afterward examined, when I come to
consider that Text on which they chiefly bottom their persuasion; give me leave
only, before I proceed to that, to show you the nature and use of a Lot, as
which will conduce not a little to show it a lawful matter of Recreation. Now a
Lot (as Mr. Gataker Of the natural use of Lots. chapter 1.
has shown at large) is nothing else but a casual event applied to the
deciding of a doubt, and has place Ibid. c. 5. page 125, etc.
not in things of moment (for such undoubtedly ought not to be put to that
hazard, save where there is an express command of God for it) but in things
indifferent, and concerning which it matters not, whether they be done one way
or another. But what is there in all this, that can hinder a Lot from being
made matter of disport, and consequently from becoming an ingredient of those
Games to which it is commonly applied? Is it the casualty of the event? But who
(as the same Mr. Gataker Ibid. chapter 6. page 170.
reasons) is so excessively austere, or so extremely superstitious, as to deny,
but that a man may make sport with such casual events as do usually occur? May
not one lawfully take pleasure in seeing a man shoot, or catch, at ought
blindfold? Or may we not please our selves with our own or others tripping on
the way, when no hurt ensues, or in their treading in some unclean thing
unawares? Lastly, Is it not equally warrantable to make Game of a Hare that
casually crosses us, as of one that we advisedly light upon? If with these and
other the like Casualties then we may lawfully sport our selves, why not as
well (as the same worthy person goes on) with the shuffting of Arrows, or the
drawing of Tickets, the dealing of Cards, or the fall of a Dye? There being as
much of casualty in the one as the other, and therefore either both to be
condemned, or neither. But it may be, the Crime lies in applying of this
casualty to the deciding of a doubt; as for Example, who shall play or stay
out, who begin or follow, or what Cards each person shall have to make
advantage of. But neither in this can any the least Crime be supposed, if it be
duly adverted to: For Christian liberty See Gatak. of the nature, etc. of a
lot. chap. 6. Sect 8
implying a free use of all Gods Creatures, to employ them unto such purposes
as they are by natural power enabled to; what should hinder men, upon consent,
to employ a Lot to the determining of a doubt, which that Lot, by the consent
of men, is enabled to determine? especially when, as it afterward follows in
the account before given of a Lot, the use of it is only in matters of
indifferency, which are the proper subject of Recreation. All therefore that
can in Reason be objected against the use of Lots in sports, is that of
Solomon, Prove. 16.33. The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing, or
(as it is in the Hebrew) every judgment of it is of the Lord. From whence
though some have endeavored to infer, that there is an immediate providence in
every Lot, and consequently, that he, who makes use of it in trifling matters,
puts God upon exerting such an immediate providence in them; yet, as all that
can be necessarily inferred from thence is, that there is a Providence of God
in all things, even in the least, in the most casual things, and among the rest
by name in a Lot, (what is here said concerning a Lot, being elsewhere Prove.
16.1.9.19.21.20.24.21.30, 31.
affirmed of all men's thoughts, and ways, and words, and works, in all which
certainly no man will affirm an immediate Providence to interpose) so, that we
cannot with reason infer an immediate Providence in every Lot, is evident,
partly Gatak. ibid. chapter 7. Sect. 4.
in that the lighting of the Lots in this or that manner ordinarily comes
immediately from the act of the Creature, whose motion determines it to that
manner after which it happens; and partly, that if there were any such
immediate Providence in Gatak ibid.
them, it should be in the natural power of the Creature, because in his
natural power to cast Lots at pleasure, to put God upon the exerting of an
immediate Providence, which it were little less than blasphemy to affirm.
Against such Games therefore as are conversant about Lots no just exception can
be made, unless where they are abused, which it is not only none of my design
to defend, but, as I shall afterward show, to detect and condemn.

From such Recreations therefore as are conversant about Lots, pass we to those
that are conversant about the motion of the body, and particularly that of
Dancing. A Recreation, which, however some zealous people have inveighed
against, yet if used with sobriety cannot in the least be faulted; for beside
that it does not appear, how it should be more unlawful to Dance than Sing,
Dancing being but a harmony in the motion of the Body, as Singing is in that of
the Tongue; beside that he, who affirms there is a time for every serious
purpose, has not stuck in like manner to affirm, that there is a time for
sporting ones, and particularly for that whereof we speak, (which how he could
reasonably do, if Dancing were unlawful in it self, will be found not easy to
determine?) With what face can any man condemn that as unlawful, which is not
only foretold by God as the joyful effect of his redeeming Israel, Jer. 31.13.
(for then, says he, shall the Virgin rejoice in the Dance, both young men and
old together) but is affirmed by the Scripture to have been the expression of
David's joy, at the bringing up the Ark to Jerusalem; and (which is more) Psalm.
149.3. is recommended by the same David to others, to express the praises of
God by? And though it be true, that all Dancing is not equally innocent, and
those which they call mixed Dances, may administer matter of temptation, where
they, who are lewdly disposed, are joined together: yet as I doubt not there is
a far greater danger of temptation from the converse of young persons out of
it, as having nothing else but one another persons to take up their thoughts,
whilst the others are diverted by intending of those measures they are to
tread; so neither can I imagine but where persons of sober education are mixed,
they may use it with the same innocence, wherewith they may do other
Recreations which are less condemned.

One only Recreation remains, of those which we before instanced in, to wit the
Recreation of Stage Plays; concerning the unlawfulness whereof in themselves,
as I could never yet see any convincing Argument, with what clamor soever they
have been decry'd, (for why should it not be as lawful to represent the actions
of men in our own, or behold them when represented by others, as it is to
depict their Faces upon a Tablet, or please our selves with looking upon them
when they are?) so I could heartily wish the enemies of Stage Plays had forborne
the arguing against them from men or women's putting on the apparel of the other
sex; partly, because if it have any weight in it self, it is accidental to
them, and partly, because it may have in part occasioned the bringing of Women
upon the Stage, which our own lamentable experience has shown to be rather for
the worse than for the better. If there be any thing offensive adhering to some
particular Plays (as it is too too apparent there are) that is nothing to the
Recreation it self, and persuades only, as a Learned Man has well observed,
that the Master of the Revels (who according to the ancient constitution ought
to see that nothing be spoken but what is fit to be heard) expunge out of them
whatsoever is offensive, and that, till that is done, all sober persons would
forbear the sight of such, there being no doubt but in that and all other
Recreations, men ought not only to take care that those they use be innocent
for their kind, but lawful for the particular, and such as are free from that
immodesty, and profaneness, and scurrility, wherewith they say the compositions
of this latter age abound.

But beside that to make our Recreations lawful, they ought to be conversant
about such things, by which, either the Body, or Mind, or both, may be less
indisposed to labor, but neither corrupted or depraved; we are to take care
that we use them as Recreations, because otherwise we convert them to another
use than what they were designed to by God. The only thing of difficulty is,
what it is to use them as Recreations, which may be comprehended in this
general Aphorism. For then, and then only, do we use Recreations as such, when
we use them as things on the by, and not as the main business of our life, for
a moderate refreshment, and not as the means of our support, and much less to
overthrow it. For Recreations (as was before shown) having no other end than to
relieve us after Labor, or dispose us for it, they must consequently be looked
upon, and accordingly used, as things on the by, and not as the main; to
procure to us a Refreshment, and not a Livelihood (which God has appointed
Labor for) and much less to destroy it. The result of which observation will
serve us for a direction both as to the Time which may be allotted to them, and
the Money which may be either expended or acquired at them. I begin with the
former of these, even the Time which may be allotted to them; concerning which,
these Three things are easy to be observed, because naturally flowing from the
former observation.

1. That our Recreations are not to have either the greatest, or an equal share
of our time with those Employments to which we are designed; yea, on the
contrary, that they ought to have no more of it, than may serve us for a relief
after labor, or to quicken us to our future ones. A caution which I would to
God I had no occasion to mention, amongst the other necessary ones which this
debauched age calls for. But as it is too apparent that some men's lives are in
a manner one continued Recreation, or if mixed with any thing of business, yet
as but a Parergon to the other; so those who are not so vain, nor it may be can
afford to be so, yet spend whole days and nights in it; by that means
converting that into their repast, which was intended only as Physic, or (if
you had rather I should so express it, because Recreations were no doubt
intended for a moderate delight) converting that into meat which was intended
but as sauce to it. Which as it is apparently contrary to the design of
Recreation, and consequently not without a great degree of guilt, yet has this
farther mischief attending it, that it engages us in a second. He who has
thus wearied himself with Recreations, (for even these, if continued in, are
not without a burden to those that use them) being of necessity to refresh
himself by ease or sleep, before he can betake himself to his employments. And
though I will not deny but sometimes one or more whole days may be borrowed
from our employments, the general consent of Nations having indulged such a
liberty, and the pains of the laborious person seeming not without reason to
require it, (for what satisfaction could it be to men in perpetual travail to
have Recreations only by snatches and in smaller portions?) yet I think it but
a just consequent of the former observation, that ordinarily our Recreations
should be meted by smaller portions; as because a less portion of time may
generally suffice for the refreshment of Nature, so because it is but a (...),
and therefore rather to have a share in so large a portion, than to devour it
all. 2. It is to be observed Secondly, that as we are not to spend more of our
time in Recreation than may serve for a relief after labor, or to quicken us
to the following one; so neither to give way to our Recreations at any time,
when either the duties of Religion, or those of our several Employments, call
upon us to intend them; that which is but on the by being in reason to give
place to the main, the (...) to that which is Business and Employment. Upon
which account, as all those must be looked upon as Criminals, who can so easily
suffer their Recreations to trespass upon the time of their devotions; so next
to them such who can intend them, when the care of their several Families, or
the business of their Employments call for their regard. 3. I observe Thirdly,
and more than that I shall not need to observe as to the Time, that our
Recreations, where they may be as well used at another part of the day, ought
not ordinarily to have the morning of it; partly, because the rest of the
foregoing night supersedes the use of them, and partly, because that part of
the day, through the Agility which the foregoing Rest gives, is the most
opportune for business, which is in reason to be preferred before the other.
From the matter of Time proceed we to that of Money, where again these two
useful Cautions present themselves: The former whereof respects the expense or
hazard of it; the latter, the acquiring or designing it. For though I see no
more reason to proscribe all Play for Money, than for Glory and Reputation,
which he must be an extraordinary person who should be able perfectly to
separate from it; yet I cannot forbear to say, upon the strength of the grounds
before laid down, that it is utterly unlawful either to expend or hazard more
Money about it, than can well be spared from more important occasions, such as
are those of Charity, or the relief of our selves or families: Partly, because
that which is only a thing on the by ought to yield to more important
occasions, and partly, because such expense or hazard engages Men in that sin
which this Commandment expressly forbids; he who thus entrencheth upon the
occasions before remembered, robbing the Poor of that charity which is due from
him to them, as himself and family of that support, which is no less incumbent
on him, even by the force of this Commandment: He who forbids to steal,
commanding also to take care that we may have wherewithal to minister to our
own necessities and those of others. Upon which account, as it will be
necessary to look upon all those as offenders, who play away Manors, Estates,
yea and their own Liberty, being not unlike herein to those Ancient Germans,
whom De moribus German. Aleam, quod mirere, sobrii inter seria exercent, tantd
lucrandi per dendive temeritate ut cum omnia defecerunt, extremo ac novissimo
jactu de liberate and de corpore contendunt. Victus voluntariam servitutem
adit.
Tacitus speaks of, who, after they had played away all they had, were wont to
stake their own persons to become slaves to them they played with, if they
should happen to be overcome: So we are to look upon such also as offenders,
who either hazard, or tempt others to hazard such sums of Money, as by the loss
whereof they may be either straightened in their own or families support, or
disabled in any measure from ministering to the necessities of the Poor. Again,
as it is utterly unlawful either to expend or hazard more Money about our
Recreations, than can well be spared from more important occasions; so it is no
less unlawful either to acquire or design to acquire a livelihood or any part
thereof by it, as because by so doing we shall but entrench upon the Properties
of others which this Commandment does expressly forbid; so because God has no
less expressly commanded the working with our hand the thing that is good, that
we may have wherewithal to support our selves. Whence it is See Jer. Tail.
Ductor Dubit. li. 4. c. 1. p. 477.
that Holy Men have not only represented such acquisitions as unlawful to be
detained, but some Nations also confiscated them to the public. I will
conclude this Affair and my Discourse with an admonition not to play at such
Games, or for such sums of Money, under which we cannot ordinarily contain our
selves from heats of Passion and those intemperances of Language which do for
the most part attend them. For as that, which is never so lawful in it self,
may yet become unlawful to us, if it prove to us an occasion of falling, and
particularly into contention and reproachful language; so there is no doubt
such recreations ought to be forborne by us, where, through the peevishness of
our own nature, we cannot so far command our own passions, as to preserve us
from them. For though recreation be not only lawful, but in some sort
necessary, yet this or that particular one is not, and therefore in reason to
be discarded, where we find upon observation that we cannot intend them with
that indifferency and dispassionateness, which the levity thereof requires.

PART VI.
Frugality or Good-husbandry as necessary for the conserving of our Properties,
as Labor is toward acquiring them, for which cause it is assigned a place
here. That considered, either as to our own use of those good things we are
possessed of, or as to the imparting of them unto others. In the former of
which senses it requires the bounding of our expenses ordinarily by our yearly
income, the keeping in some good proportion within it, the reasons of both
which are declared; and in fine, the using of our several Properties with
moderation and care. In the latter, the using of a moderation even in our
Charity, the reasons whereof are also assigned. An exhortation to the practice
both of the one and the other Frugality from religious considerations. A
transition to the consideration of such means, as are necessary to the
defending or retrieving of our Properties, when either taken away or attempted,
or to the supplying thereof when perished and come to naught. In order to the
former whereof is represented, the appealing to the Magistrate by a Suit, and
such appeals both manifested to be lawful from Gods constituting of Magistrates
for the redressing of injuries, and an answer returned to those sayings of our
Savior and St. Paul, which seem to forbid Suits at Law altogether, but do
indeed proscribe only scandalous, vexatious, and trifling ones. As to the
latter is recommended and enjoined the using of entreaties to those who are in
a capacity to supply us.

2. SINCE one and the same thing, under diverse considerations, may become the
subject matter of different Sciences (for thus Heaven it self, though the
proper concernment of the Divine, as it is the Seat of the Blessed, and the
Hope of the Religious, may yet be the Province of the Astronomer, as to the
Revolution of it, and of those Lucid Bodies which it contains) I hope it will
not be thought strange, if I, who am a Preacher of Religion, and profess now to
explain it, represent that Good Husbandry, which worldly wisdom teaches, as a
part also of Heavenly one, yea of that Commandment which I have now chosen to
illustrate. For inasmuch as he who forbids the invading of others Properties,
must be supposed also to command the intending and conserving of our own, as
without which we shall be under a necessity of invading those of others;
inasmuch as Good Husbandry is no less necessary to the conserving of our
several Properties, than that Labor, which we before insisted on, is to the
procuring of them; he who is acknowledged to oblige to the one, must be
confessed to oblige us to the other, and consequently to look upon it as a duty
that is hereby enjoined. Here only is the difference between our consideration
of Good Husbandry, and that of the worldly man, that whilst the latter intends
it only for the securing to himself this worlds happiness, we on the other
side, recommend it as a duty laid upon us by the Almighty, and as a means to
preserve us from the temptation of invading others Properties; which the
prodigal spending of that which is his own, does not infrequently put the
unwary Spendthrift on.

Now though wherein Frugality or Good Husbandry consists were not difficult
for men to learn, if they would apply themselves to the consideration of it;
yet because men are slow of understanding, in all things of duty, and
particularly in this whereof we speak, I think it not amiss, especially having
shown it to be enjoined by this Commandment, to spend some time in the
investigation of it. For my more orderly effecting whereof, I will consider
Frugality or Good Husbandry, 1. As to our own use of those good things we are
possessed of: And, 2. As to the imparting of them to others.


1. And here not to propose to you those strict measures whereby our Ancestors
proceeded, partly because the recalling of them is rather to be wished than
hoped for, and partly because they are not of absolute necessity to be
observed, I shall represent,

1. First, as a necessary part of it, the bounding our Expenses ordinarily by
that yearly income, which our several Properties do afford us; he who exceeds
those limits, not only diminishing his Property, instead of conserving it, but
treasuring up an arrear of debt, which will make him afterward less able to
support himself. Upon which, as there will necessarily ensue a substraction in
some measure of our Charity, which I have shown heretofore, and shall more
hereafter, to have the nature of a Theft; so also a temptation to supply our
selves with invading the Properties of others, which is the very formality of
one. It is true indeed (for, for that very reason I subjoined the word
ordinarily, when I represented it as a necessary part of men's Frugality, not to
exceed the bounds of their yearly income,) it is true, I say, the so doing is
not always possible, nor yet where it is, of absolute necessity to be observed,
because there may be a just expectation of an addition to our several
Properties, the intuition whereof may make it reasonable to exceed the present
one. But as there is no repugnancy between affirming that there may be
instances where the like measures either cannot or need not be observed, and
that ordinarily they ought to be; so that ordinarily they ought to be so, the
forementioned arguments sufficiently evince, and the experience of the world
does abundantly confirm; it being rare to see any, who exceed those bounds, not
to make havoc of their Estates, and at length to end in want and beggary.
Lastly, For though that be extrinsecal to the matter of Frugality, yet it has
the astipulation of that which is of greater necessity to be regarded; he who
suffers his Expenses ordinarily to exceed the bounds of his yearly income,
shows a dissatisfaction with that portion which the Divine Majesty has
allotted him; which though no violation of the Precept of Frugality, yet is of
a more important one, even of that which enjoins submission to the Divine Will.

2. But let us rise yet higher (for so, as I shall by and by show, the Virtue
we have now before us does oblige) and enquire whether frugality do not as well
tie us to keep in some good proportion within the bounds of our yearly income,
as not to exceed or surpass them. For the evidencing the affirmative whereof, I
shall desire you to consider the necessities that may happen to every man,
whether it be by casualties, which no man how fortunate soever is wholly exempt
from, or by changing his condition from single life to marriage, which most
persons either choose or find themselves necessitated to, or by the infirmities
of old age, which are in a manner an inevitable evil: For inasmuch as all these
bring their necessities along with them, and such as that state to which they
appertain wants either strength or revenue to provide sufficiently against; it
must be looked upon as a necessary piece of Frugality ordinarily to provide our
selves beforehand, as without which neither our Properties, nor we our selves
can well be conserved. Upon which account, as all those single persons must be
looked upon as violators of it, who, however they design to enter into the
state of marriage, yet make not the least provision against those necessities
which it brings (for which cause, if they succeed ill, as generally such
persons do, they ought to thank their own want of Frugality, and not the
disposition of the Divine Providence:) So those also are to be reckoned to the
number, especially if persons of meaner fortune, who in the strength and vigor
of their years lay by nothing in store to support them under the infirmities of
old age, as if it were a rare thing for men to fall under such infirmities, or
God were obliged to support them by an immediate Providence. And indeed (for
what should hinder us from making profession of a truth, which every days
experience gives so clear an attestation to?) from hence for the most part
proceeds that scantness of Fortune, which is such a burden to the needy
person, and all that live near him: It rarely happening that men, who are so
frugal of their present Properties, as to keep in a good proportion within
them, are reduced to that necessity in any ordinary condition of life, as not
to find a competent means to support themselves under it. But of all the
necessities which it is incumbent upon men to provide against, there is
certainly none which does more require the not living up to the height of our
income, than that which Children bring; for inasmuch as these do not only
require a present subsistence but a foundation for their future support, it
will be little less than impossible for us to provide for them as we ought,
where we do not only not exceed the bounds of our yearly income, but not keep
at a good distance from them. The only difficulty is, what distance we are to
keep; which must be left, in a great measure, to the judgment of every
particular man to determine. This only would be said, That as that distance we
are to keep is to be proportioned by those necessities we have cause to
apprehend; so the greater the distance the better, especially where the
necessities are like to be pressing. Provided first, that that which invites us
to it be the command of God, and not any base covetousness; and, secondly, that
our way of living be answerable to that of sober persons, which are of the same
condition and fortune with our selves. Lastly,

3. And more than that I shall not need to say, as to that frugality which
respects our own use of those good things which God has bestowed upon us, it
is a necessary part of Frugality to use them with moderation and care, and
neither spoil them by intemperance or neglect; he who so does, destroying
instead of conserving his Property, and consequently making himself less able
to support himself, if he should fall into any distress, or minister to the
necessities of others.

2. From that Frugality which respects our own use of the good things we are
possessed of, pass we to that which respects the imparting of them to others,
and which is equally necessary to the conservation of them. Where who is there
that sees not how conducible it is to the observation of this Commandment;
whether we respect that charity which it does, though covertly, enjoin; or that
stealth which it manifestly forbids? For as by immoderate largesses men do not
only destroy their several Properties, but put themselves out of a capacity of
long continuing that beneficence in which they seem to take so much content,
than which (as Tully De Officiis li. 2. Nonnunquam tamen est largiendum, etc.
Sed diligenter atque moderate. Multi enim patrimoniae effuderunt inconsulte
largiendo. Quid autem est stultius, quam, quod libenter facias, curare ut id
diutius facere non possis? Atque etiam sequuntur largitionem rapinae. Cum enim
dando egere coeperint, alienis bonis manus afferre coguntur.
speaks) what is there that can be more absurd; so they put themselves upon a
temptation, shall I say, or rather inevitable necessity of invading the
Properties of others. For, when (as the same Tully De Officiis li. 2.
Nonnunquam tamen est largiendum, etc. Sed diligenter atque moderate. Multi enim
patrimoniae effuderunt inconsulte largiendo. Quid autem est stultius, quam,
quod libenter facias, curare ut id diutius facere non possis? Atque etiam
sequuntur largitionem rapinae. Cum enim dando egere coeperint, alienis bonis
manus afferre coguntur.
speaks) they begin to want by giving, they are compelled, for the supply of
those wants, to lay hands on the goods of others, and show themselves as greedy
of theirs, as they were before prodigal of their own. All that I can observe to
require any thing of a discussion, is, what kind of largesses the Frugality
here spoken of extends to, and by what measures it is to be conducted.
Neither the one nor other of which will be difficult to be solved by him who
shall attentively consider them. For though Frugality be mostly construed with
relation to such Largesses, as are the fruits rather of humor than
beneficence, and consequently rarely applied to those of Charity; yet that it
extends to the moderation of those also, needs no other Argument, than that
prohibition we have now before us. For how is he any other than a Thief, who
substracts from the necessary support of himself and Family (for which all
Properties were primarily bestowed) to minister to the necessities of others?
And though it be true that there are few such kind of Thieves (for which cause
that caution may seem the less necessary to have been inserted) yet inasmuch as
vainglory does sometime mix it self with men's Charity, and tempt them to be
profuse, in giving above what the necessities of themselves or Families will
well permit, I thought it not amiss to admonish, that Frugality ought to have
the inspection and moderation of them, as well as of those Largesses which have
no other Fountain, than either humor, or some other the like worldly motive.
The only thing of which there can be any doubt, is, by what measures that
Frugality is to proceed, which the grounds before laid will afford an easy
solution of. For inasmuch as the end of Frugality is the conservation of men's
Properties, as the end of those Properties primarily the ministering to our own
and Families necessities; our Frugality in giving is to guide it self by those
necessities of ours, for the supplying whereof men's several Properties were
primarily intended. Otherwise we become prodigal, rather than charitable, and
in stead of being benevolent to others, prove unjust to our selves and ours.
But because it is not impossible, when I come to entreat of the Measures of our
Charity, I may have occasion to bring this Argument again before you, because
suggesting a Limitation of it; therefore contenting my self at present with
what has been already said concerning it, I will employ the residue of my
Discourse in exhorting you to the Practice both of the one and the other
Frugality.

Now though I am not ignorant, I might furnish my self with Motives for that
purpose, from that Love which all Men naturally have for the conservation of
their own Being and Happiness; yet I shall choose rather, especially being so
amply furnished from the foregoing Discourse, to recommend it to you upon the
score of that Religion which my Profession, as well as present Task, obliges
me to display. For, is it not a part of Religion, yea an important one, to
acquiesce in the disposition of the Divine Providence, and content our selves
with such a portion of this Worlds Goods as he is pleased to allot us? And if
so, is it not of like importance to bound our Enjoyments by those Portions,
which is one main part of that Frugality which we commend? Is it not a part of
Religion, in like manner, to provide against future Necessities, and
particularly those Necessities which Children bring? And must it not then be
looked upon as such, to keep in a good proportion within the Bounds of our
present Properties, which the same Frugality, as well as the providing against
those Necessities, does command? Lastly, Is it not a part of Religion, as well
as Providence, to be temperate in all things, which the same Frugality, no less
than the Precept of Sobriety, does enjoin? But what then can be looked upon as
a part of Religion, if this be not? or where shall we find any thing, of that
nature at least, that has a juster Foundation in it? Especially, if we add to
the former Considerations, that without Frugality we cannot well either be just
to our selves, or contain our selves from doing Injustice unto others:
Prodigality, though at first blush it look like an excess of Indulgence to our
selves, yet being Cruelty and Injustice, because both spoiling us for the
future of the necessary Means of our Support, and, which is no less Injustice
to our selves than others, putting us upon a necessity of invading the
Properties of others, and so undoing our own Souls, as well as making havoc of
our Brothers Fortunes. From whence as it will unavoidably follow, that
Frugality is a great part of Religion, because diffusing it self into so many
and so important Duties of it; so it cannot at any time cease to be such,
unless where it degenerates into Sordidness, which is rather Covetousness than
Frugality, or is taken up upon purely prudential Considerations.

3. Of Labor and Frugality I have entreated hitherto; and I have entreated so
much the more largely of them, because they are the only ordinary Means of
procuring or conserving our several Properties. But because it may so happen,
that our several Properties may be taken away, or at least attempted by others,
or by some sinister accident perish and come to naught; therefore it will be
necessary for us to inquire, what other Means there are whereby the former may
be either retriv'd or defended, and those which are perished may be supplied.

Now though, if Magistrates had not been constituted, no doubt at all could be
made, but we might even by forcible means defend or retrive our several
Properties, no natural Reason forbidding the vindicating to our selves what God
by his Providence has made our proper Portion; yet the same is not to be said
after the Constitution of Magistrates, and that Power wherewith they are
invested, of doing Right to the Injured Party: partly, because he who
constitutes such a Power, must be supposed also, because it would be otherwise
in vain, to oblige private Persons to seek their Remedy there; and partly,
because Force could not be lawful, were there no Magistrate to defend us, if
more peaceable Means could be able to protect us. From whence, as it will
follow, that we are not ordinarily to right our selves, and much less to do it
by force of Arms; so, that it may be both lawful and necessary (because
necessary sometimes to the conserving of our several Properties) to appeal for
redress to the Magistrate, and sue the injurious Person at his Tribunal. For,
if (as I have heretofore shown, and shall hereafter more largely) Magistrates
were appointed by God for the redress of Injuries, what should hinder the
injured Party to appeal to the Magistrate for it, especially when there is no
other way left to compass it? Which said, I shall the more confidently apply my
self to the consideration of what the Gospel teaches, as which is the only
Objection against this way of defending or retriving our several Properties.
For, inasmuch as the same Gospel does both approve and assert those Powers
which claim to themselves the power of Redress; it is impossible to think it
should proscribe all Appeals to them, and enjoin Men rather to suffer any
thing, than to do it: A power of Redress being in vain, where it is unlawful to
be appealed to, by those who are most concerned to seek it. Taking it therefore
for granted, that such Appeals are both lawful, and sometimes necessary; I will
make it my business to inquire, what our Savior meant, when he said, If any
man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak
also: as also what St. Paul did, where he represents going to Law as a fault,
and advises rather to suffer our selves to be defrauded: Both which Passages I
will be so much the more particular in the consideration of, because they will
discover to us the due Limitations of that which we have affirmed to be lawful
in it self. I begin with that of our Savior, because no doubt the Foundation
of the other, but however the most to be considered, for his sake from whom it
fell; toward the explication whereof I shall offer, first, That his meaning
possibly was, not that we should not seek a Redress of our Wrongs in any case,
but that we should not seek it with a revengeful mind, and with a design more
to punish others, than right our selves. Which Notion is so much the more
probable, because it is urged as an Instance of our not resisting evil, after
the same manner that the Jews are found to have done, when, by the permission
of God, they required an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth. For, such
resisting of evil as is there spoken of, serving only for the punishment of
those from whom the evil proceeded, all that can justly be inferred from that
Doctrine which is opposed by our Savior to it, is, that we are not either to
defend or retrive our several Properties with the same vindictive Mind which
those Persons cherished, who required such a Retaliation as served to punish
the injurious Person, but not at all to afford redress to themselves. For, what
advantage, save the satisfying of a vindictive Mind, could the plucking out
another Man's Eye, or knocking out another's Tooth, procure to him that had lost
his own? But let us suppose, that this were no part of our Savior's meaning,
or at least that it were but the less principal one; yet it will not thence
follow, that he forbad absolutely the defending or retriving our several
Properties by a Suit of Law. For, his meaning possibly might be, yea
undoubtedly was, that we should not take such a Course in trifling Instances,
and when nothing but a Coat or Cloak is the foundation of it. For, what
Patience or Meekness (which Graces the New Testament does infinitely commend)
what Patience or Meekness (I say) can that be, which will have satisfaction
made it for every the least Injury it sustains? But as it is one thing to
condemn the going to Law for trifling Matters; and another, the so doing for
the conservation of those things which are necessary to our own Families
Support, or at least to the maintaining of us in that condition wherein he has
placed us: so, that it was not the intention of our Savior to forbid the last,
is sufficiently evident, from the obligation his Gospel lays upon us, to make
provision for our own. For, being thereby obliged to make provision for our
own, and that too under no less penalty than of being reputed worse than
Infidels if we do not; it must consequently be thought lawful, where other
means fail, to appeal to that which is but his own Ordinance, for the defending
of that which is to maintain them. Lastly, our Savior might mean (for so
largely oftentimes do the Penmen of the Scripture, and other Authors speak,
when the thing which they condemn is not intended to be wholly banished) our
Savior (I say) might mean, that in regard of those heats and other
inconveniences which do commonly attend Suits of Law, we should avoid them both
as long and as much as is possible for us, choosing rather to suffer somewhat,
than to take such a suspicious course; but however resolving to try all other
ways, before we betake our selves to that. Which Advice, as it is no wonder our
Savior should give to his Disciples, when we find Tully De Officiis lib. 2.
Convenit autem tum in dando munificum esse, tum in exigendo non acerbum: in
omnique re contrahenda, etc. aequum and facilem, multa multis de jure suo
concedentem: a litibus vero, quantum liceat, and nescio an panlo plus etiam,
quam liceat, abhorrentem.
, who was an Advocate, advising to abstain from Suits of Law, as far as Men
well can, or rather farther; so neither that he should express it with such
Terms of dislike, as if he meant to banish all: that which is for the most part
bad, looking so like that which is simply and universally such, that it may
very well be expressed in the same general Terms of dislike with the other.
From that Passage of our Savior concerning Suits of Law, pass we to another of
St. Paul, in which yet we shall find far less difficulty than in the other.
For, beside that that which he chiefly condemns, 1 Cor. 6.1. was their going to
Law before Heathen Tribunals, by means whereof Christian Religion, pretending
so much as it did to Peace, could not choose but hear ill among those who were
Enemies to it; he seems to me rather to approve than condemn going to Law,
where that and other Inconveniences were separated from it. For, not only
questioning with them, in the first Verse, for going to Law before the unjust,
and not before the Saints; but demanding of them, in the next Verse, whether
those Saints should not judge the world, and if so, whether they were not
worthy to judge the smallest matters, such as all Earthly matters are, in
comparison of the other; he seems to me plainly to insinuate, that, provided
the ground of the Suit be a matter of moment as to this World, and such the
loss whereof could not well be born, an Appeal might lawfully enough be made to
Christian Tribunals, for the redress of those Injuries we sustain. For, though
there are, who have understood St. Paul to mean no other in this place, than
the referring of their Debates to the Arbitrations of Christians (which yet,
that I may add that by the way, is not much different from going to Law before
a Judge, a pious Judge (as Annot. in Mat. 5.40.
Grotius has well observed) especially if appealed to by the consent of the
Parties at variance, differing little from an Arbitrator, but that he is chosen
to that Office by Public Authority) yet as that Interpretation of theirs is
not without violence to the Text, which represents those supposed Arbitrators
under the Title of Judges, and pleads their fitness for the Office, from those
Thrones of Judicature whereupon they shall be hereafter placed; so, with much
more violence to the Command of Christ Mat. 18.15.
, who, in case of difference between Man and Man, commands the telling of it
the Church, and the practice of the Church Thorndike of the Right of the Church
in a Christian State, cap. 1. page 37. etc.
upon it: Which, whilst the Emperors continued Heathen, decided Differences in
matters of Estate, between those of their own Body; and after that, and when
therefore there was not the like Reason of making the Church a Judge in matters
of that nature, continued so to do, in some measure, by the Indulgence of
Christian Princes. All which things I have laid together, not to give
countenance to Contentions, from which I know our Religion is most averse; but
to show, that as Suits of Law may be sometime necessary to the conserving of
our Properties; so, where they are so in any great measure, they are no way
contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel, which however it may disallow of
scandalous, vexatious, and trifling Suits, yet does not disapprove inoffensive,
charitable, and important ones.

4. But because the Properties of Men may not only perish to the Owners, but
in themselves, and consequently put Men upon a necessity of seeking a new
Supply; therefore it may not be amiss to subjoyn the Means of effecting that
also; which, where ordinary Means fail, is no other than that of Asking: our
Savior both supposing as much, when he requires us to give to them that ask;
and that Order which God has established in the World, confirming it. For,
though (as I before See Explic. of this Commandment, Part 1.
observed) all Men have a Natural Right to such a Portion of this Worlds Goods
as is necessary to their Support, by means of that Grant of them which was made
to Adam and his Posterity; yet inasmuch as particular Properties stand by the
same Divine Will by which that general Charter did which was made to Adam and
his Posterity, no Man is ordinarily to supply his Wants, but by making suit to
those Persons into whose Hands God has by his Providence put the possession of
this Worlds Conveniences. But so that we are to proceed, the Scripture gives us
sufficiently to understand, even where it does most strongly assert the Right
of the Poor to a Subsistence. For, though Solomon, where he requires the not
withholding of good from the necessitous, as both the Septuagint Version (...)
--
, and the following Words oblige us to explain it; though he, I say, Prove.
3.27. calls those necessitous ones such to whom that good is due, or, as it is
in the Hebrew (...)
, the Lords or Owners of it: yet advising afterward, as he does, that we
should not say to them, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give, when
thou have it by thee, he plainly shows, that that Right of the necessitous is
to be su'd out by Entreaties, and not either clancularly withdrawn, or
extorted: That which is properly a Gift, depending upon the good will of him
that is to bestow it, and consequently not to be attained without the use of
such Means as may make that Will of his propitious to us.

PART VII.
Concerning the contributing, what in us lies, to the procuring, conserving, or
enlarging our Neighbors Property, which is the Second Branch of the
Affirmative part of the Commandment. The Means of effecting that, the
Liberality of our Endeavors, or of our Purses: The former whereof is
recommended upon the score of its both general practicableness and use; the
latter, for its immediate subserviency to the advantaging of our Neighbor. The
Liberality of the Purse more particularly considered, and shown to imply the
remitting of what is due, or at least not exacting it with rigor; the giving
of what we are actually possessed, or lending; and, in fine, an Hospitable
Entertainment. Inquiry is next made, whether the use of the formentioned Means
be to be extended unto all, and in what order, and manner, and proportion. For
the resolution whereof, the Reader is in part remanded to the Affirmative part
of the Sixth Commandment, and in part afforded Satisfaction here. In order
thereunto, the several Liberalities before spoken of are resumed, and such
Remarques made upon each of them as were before omitted. Concerning the
Liberality of Men's Endeavors, is noted, That inasmuch as it takes little from
our own Properties, we ought to be the more free of it; but yet not so free, as
for the sake of one, to offer any Injustice unto others. Concerning the
remitting of what is due, which is the first Species of the other Liberality;
That it cannot be omitted without a manifest resistance of the Divine Will,
where the Person concerned becomes insolvent by the sole disposition of his
Providence; provided that the Remission be not prejudicial to others, nor draw
after it any intolerable prejudice to our selves. The Explication more
particular in the Liberality of Giving, as observing concerning the Objects of
it, that they are such, and such only, who are under any need of it, and are
beside that in an incapacity to provide for themselves; by which means all
wealthy or slothful Persons are excluded from any share of it: concerning the
Order which it ought to observe, that though those of the Household of Faith
ought, caeteris paribus, to be preferred before other Men; yet not before those
of a Man's own Family and Kindred; as moreover, that, where the necessitous
Persons are many, the preference ought to be given to those whose Necessities
are most pressing: concerning the Proportion this Liberality is to observe,
that it ought to be according to Men's Ability, and that no one ought to value
that at less than the Thirtieth part of his yearly Income; that where the
Necessities of those that are about us cannot otherwise be provided for, we
ought to give above our Ability, if we understand thereby an Ability to provide
for our selves according to that Condition wherein God has placed us:
concerning the Manner of our Giving, that it ought to be without
superciliousness and contempt, as also with cheerfulness, speed, and secrecy.
A Transition to the Liberality of Lending, and of Hospitality; concerning the
former whereof is observed, That though there be no necessity of lending gratis
to such as borrow only for the Improvement of their Fortunes; yet that we
ought so to do, where those that borrow, borrow only to procure or continue to
themselves a bare Subsistence: Concerning the latter, That it ought to be
extended to Strangers, as well as to those of our own Neighborhood, yea to all
whom we are in a capacity so to minister to; That, though it minister to Men's
Necessities, yet it ought not to minister to their Intemperance: where also the
means of retrenching that is described. The Conclusion of the whole, with the
Promises that are made to the Charitable Man, and that his own Property is more
likely to be improved, than any way diminished by his Liberality.

II. IT having been often said, and largely proved, that every Negative in the
Decalogue includes an Affirmative, and that that Affirmative is Love; it is
easy to infer, That the Negative we are now upon, forbidding the invading of
others Properties, the Affirmative does principally suggest the contributing
what in us lies toward the procuring, conserving, or enlarging them. For then,
and then only, can we be said to love our Neighbor in the Instance that is
now before us, when we do not only abstain from the invading of his Property,
but endeavor to procure him one if he wants, or to conserve and add to it, if
he has. Taking it therefore for granted, that so to do, is in part the
Affirmative of this Commandment, I will make it my Business to inquire, 1. By
what means it may and ought to be effected. 2. Whether our Endeavors of thus
doing good to others, ought to extend to all sorts of Persons; and in what
Order, and Manner, and Proportion.


1. Now there are two ways (as Tully De Officiis, l. 2.
well observes) whereby Men may become useful to others, as to the procuring,
or conserving, or enlarging of their several Properties; the Assistance of
their Endeavors, or of their Purses: Whereof, though the latter be most taken
notice of, and so far as in a manner to appropriate to it self the Name of
Liberality; yet the other does no doubt alike deserve our consideration and
regard, that I say not also more importunately require it: As being, 1. in the
power of the Poorer, as well as the Richer sort; of those whose Properties are
as strait, as theirs whom they desire to enlarge or conserve. For, though, as
St. Peter sometime spoke concerning himself, Gold and silver have they none;
yet they are not oftentimes without an Ability of giving that Advice, and
Encouragement, and Assistance, which may be alike useful to the procuring,
improving, or conserving of others Properties: Solomon Eccl. 9.14, 15.
having told us of a poor man, who, however he was not afterward regarded for
it, yet by his wisdom delivered the City wherein he dwelt from the Power of a
Great Monarch, who had used no contemptible means to make himself Master of it.
But neither, 2. as was but now intimated, is the Liberality of our Persons less
to be considered, for the use it is of toward the forementioned purposes, as
will appear, if we consider it with reference to Men's Labors, or the
conciliating the Favors of other Persons toward them. For, Labor (as was
before said) being not only appointed by God for the procuring of this Worlds
Happiness, but not without a natural aptitude to it; he must be looked upon as
no unuseful Person, who shall either direct Men in the management of it, (which
in all Employments is of great weight) or encourage and assist them in the
performance of it. In like manner, when, as it often does, the Properties of
Men depend, either as to their being, or well-being, upon the Benevolence of
others; it is easy to see, that he who is no Niggard of his Person and
Endeavors, may by his Authority or Intercession procure the Favor of those
who have the collation of Benefits, or by his Wisdom and Eloquence (if those
Properties Men have be attempted by others) defend them from their Rapine, or
recommend them to those by whom they may. All which Beneficences, as they are
undoubtedly of great use toward the advantaging of our Brothers Properties; so
they have this farther to commend them to us, that whilst the Liberalities of
the Purse, as Tully De Officiis, lib. 2.
speaks, exhaust the Fountain of it, and make Men less able to be liberal for
the future, that Liberality which exerts it self in our Endeavors, does not
only suffer no detriment by its being often used, but gains so much the more
by it, because making Men both more apt for the exercise thereof, and more
ready to intend it.

From the Liberality of our Persons and Endeavors, pass we to that of our
Purses, as being more immediately subservient to the advantaging of our
Brothers Property, and therefore no doubt more especially required. Now there
are four ways whereby we may be thus liberal; by remitting of what is due, or
at least not exacting it with rigor; by giving of what we are actually
possessed of, or lending; and lastly, by a Hospitable entertainment. Of the
first of these much need not be said, whether we consider it as a Duty, or as a
Means to procure or conserve our Neighbors Property. For, as the latter of
these is so apparent, that it seems not to stand in need of any Proof, Men
being often undone, where they who are their Creditors will neither remit ought
of what is due to them, nor allow them a competent time to discharge the Debt;
so the latter needs no other proof than that Love and Benevolence wherein our
Savior has summed up this and other the Precepts of the Second Table. For,
though the exacting of what is due in its full proportion, be no way contrary
to the Precept of Justice; yet it may be sufficiently repugnant to that of
Love, especially as urged upon us by the Gospel: Love prompting Men to forgive,
as well as give; to remit of what it may require, as well as to part with what
it is possessed of. And not without Reason; he who forgives, giving away what
he does so, because it is in his power to exact it. To the Liberality of
Remitting or Forgiving, subjoyn we that of giving; a Duty no less necessary to
the forementioned purposes, nor less necessary to be observed, whether we do
respect that subserviency of it to the advantaging of our Neighbor's
Properties, or that right we have often said the necessitous person to have to
such a portion of this worlds goods, as may afford him a subsistence: for it
being apparently the intention of God, and so declared in his first grant of
Dominion, that each of the Sons of Men should have a share in them, it is of
necessity to be looked upon as the duty of those, into whose hands God has put
the possession of them, to communicate them to such as shall be found to stand
in need of them; he, who refuses so to do, as much as in him lies, defeating
God of his intention, and men of that right which accrues to them by it. Whence
it is no doubt that Almsgiving both See for the Old, Deuteronomy. 24.13. Where the
Septuagint render the word righteousness by (...), as also, Psalm. 112.9.

For the New, Mat. 6.1. according to some Greek Copies.


in the Old and New Testament has so frequently the name of Righteousness;
that being not improperly styled Righteousness, which he, who is the Object of
it, has the original grant of Dominion to warrant his title to. Thirdly, as
there is a liberality in forgiving and giving, so there may be a liberality in
lending; that no less than either of the other tending to the advantaging of
Men's Properties, and oftentimes much more to the welfare of their Souls: For
whereas giving many times relieves Men's idleness as well as wants, and makes
them careless in the discharge of the Duties of their several Callings; lending
puts the necessitous person upon a necessity of being industrious, if it were
that he might be in a capacity to repay that which he has borrowed of us.
Lastly, for though that be a species of giving, yet it deserves a particular
mention for the commendation is given to it by the Scripture; There is a
liberality in entertaining, as well as in giving, or lending, and particularly
in the entertaining of Strangers. To the practice whereof, though there be
other inducements, and such as are it may be of more affinity with that
Commandment which I have now chosen to entreat of; yet it may suffice to
mention that which is used by the Author to the Hebrews Heb. 13.2.
, that thereby some men have entertained Angels unawares: that being to be
looked upon as no contemptible piece of Liberality, to which God has sometime
vouchsafed so excellent a reward.

2. It being thus evident what are the means of bringing that advantage to our
Neighbors Property, which I have affirmed to be incumbent upon us by the
affirmative part of this Commandment; my proposed method obliges me to
enquire, whether the use of those means be to be extended unto all, and in what
order, and manner, and proportion. But because in my account of the Affirmative
part of the fixth Commandment, I have in a great measure prevented my self in
most of the queries proposed, and particularly so far as the liberality of our
persons or endeavors is concerned, I will only touch at such things in each of
them as were there wholly omitted, or obscurely and imperfectly delivered. Now
there are two things observable, beside what were before noted, concerning that
Liberality which exerts it self in our endeavors: 1. That inasmuch as it takes
little from our own Properties, that Liberality especially which consists in
giving good advice, we ought to be the more free in bestowing it upon those
that need it; it being a strange piece of niggardliness, that I say not of envy
and maliciousness, which will not impart of such boons, as bring little or no
prejudice to him that gives them. And though the reasonableness of that which
follows, seemed so evident to the great Master of Morality Tull. de Officiis ^.
2. Jam illud non sunt admonendi (est enim in promptu) ut animadvertant, cum
alios javari velint, ne quos offendant.
, that he hardly thought fit to make it the matter of an admonition; yet
inasmuch as men are often peccant in it, I thought it not amiss to observe, in
the second place, that we should not so endeavor to promote some men's welfare,
as to offer any the least injustice to others; he, who forbids the doing injury
to any man, consequently prescribing that Liberality, which cannot take effect
without it. Upon which account, all those must be looked upon as Offenders,
who, to promote the welfare of some one or more persons, by calumnies or other
such like courses endeavor to obstruct their rise, who have the same
pretensions with their Favorites.

From the Liberality of our Persons or Endeavors, pass we to that of the
Purse, and consider the several species of them before set down. Where who is
there that sees not first, I do not say how necessary it is to remit sometimes
of our own right, but to remit of it especially there, where the person
concerned in it becomes unable for the satisfying of it, by the sole
disposition of the Divine Providence? Extremity in such cases arguing as little
regard of God, as consideration of the calamities of our Brethren: For inasmuch
as inability puts a man out of a capacity of discharging that debt which he
has contracted; where the inability proceeds merely from God, it must be a
kind of resistance of his Will to be over rigid in exacting it. I will not add,
though pertinent enough, that how incumbent soever it may sometime be to remit
of our own right, yet it is to be understood where such a remission is not
prejudicial to others, nor draws after it any intolerable prejudice to our
selves: as because, though we may part with our own right, yet we cannot do so
with those of others; so the parting with our own right is ever to be
understood with subordination to our own necessities, to which, as I have
before shown, the Law of Reason as well as Charity obliges us to have the
first regard. Setting aside therefore that Liberality which consists in
remitting of that which is our due, I will proceed to that of giving, as being
more apparently subservient to the welfare of other men. And here not to tell
you, because sufficiently evident from the forequoted discourse, that no
qualification whatsoever can exclude those from our Charity, whose condition
makes them proper objects of it; it shall content me to observe, because not
before noted, that the condition of those and of those only is such, who are
under any need of it, and are beside that in an incapacity to provide against
it: by the former whereof are excluded all persons of better or equal fortunes
with our selves; by the latter, all idle or slothful ones. For as Reason and
Charity both oblige us to give the first place to our selves, and consequently
not to part with that to others, which we are under a like necessity our
selves; so the Command of God, and the Precept of S. Paul, debars those of any
relief, who will not contribute ought to their own subsistence. Upon which
account as our Laws have spoken the same thing, and, which is more, made it
penal to relieve them; so, that they are at any time relieved by considerate
persons, is only imputable to their importunity, and the neglect of those in
Authority who suffer them to use it. Which neglect is so much the more
criminal, in that it does not only encourage those idle persons in their sloth,
and many other wickednesses, which slothfulness draws after it, but makes the
charitable person less able to minister to those necessitous ones, who are
either wholly incapacitated for labor, or cannot by all their labor compass a
tolerable subsistence. But because, even of those who are fit objects of
Charity, all cannot be relieved by all, by means of the shortness of our
Fortunes; therefore I proposed also to enquire in what order we are to relieve
them, and which of the many necessitous ones ought to be preferred. Which
demand, though I have in part satisfied already, in the place so often referred
to by me, yet there are two things of moment which were not there observed, and
will therefore be fit to be taken notice of here: 1. That though those of the
Household of Faith ought, caeteris paribus, to have the precedence of other men,
yet not when the necessitous ones are of our own Family or Kindred, Justice as
well as Charity obliging us to give to these, and consequently to prefer them
before such, who, however better deserving otherwise, yet have nothing but the
Law of Charity to oblige us to the relief of them. Again, though all
necessitous ones are fit objects of Charity, and consequently, where our
faculties will permit, to be relieved by us; yet Reason as well as Charity
oblige that, where our Faculties will not permit the extending of it to all, we
give the preference to those persons whose necessities are the most pressing:
For, if the necessities of men make them fit Objects of Charity, those persons
must be looked upon as the fittest Objects, and consequently they to be
preferred, who labor under the most pressing ones. And more than this, as I
shall not need to say concerning that order which is to be observed by the
charitable person in giving, so I shall therefore proceed to enquire after what
manner and proportion we are to do it, the next things in order to be
considered. For the resolution of the latter whereof, as being the most
important Query; the first thing I shall offer, is, That it be generally
according to our ability, and not either above or below it; not only Tully De
Officiis lib. 2.
so advising, where he requires the referring of our bounty to our Faculties,
but he, whose judgment is more considerable, even S. Paul, he enjoining the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16.2. that every one should lay by him in store for the
supply of the necessitous, according as God had prospered him. By virtue of
which Rule, as the Charity of wealthier persons must be concluded to be in a
greater proportion than those of meaner ones; so, that the Charity of both the
one and the other ought not either to fall below or exceed it: he who offends
in the defect being unjust to the necessitous, to whom, as I have before shown,
God has made our Charity due, as he who offends in the excess, unto himself.
But because, through that self-love which prevails in the most of us, men will
be apt enough to think they give according to their ability, when in truth they
do nothing less, I will propose to your consideration, in the second place,
what measures God prescribed the Jews in the exercise of this great Duty of
Charity; which was, that beside the Tithe payable every year to the Priest, as
you may see, Deuteronomy. 14.22. they should every third year See Hammond's Sermon. on
Deuteronomy. 26.12, 13. and Seldens History of Tithes, c. 2. sect. 3.
, as it is in the 29. v. of that Chapter, set apart another Tithe for the poor,
which being resolved into a yearly rate will amount to the Thirtieth part of
our yearly income: For though this Law do induce no direct Obligation upon us,
as being a part of the Jewish Polity; yet inasmuch as Charity is no less
required of us than of the Jews, and our Savior professes not to have come to
destroy, but rather to fulfill the Law and the Prophets, we cannot in reason
deem our selves obliged to set apart less for the poor than the Thirtieth part
of our yearly income. Lastly, as consideration ought generally to be had of our
ability, and of those measures which God has given us to judge both of that
and our own duty by; so I see not how we can sometime avoid the giving even
beyond our ability, if we mean thereby an ability to provide for our selves
according to that state and condition wherein God has placed us, and not an
ability to serve our own necessities. For as we find that S. Paul, who does
generally refer men to their ability, yet mentions it with commendation that
the Corinthians, whom he wrote to, gave not only according to their ability,
but above it, 2 Cor. 8.3. so I see not how we can avoid the abating of our own
enjoyments, where the necessities of those that are about us cannot be
otherwise in any tolerable measure supplied: he, who gave the Earth for the
support of all, consequently obliging those who are possessed of it, to
communicate thereof to the necessitous; and therefore also, where the support
of those is not otherwise to be procured, to abate of those Enjoyments, which
the place we hold in the World might otherwise warrant the enjoyment of. One
only thing remains, relating to the liberality of giving, and that is the
manner after which we are to do it; concerning which I say, first, That it
ought not to be with that superciliousness and contempt of the poor, wherewith
it is too often attended: Not only their descent from the same common Parent
forbidding it, but the particular regard which God professes to have to all
necessitous persons, and that relation wherein our Savior has owned them.
For, what place can there be for superciliousness, where those, to whom we
give, are not only of our own blood, and the same common stock, but under the
particular care of and relation to God and Christ, and that too in such a
proportion, that what is done or not done unto them, he interprets as either
done or not done unto himself? But neither, secondly, are we to give with
grudging and repining, as it is but too frequent with those who are not
otherwise peccant; as because God, to whom we are obliged for being in a
capacity of giving, professes to love 2 Cor. 9.7.
a cheerful giver, and should not therefore be so ill requited, as to find a
grudging one; so because (as has been often said, but can never be too much
repeated) that Charity is no more than is due to the poor from us. For, what
place can there be for grudging, where that, which we are to give, is but the
right of those to whom we are required to impart it? Thirdly, as we ought to
discard from our giving all superciliousness and grudging, so also all slowness
in the doing of it, not only Solomon so requiring, where he forbids us to say
to the necessitous person, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give, when
we have it by us, but also the design and end of Charity; the deferring of a
benefit making it of little use to him that craves it, and sometimes also of
none at all. I will conclude this head, and my discourse concerning the
Liberality of giving, with admonishing, in the fourth place, that it be done
secretly, and so (as our Savior speaks) that the left hand may not know what
our right hand does; lest that, which was intended for a benefit to our
Neighbor, prove an exprobration to him, either of his necessities or
obligation to us, and to our selves a temptation to pride and vanity. Which as
it is enough to sour the most excellent Charity, and make it disgustful both
to God and Man; so has this farther inconvenience attending it, that whilst it
seeks the praise of Men, it debars the charitable person of the praise and
reward of God; he who forbids us to do our Alms before men to be seen of them,
Mat. 6.1.
assigning for the Reason of it, that so doing, we shall have no reward of our
Father which is in Heaven. And indeed, as to give secretly has Reason as well
as the Precept of our Savior to oblige us to the observation of it; so there
wanted not among the Heathen, who saw the reasonableness of it, and inculcated
it almost in the same terms; Marcus Antoninus (...). li. 5. sect. 6. -- (...).
not only insinuating the so giving, that we our selves may not know what we
our selves have done, but resembling the benesicent person, among other things,
to a Vine, which is neither sensible of its own fruitfulness, nor makes any
noise of it, choosing rather to superadd in their proper season new clusters to
its former, and to continue its truitfulness, than to be esteemed for it.

Of the Liberality of giving, what has been said may suffice; proceed we to
that of lending, a Liberality which I have already shown to be no less
necessary in its self than the other, and might also be no less incumbent upon
us, by the Precept of our great Master Christ; in the very same breath Mat.
5.42.
wherein he commands the giving to every one that asks, forbidding to turn away
from him that would borrow of us. Now there are two things observable
concerning this Liberality, proportionably to the twosorts of persons with whom
we have to do: For either they may be such who want it for the improving of
their Fortunes, or such as borrow it of us to procure or continue to themselves
a bare subsistence. Now though I doubt not (as has been before declared) but
that he who lends to the former persons, may require what he does so with a
valuable Consideration for it, especially where the money lent is needful
enough to a Man's self: yet as such persons may sometime prove unfortunate in
the management of it, in which case it may be but requisite to remit somewhat
of our own demands; so it cannot at all be accounted lawful, where we our
selves can possibly be without it, to take the like Use of those who borrow
what they do, merely to procure themselves a subsistence, not only the Law of
Moses forbidding so to lend to a poor Brother, but the Law of Nature and
Christ: He who lends to such a person upon Use, being so far commonly from
advantaging him, which is the end of Charity, that he only helps to plunge him
so much the deeper in necessity and calamity. The same is to be said of the
taking of Gifts of such persons, or making any other advantages of them; it
mattering not at all, under what notion it comes, so a Consideration be paid,
which changes it from Liberality into a Contract, and, in the present case, an
unmerciful one.

I am now arrived at the last species of Liberality, best known by the name of
Hospitality; concerning which, as the Scripture has not been wanting in
furnishing us with Examples Genesis 18.3. Genesis 19.2. Judge. 19 20.
, so neither in inculcating the Fractice thereof upon us: S. Paul in his
Exhortations joining Hospitality with distributing to the Necessities of the
Saints, Romans 12.13. as S. Peter 1 Pet. 4.9.
with that Charity which covers a multitude of sins. And not without Reason, if
we consider, I do not say how much it immediately conduces to the conserving
of the Properties of meaner persons, but to the encouraging of them to undergo
that labor and travel which God has been pleased to lay upon them. Now though
even here that Caution is to have place, which refers the Benevolence of Men to
the measure of their several abilities; yet I cannot forbear to say, that,
provided it keeps within those bounds, it ought not to content it self with
extending to a few, or indeed to those of its own Neighborhood; as because the
word, which we render Hospitality, (...)
imports the entertaining of Strangers, so because it is a Virtue of those whom
God has blessed with more liberal Fortunes, and from whom therefore he expects
a more than ordinarily comprehensive Charity. And I cannot but upon this
occasion call to mind the Story of Henry Spotiswood's History of the Chapter of
Scotl. l. 2. p. 57.
Wardlow, sometime Archbishop of S. Andrews in Scotland, who, agreeably to his
own Function, and the Precept of the Apostle, employed that Revenue, which God
had given him, in the entertainment of other persons: For, being prevailed with
for the ease of his Servants, to make a Bill of Household, that they might know
who were to be served by them; when he was asked whom he would first name, he
answered Fise and Angus, which are two large Countries in Scotland, containing
many millions of People. By which answer of his, as he wisely freed himself
from their importunity, who would for their own ease have retrenched that good
Man's Hospitality; so he gave an evident testimony of a truly Christian and
generous mind; and such as it will concern those of the richer sort, but
especially of the Clergy, to show themselves diligent imitators of: That and no
other being truly Christian Charity, which, so far as in it lies, extends it
self to all, I do not say that are the Children of the holy Jesus, though that
be a large Family, but the Descendants of our common Parent Adam. Care only
would be taken (as being in a manner the only blemish which adheres to this
most excellent Virtue) that that which is intended by the hospitable person for
the refreshment of Strangers and others, be not converted into luxury and
intemperance; that, as it often happens, not only proving no Charity to their
Bodies, but the destruction of their Soulls, which is the greatest cruelty we
can be guilty of. And indeed, as those times which were most famous for
Hospitality, found a way both to prevent and retrench all such intemperances;
so if we could live to see the simplicity and plainness of those ancient days
recalled, there is no doubt we might live to see their Hospitality also
recalled, without any of those inconveniences which do now attend it; they
arising for the most part from that, which has been also the bane of
Hospitality, even a desire of gratifying our Palates with curious and costly
Entertainments. For as those things which are most plain are also procured at
the easiest rates, by which means men may be better fitted to be liberal
toward other men; so, at the same time they gratify the appetite, they do
also satiate it, and not like the curiosities of latter time produce a thirst
which is equal to the other, and which nothing but intemperance can aslake.

Such are the means whereby we may contribute to the subsistence of others, and
to the procuring or conserving or improving of those Properties from which they
derive it: in which as I have often said, and I hope sufficiently proved, that
the Affirmative part of the Commandment does consist; so they have this farther
to commend them to our consideration and use, that they would if duly observed,
not only not abridge our own Properties, but preserve us from the temptation of
invading those of others, which the Negative part of the Commandment does
forbid. It being not to be thought, especially after such glorious Promises See
Prove. 11.25. Prove. 19.17. Prove. 28.27.
as are made to the charitable man, that he should be under any necessity of
invading the Properties of others, who, in obedience to the Divine Command,
has been so liberal of his own.

THE NINTH COMMANDMENT.
THE NINTH COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

PART I.
The Contents.
This Ninth Commandment both refers to, and supposes Humane Judicatories; upon
occasion whereof, inquiry is made, 1. By what Divine Right they now stand. 2.
What Persons intervene in them, and what their respective Duties are. The
former of these evidenced from the necessity there is of determining
Controversies, from the Precept given to Noah of shedding the Blood of the
Murderer, and from the Divine Right of Regal Power, of which the Power of
Judicature is a part. The latter of the forementioned Questions brought under
consideration, where both the Parties that intervene in them are enumerated,
and their respective Duties described. Those of the Plaintiff shown to be, not
to raise a false Report, not to mix untrue Reports with true, nor prosecute
even a true one in trifling Instances. Those of the Defendent, to own justly
imputed Crimes, not to charge his Adversary with the same or the like
Calumnies, nor show himself morose in his Deportment to him. The Duties of the
Advocate, not to espouse such Causes as are apparently evil, (though probable
ones they may) nor yet to make choice of them merely by the Purses of those
that present them; as, after they have espoused them, to manage them with all
fidelity, and diligence, and dispatch: in fine, to content themselves with a
simple Narration of the Cause, and neither to be lavish in the commendation of
their own Clients, nor in the reproach of the Adversary. A more large Account
concerning Witnesses; where, after a Declaration of the use of them in
Judgment, their requisite Number, and necessary Qualifications, their Duty is
shown to be, not to deliver any thing that is false, not to conceal or
transpose any thing that is true, as, in fine, not to deliver what they deem to
be so, with any great^r assurance than they themselves are persuaded of in
their own Bosom. A Conclusion of the whole, with a Reflection upon the Duty of
Judges, whether they be Judges of Right, or of Fact: where, among other things,
is shown, 1. That they ought to pass Sentence according to the Proofs that are
made before them, whatsoever jealousy or private knowledge they may have of
the thing in controversy. 2. That, in doubtful Cases, they ought to incline to
such Determinations as are favorable to the Accused Party.

THAT it may the better appear what that is which is here forbidden, what
Crimes are comprised under it, and what Duties enjoined by it, I foresee it
necessary to premise something concerning Humane Judicatories, which this
Commandment does both refer to, and suppose; not only the use of Witnesses so
persuading, which every one knows to have been introduced to decide
Controversies between Man and Man, before a competent Judge; but that Phrase
which the Hebrew makes use of to express the bearing of false Witness, and the
manner of the Jews Procedure in their several Courts of Judicature. For, it
appearing from Lev. 5.1. that Witnesses were interrogated upon Oath, concerning
that particular Affair which they were called to bear witness to; it is but
reasonable to think, especially when the Hebrew Phrase (...)
imports the not answering falsely, that the intent of the Commandment was to
forbid the bearing of false witness before a Judge, in any Controversy that
should occur. Which, as it plainly supposes the being of such Judicatories
among the Jews, and God's approbation of them; so makes it but necessary to
inquire, because otherwise the Prohibition would be null, 1. By what Divine
Right they now stand. 2. What Persons intervene in them, and what their
respective Duties are.


1. For the evidencing the first whereof, even the Divine Right of Humane
Judicatories, I shall allege, in the first place, that which is antecedent to,
and the Foundation of all other Laws, even the Law of Nature: For, that
persuading the determination of all Controversies between Man and Man, as
without which Humane Society could not subsist; it must consequently be
supposed to enjoin, because there is no other way of ending them, the
constituting of some indifferent Persons to do it; no Man being to be thought a
competent Judge in his own Case, and much less likely to be thought so by him
with whom he has to do. Upon which, as there will follow a necessity of
referring them to the determination of another, which is that for which Humane
Judicatories were appointed; so also (which makes them properly such) the
furnishing them with a Power to constrain the Parties at variance to submit to
their Determination and Sentence. Otherwise, among contentious Persons at
least, the Controversy would recur, and involve them in new and greater Heats.
To the Law of Nature, and its Dictates, subjoyn we that which is called the Law
of Noah, or rather that which was given by God to him and his Posterity;
concerning which, though, saving in the Vid. Seldom. de Jure Not. and Gent. l.
7. c. 4.
Tradition of the Jews, there be no express mention, as to any Precept which
imports the constituting of Humane Judicatories; yet as a Tradition so received
as that, is not lightly to be despised, especially when as to some Precepts it
has a certain Foundation in Scripture; so that it is not without ground, even
there, as to this Precept whereof we speak, may be competently evidenced from
Genesis chap. 9. verse. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed. For, God not only decrying there the shedding of Man's blood, but
requiring the shedding of his that did it by another; he seems to me plainly to
intimate the constituting of a Magistrate which should both take cognizance of,
and punish it: as because otherwise the Blood of Men might continue unrevenged,
if he who were the next of kin (whom Grotius In locum. and De jure belli, etc.
lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 5.
supposes to have been empowered) should have wanted Courage or Ability to
execute it; so because, Murder being for the most part secretly committed,
there was a kind of necessity of authorizing some to make inquisition after it,
and draw both the suspected person and others to their Tribunal. Otherwise it
should have been lawful for the avenger of blood to have followed his own
uncertain conjectures (which it is not very likely God would ever have
permitted) or the Fact must have continued unrevenged, which the Precept before
mentioned was intended to provide against. Whence it is that the Chaldee
Paraphrast Per testes ex sententia judicum sanguis ejus fundetur.
, agreeably to the design of a Paraphrast, and his own custom elsewhere,
explains those words, Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed, it shall be shed by the Sentence of the Judges, upon the evidence of
Witnesses. Lastly (for against that to be sure no exception can be made,
whatsoever there may be supposed to be against either of the former Laws) the
Law of Christ bearing witness to the Divine Institution of Regal Power, of
which I have heretofore Explicat. of the fifth Commandment, Part 5.
shown the Power of Judicature to be a part, and moreover declaring those, to
whom that Power is committed, to have been appointed by God for the welfare and
praise of the good, and the avenging of such as do evil; it must also be
supposed (because that is not otherwise for the most part to be attained) to
privilege them to enquire into the causes both of the one and the other, and
accordingly either to encourage or punish them. In conformity whereto, as we
find all, whether Christian or Heathen Magistrates, to have proceeded, with the
general approbation of the Word; so, which is more, S. Paul not only submitting
himself to the Tribunal of Caesar, but professing himself to be under an
Obligation Acts 25.10.
to be judged by it. And more than this I shall not need to say of the Divine
Right of Humane Judicatories, and may therefore have leave to go on to enquire,

2. What Persons intervene in them, and what their respective Duties are. As to
the former part of this Query little need to be said, because every man's own
observation can inform him, that the Persons principally concerned, are the
Plaintiff, the Defendant, their respective Advocates, the Witnesses, and the
Judge. The only thing worthy an investigation is, What their respective Duties
are; which accordingly I come now to enquire into.

To begin with the Plaintiff, because it is he that gives beginning to all that
is done in Courts of Judicature; where, first of all, I shall recommend that of
the Prophet Moses, Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not raise a false report. A Caution
extremely necessary, whether we consider the Practice of the World, or the
mischiefs that accrue to our Neighbor by it: For, as it is too usual with men,
whether out of maliciousness, or some such sinister end, to lay to their
Neighbors charge things that they know not; so the iniquity thereof will
easily appear, if we consider the inconveniences that do naturally, and almost
necessarily, flow from it: The Properties and Lives of Men being not seldom
blasted by it, but their Reputation always; he who boldly calumniates, though
he attain no other end, yet seldom failing to leave a stain upon the good name
of him he does so. But neither, secondly, is it less necessary, even upon the
score of the forementioned Caution, to proscribe and condemn the mixing of
untrue with true Accusations, or making a worse construction of them than they
deserve: he who adds to, or perverts any Man's Words or Actions, being so far
guilty of a false Report, as he does either add to, or pervert them. Lastly,
For though that have been intimated before, yet it may seem but necessary to
repeat it, to obviate the too common Practice of it; As it will concern him who
is the Plaintiff not to raise a false Report, either in whole or in part; so
neither to take up and prosecute a true one, where the matter of the Complaint
is only in trifling Instances, and such it may be which, though contrary to
the Letter of the Law, yet are not so to the Intent of the Lawgiver, and are
capable of a favorable Interpretation. For, where is that Meekness, and
Kindness, and Forbearance which Christianity so often and so earnestly
inculcates, if it may be lawful for him that makes profession of it, to draw
his Brother before a Tribunal for every petty Trespass, or harsh Word, or for
every the least deviation from a Statute?

From the Plaintiff or Accuser, pass we to the Defendant; who is either rightly
accused, or not. If the former, the Principles of Justice and Charity, as well
as those of Prudence, will persuade him to agree with his Adversary, whilst he
is in the way with him, lest the Adversary deliver him to the Judge, and the
Judge to the Officer, and so he be cast into Prison. For, what Justice or
Charity can it be, to put a Man to the vexation or charge of a Suit, to recover
that which we our selves cannot but acknowledge to be his due? But let us
suppose the Right either to lie, or at least to be supposed to lie on the
Defendants part (as who is there that is not willing to believe it to be on his
own?) yet will not that exempt him from a possibility of offending, and
therefore neither from the necessity of a Caution. Such as is, first, That that
supposed Right of his do not transport him into the like Crime, and make him
charge the adverse Party with the same or the like Calumnies wherewith he
himself is loaded. For, as it is but too usual with Men, otherwise of good
behavior, to endeavor by false Accusations to blast the Credit of those by
whom they think themselves unjustly worried; so, beside the imitation of the
others Injustice and Falsehood, it is the result of Revenge, which our Religion
has no less severely interdicted than the other. Alike criminal, and therefore
alike necessary to be cautioned against, is the avoiding of all civil Converse
with those by whom we are impleaded, or entertaining them when they come in our
way, whether with rude Gestures, or ruder Language. For, beside that it is not
impossible, but that he by whom we are impleaded may be in the right, or at
least may be as strongly persuaded of it; in which case the forementioned
rudeness will be unjust, as well as uncharitable, because bottomed either upon
unsound or uncertain grounds: it is ill agreeable with that Kindness to an
Enemy, which our Religion so much talks of, but which so few that make
profession of it give any tolerable proofs of.

But because, though the Plaintiff and Defendant furnish Work for Courts of
Judicature, yet they commonly leave that Work to be managed by Men Learned in
the Law, who may overshoot themselves, as well as those whose Causes they
espouse; therefore I judge it but necessary, that these also should have a
share in those Instructions which concern the Regulations of Courts of
Judicature. Now there are two things which such Persons are to intend, and to
which therefore our Instructions ought to be adapted: the one, the Choice of
those Causes that come before them; the other, the Management thereof. Now
though, as to the former of these, little scruple be generally made, where
there is a probability of a proportionable Reward, to excite and encourage
their Endeavors; yet I cannot forbear to say, that it can no way be deemed
lawful to espouse such Causes as are apparently evil, and which tend more to
usurp upon other Men's lawful Right, than to vindicate the Clients own. For,
beside that by so doing Men shall ill requite the Divine Majesty for that
Ability and Eloquence which he has furnished them withal, they shall only
lend their assistance to the promoting of Contentiousness and Injustice, and to
the subverting of peaceable and just Possessions: which how it agrees with that
Justice and Equity for which Courts of Judicature were appointed, but which to
be sure the Law of Nature and Christianity have laid upon all Mankind, I dare
venture to the judgment of the most prejudiced Advocate, to give a satisfactory
Account of. I say not the same, where the Cause that is presented to them has
a fair and probable appearance, however it may prove when it comes more closely
to be examined. For, as the Men of that Profession have seldom the leisure to
look narrowly into the Merits of a Cause beforehand, and cannot therefore be
thought to be obliged to refuse any Cause that has a fair and specious
appearance; so, if they should be over-scrupulous in admitting such, they might
not only prejudice themselves in the exercise of their Profession, which is a
weighty Consideration, but prejudice the Rights of that Person which addresseth
himself to them, by refusing him the assistance of their Endeavors. To say
nothing at all, that to be too peremptory in judging of a Cause beforehand,
would be to exceed the bounds of their Profession, and assume the Person rather
of a Judge, than of an Advocate. But as it is one thing to lend a Man's
Assistance to a probable Cause, which (as Tully De Officiis lib. 2. Judicis
est, semper in causis verum sequi: patroni nonnunquam verisimile, etiamsi minus
sit verum, defendere: qu^d scribere, praesertim cum de Philosophia scriberem,
non auderem, nisi idem placeret gravissimo Stoicorum Panaetio.
well observes out of Panaetius) may be the part of an Advocate to defend; and
another, to lend his Assistance to one that is apparently evil and unjust: so
having cautioned Men against the latter, I shall only add, that they would not
choose their Causes merely or mostly by the Purses of those that present them,
nor detrect those of the Poor and Indigent: Charity, as it has a tie upon the
Learned in the Laws, as well as upon other Men, so having, as to them, no more
proper Field Tull. de Offic. lib. 2. Diserti igitur hominis and facile
laborantis, quodque in patriis est moribus, multorum causas and non gravare and
gratuito defendentis, beneficio and patrocinia late patent.
, or larger, to exercise it self in, than a ready and gratuitous defending of
the Poor from the Oppressions of the Wealthy, by that Reason and Eloquence
which makes their Profession to be had in Honor. From the Choice they are to
make of Causes, pass we to the Management of those they choose; where again many
useful Rules present themselves: Such as are, those that enjoin Fidelity and
Diligence in the Administration of what they undertake, Watchfulness against
all Disadvantages which may any way prejudice it, and Dispatch. But because
these, how little regarded soever, are so apparently both the Duties of
Justice, and of the Advocates Profession, that he must be wilfully blind that
does not own their Obligation; I shall choose rather (having thus barely
mentioned them) to caution the Men of that Profession against a Practice,
which, how common soever, yet is of too pernicious consequence to be passed by:
I mean, the passing from the Merits of the Cause, to the defaming of the
adverse Parties Person, and making him as odious or ridiculous, as it is in the
power of Art to make him. For, though a wise and considerate Judge will not
lightly be moved with Discourses of that nature, or rather will use his
Authority to repress them; yet as even they may be sometime tempted by them, to
press more hardly in their Sentence upon those whom they have been instructed
either to despise or abominate: so such Discourses may be of more force to
pervert the Judgment of a Jury, who are not generally so much Masters of Reason
as Judges are, and much less of their Passions and Affections. And though I
will not say, there is as much reason to forbear all Rhetorical Insinuations,
and particularly such as spend themselves in the commendation of that Person
whose Cause they have undertaken to defend; yet as the grave Judges of
Areopagus have been remembered with applause, for forbidding at their Tribunal
any other than simple Narrations, and such as served rather to discover the
Nature of the thing in question, than to adorn or disgrace it; so if other than
such simple Narrations were not lightly countenanced, the Truth of a Cause
would more easily appear, and they to whom the Determination thereof is
committed, would have no temptation to resist the force of it, from the
suggestions either of Love or Hatred.

Being now, by the Order of my Discourse, to entreat of the Duty of Witnesses,
the only Persons directly concerned in this Commandment, I suppose it will be
neither unacceptable, nor unprofitable, to premise something concerning the use
of them in Judgment, their requisite Number, and necessary Qualifications; the
knowledge of these helping not a little to discover their Obligations, or to
bind them so much the faster on them. Of the Use, or rather necessity of
Witnesses, much need not be said, as being apparent and obvious: For, it being
not to be supposed, on the one hand, that Men will ordinarily confess that
Fault, which they have not been careful to keep themselves from the commission
of; and it being evident, on the other, that a Judge has not Eyes enough to
discover all, nor is well qualified to pass Sentence upon them, though he had
(it being easy for a Judge, if he were allowed to witness as well as sentence,
to make whom he pleased Criminal) there will arise a necessity of determining
the thing in controversy, by the Testimony of some indifferent Persons, who
shall either be called to that Office, or voluntarily present themselves. And
accordingly, as all Nations, led thereto by the Light of Reason and Nature,
have both used and generally approved this way of procedure in Judgment; so I
know none to rival it, but the Ordeal Purgations of our Saxon Ancestors (which
yet were not used but in the defect of other Proofs) and the extorting a
Confession from the accused party: The former whereof was no better than a
presumptuous temptation of the Divine Providence; the latter injurious to
Humane Nature; and, beside that, no way proper to produce the desired effect:
Few persons, how innocent soever, being of ability to resist the force of
Torture; and those that are of ability to resist, being as likely to deny the
Crimes, wherewith they are justly charged, as those that are not, are ready
enough to own falsely imputed ones. From the use or rather necessity of
Witnesses, pass we to the number; which by the Law given to the Israelites
ought to be no less than Two; especially where the life of a Man is concerned.
And not without Reason, if we consider the weight of the thing in question, and
the danger of passing a wrong Judgment, where one Man's testimony may be
admitted. Which as all wise people will be careful to prevent, lest whilst they
seek to punish a supposed Malefactor, they make themselves really such; so
especially, if they consider, that it is better to let a bad Man escape, than
run the hazard of punishing a good; it being certainly and always an injury to
punish a good Man, but not such to let a bad go free. In the mean time, though
I say that two Witnesses ordinarily ought to pass to the condemning of any
person to death; yet as I will not affirm the same to hold in matters of
Estate, especially where the thing in Controversy is of no very great concern;
so neither universally in criminal matters, and particularly in the case of
Treason. For, as the presumptions many times may be such, that they may well
make the testimony of a single Witness credible, especially if that Witness be
an unstained one; as moreover it may so happen, that a single Witness may be of
so fair a reputation, that he may be looked upon of equal weight with two or
more ordinary ones: So the life of a Prince, and the welfare of a State, are
things of so infinite concern, that the machinations of Evil Persons against
them are not lightly to pass unrevenged, where there is an apt proof of the
contrivance of them. In cases extraordinary therefore, or where the matter is
of no great concern, there may be place for a single Testimony; otherwise there
is no doubt, the exacting of two is both more reasonable and safe: As because
God himself did sometime require it; so because there is not that danger of the
corrupting of two, which there may be of one; or, if there were, that
corruption might more easily be discovered, by examining them apart, as we see
in that famous instance of Susannah. The only thing farther to be premised, is
the qualification of the Witnesses, concerning which I intended to be much more
large, than I have upon second thoughts resolved to be. But considering with my
self, that I had all along avoided the instructing of Public Persons, whose it
is to judge of the qualification of those Witnesses they will admit; and
considering moreover, that things of this nature are better judged of by Men
versed in Judicial Proceedings, and the necessities of the World, than by one
who converseth only with Books, and his own Thoughts; I deemed it but
reasonable to leave this head, with advertising only, that they ought to be
persons of competent understanding, of honest Fame, and without all suspicion
of love or hatred or corruption. It being thus evident what use, or rather
necessity, there is of Witnesses in Judgment; what number of them is requisite,
and in general also how they ought to be qualified: it remains, that we enquire
to what Duties they are obliged, which are these four especially: 1. That they
deliver nothing that is False. 2. and 3. That they neither conceal nor
transpose any thing that is true: And, 4. And lastly, That what is true, or at
least deemed by them to be so, be delivered with no other degree of assurance,
than they themselves are persuaded of in their own bosoms. The first of these
is the very thing which this Commandment does inculcate, and will hereafter be
more largely exemplified, when I come to show the sins that are forbidden by
it. The second and third (as I shall afterward show) are included in the
former; and the fourth a necessary consequent of it. For, inasmuch as moral
falsehood consists not in the disagreeableness of the thing we utter with that
which it concerns, but with our own estimate of it; he must be looked upon as
giving a false Testimony, who shall utter any thing with a greater degree of
assurance, than he himself is persuaded of it. And more than this I shall not
need to say at present concerning the Duty of Witnesses, because I must resume
it in my following Discourse; and may therefore with Reason go on to the Duty
of Judges, the last thing proposed to be discoursed of.

Now there are two sorts of Judges, at least in the most of our Courts of
Judicature, and which therefore are to be considered apart; whereof the former
are (if I may so speak) the Judges of Right, the other the Judges of Fact.
Judges of Right I call those, who are commonly, and indeed only known among us
by the Name of Judges, and to whom it belongs to enquire into the Fact that is
brought before them, to declare the sense of the Law, and to pass Sentence upon
Verdict given. Judges of Fact (for so indeed they are) those which are best
known by the Name of Jurymen, and to whom it belongs, upon the hearing of the
whole matter, to umpire differences between Man and Man, and either to absolve
or condemn the person accused. An Institution (as Dr. Bates Elench motuum
nuper. in Anglia, part. 2. p. 359. Sed sciant tam exteri quam posteri,
consuetudin^m hanc duodecimvir alis inqu^sitioni^ ex aquo and bono petuam
singulart Regum tum Saxonico um tum Normannorum indulgentiae dehitam, ab omni
retro memoria ad nos traductam, hac aet ate, cum aliquantisper intermitteretur,
publicis desideriis maxi me comprobatam. Aequissimi Plebis aestimatores
Plebeii, Nobilitatis Nobiles; siquidem ejusdem loci atque ordinis hominibus
inest charitas, abest invidia.Praeterea, si quos Praetor ediderit tibi
infensos, licet etiam atque etiam rejicias. Nec imprudentes appellare fas,
facti rationem a testibus, rem omnem cordm allegantibus and probantibus, juris
naturam a Judice Legum studiis innutrito, edoctos. Caeteras parts simplex and
incorrupta men's rectius examinat, quam calliditas alienae libidinis administra.
observes) for which we are beholden to our Saxon and Norman Kings, and which
is indeed none of the least commendations of the Government; none being more
proper Judges of Men, than those who are of the same rank and condition, and
who may therefore be supposed to be equally estranged from hatred and envy. And
though it be true that these also may not be without their affections, but
however may seem less qualified for Judgment by their own unskilfulness; yet as
the former inconvenience is in a great measure superseded, by that liberty
which our Law allows to the person accused, to reject to a certain number, such
of them as he may suspect to be ill affected toward him; so, the latter is
perfectly removed by that account which they have from the Witnesses of the
manner of the Fact, as from the Judge of the nature of the Law; other things
(as the same Learned Man observes) being more rightly seann'd by a simple and
incorrupt mind, than by craft, which is but too often the instrument of
another's lust. Of the Duty of the former Judges I will not say much, because
they do not stand so much in need of an Instructor, nor am I so proper for it,
though they did. It shall suffice me therefore briefly to admonish, or rather
pray, that inasmuch as the design of their place is to administer Justice, they
would do what in them lies to discover where the Right is, and not spare any
pains or patience to investigate it. That they would not receive Informations
beforehand to forestall their judgments, and much less suffer them to be
blinded by the intercession of Friends, the solicitations of great Persons, or
the receiving of Rewards. That they would restrain both the Litigants and their
several Advocates from personal aspersions, and such as serve rather to hide,
than discover the truth of the thing in question. That they would examine such
Witnesses, as show themselves crasty and reserved, with all dexterity and
accuracy; and help out and encourage such, whom bashfulness, and the awe of so
great a presence deters; that they would bear with the impertinences of those
of the meaner sort, and who know not how to tell a story, without interlacing
things of little concernment to it; lastly, that they would carefully and
faithfully recapitulate the whole matter, and with all uprightness and
perspicuity deliver the sense of that Law which respects it. So doing they
shall not only fulfill their own parts, but help the Jury in a great measure to
satisfy theirs. Who as they are in Reason and Law to receive the sense of the
Law from the Judge, and the knowledge of the Fact from the Depositions of the
respective Witnesses, so shall at least free their own Souls; if, without
favor, or hatred, or any such corrupt affection, they shall set themselves to
consider of all that has been proposed, and impartially deliver their own
sense: For though even thus they may sometime happen to err in Judgment, yet
they shall not offend; because governing themselves by the best light, which
the Evidence that has been given, and the Dictates of their own Judgments have
afforded them.

These two things only seem necessary to be added, for the better explicating
the Duty of these and all other Judges, 1. That they ought to pass sentence
according to the proofs that are made before them, whatsoever jealousy or
private knowledge they themselves may have of the falsehood of the thing
attested to. 2. That in doubtful cases, and where the truth does not appear,
they ought to incline to such determinations as are favorable to the accused
party.


1. Now though the former of these Assertions be generally allowed of, even
when the Person who ought to pass sentence, has a strong suspicion of the
falseness of the Witnesses, for the Reasons before given of the use and
necessity of them in Judgment: yet as there has not been the like accord,
where (as it may sometime happen) he who is to pass sentence knows the contrary
to what has been deposed; so it may seem but necessary for that Reason to
enquire, whether a Judge in that case ought to pass sentence according to what
has been attested? For the resolution whereof, the first thing I shall offer
is, That if he do pass sentence at all, he ought to pass sentence according to
what has been deposed; yea though his own private knowledge do contradict it.
For, beside that a Judge, as such, exercises a Public Authority, and is
therefore in Reason to guide himself in it by a Public Knowledge, and such as
comes to him as a Judge, and not as a Private Person, (otherwise he who takes
Cognizance, and he who passes Sentence shall not be the same;) beside that a
Judge by the nature of his Office, and the Oath which is laid upon him, is
indefinitely obliged to square his Judgments by the Laws and Manners of the
place, which do every where make it necessary to proceed according to what is
made out to him in Judgment: That he ought so to proceed, may be abundantly
evidenced from the force of those proofs, which the Testimony of Witnesses
gives; for those making the thing proved to be looked upon as Truth, even in
the opinion of Joh. 8.17.
God himself, it is but reason that a Judge, who is obliged to judge according
to truth, should pronounce agreeably to them, and consequently not according to
his own Private Knowledge. Neither will it avail to say (which is one of the
things that is usually objected) that so doing he shall act against his own
conscience: For, beside that there is a difference between acting against a
Man's Knowledge, and acting against his Conscience; the former importing only a
speculative Knowledge, which induces no obligation of it self; the latter
connoting a practical one: there is no necessity at all that the Judge of whom
we speak, should act against his own Conscience. For the force of Conscience
arising from the persuasion of the Judgment, that such or such a thing ought to
be done or omitted by us; he who can settle it in his mind, that he ought to
proceed secundum allegata and probata, as there is no doubt every Judge ought
to do, may take the course before spoken of without any reproach from his own
Conscience. As little am I moved with what is further objected against this
Assertion; that Positive Laws, and particularly those of men, ought to yield to
the Law of Nature, which requires of us, for instance, the absolving of an
innocent person, whatsoever Testimony may be made against him. For, beside that
it is the voice of Nature, no less than of Positive Laws, that in the mouth of
two or three Witnesses every word shall be established, there being otherwise
no end of Contentions, if what such suggest may not be admitted to determine
them; neither is he to be reputed as innocent in foro humano, who shall have
such Allegations attested against him, and shall not be able to wipe them off.
I conclude therefore, That whatsoever a Judges Private Knowledge may inform
him, he ought, if he pass Sentence, to guide himself by what appears to him in
Judgment. But neither, secondly, shall I stick to affirm, that he both may and
ought to pass Sentence, if the Prince shall oblige him to it. As because there
is really no iniquity on his part so to do, inasmuch as he only condemns him
whom the Law pronounces nocent; so, because it is a greater inconvenience than
the condemning of an innocent Person, to detrect the Commands of him, by whom
he is constituted a Judge: He who so does, beside the scandal of his Example,
opening a way for himself and others, to avoid the passing of a Sentence,
whenever they shall please to pretend that they know the contrary to what
has been alleged and attested. It may be enough for such persons to endeavor
the avoiding of it, if it may be with the Princes Will; or, if that cannot be
done, to use their art to convict the Witnesses of falsehood; which by ways best
known to Men versed in those Affairs has oftentimes been accomplished, when
the Judge has had only a suspicion of their Treachery; or, if that cannot be
done, after Sentence to signify it to the Prince, in whom as the power of
Pardoning is, so it is hardly to be imagined, but he will gladly make use of it
upon such an occasion, which will absolve both the Judges own Conscience, and
the accused party.

2. I will conclude this Affair and my Discourse, with admonishing those to
whom the Power of Judging does belong, That in doubtful cases they ought to
incline to such determinations as are favorable to the accused party. For
every one being in Reason to be presumed to be innocent, till the contrary
thereof be made appear; it is but just, where the Proofs are not very clear,
that the Judgment should be with favor toward him who has been convented at
their Tribunal.

PART II.
An Address to the Explication of the Negative part of the Commandment; where
the Errors of Witnesses, and the Criminalness thereof, are first of all
inquired into; as, after that, what Falsities are comprised in them, whether in
or out of Judicial Proceedings. The first Error of Witnesses, the bearing of a
false one, whether as that imports such a Testimony as disagreeth with the
Nature of the Thing attested to; but principally and chiefly as it imports such
a one as disagrees with our own Opinion concerning it. The Criminalness
thereof, the Prejudice it does to him against whom it is alleged, the
Assistance it lends to the Injustice of the Accuser, its hindering those from
doing Justice who are otherwise disposed to do it, and Perjury. The second
Error of Witnesses, the concealing of any thing that is true; the Criminalness
whereof is evinced from the prejudice it may bring unto our Neighbor, and from
its contrariety to that great Precept of Love, which commands us to advantage
him, as well as no way injure him. The like Criminalness evinced in the
transposing of that which is true, or affirming what we deem to be so, with any
greater degree of assurance than we our selves are persuaded of in our own
Thoughts. An Inquiry into the Falsities and other Errors which are
comprehended under those of Witnesses; which from the general Design of the
Decalogue, as well as of the present Commandment, are shown to be all Falsities
in Judicial Proceedings. An enumeration thereupon of the several Falsities
committed in them; and an Inquiry whether the Defendant may plead Not guilty to
what he is justly charged with. Extrajudicial Falsities to be looked upon as
alike forbidden by this Commandment, where they are also pernicious ones.

BEING now pretty well provided, by what I have premised concerning Courts of
Judicature, to give an account of those Sins which are by this Commandment
forbidden in them; Reason would I should give the first place to those of
Witnesses, Negative part of the Commandment.
which the Commandment does expressly condemn: As because what is so condemned,
ought to be looked upon as principally intended; so, because whatsoever else
may be supposed to be forbidden by it, must be upon the account of its affinity
with that which it principally intends. Taking it therefore for granted, that
the Errors of Witnesses in Judgment are principally struck at, I will inquire,
1. What those Errors are, and wherein the Criminalness thereof consists. 2.
What Falsities are comprised under them, whether in or out of Judicial
Proceedings.


I. Now there are four things (according as was before observed) which this
Commandment does either expressly, or by consequence, forbid in those who are
Witnesses in Judgment.

1. The uttering of any thing that is false. 2. and 3. The concealing or
transposing of that which is true. 4. The affirming of any thing which is
deemed by them to be so, with any greater degree of assurance than they
themselves are persuaded of in their own Breasts.
1. Of the first of these little need to be said, I mean, as to show it to be
forbidden by this Commandment; the Letter of the Commandment forbidding the
bearing false witness against our neighbor, which is to me the same in sense
with the uttering of any thing that is false. For though I deny not but a false
Witness may be for the advantage of one Party, and therefore in that respect
not a bearing false witness against our Neighbor; yet inasmuch as what is for
the advantage of one, is, eo nomine, to the prejudice of the other that
contendeth with him in Judgment, he who gives a favorable, but false Testimony
for the one, must be supposed to bear false witness against the other, which is
the very thing forbidden by this Commandment. All therefore that will be
requisite for me to show upon this first Head, is, what a false Witness is, and
wherein the Criminalness thereof consists. Now there are two Notions whereof
the word Falsehood is capable, as shall be more at large declared Vid. Part 3.
Explicat. of this Commandment.
, when I come to entreat de industria of the nature of Truth and Falsehood: that
which imports the disagreement of our Words with the nature of the Thing
whereof we speak, and that which imports the disagreement of them with our own
Opinion of it. Both the one and other of these Falsehoods is intended in this
Commandment; but the latter principally and chiefly. For, though a Man may be,
and no doubt is, obliged to inform himself well of what he speaks, because
Words were intended to express the Natures of Things, as well as our own
Conceptions of them; though he may also, for that reason, be chargeable with
the Crime of Falsehood, if that whereof he speaks have not been duly weighed
beforehand by him: yet inasmuch as it is not in the power of the Speaker to
give other account of any thing, than according to that Opinion which he
himself has conceived concerning it; that Falsehood is in reason to be looked
upon as chiefly forbidden, which consists in the disagreement of our Words with
our Thoughts, as which alone we are entirely in a capacity to prevent. It being
thus evident what we are to understand by Falsity, and particularly by that
Falsity which cleaves to a Testimony in Judgment; proceed we to show wherein
the Criminalness thereof consists, and for which it is forbidden by this
Commandment.

And here not to allege its contrariety to Truth, which, as I shall afterward
show, ought to be preserved inviolable, partly because false witnessing has a
farther Criminalness in it, and partly because I shall have a more opportune
place to entreat of that; I shall desire you to consider,

1. That which seems principally here intended, even the prejudice it does to
that Person against whom it is alleged. For, inasmuch as necessity requires,
that they to whom the Power of Judging does belong, should proceed in their
Sentence according to what has been attested; it cannot be but where the
Witness is false, the Judge should pass Sentence against the accused Party, and
deprive him of that, whether Estate or Life, which is called in question by the
Accuser: The former whereof is, on the Witnesses part, a Violation of the
Eighth Commandment; the latter, a Violation of the Sixth. For, as it is by his
Testimony that the Judge does what he does, and therefore he, and not the
Judge, chargeable with the Consequence of the Sentence; so I know not whether I
may not represent him as more chargeable with that Consequence, than him by
whom he is suborned: Because, though the latter give beginning to the
Accusation, yet it is his Testimony, that gives occasion to the Sentence, by
which the Accusation becomes effectual. Whence it was, that if the falseness of
a Witness happened to be discovered, he who forbad the bearing of false witness,
required the retaliating upon him that did so, that mischief, whatsoever it
was, which he thought to do unto his Neighbor by it, Deuteronomy. 19.18, 19.

2. But beside the prejudice which a false Witness does to the accused Party,
which alone would suffice to render his so doing Criminal; it would also be
considered, which is not without a Crime, that he lends his Assistance to the
Injustice of the Accuser: As because he so far interests himself in the Guilt
of that Fact to which he becomes so assistant; so because he encourages him,
and other such like Persons, to the perpetration of new Injustices: He who
prospers by his Villainy, being not likely to give it over, where there is so
ready a means to give success to it.

3. I observe, thirdly, That as he who bears false witness, gives assistance to
the Injustice of the Accuser, and promotes that Wickedness which he ought
rather to discountenance; so he hinders those from doing Justice who are
otherwise disposed to do it, yea makes them instrumental to the contrary: Which
however no way prejudicial to the eternal Welfare of the Judge (because no Man
can become Criminal but by his own consent) yet is prejudicial to his Fame,
which by that means is often called in question; to his Office, which it
renders useless, yea pernicious; but much more to Humane Society, because
corrupting those Judgments, upon the right proceeding whereof, the Safety of
Men's Persons and Fortunes does depend.

4. Lastly, Forasmuch as Men are not any where admitted to bear witness,
without adding the Oath of God to what they so bear witness; he who bears any
false witness, adds Impiety to his Injustice, and profanes the Name of God,
whom he does so invoke, as well as his who is his Vicegerent, and whom he does
by his false Testimony elude.

2. Of the first thing forbidden in a Witness, what has been said may suffice;
where I have shown what it is to bear false witness, and wherein Criminal:
Proceed we now to show the same concerning the concealing of any thing that is
true, the second thing affirmed to be forbidden by the Commandment. For the
evidencing whereof, though it might suffice, as to our Courts of Judicature, to
allege the Oath which the Witness takes to speak the whole Truth, as well as
nothing but the Truth; because he who so promises, makes himself a false
Witness, if he conceal any part of it: yet I think it not amiss, because that
will add more force to the Admonition, to evict it from the Commandment it
self. A thing which will be no way difficult for me or any Man to do, who shall
consider the End of the Commandment. For, the Design thereof being apparently
to secure the Persons and Estates of Men from receiving any prejudice by the
Testimony of Witnesses; if Men may be prejudiced by a partial Witness, as well
as by a false one, there is no doubt that also ought to be looked upon as
forbidden, because equally contrary to its design. Now that the Persons and
Estates of Men may no less suffer by the concealing of a Truth, than by giving
attestation to a Falsehood, will appear if we consider how much the concealing
of a circumstance may alter the nature of the thing in question. Thus for
Example, Though it be criminal, and so declared by our Laws, to take away the
life of our Neighbor, yet it is not so, nor ought to be so reputed, to take
away his life if it be only to defend our own; he who shall depose the killing
of the party, but withal conceal that parties first invading him that slew him,
shall make a murderer of him who is perfectly innocent, and who ought rather
to be defended than condemned. In like manner, he who shall depose the lending
of such a sum of Money to the accused party, as the Plaintiff demands, but
withal conceal, what he well knows, the paying of it back to him, shall make
him obnoxious to the penalty of the Law, who ought rather to have the
encouragement of it, as having discharged that obligation which he had
contracted. And indeed as a bad cause may become specious and plausible by
paring off those things which show it to be monstrous and deformed, (for thus
(as Palavicino Istoria del Concilio di Trento, li. 1. c. 26.
well resembles it) out of a misshapen stone men frame a comely Statue, not by
adding to it, but by taking away) so there is as little doubt to be made, but a
fair and plausible Cause may become odious and detestable, by paring off any
part of it; monstrosity arising no less from the defect of a necessary Limb,
than from the addition of a superfluous one. But neither is this all which may
be said against the concealing of a Truth, though indeed it be the main, and
what ought more especially to be considered. For as though the Letter of the
Law forbid only the prejudicing of our neighbor by our testimony, yet that
love which is the spirit of it, and to which the whole is reduced by our
Savior, requires also the advantaging of him thereby; so he who shall omit so
to do, (as he who conceals any part of it may) must be looked upon as alike
offending against the Commandment; he who conceals any part of the Truth
Vterque enim reus est, and qui veritatem occultat, and qui mendacium dicit:
quia and ille prodesse non vult, and iste nocere desidederat.
showing as much unwillingness to profit, as he who utters that which is false
does a desire to do harm. I will conclude this particular when I have said,
that, though when we affirm it to be criminal to conceal a Truth, we mean only
such Truths as are pertinent to the matter in debate; yet men ought to be very
well satisfied, that what they do so conceal is no way pertinent to it: that
which appears to us to be inconsiderable, being oftentimes of moment if it be
judged of by more competent understandings.

3. From the concealing of a Truth, pass we to the transposing of it, the third
thing affirmed by us to be forbidden by the Commandment; and not without cause,
if we consider how much greater affinity it has with that falsehood which it
expressly condemns for falsehood (as was before said) consisting in the
disagreement of our words with the nature of the thing we speak of, or at least
with our apprehension of it; he who shall give in an account of any Fact, in
any other order than he knows the fact to have been committed, shall be as
guilty of falsehood, as he who adds fictions of his own, and it may be too no
less prejudicial to his Neighbor. It may seem ludicrous, but it was a sad
truth of a noble English Gentleman sent Ambassador into Foreign Parts, and
with him an honorable Espy under the notion of a Companion: By whom he was
accused at his return to have spoken such and such things, and at such and such
times. The Gentleman pleaded ingeniously for himself, that it might be he had
spoken some of those things, or it might be all those things, but never any of
them in that order nor in that sense. I have (said he) several suits of
Apparel, of Purple Cloth, of Green Velvet, of White and Black Satin. If one
should put my two Purple Sleeves to my Green Velvet Doublet, and make my Hose,
the one of White Satin, the other of Black, and then swear that it was my
Apparel, they who did not know me would think me a strange man. I cannot tell
how this Plea fitted the Person of whom we speak, because as his charge so his
name is altogether unknown to me, having borrowed the forementioned story, in
the generality wherein I have delivered it, from Bishop Bramhal Replication to
the Bishop of Chalcedon touching Schism, page 46
, but certainly the Plea was reasonable in it self, and extremely pertinent to
the case we speak of. For it being notorious to all men, that the good or evil
of any action depends much upon the circumstances wherewith it is clad: he that
shall go about in his testimony to confound the order wherein they came, may
make as unseemly an alteration, as he who should so piece together the parts of
different colored Garments.

4. Lastly, As it is unlawful by this Commandment to conceal or transpose any
truth, as well as to utter that which is contrary to it; so it must be looked
upon as alike forbidden by it, to affirm that which we deem to be so, with any
greater degree of assurance, than we our selves are persuaded of it: As because
by so doing we shall fall into the crime of falsehood, inasmuch as the words we
make use of exceed the measure of our own persuasions, in the disagreement
wherewith I have shown falsehood to consist; so because by this means we may
bring that condemnation upon our Neighbor, which otherwise neither would nor
ought to be inflicted on him; confident asseverations leaving no place for
presumptions of the accused's innocence, which are of force under fainter ones.
A familiar instance will clear my meaning, and show the necessity of this
caution. For suppose we (what does not infrequently happen) that a company of
honest men are set upon in the Road by Robbers, and one of them in the fray
murdered by them. And suppose we also, which is alike common, that though the
Robbers escape for the present, yet some one or more persons are taken upon
suspicion for them. In this case, I say, it will concern those who were present
at the fact, not to affirm those suspected persons to be the men, with any
greater degree of assurance, than they themselves are persuaded of in their own
bosoms. For as by too confident an asseveration they may bring condemnation
upon a person, who it may be is no way worthy of it; so they will undoubtedly
cut off from the accused party, that which is the birthright of all men living
who are not convicted of any Crime, even the alleging for himself the former
orderliness of his life, and other such like presumptions of his innocence. For
though these may be of force, where they who are produced as Witnesses, do only
attest their own suspicion of those being the criminal parties; yet they are of
no force, nor ought to be, where the Witnesses shall swear peremptorily, that
they know them to be the men that set upon them. By which means as it has
sometime happened, that persons wholly innocent have undergone an unjust
sentence; so they who consider how heinous a thing it is to take away the life
of an Innocent, will beware by their example, how they affirm any thing in
Judgment, with any greater degree of assurance, than they themselves are
persuaded of in their own bosoms.

II. Having thus given an account of the Falsities and other Errors, which the
Commandment we have now before us cautions Witnesses against; my proposed
method obliges me to enquire, what Falsities are comprised under them, whether
in or out of Judicial Proceedings. The ground of which Question, is that
latitude which I have often shown the Commandments we have now before us ought
to be construed in: For, inasmuch as the Decalogue was intended as an Abstract
of the whole Duty of Man, or at least of so much of it, as concerns the
regulation of our Manners; inasmuch as all the foregoing Precepts have been
shown to extend to the commanding or forbidding of several other things, beside
what they particularly express: it is but reasonable to think, that what we are
now in the Explication of is of the same comprehensive nature, and extends to
the forbidding of other Falsities, beside those of Witnesses; which what they
are I come now to declare. In order whereunto,

1. The first thing that I shall offer is, That little doubt can be made, but
all other Falsities in Judicial Proceedings are alike condemned with those of
Witnesses: Partly because it is usual in the Decalogue to set one particular
Species to denote all that are of the same Genus; and partly because other
Falsities in Judgment are alike prejudicial to our Neighbor, with those that
are expressly forbidden. But from hence it will follow,

1. That it is alike forbidden to the Plaintiff by it, to raise a false Report,
or mix untrue Reports with true; these as they are alike Falsities, and
prejudicial ones, so giving occasion, shall I say, or rather producing those
Falsities, which the Commandment does expressly condemn: For were it not for
false Accusers false Witnesses could have no place, as being only abettors of
what the other raise. Now forasmuch as in Reason that is to be looked upon as
forbidden by a Commandment, which is, if I may so speak, the Cause of what it
does: if False Witnesses be forbidden by it, False Accusations must be so much
more; because not only alike prejudicial to our Neighbor, but the Parent of
the other. It will follow,

2. That it is alike forbidden to the Defendant, to deny that in Judgment which
he is justly charged withal; this as it is certainly a Falsity, so, if the
Accusation be in matters of Estate, alike prejudicial to our Neighbor; if in
matters Criminal, to the State; that being thereby obstructed, or at least
retarded in the Execution of Justice, upon which the welfare of it does depend.
Neither will it be of force to say, that no Man is bound to accuse himself;
which whether he be or no I will not at present concern my self to enquire,
having in another Explic. of the Third Commandm. Part 3.
place spoken sufficiently to it. For, in the present case (as a learned Jer.
Tailor Ductor Dubit. l. 3. c. 2. p. 91.2.
Man observes) the Man is accused already, and he is not called to be his own
Accuser, but to defend himself if he be unjustly charged, but if not, to
confess it. Which particular I the rather add, because the only pretense which
has been alleged for such persons pleading of Not Guilty, is, that the asking
of Guilty or Not Guilty is a matter of formality, and intended only to usher in
the Judicial Proceedings. The contrary whereof, as it is to me sufficiently
evident, from the Law's passing Sentence upon the Criminals pleading Guilty, so
will appear yet more reasonable, from what we have before said of the ground of
Witnesses in Judgment: For Witnesses having no other foundation, than the
supposition of the obscurity of the Fact, or the accused Party's denying it, it
is but just to suppose, that they who put the Question of Guilty or Not Guilty,
intend it not as a mere Formality, but as a thing in the order of Nature
antecedent to the production of Witnesses, and by which Sentence ought to pass
if the Fact be acknowledged. Otherwise (as the fore-quoted person remarks)
Trials of Criminal Causes, between the Judge and the Thief, would be like a
match at Fencing, and the accused party by that question forewarned only to
stand upon his guard; which whether it be agreeable with the gravity of those
Tribunals, or the design of their Institutions, I will leave to all sober Men
to judge. In the mean time, if they, who better understand our Law or the
practice of it, look upon it only as a Formality, I will not gainsay them in
it, or in the consequence they deduce; provided that in matters of Estate they
privilege not the Defendant to deny that Usurpation wherewith he is justly
charged; that, as it is a continuance of the old injury, so producing a new
prejudice to our Neighbor, because putting him to a farther trouble and
charge, to evict his own confessedly lawful demands.

3. The same is to be said, thirdly, of the Advocates defending of a false
Cause, or making use of false Pretenses to uphold it; these as they are alike
false, so tending equally to the prejudice of him, who is by their respective
Clients injured in his Cause. But neither,

4. Fourthly, will it be at all difficult to infer from the prohibition of
false Witnesses, that the Judge is much more forbidden to pass a false
Judgment; a false Judgment as it is equally opposite to Truth, so tending more
immediately and effectually to the prejudicing of the party concerned; inasmuch
as it is by his Sentence that the Controversy is decided, and justice or
injustice executed.

5. Lastly, Forasmuch as though the Judge passes Sentence, yet that Sentence
of his is oftentimes, through Bribery or otherwise, misrepresented by those
into whose hands it is put to draw it up or record it; they also, by what name
soever they are known, are to be looked upon as violators of the Commandment,
because both alike Falsifiers and prejudicial to their Neighbors in Judgment.

2. From Judicial Falsities pass we to extrajudicial ones, and enquire, whether
any of them are forbidden, and what. For the resolution of the former whereof,
Philo de Decalog. prope finem. (...).
I shall lay for my ground that short descant of Philo upon this Commandment;
he in his so often quoted Tract de Decalogo affirming to be contained in this
Commandment, the prohibition of deceiving and of false accusing, of being
assistant to Malefactors, and an hypocritical perfidiousness; all but the
second whereof have place in other proceedings as well as Judicial ones. Now
though I do not intend to rely upon his Authority, as which alone will not
suffice to show the Commandment to be so comprehensive: yet as I thought it not
amiss to allege it to show the opinion not to be novel, nor propugned only by
such as are of little esteem among learned Men; so, having so done, I shall
fortify it by the Authority of Reason, which is an Authority Men cannot so
easily gainsay. For is it not reasonable to think, especially in so
comprehensive a Law as I have shown that of the Decalogue to be, that those
sins are forbidden by a Commandment, which however not particularly mentioned,
yet are of the same nature with that which is? And if so, may we not reasonably
reckon to this, at least all such Falsities as are prejudicial to our
Neighbor, whether they be committed in Judgment or not? Especially when (as
the same Philo adds in the place before quoted) he who contents himself in this
Commandment with the Prohibition of False Witnessing in Judgment, has in other
places as expressly interdicted the other. But from hence it will follow, which
is the second thing to be spoken too, that we are to look upon as included in
this Prohibition, all such Falsities or Lies, as have the name of pernicious
ones; particularly those which wound our Neighbors reputation, as Calumnies
and the like; or prejudice him in his Estate, as breach of Promises or
Compacts. I say not the same at present of such Falsities or Lies as have the
name of officious or jesting ones; partly because the perniciousness thereof is
not so apparent, and partly because I reserve the discussion of them to another
place. Only as if it do appear that those Lies no less than the former are
condemned by the Law of God and Nature, little doubt can be made but they ought
to be reckoned to this Commandment, because they will not elsewhere find a more
commodious place; so it will become more pardonable to enquire into them here,
if we consider their affinity with the other in the point of Falsehood, or the
opinion of our own Church concerning them: That Catechism of its, which I have
chosen to explain, bringing within the compass of it evil speaking, lying, and
slandering, without any exception or restriction. In the mean time, let it
remain as certain, because abundantly proved, that all Lies whatsoever, which
bring any prejudice to our Neighbor, are to be looked upon as forbidden by
this Commandment, whether they be such as are committed in Judgment, or such
whose subject matter has no affinity with it. For though the former may be
more Criminal, in respect of that Oath which is affixed to them, and the
quality of those Tribunals which they are intended to elude; yet the latter may
be no less, if we consider either their dissonancy to Truth, which is one part
of the others evil character; or their prejudicialness to our Neighbor, whose
either Life, or Fame, or Fortune, the Commandment we have now before us was
intended to secure.

PART III.
A Digression concerning the Nature of Truth and Falsehood: The several Species
thereof, and our Obligation to pursue the one, and avoid the other. An Inquiry
in the close, whether the Truth be always to be professed; and, if not, how,
and in what Cases, it may be either suppressed, or concealed, even when we make
a semblance of declaring it.

THOUGH I had it sometime in my thoughts to defer my Discourse of Truth and
Falsehood, till I came to entreat of those Falsities which had nothing to make
them criminal but their being such; yet considering with my self, that Falsehood
is a part of the Character of those Sins which this Commandment professes to
condemn; as moreover, that I should be thereby obliged, to make my Account of
them complete, to scatter here and there some Remarques concerning the Nature
of them, which afterward I should be forced to repeat; considering, lastly,
that by a present discharging my self of that Obligation, I might both free my
self from those Remarques, and at the same time I explicated the nature of
Truth and Falsehood, give light to all those Falsities which have or shall be
the matter of my Discourse: I resolved with my self, not to defer any longer
the paying of that Debt, which the Argument I have now before me, no less than
my own Promise, has bound upon me. Setting aside therefore, for the present,
the prosecution of those Falsities, which I have said to be forbidden by this
Commandment, I will make it my business to inquire, 1. Wherein Truth and
Falsehood do consist: where I shall moreover enumerate the several Species of
them. 2. What Obligation there is to pursue the one, and avoid the other. 3.
And lastly, Whether the Truth be always to be professed; and, if not, how, and
in what Cases it may be either suppressed, or concealed.


1. Now Truth is nothing else than an Agreement of those things to which it is
attributed, with the Nature of those things which they are designed either to
resemble or express; and is either intrinsecal, or extrinsecal. Intrinsecal I
call that which resideth in the Mind of Man, and consists in the agreement of
its several Apprehensions with the Nature of those things which it pretends to
judge of. But this, as well as the contrary thereof, even Error, is no part of
our Inquiry here, because the Commandment we have now before us is of the
number of those which profess the regulation of our Deportment to our
Neighbors, and not the right ordering of our own private Concerns. Extrinsecal
I call that which either resides in our Words, and other such like Expressions
of our own Mind or Things; or, that which resideth in our Actions. Whereof the
former consists in the agreement of them with the Mind of him that uses them,
and has the name of Ethical or Moral Truth; or, with the things about which
our mind and the expressions thereof are conversant, and has the name of
Logical. The former of these is again double, according to the different
faculties of the Mind, which are either its Understanding or Will: In respect
of the former whereof that Speech is said to be true, which is agreeable to our
Thoughts and Apprchensions; as in respect of the latter, that Speech which is
agreeable to our purpose and resolution. Lastly, Forasmuch as our words may not
only look backward to our apprehensions or purposes, but forward to some
particular action to be done by us; hence it comes to pass (as was before
noted) that there may be a truth in our actions, as well as in our words, or
other the like notes of our thoughts or meaning, which is, when we act
agreeably to those promises or compacts which have proceeded out of our mouth,
or been any other way declared. Which said, it will be no way difficult to
discover those several falsities which are committed in the world, and which
this Commandment was intended to discountenance. For inasmuch as Falsehood is
nothing else than a contrariety to Truth; hence it comes to pass that if the
question be concerning that truth which resides in our words, or other the like
expressions of our own mind or things, that Speech is said to be false
respectively, which agrees not with our own conceptions, or with the nature of
those things which are the proper subject of them. If the question be yet more
particularly put concerning that truth, which consists in the agreement of our
words with our conceptions; that Speech is to be looked upon as false, which
either agrees not with our thoughts, and has for the most part the name of a
lie, or with our own purposes and resolutions, and may for distinction sake be
termed treachery. Lastly, If respect be had to that truth which resides in men's
actions, and which consists in the agreement of them with their promises or
compacts; so that action shall be looked upon as false, which does not agree
with the purport of those promises or compacts.

2. The nature of Truth and Falsehood being thus explained, proceed we, as our
proposed method obliges us, to enquire into the obligation we have to pursue
the one, and avoid the other. For my more advantageous resolution whereof, I
will resume each of those species of Truth and Falsehood, into which I have
before divided them.

To begin with that truth which I have said to consist in the agreement of our
words or other such like significant notes, with those things they are intended
to express. Where again I shall show, both that there is an Obligation to it,
and what the measure of that Obligation is. That there is an Obligation upon
men to intend this Truth, will need no other arguments than what I shall
afterward allege, to show the Obligation there is upon them to make their
words agree with their conceptions. For the end of Speech being to convey by
the means of our own Conceptions, the nature of those things which we have
taken cognizance of; if there be a tie upon us to make our words agree with our
thoughts, there will be also a tie upon us to make them agree with the nature
of those things for which those our Conceptions are transmitted. These two
things only would be added to that assertion, because but just limitations of
that and our obligation. 1. That the obligation of making our words agree with
the nature of the things we speak of, is to be understood only so far, as it is
in our power to make them so, by a previous information, or recollection of our
selves concerning it; As that too, 2. in such things only which we are under an
obligation to understand, whether from our Religion or Profession, or the
Office we take upon us: It sufficing in other things to give such an account
concerning them, as our present thoughts shall suggest. For whereas, if we are
obliged at all to make our words agree with our thoughts, it must be supposed
to be absolutely, because no man of common understanding can be ignorant of his
own thoughts, or want words to express them; the obligation to make our words
agreeable to the things we speak of, can extend no farther than it is in our
power to make them so, by a previous information or recollection of our selves;
the weakness of Humane Nature making it impossible to conceive rightly of all
things, and therefore also (because our words must be regulated by our
conceptions) to speak with exact truth concerning them. From whence as it will
follow, that it may be many times unavoidable, to speak dissonantly to those
things which are the subject of our Discourse; so that that Falsehood can be no
farther imputed to us for a crime, than it was in our power to have prevented
it by a due information, or recollection of our selves. Again, forasmuch as no
man can be bound to enquire into the nature of any other things, than those
which he is under an obligation to understand; it will follow, that he is under
no farther obligation to make his words agree with any other, than his present
thoughts shall suggest; there being no need of any scrupulous diligence, where
the thing we speak of is not necessary to be known. Thus for instance, though
it may concern a Divine to see that he deliver such doctrines in Religion, as
are agreeable to that word, which is or ought to be the rule of them; yet there
is not the like tie upon him, to speak with that care and consideration
concerning those things which are perfectly extrinsecal to it. Upon which
account, at the same time he shall be chargeable with Falsehood by reason of the
former, if they be found to be dissonant to the Scripture; yet he shall not be
chargeable with the like Falsehood upon the score of the erroneousness of the
latter, if he speak what his present thoughts do suggest. In like manner,
though it may concern a man, when summoned as a Witness, to inform himself well
beforehand, or at least to recollect himself, before he pretend to give a
testimony in judgment, because for want of that he may prejudice a man in his
Cause; yet there cannot be the like tie in extrajudicial matters, and where
there is not the same consequence of what we speak: It sufficing in such cases,
because not concerning us to know them, to speak agreeably to our own
Conceptions, into the obligation whereof I am next in order to enquire. For the
evidencing whereof, though (if that could be made appear) it would be the most
compendious method to allege, that words are naturally signs of men's
conceptions, because so (as Aquinas 2.2ae. quaest. 110. art. 3.
has argued) it must be looked upon as unnatural, to make show of that in our
words, which we have not in our minds; yet, because how true soever that may
be, there is no natural reason to make it appear, or at least none which occurs
to my observation, I shall take a farther way about to evince the obligation of
it, and such as shall be less liable to exception. In order whereunto, I will
lay for my ground, what in a former Discourse has been sufficiently proved,
that God has laid upon all Mankind an obligation to profit each other in those
several ways, whereby they are capacitated to contribute to it. For as from
thence it may be easily inferred, that they are to communicate of their
conceptions to each other, because both a remedy of Solitude, which is
extremely prejudicial to Humane Nature, and of necessary use to direct those
they have to do with in their Lives and Actions; so it will also follow that
they are both to agree of certain external marks of notifying their own
conceptions, and having so agreed of them, to abide by them, as without which,
what they speak would be uncertain to the hearers, and consequently neither
delight nor profit them. Now forasmuch as men are not only fitted to
communicate their conceptions to each other, but have also (whether led thereto
by the Divine Spirit at first, which I for my own part believe, because we find
Adam making use of his tongue as soon as he had a being, or conducted thereto
by the aptitude there is in the tongue so to do) agreed upon words as the
declarers of their conceptions each to other; it will follow, that being thus
agreed upon as the declarers of men's minds, they should observe them as such,
and consequently make them correspond to those several conceptions which they
were instituted to declare. The same is to be said, for the reason before
mentioned, of the blots of the Pen or Printing Press, whether they be such as
were intended to represent words figured by the tongue, as the characters of
most Nations in the world, or the sense and importance of them as those of the
Chinese. For these being no less useful to persons at distance, than the other
to those that are present; and beside that, by the same general consent
appointed declarers of men's conceptions; there is the same necessity of making
them to correspond with those conceptions, which they were so agreed on to
express. And though Nods, Gestures, and Habits, and other such like things, are
not with the same general consent appointed to declare our thoughts: yet as
these are alike expressive of them, and made use of oftentimes either out of
necessity or choice, (for thus dumb men speak to each other by signs, and those
who have the faculty of speaking, do so too to them that have not the use of
hearing) so there is no doubt where they are alike agreed on to notify men's
thoughts, there is the same obligation to make them correspond to them. For the
clearing whereof, I will instance first in a thing which is in use among the
Turks, and after that descend to another which is of more general observation.
Epistol. Turcic. 3.
From Busbequius we have it, an Author of good credit, and one who spent many
years among them in an Embassy from the Emperor, that one of the causes of the
Turkish Women's repudiating their Husbands, is their endeavoring to abuse them
contrary to the prescript of Nature: A crime, which, however rare among other
Nations, is yet it seems very familiar among them. Now forasmuch, as St. Paul
speaks, that is a sin not fit to be named, and much less by that Sex which has
modesty for its particular ornament; instead of putting them to the blush of
speaking out so foul a fact, they are by a custom among them instructed to pull
off their Shoe, and turn it the inside outside. Upon the sight whereof the
Judge proceeds to a Divorce without any more particular Declaration. Now if any
of those Women should without cause use the same Ceremony, when they were
demanded a reason of their desire of being Divorced; there is no doubt they
would be as much guilty of Falsehood in it, as those who should falsely charge
their Consort with their Tongues; because that Ceremony is equally agreed on,
as an expression of their meanings, as words both with them, and all other
Nations are. In like manner, where it is Customary, as I think it is with most
Nations in War, to declare the desire of a Parley by the hanging out of a White
Flag upon the Walls of that Town which is besieged; if, as some perfidious
People have done, they should use it only to entrap their Enemy, they ought to
be looked upon as Falsifiers, and as such to be severely chastised: For words
themselves becoming signs of Men's thoughts, by that sense which is put upon
them by the consent of those by whom they are used; where there is the same
consent, there will be the like obligation to make them correspond with the
mind of the user; and therefore also the like Falsehood, if Men prevaricate in
them.

Being now by my proposed method to entreat of our obligation to that Truth,
which is conversant about Promises or Compacts, I must desire you to call to
mind that there is a double Truth; whereof the former consists in the agreement
of Men's Promises with the Purpose and Will of them that make them; the latter,
in the agreement of their Actions with the Promises they make. Our obligation
both to the one and the other of which is founded in their necessity to the
maintaining of Humane Society. For Humane Society being not to be maintained
without a Commerce of benefits, because no Man is so happy as not to stand in
need of another help, and benefits being not always in our present power to
bestow, or not needful at the present time to the party that craves them; there
will arise from thence a necessity of declaring our purpose to bestow them
afterward, and of performing in due time what we have so declared we will; as
without the former of which there can be no assurance, to the party we deal
with, of enjoying what we contract for, no more than without the latter there
can be an actual enjoyment of them. And more than this I will not say at
present, concerning our obligation to make our Promises agree with our
Purposes, as our Actions to agree with those Promises; because whatsoever will
be farther necessary to be said concerning them, will fall in pertinently
enough afterward, when I go on to show what falsehoods are here condemned. Only
because there are some Promises which are voluntarily made, and to which there
is no forcible inducement on the part of him to whom they are so; it may not be
amiss, because these are different from the Promises before spoken of, to show
that they induce an obligation to performance, and how they come to induce such
an obligation. That they induce an obligation upon the party promising, is
sufficiently evident to all, who acknowledge the authority of the Scriptures,
they Vid Neh. 9.8. Heb. 6.18. -- 10.23. 2 Timothy 2.13.
assuring us that God himself is bound by them to perform what he has promised
to us: For the Promises of God being perfectly voluntary, and so voluntary,
that, if he pleased, he might inflict upon us those evils which are contrary to
them; it will unavoidably follow, that such Promises, no less than others, will
much more oblige us, who are much more capable of being obliged. The only
difficulty is, how they come to oblige: which (though a question rarely
resolved, or endeavored so much as to be so) yet seems to me not incapable of
one. For inasmuch as a voluntary Promise is an indication of a benevolent mind
in him by whom it is so made, it cannot but give hopes to him to whom it is so,
of enjoying that boon which is so voluntarily promised him; from whence if
there does not ensue (though that often does) a neglect of supplying himself
some other way; and consequently, if the Promise be not performed, a want of
what he needs; yet there will undoubtedly follow a grief and trouble of mind,
upon the disappointment of such hopes. By which means, the party, to whom the
Promise is made, is not only bereaved of the promised benefit, but suffers a
real prejudice, which that Love which one Man owes to another does forbid. Now
forasmuch as even a voluntary Promise cannot be violated, without prejudice to
him to whom it is made; it will follow, because we are obliged to avoid the
prejudicing of our Neighbor, that we ought to perform those Promises, as
without the performance whereof the other cannot be done.

3. Having thus shown wherein the nature of Truth and Falsehood do consist, as
also what obligation there is to pursue the one, and avoid the other; the next
thing to be enquired into, is, whether the Truth be always to be professed, or
if not, how and in what cases it may be suppressed, or concealed. That the
Truth is not always to be professed, needs no other evidence, than that men are
not bound to discover all things to all persons, as being oftentimes no way
profitable to others, and not a little prejudicial to themselves. In which case
no man can doubt but they may be suppressed, or concealed by some Artifice or
other. The only difficulty is, how and in what cases the Truth may be
concealed, which accordingly I come now to investigate. In order whereunto,
because no doubt can be made but it may be lawful sometime to hold our tongues,
and so suppress that Truth which we are unwilling to discover, I will spend the
main of my enquiry, in finding out those ways whereby it may be concealed, even
when we make a semblance of declaring it. Now there are two ways whereby this
may be effected, proportionably to the two ways there are of declaring our
minds to each other, Gesture and Speech. The former, when we make use of some
Gesture, which though not agreed upon to have such or such a sense, yet is apt
to be interpreted as an indication of it. An Example hereof we have in our
Savior, and from whose practice therefore we may collect the lawfulness of the
usage; for meeting after his Resurrection with two of his Disciples going to
Emaus, and to whom after he had adjoined himself, he discoursed at large of the
Death and Resurrection of the Messiah, and the evidence there was of them out
of the Prophets, when they drew near to the Village, he made a show (...). Luc.
24.28.
by his Gesture as if he would have gone farther, when no doubt his intention
was (and so the Greek word (...) insinuates) to stay some while with them, and
reveal his own person to them: That which is said to be feigned, or dissembled,
importing the absence of that which it feigns, and consequently that our
Savior did not intend at that time to proceed farther. In like manner, when
Joshua in order to the taking of Ai had laid an ambush behind the City, before
he betook himself to an Assault, the Text tells us, Josh. 8.15. that the better
to draw the Inhabitants out of the City, Joshua and all Israel, immediately
after their first onset, made as if they were beaten by them, and, to continue
them in that error, fled by the way of the Wilderness; though, as it appeared
afterward, to return upon them with the greater force, and by the help of
their Ambush to hem them in. But what speak I of such kind of Dissimulations
being lawful in War, where according to that of the Poet, Dolus an virtus quis
in host requirat? when they may be of no small use in the management of
Religion, and are adopted by S. Paul into it? he both by his Practice and
Exhortation recommending to us the becoming of all things to all men, that we
may by any means save some; which is in other words (and accordingly S.
Chrysostom Not. ad 1 Cor. 9.20. (...).
glosses it) that by making show by our practice as if we were of their mind in
some things of Religion, we should procure our selves a good opinion among
them, and by that means an opportunity to insinuate our own Doctrines. This
only would be added, though intimated before, That when we affirm it to be
lawful, to make use of certain Gestures, to conceal our Minds from other Men,
we intend it only of such Gestures as are not by general consent appointed to
declare that which we make semblance of, those that are (as was before noted)
being not to be made use of, but where our Purposes agree with them. Thus, for
instance, though it may be lawful by such a dissembled flight to draw our Enemy
into a snare; yet it is not so, by the hanging out of a White Flag, or other
such like usance, to make show of a Parley, when we mean it not; this being by
a general consent appointed as an indication of it, and therefore not to be
made use of, but where we are real in it.

From Gestures, and other such like indications of our Minds, pass we to Words,
and enquire how the Truth may be concealed in them: In order whereunto, two
methods present themselves, which, where they are used with discretion, contain
nothing unlawful in them: To give in only some part of that Truth which is
demanded; or cloth that we do in ambiguous terms. Thus to resume the former
method; If a Man should be demanded an account of any Action, the chief Reason
whereof he were unwilling to discover; I should no way doubt, if he were moved
to that Action by more Reasons than one, but he might give in a less principal
one, without taking any notice of the chief: He who so does, unless he give it
in as the only, or principal one, offending not against Truth, because
suggesting that which really moved him to it. Agreeably whereto, when Jeremiah
the Prophet was questioned by the Princes of Judah, concerning a Discourse that
passed between him and King Zedekiah, the chief subject whereof had been by
that King forbidden to him to reveal; Jeremiah, instructed beforehand by the
King, told them, that he presented his supplication before the King, that he
would not cause him to return to Jonathan's House to dye there: Which, though
true enough, yet was neither the only, nor the principal part of their
Discourse, Jer. 38.24. and so on. As little doubt is to be made, but, where we
are to deliver some unpleasing Truth, it may be sometimes lawful for us to wrap
it up in ambiguous terms; and such as in all probability will be construed to
another sense than is by us intended. Because there is nothing more frequent
with holy Men in Scripture, yea even with our Savior himself; who, to keep his
Disciples from being surprised with sorrow, represented Lazarus Joh. 11.11.
his death at first under the name of sleep; as his own Joh. 2.20.
Body to the Jews under the notion of a Temple; telling them that if they
destroyed that Temple, without yet specifying what he meant, in three days he
would raise it up. Of the same make are the several Parables delivered by our
Savior in the Gospel; that of Nathan to David 2 Samuel 12.1. and another of one
of the Sons of the Prophets to Ahab, 1 King. 20.39. The only difficulty is, how
these latter ones may be saved from the imputation of a Lie: For Nathan telling
the story of a rich Man who took his poor Neighbors only Ewe-lamb, not as the
cover of some concealed Truth, but as a thing really acted, which he himself
knew not to be; he may seem thereby, instead of a Parable, to have told a false
story, and (as Seneca speaks of an Hyperbole) to come to the Truth by a Lie.
But because, when I come to enumerate the several Falsities that are here
forbidden, I shall have a more opportune place to return an Answer to that
Objection, I will put an end to this Affair with an advertisement of the Hebrew
Masters, that, if any man know how to use ambiguous speaking, he may be allowed
so to do, but if not, he ought rather to hold his peace altogether; he who
uses words in such a sense in which they are not commonly construed, making a
Lie instead of an ambiguity; because Custom, which is the Master of Language,
determines them to another sense, and consequently makes them disagreeable to
the conceptions of the Speaker. In the mean time, though I say that the Truth
may innocently enough be either suppressed or concealed, by such Artifices as
have been before described; yet both the one and the other are to be
understood, where they are no way prejudicial either to God, or our Superiors,
or our Neighbors; for where the honor of God, the reverence we owe to our
Superiors, or our Neighbors just profit is concerned, there no doubt it shall
not only not be lawful for us to suppress any part of the Truth, but incumbent
upon us to deliver it in the most clear and expressive terms, that our
invention can suggest. The result of which observation will be, among many
other things, that there ought to be no equivocation either in Contracts or
Judicial Proceedings: As by the former whereof our Neighbors Rights may be
impaired; by the latter moreover an injury offered both to God and our
Superiors, whose those Judgments are, which ambiguous speeches endeavor to
elude.

PART IV.
The Account of Extrajudicial Falsities resumed, and particularly of Pernicious
ones. These last divided into such as strike more directly at our Neighbors
Reputation, as Calumnies or Slanders; or at his Estate, as breach of Promises
or Compacts. Of the several sorts of Calumnies; and wherein the criminalness
thereof consists: which is shown to be, 1. In that they bring Grief to the
Party that lies under them. 2. That they are a bar to his Preferment and
Advantage. 3. That they obstruct him in doing good both to the Souls and Bodies
of other Men. To which is added as a cumulus of their guilt, that the
inconveniences they draw after them are in a manner irremediable. An Address to
the Explication of such Falsities as strike more directly at our Neighbors
Estate; such as is the breach of Promises or Compacts. In order whereunto,
enquiry is made what is, or is not, to be looked upon as a valid Promise or
Compact; and the breach of such as are valid declared to be criminal, upon the
account of that Grief which it brings upon the Party that is disappointed, of
that injury it does to Humane Society, as which cannot subsist without a
religious observation of them, and (because the Oath of God is usually affixed
to them) of Perjury also.

TO return now (from whence I have been for some time diverted by a Discourse
of the nature of Truth and Falsehood) to the consideration of Extrajudicial
Falsities, which I have said to be of three sorts, Pernicious, Officious, and
Jesting ones. The first whereof I have already shown to come within the compass
of the Prohibition, and shall therefore need only to enquire, what the several
species thereof are, what their nature is, and wherein criminal.

Now Pernicious Falsities, or Lies, may be reduced to two heads, according as
was before insinuated, such as strike more directly at our Neighbors
Reputation, and have the name of Calumnies or Slanders; or at his Estate, as
breach of Promises or Compacts.

I begin with the former of these, even Calumnies, or Slanders, which may be
committed these two ways; by denying our Neighbor to have those either Parts,
or Virtues, or Endowments, which he really has; or, by ascribing to him such
Defects or Vices whereof he is no way guilty: the former whereof has the name
of Detraction; the latter, of Calumny or Slander properly so called. As for
other the divisions of Slander, they are either of no great moment, or easily
apprehended; and therefore it shall suffice me to note, That they may be either
secretly whispered, and have the name of Whisperings and Backbitings; or, more
openly, and in the very face of the Party concerned, and may for distinction
sake be termed open Slanders. If there be any thing farther to be remarked,
concerning the nature of those particular species, it will fall in more
pertinently, after I have described to you the criminalness of Slanders in the
general: To which therefore I shall now betake my self, as being both the next
thing in order to be discoursed of, and the most material part of our Enquiry.

I have before observed, that Slanders in the nature of them strike at the
Reputation of him who is the Object of them: From whence as it will follow,
that the criminalness thereof is founded in that prejudice which they bring to
Men's Reputation; so, to attain the due importance of it, we must enquire into
the evil Consequences which do naturally arise from that prejudice: which are
these three especially.

1. That they bring Grief to the Party that lies under them. 2. That they are a
bar to his Preferment and Advantage in the World. 3. And lastly, That they
obstruct him in the doing of good, both to the Souls and Bodies of other Men.
1. It is Solomon's Observation, and more than once inculcated, though under
several modes of speech, that a good name is better than the most desirable of
outward blessings; whether they be such as do more immediately gratify our
Senses, as precious Ointments Eccl. 7.1.
do, or procure those things that gratisie them, as Riches Prove. 22.1.
. What ground Solomon had so to affirm, needs not to be enquired into, when
every Man's own Experience can attest the Truth thereof to him; as neither,
after that Experience, what ground there is to affirm, that the loss of a good
name will bring Grief to the Party that sustains it; it being easy to collect,
that the loss of that cannot be without Grief, the presence whereof we do so
passionately desire, and so carefully cherish when we have it. Agreeably
whereunto, as there is nothing more usual, than to see Men who labor under any
Reproach to pine away in their Calamity, and even refuse to enjoy those other
blessings they are possessed of; so oftentimes the smart of it has been such,
that to deliver themselves from the sense of it, they have thought it worth
their while to leave the World, and dye. For thus, when one Petrus Ossunius
Thuan. Hist. sui Temporis. Tom. 2. l. 34. page 220.
a Man of approved Valor, had by the surprise of some panick Fear lost his
Courage, and looking upon his Party as desperate, retired himself from the
Battle; he contracted so great a Grief of Mind from that shameful withdrawing
of himself, that all the exhortations of his Friends and Commanders could not
hinder him from ending of that life by a wilful abstinence, which the shame of
retiring himself made him think himself utterly unworthy of. It is true indeed,
there is some difference between that Grief which arises from a just reproach,
and that which arises from a falsely imputed one; because under the latter a
Man has the comfort of his own Conscience to support him, which is wanting
under the imputation of the other. But as the weakness of Humane Nature suffers
not Men oftentimes to make the most of that advantage, which the comfort of a
Man's own Conscience gives; so it matters not, as to that good opinion which we
seek, whether the Reproach we lie under be deserved or no, provided it be but
believed so to be: He who is unjustly reproached, provided it be also credibly,
suffering equally the loss of Men's good opinion, with those who are not
undeservedly Reproached. Forasmuch therefore, as loss of Reputation cannot but
bring great Grief to the Party that sustains it; forasmuch as that loss is or
may be occasioned by Slanders as well as by the most just Reproaches: he who is
guilty of affixing them must be looked upon as an Offender, because procuring
that undeserved Evil to his Neighbor.

2. But beside the Grief which arises from that, whether loss or prejudice of
Reputation, which Calumnies or Slanders give; it would also be observed, that
it may no less prejudice a Man in his Estate, and so offend against the Eighth
Commandment as well as the Ninth. For the evidencing whereof, we shall need
only to consider of those Qualifications, which either advantage or
disadvantage Men, in the acquisition of this worlds Conveniences: For does it
not contribute very much toward that to be accounted wise and knowing, and so
fitted for the management of those Affairs, which Wealth and Advantage wait
upon, and without which they are not ordinarily to be attained? Does it not
contribute alike, or more to it, to be esteemed faithful and diligent, and
sincere in all we undertake? Lastly, Is it not a bar, and that justly, to have
the fame of being ignorant and unfaithful? As by means of the former whereof
Men are incapacitated to manage Affairs, no less than by the latter rendered
unfit to be trusted with them. But how then can the Slanderer acquit himself
from injuriousness, yea from robbing the Party slandered, no less of his
Livelihood, than of his Reputation? For though his Slanders strike immediately
at the others Reputation, yet they wound his Subsistence through the side of
it, as which does in a great measure depend upon the other.

3. But of all the inconveniences which arise from that loss of Reputation
which Calumnies or Slanders give, there is certainly none more considerable,
than that they obstruct men in doing good, either to the temporal or eternal
being of their Neighbor. For though men ought not so much to consider, who it
is that speaks, as what is spoken; as without which men shall be chargeable
with having the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of Persons: yet
experience shows, the contrary method has prevailed, and men consider not so
much what, as who; rejecting even wholesome advice, for the ill opinion they have
of the party that gives it, and admitting as readily of pernicious ones, if
proceeding from one that is better thought of. Of the former whereof, as the
Lacedaemonians were so sensible, that when at any time a bad Man happened to
give good advice, they caused it, before it was followed, to be spoken over
again by a good (and it is all one as to this affair, whether a Man be really
bad, or reputed such); so he must be a stranger to the World, and to the
several Transactions of it, who has not seen enough to confirm him in the
latter. For what is there that gains Disciples to the Extravagances of this
latter Age, but the repute of those that propugn them, for the piety and
orderliness of their lives? Now forasmuch as Men are more influenced by the
Reputation of their Instructors, than by the Reasonableness of their Doctrines;
forasmuch as even the most wholesome advice suffers by the ill Fame of those that
give it, as well as pernicious ones gain upon the world, by the good opinion is
had of the Propugners; he who falsely brings up an ill Report upon any Person,
shall be as injurious to that Truth, whatsoever it is, which he recommendeth,
as to the Fame of the Person that disseminateth it. The Consequence whereof,
though it be visible enough in the Things of the World, and particularly in
matters of Public Concern (for thus we have known a most excellent Prince, not
only brought into contempt with his People, by the slanderous insinuations of
ambitious Men, but his most salutary Admonitions slighted and rejected, though
to the ruin of those that did so, and of the State) yet is it no where more
apparent than in things of Religion, and in those who have the management
thereof: For let those once suffer in their good names by a slanderous tongue,
and though they themselves speak with that of the most eloquent Man, or of an
Angel; yet all they say shall be little regarded, and those crimes, wherewith
they are, though unjustly, charged, thought a sufficient confutation of it.

Now though what has been said may be enough to show the Criminalness of that
Falsehood we have before us; yet I must not forget to add, that it becomes not
more pernicious as to those evil Consequences it produces, than as to the
irremediableness thereof. For whereas other Losses may not only be repaired,
but made up with advantage, to those who have had the ill Fortune to sustain
them; the loss of Reputation is such, as though it may be in some measure
salved, yet can rarely, if ever, be perfectly cured: Men being apt to believe,
even after the Confutation of the Slander, that it was not altogether without
ground, however it might be improved by the malice of him that raised it. For
beside that men are naturally inclinable to think evil of other persons,
because by that means they may be encouraged to entertain a better opinion of
themselves, or at least not obliged to entertain so severe a one; even they,
who would not otherwise be overforward to think ill, find themselves in a
manner constrained to do so, through the fear of thinking too much ill of the
Reporter. For who can lightly think Men so desperately wicked, as to raise any
gross Calumny, for which there is not some ground in him that is aspersed with
it? It is possible indeed, such a one may have represented the Crime far
greater than it really was; it may also be that he might be moved to it, more
out of a design of prejudicing his Neighbor, than out of any just resentment
of his miscarriage: But who, that is not alike wicked, can be so strangely
uncharitable, as to think any Man would so calumniate, where there were not
some real cause for it? Thus, I say, well meaning Men are apt to argue, even
when they have nothing to betray them to it, but the fear of thinking too much
ill of the Calumniator; how much more then, when, as for the most part, there
is some color in the calumniated persons Actions, for that Reproach wherewith
he is bespattered? For though Men may be wicked enough to raise ill Reports,
without any color at all, yet they are not generally so foolish as to do it;
as knowing that if they should, they might lose their end in it, because so
they would not easily be believed. To all which if we add, That the Slander
oftentimes reaches thither, whither the Confutation thereof never comes; so it
will be no hard matter to believe, that a Slander is a thing which cannot
easily be wiped off, and which therefore ought to be reckoned among Crimes of
the highest nature. In the mean time we may see, what Reason there is for the
Slanderer to do all that in him lies, whether by open confession, or otherwise,
to make satisfaction to the injured Party: For well may he think himself
obliged to do so, who cannot well, though he would, skin over that wound which
his intemperate Tongue has made. I will conclude this particular, when I have
said, That though all Slanders of what sort soever are chargeable with those
inconveniences, which I have affirmed to arise from them; yet that which
charge Men with any Defect, or Vice, is more apparently such, than that which
only detracts from their real excellencies; because whilst the latter does only
lessen Men's Reputation in the world, the other makes havoc of it and destroys
it. I am not well resolved to affirm the same of open calumnies, in comparison
of those which are secretly whispered. For though the former may bespeak a
greater boldness in him that disperseth them; yet the other may proceed from a
more malicious heart, and prove more pernicious in the event: Inasmuch as they
spread their poison far and wide, before it comes to the notice of the party
concerned, and when it does so, leave him ignorant of the Author. By means of
the former whereof, as they make the deeper impression, and so become the more
difficult to be rooted out; so the slandered persons ignorance of the Author
leaves him without a possibility of easing himself of his reproach, by
detecting the depravedness of his accuser. Such are the sentiments which Reason
and Nature suggest concerning the criminalness of slanders, and not unlike are
those which the Holy Scriptures prompt us to: St. Paul, Romans 1.29, and 30.
reckoning Whisperers, and Backbiters, or (as I should rather with Grotius
render the last word even (...)) open Calumniators, among the most notorious
offenders of the Gentiles, and such whose offenses were both the product of a
reprobate mind See verse. 28.
, and made the Committers thereof worthy of death verse. 30. ib.
it self. The consideration whereof, as it ought in reason to deter us from the
sin; so from partaking in any measure in it: which we shall do, if either we
listen easily to slanderous reports, or lightly give credit to them, or
propagate the notice of them to others: He who lends an Ear to such,
encouraging the Slanderer in his practice, whilst he who lends him his Faith
and Tongue goes along with him in it, because robbing the party slandered of
his own good opinion first, and after that of other men's.

Of such Falsities or Lies as strike more directly at Men's Reputation, what
has been said may suffice; proceed we therefore to those which strike at their
Estates, which are no other than breach of Promises or Compacts. Give me leave
only (because otherwise what is to be looked upon as such cannot well appear)
to premise something concerning the nature and qualifications of a Promise, and
show what is or is not to be accounted a valid one. Now a Promise is nothing
else than a declaration of our consent to that which is the matter of a
Promise; and is either without any engagement on the part of him to whom the
Promise is made, and has the name of a Promise more particularly; or with one,
and is styled a Compact. Both the one and the other of these is a part of our
Enquiry, but especially the latter, as which is both of more use and necessity.
In describing therefore the due qualifications of them, which is the next thing
to be considered, though I will have respect to both, yet to the latter more
particularly; which said, I will now go on to the indagation of them. And here
in the first place I shall desire it may be considered, that forasmuch as a
Promise is nothing else than a declaration of our consent; that only is to be
looked upon as a valid one, which is made by those who are of sufficient
capacity to understand what they consent to, and make a sensible declaration of
it. By which means, the affirmations or stipulations of those who are not
arrived to years of understanding, as those of Children, or such as are crazed
in them, as those of Madmen, must be excluded from the number of valid ones.
For Madmen and Children having not the free use of that reason, which is
necessary both to the right determination of their Wills, and the due
declaration of that determination unto others; neither can they be thought to
be in a capacity to make any valid Promise or Compact, which requires the
presence of both. I observe Secondly, That forasmuch as a Promise is nothing
else than a declaration of our consent; that and that only is to looked upon as
a valid one, where the matter of it is such as we have a power to determine our
Wills to. By which means neither are those affirmations or stipulations to be
looked upon as such, the matter whereof is contrary to the declared will of
God, or the Magistrate, or other our Superiors, to all whom we are before
obliged. For there being no place for the determination of the Will, where it
is before determined by a Superior power: neither is there any place for
Consent, which is nothing else than such a determination, and consequently
neither for a Promise or Compact. It is to be observed Thirdly, and upon the
score of the former definition, that neither is that to be looked upon as a
valid Promise or Compact, which was founded in the error of the party that
made it. For there being nothing more contrary to consent than error, because
rather surprising the Will than leaving it to it self, in the free
determination whereof Consent consists; neither is he to be looked upon as
consenting to what he declares, who is drawn so to do by his own mistake, and
would not have done so if he had not fallen into it. This only would be added,
That when we say that that is not to be looked upon as a valid Promise or
Compact, which was founded in the error of the party that made it: we
understand it of such an error, as it was not in his power to have prevented.
For though (as the Civil Law L. Si per errorem. Dig. de Jurisdictione.
speaks) they who err do not seem to consent; yet cannot that in reason have
any other interpretation, than where the error could not have been prevented:
there being no doubt a man may determine his Will precipitately as well as
considerately, and therefore to be looked upon as having so determined it,
where he was not careful to prevent it, and having so determined it, to abide
by it: An error, though it oblige not where it is perfectly involuntary, yet
being of force where it is otherwise, because the subject of the erring persons
choice. But as where the Promise or Compact was founded in the error of the
party that made it, and such an error also as was unavoidable, I see not with
what reason it can be looked upon as such, and much less as obligatory to the
maker; so having said so much, I shall proceed in the fourth place to those
Declarations which are extorted from us by threats and violence, and which may
therefore seem to have less of the nature or obligation of Promises, than those
which are drawn from us by deceit. For how can he be said to consent, who is
put upon the Declaration by such a fear as may fall upon a constant man? Or
what reason is there that Robbers and Pirates should reap any advantage by our
promises, who break their own Faith both to God and Man? But neither will the
one or other of these Considerations make the Promises to be improperly such,
or of no force and obligation. Not the former, because though he who has
violence offered him, may seem not to consent, yet he really does: as because
the violence that is offered cannot reach unto his Will, which deceit and
error does; so because his consent is full and absolute, the present state of
things considered. For though, if the party set upon were free from his fears,
he would not make a promise of paying a sum of money to him that did so; yet he
would not, if he were wise, considering the danger he is in, but make such a
promise to him; it being more eligible undoubtedly to redeem a man's life from
danger than refuse to bind himself by a Promise, which is only disadvantageous
to his Estate. But neither is it of any force as to the nulling of such a
Promise, that the party that exacts it, has by his course of life violated his
own Faith both to God and Man. For though by so doing he makes himself unworthy
of any benefit; yet nothing hinders but we may bestow one on him, and
consequently but that having promised it we actually should. Beside, though as
a Malefactor he might be spoiled of what he is already possessed of, as having
forfeited those rights he sometime had; yet inasmuch as the party promising
deals not with him as such, Vid. Grot. de Jure Belli ac pacis, li. 2. c. 11.
and li. 3. c. 19.
but as a Contractor bonae fidei, he does thereby both remit of that advantage
which he might otherwise have taken of him, and obliges himself to perform his
own promise to him. Very apposite to this purpose is that of Nabis in Livi.
Hist. li. 34. page 36. Edit. Lugd.
Livy, when Quinctius Flaminius objected Tyranny to him, and by that means
thought to free himself from the consequence of that League which he had made
with him. Concerning the name of Tyrant (says he) this I can answer, that
whatever I now am, I am the same that I was when thou O Titus Quinctius
enteredst into a confederation with me. Then I remember you called me King, now
I see I am called a Tyrant. If therefore I had changed the name of the
Government, I ought to have been accountable for my inconstancy, when you
change [both my name and your own behavior to me] there is the same reason you
should give an account of yours.

It being thus evident what is or is not to be looked upon as a valid Promise
or Compact, which I have insisted so much the longer on, lest that, which is no
breach of any valid Promise, should either fall under the same censure with
that which is, or give countenance to the admission of it; proceed we to show
wherein the criminalness of that which is the breach of a valid Promise
consists, which the grounds before See Explic. of this Commandment. Part 3.
laid down will easily discover. For a simple Promise becoming obligatory, by
the hopes it gives to the party concerned of enjoying what is promised; the
disappointment whereof cannot be received without grief of mind to the party
disappointed, and it may be too not without prejudice to his Affairs, through
the neglect the Promise may occasion in him of supplying himself some other
way: the breach of such a Promise will consequently become criminal, by that
grief and prejudice which a disappointment does naturally produce. Again,
Forasmuch as Humane Society cannot be maintained without a Commerce of
Benefits, nor that Commerce often pass but by Promises and Compacts; because
the benefits we desire of each other are not always in our present power to
bestow, or not needful at the present time to the party that craves them: he
that violates such Promises or Compacts shall destroy that necessary means of
Commerce, and consequently also make a breach upon Humane Society, which cannot
well be maintained without it. Whence it is, that though other falsities have
sometime met with excuse or patronage, yet breach of Faith has been always so
exploded, that it has not been allowed of even toward an Enemy, and from whom
men were like to receive but a very ill requital for observing it. For thus
when Regulus had plighted his Faith to the Carthaginians, Tull. de Offic. li. 3.
that he would return to them again, if he did not obtain from the Senate of
Rome the deliverance of their Captives: he not only dissuaded the Senate from
delivering them up, as conceiving the detaining of them to be of more advantage
to his Country, than his own release, who by reason of his old age was become
unuseful to it; but readily returned himself, though he could not well promise
himself any other usage than he afterward met with. And though there was not
the like Faith in those Ten Roman Gentleman, who after the Battle at Cannae
were sent by Hannibal to Rome, to procure the redemption of some Captives of
his own; yet as it appears by the Story (though delivered with some variety)
that several of them returned to the Camp of the Carthaginians, according as
they had promised to do; so he of them who thought to have freed himself from
that Obligation by returning back immediately after his departure, as if he had
forgotten something, was by the Decree of the Senate (as Tully Tull. de
Officiis loco citato, and etiam li. 1. ej. tractat.
tells the Story out of Polybius) remanded back to Hannibal bound. So hateful a
thing was it always adjudged, either to violate the Faith men have once given,
or use any collusion in it; and not without cause, if we consider the
destructiveness of it to Humane Society, or the Oath of God which is commonly
affixed to it: He who violateth a Faith which is so sealed, offering no less
despite to that God whom he invokes, than injury to those men whom he
deceives. I will shut up this Discourse with a passage of St. Paul, which I
allege to show the agreement there is in this particular as well as in all
others, between the Scripture, and the light of Reason and Nature. It Is in the
First to the Romans and the 31. where among other the gross Offenders of the
Gentiles, and such whom he afterward pronounces worthy of death, he reckons
Romans 1.31. (...) (i. e. exponente Hesychio) (...).
Covenant-breakers, or such as abide not by those Compacts they have made.

PART V.
Concerning Officious Falsities, and that merely as such they are not
allowable; because, however they may be profitable to those persons for whose
advantage they are told, yet they may be pernicious to Humane Society, by
rendering those external marks uncertain, whereby we are to communicate our
Thoughts each to other. An enquiry thereupon, whether there be any case in
which they do not render those external marks uncertain. This resolved, by
pointing at some particular cases; such as are, 1. Where Officious Falsehood is
allowed of by the same general consent, by which words are agreed upon as the
declarers of Men's Minds. Of which number are those Falsities that are told to
Children, Madmen, and sick Persons. 2. Where the Falsehood is both made use of
to insinuate an useful Truth, and detected by the Vtterer, as soon as he finds
it has made way for the other. Evidences of the lawfulness of this out of
Ecclesiastical Story, and from more authentic Examples in the Scripture. 3.
Where the Officious Falsehood is made use of to save the life of an innocent
Person. All other cases condemned as utterly unlawful; and particularly where
the Falsity that is told is prejudicial to any Man: as those that are allowed,
allowed only where a kind of necessity does prompt Men to it. An objection out
of Job 13.7. against Officious Falsities answered; together with a brief
censure of Equivocations and mental Reservations. Those Falsities which have
the name of Jesting ones more universally condemned. A Conclusion of the whole;
with a short account of the Affirmative part of the Commandment.

BEING now to give an account of the nature of Officious Falsities, the second
sort of those, which I have termed Extrajudicial ones; I must desire you to
call to mind, what has been heretofore said concerning our Obligation to that
Truth, which consists in the agreement of our Words, and other such like notes,
with those Thoughts of ours which they were intended to express. Now that
Obligation (as you may remember) I founded in that more known one, which is
incumbent upon all Men, to profit each other in those several ways, whereby
they are capacitated to contribute to it. For as from thence it may be easily
inferred, that they are to communicate of their Conceptions each to other;
because both a remedy of Solitude, which is extremely prejudicial to Humane
Society, and of necessary use to direct those they have to do with in their
Lives and Actions: so it will also follow, that they are both to agree of
certain external marks to make known their Conceptions by; and, having so
agreed of them, that they should abide by them, as without which what they
speak would be uncertain to the Hearers, and consequently, neither delight nor
profit them. Which one thing, if diligently heeded, will void all that
difficulty, which does or may occur in the nature of Officious Falsities. For
from hence it will appear, First, That the bare officiousness of a Lie can be
no just pretense for the deeming of it to be lawful: Because though Officious
Lies are not only not pernicious but profitable, if considered with respect to
those Persons for whose advantage they are told; yet they may be pernicious to
Humane Society, by rendering those external marks uncertain, by which we are to
communicate our Thoughts unto each other. If therefore such Falsities, or Lies,
as have the name of Officious, be in any case allowable, it must be where they
do not render those external marks uncertain: which in what cases it may
happen, I come now to declare. And here,

1. In the first place, I shall no way doubt to represent as one, the telling
of an Officious Falsehood, where it is allowed of by the same general consent,
by which Words have been agreed upon as the declarers of Men's minds; partly
because an exception so founded must be looked upon as a just abatement to that
of which it is so; and partly, because if any Officious Falsities be so allowed
of, no Man can thence take any just occasion to call in question the meaning of
those who utter them, when they speak upon other perfectly unlike occasions
(which is one way of rendering those external marks uncertain) or think it any
just Warrant to himself to confound those external marks, when he is called to
deliver his own mind in other matters. By which account we must first separate
from the number of Criminal Falsities, those that are told to Children and
Madmen, to bring them to that peace and quiet, which is not for the most part
otherwise to be attained. For it being allowed of by a general consent, thus to
impose upon Children and Madmen for their good, I see not how it can derogate
ought from the credit of those that do so, where they speak of other matters,
or encourage other persons to falsify in them, which alone can render those
external marks uncertain. The same is to be said of Physicians, and other
Persons, who have to do with sick and peevish people, and whom therefore they
must beguile into their own good, whether it be by alleviating of the Distemper
they lie under, or representing the Medicament they give under some other
notion than appertains to it; or lastly, (than which nothing is more common
among Physicians) when they have to do with Hypochondriacal persons, by
complying with their Patients Fancies, and pretending a belief of those very
Whimsies, wherewith they find their Patients overrun; for the telling of such
kind of Falsities, and to such persons, being indulged by the same common
consent, by which Words, and other such like notes, have been agreed upon for
the declarers of Men's minds, neither can the use of such Falsities be thought
to invalidate their Authority in other matters, and where there is no such
consent for the use of any collusion in them. Not unlike I should also think
(for I will not be positive in things of this nature) is the case of those
false Stories, that are commonly given out in War, to encourage our own Party,
and discourage the adverse one; such as is, for Example, that a Wing of the
Enemies Army flies; or that a part of our own, on this or that side of the main
Body, has had that success which they really have not: Because as such Stories
may be of use to those Parties for whose advantage they are told; so they may
seem to have been allowed of by the same general consent, by which Words, and
other such like external notes, have been appointed declarers of our minds.

2. But beside that an Officious Falsity, or Lie, cannot be thought to render
those marks uncertain, by which our Thoughts are to be declared, where the
Falsity is allowed of by the same general consent by which those external
marks, and particularly Words, have been agreed upon for the declarers of Men's
minds: neither can they be thought to prejudice them, secondly, where the
Falsity is both made use of to insinuate an useful Truth, and detected by the
Vtterer, as soon as he finds it has made way for the other. An Instance hereof
we have in Ecclesiastical Story, and one or more in the Sacred Scriptures; and
in such Persons moreover, and about such Affairs, as will make the lawfulness
unquestionable. The purport of the former See Jer Taylor's Ductor Dubit. Book
3. Chapt. 2. Rule 5.
is, That when two Eutychian Bishops, who, believing the two Natures in Christ
made but one, did consequently believe, that the Divinity or Godhead did dye as
well as his Humane Nature; when these, I say, came to the Court of a Sarazen
Prince, he, to undeceive them of their Error, pretended great sorrow at the
receipt of some Letters: Into the contents whereof when they had with some
curiosity enquired, the Prince with a seeming great sorrow told them, that he
had received certain intelligence, that the Archangel Gabriel was dead. They to
comfort him told him, that certainly it could not be true, and for their parts
they did believe it to be impossible. O Fathers, replied the Prince, can you
think it to be impossible for an Archangel to dye, when you affirm the Godhead
of Christ did? By that Fiction of his plainly convincing them of that Error,
which they had taken up concerning the Nature of our Savior. But why do we
look into Ecclesiastical History, which is less known, and less approved, when
the like Instance occurs in the Sacred Scriptures, and that too both in
divinely inspired Men, and in the delivery of their Message? That I mean, which
it acquaints us with, concerning Nathan's address to David; and the address of
one of the Sons of the Prophets to King Ahab. For though a Parable, when
delivered as such, that is to say, as an Emblem of some concealed Truth, have
not the nature of a Falsity; because it delivers nothing disagreeable to the
mind of him that uses it, nor yet with the Custom of the World by which such
forms of expression are agreed upon as declarers of it, no less than simple and
natural ones; yet the like cannot be said of a Parable, when it is represented
as a thing really acted, and as such endeavored to be imposed upon the
hearers: He, who so does, speaking dissonantly both to Truth and his own
Thoughts, because convinced that that was not real which he suggests as such.
Which notwithstanding we shall find, that even such have been used, and upon
such occasions also, as will put the lawfulness thereof past all question. For
did not Nathan, when sent to David to make him sensible of his sin in the
matter of Vriah's Wife; did not he (I say) upon that occasion begin a Story to
David of two Men in one City, the one rich and the other poor? The former
whereof, when a Traveller came to him, spared to take of his own Flocks, but
took the others only Ewe-lamb, which lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a
Daughter, and dressed it for the wayfaring Man that was come unto him. Nay did
he not all along deliver it rather as a thing really acted, than as a Parable,
and so that he convinced King David of the truth of it? he immediately
subjoining, in agreement with Nathan's Story, that the Person, who had so done,
should restore the Lamb fourfold, according to a Provision made in that behalf
by the Levitical Law. And indeed otherwise the Prophet Nathan's design might
have been frustrated, in making David so sensible of his guilt: For if he had
delivered it to him as a Parable, the guilty conscience of David might have
been more shye in condemning the action of the rich Person, whom Nathan spoke
of, lest, as it after happened, he should be forced to condemn himself. But of
all the instances, which either Sacred or Profane Story suggest, concerning the
telling of Falsities, to insinuate thereby some useful Truth, there is
certainly none more plain, than that Story which was told by a young Prophet to
Ahab, upon occasion of letting go Benhadad King of Syria; the sum of which, in
short, is this: One of the Sons of the Prophets, being so instructed by God,
puts on the person and guise of a Man that had been engaged in the Battle, and
that he might the better appear so (for that in my opinion is the best account
of that action) commands first one, and then another, by the word of the Lord
to smite him, which accordingly that second did, and wounded him, as you may
see 1 King. 20.35. That done (as the Story does farther instruct us) the
Prophet departs, and having disguised himself farther, with ashes upon his
face, waits for the King by the way. At length the King comes, and this
concealed Prophet cries out to him, and tells him that when he went into the
midst of the Battle, behold a man turned aside, and brought a Prisoner to him,
and said, keep this man: if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be
for his life, or else thou shall pay a Talent of Silver. But it happened
afterward (says he) that whilst I was busy here and there, the man was gone,
and I thereby liable to the Penalty. Than which what more apparent instance can
we desire of the telling of a Falsity, thereby to insinuate some useful Truth?
It appearing both from the Antecedents and Consequents, that this whole Story
was not only a Fiction of the Prophets, which all Parables are; but, which
makes it a perfect Falsity, represented not as the cover of some concealed
Truth, but as a Truth in it self, and all the art imaginable used to make it
appear so to be. Neither will it avail to say, as I find it is by some Learned
Men, that it ought not to be looked upon as such, or at least not as a Lie;
because the intention thereof was not to deceive, but to teach with the more
elegancy and effectualness. For beside that it is to me pretty apparent from a
former Discourse of the nature of Truth and Falsehood, that to deceive is no
essential part of the definition of a Lie, though it be an inseparable accident
of it; even this Fiction of the Prophets can no more be acquitted from the
design of deceiving, than any other Officious Falsities: For though the
ultimate design of it was to bring the King to the sense of his sin, in letting
Benhadad go, contrary to the Command of God; yet the intermediate design of it
was to deceive the King, and make him believe what he told him to be a real
Truth; as without which he could not so easily have brought him to condemn his
own action, in that supposed action of the Prophet. But what shall we then say,
to acquit this and the like actions from being to be looked upon as a sin? Even
that which was before said to acquit some others, to wit, That it was neither
pernicious to the party to whom it was told, which is one ground of the
Prohibition of Falsities, nor any way destructive of the significancy of those
external marks, which are agreed upon as the declarers of Men's minds. All
pretense of that being taken away, by the Prophets immediately discovering it
to be a Story, and that he had no other end in it, than to convince the King of
his miscarriage: He, who not only detects the falseness of his own Story, but
gives an account of the Reason he made use of it, leaving no pretense to Men to
doubt of his sincere speaking in matters of another nature, nor giving any
countenance to the insincerity of theirs.

3. Lastly, As an Officious Falsity cannot be thought to prejudice the
Authority and significancy of words, where it is both made use of to insinuate
an useful Truth, and detected almost as soon as delivered; so I should think
also, that neither will it, where it is made use of to save the life of an
innocent Person: Partly because the weightiness of the occasion may both plead
its excuse, and take away all pretense of violating the Truth upon less
occasions; and partly, because I find the Egyptian Mid-Wives and Rahab both
commended and rewarded for that good which they procured by an untruth. For
though much account be not to be made of one of Egypt or Jericho, if considered
merely as such; yet are they not to be despised where they have the
commendation of the Almighty, and particularly where one of them, even Rahab,
is magnified both for her Faith and Works.

These three things only seem necessary to be added, to prevent all
mis-interpretation of what we have said concerning some Officious Falsities.
First, That we are to understand it of such Falsities as are purely Officious,
and no way prejudicial to any Man: For though a Man may be allowed to advantage
himself or Relations; yet not with the hurt or injury of another. By which
means all those Falsities will necessarily be condemned, which are committed in
Commerce between Man and Man; whether it be that of private Men between one
another, as in Contracts and Bargains; or of Princes and States in Leagues. He,
who uses any Falsity in that, at the same time he advantageth himself, doing
an injury to him he deals with. Upon which account, though in that sense,
wherein Sir Henry Wotton used it, it was a very allowable definition of an
Ambassador, that he was a Person sent abroad to lie for the benefit of his
Prince; yet is there certainly nothing, which is more unbecoming their
Employment, or more scandalous to their respective Princes and Religion. I
admonish secondly, That when I say there may be cases wherein an Officious
Falsehood may be lawful, it will equally follow, and therefore alike to be
observed, that out of those cases all Falsehoods, how officious soever, must be
concluded to be unlawful. And indeed as those cases are not many, wherein an
Officious Falsehood can be supposed to be lawful, so neither can they give Men
any pretense to falsify in other matters; the only cases wherein they are
lawful, being (as has been at large declared) where they are allowed of by
general consent, where they are made use of to insinuate some useful Truth, and
detected as soon as it is; or to save the life of an innocent person. Lastly, I
shall desire it may be considered, That as those, who have spoken the most
favorably of Officious Falsities, have represented them as such things as have
something of Hellebore in them; so like that, and other things of the same
dangerous nature, they ought, even in the most allowed instances, to be used
sparingly, and with discretion; and rather where there is a kind of necessity
to prompt men to it, than when they may be avoided; especially considering the
severe and general condemnation of Falsities in the Doctrine of the Sea Prove.
13.5. -- 30.8. Psalm. 5.6. Col. 3.9.
Scripture, and the prejudice that may thereby accrue unto Religion, and
particularly to sincerity and Truth: For though all Falsities are not criminal,
yet they look so like those that really are, that they may tempt unwary Men,
either to make a mock of Truth, or run upon any Falsity of what nature soever,
which may be of any advantage to themselves.

I will conclude this head, when I have returned an answer to that which is
objected out of Job chap. 13.7. Will you speak wickedly for God, or talk
deceitfully for him? An Exception indeed specious enough, and so much the more,
for the Inference that seems naturally to flow from it: For if we may not talk
deceitfully for God, and his Glory, as that Question does manifestly import;
then certainly not for any inferior end, and much less for the saving of a
life. But beside that he who shall consider that Speech of Zophar's, to which
this is an Answer, will find the deceitful speaking here meant to be no other,
than the robbing of Job of his integrity, that so God might be justified in his
proceedings against him, which is in the number of those Pernicious Lies, which
I have shown to be universally unlawful; though nothing else should be meant
thereby than an Officious Falsity, yet will it not thence follow, that because
we may not talk deceitfully for God, and for his Glory, therefore neither may
we for the saving of an innocent person: He who talks deceitfully for any
thing, tacitly insinuating that it may stand in need of it; which though a
Reproach to the Almighty (because arguing something of weakness in him) yet
none at all to Man, because naturally weak, and made much more so by the fall
of our first Parents. These things indeed (as Grotius De jure belli ac pacis.
l. 3. c. 1.
observes) do not please the School of latter Ages, as which has chosen S.
Augustine of all the Ancients to be followed by them in all things. But the
same School has admitted tacit Interpretations and Reservations, so abhorring
from all common sense, that it may very well be doubted, whether it were not
much better to admit of speaking falsely in the cases before mentioned, than so
indiscriminately to exempt them from it; as when they say I know not,
understanding in their mind, so as to tell you; or I have not such a thing,
meaning to give or lend to you; and other such like Reservations, which common
sense rejects, and which if they be admitted, nothing hinders, but he, who
affirms any thing, may be said to deny it, and he who denis, to affirm it. The
result of which Discourse is, That by whatever softer name the Masters of that
Art may call those their Equivocations, they are no other than Falsities, or
Lies, as expressing that in Words, which is no way agreeable to the Speakers
Thoughts, and which therefore they are forced to piece out with interpretations
in their minds. Neither will it avail to say, as it is by the Masters of that
Art, That an Address to God may be no less true, which is made up in part by
the expressions of the Tongue, and in part with the conceptions of the Mind; as
for Example, if a rich Man should say in any private Address of his, Thou
know, O God, how poor and miserable I am, and understand in his mind, as to
the qualifications of his Soul. For though in our Addresses to God it be all
one as to Truth or Falsehood, whether we speak out the whole, or a part only,
because our Thoughts are no less knowable to him than our Words; yet among Men,
to whom the Thoughts of our hearts cannot be known, but as they are manifested
by our Words, or other such like notes, the Truth or Falsehood Sanderson De
Juramenti Obligatione. Praelect. 6. Sect. 6.
of them is in Reason to be estimated by those things only, which can declare
our conceptions to the Hearers. Which since those Reservations, which are in
the Mind, cannot do; in judging of the Truth of any Speech, account is to be
made of those things only that are expressed, and not of mental Reservations.

Of Pernicious and Officious Falsities, what has been said may suffice;
proceed we therefore to such as have the name of Jesting ones: By which Title I
mean not all Fictions of the brain, which are devised to delight; for so all
Parables of the Scripture are, and though not invented for delight only, yet to
delight as well as profit. But I mean such Fictions, as are represented as real
Truths, contrary to the mind and knowledge of the Utterer. Now concerning these
much need not be said, to show them to be generally unlawful, and as such to be
eschewed and avoided; as because the observation of Truth is of much more
concernment, than our delight; so because the Scriptures of the New Testament
have not only imposed upon us the simplicity of the Dove Matt. 10.16.
, that guileless Creature, but moreover forbidden to us the speaking of a vain
Matt. 12.36.
or idle word. If there be any case wherein these kind of Falsities are
allowable, it must be where they are in a manner detected as soon as told, and
neither our own sincerity made liable thereby to exception, nor the
signification of those external marks, by which we are to communicate our
Thoughts to each other, brought into uncertainty with the World. That of S.
Paul shall put an end to this Argument, and the Negative part of the
Commandment, Ephesians. 4.25. Wherefore putting away Lying, speak every man Truth
with his Neighbor, for we are members one of another. All Pernicious Lies
being simply and universally unlawful; all Officious ones, unless in those few
cases before excepted; and all Jesting ones, unless in the case but now
mentioned, if yet that may be excepted out of the number.

And here a fair opportunity is ministered to me, Affirmative part of the
Commandment.
of entering upon the Affirmative part of the Commandment, which I shall gladly
embrace, though in the close, as you see, of this Discourse; because I have in
a great measure dispatched it already, as knowing not well how to entreat of
the other without it. Where, first of all, I shall represent, because Judicial
Matters are principally referred to, the doing what in us lies to advantage a
just Cause; which that love, in which our Savior sums up this and other the
Precepts of the Second Table, does manifestly require. Now this a Witness will
do, yea cannot otherwise discharge himself of the tie of love, if he
voluntarily present himself to attest his knowledge, where either the matter in
debate requires it, or he can think it will be acceptable to the party
concerned: If when thus presenting himself, or called to it by others, he shall
duly recollect himself, that so he may omit no material part of his Evidence.
Lastly, if, having thus recollected himself, he clearly and fully declare it,
and speak the truth, and the whole truth, as well as nothing contrary to it.
The Plaintiff shall do his duty, if he shall prefer only such Enditements as
are true and material, and prosecute them with candor and moderation; as the
Defendant his, if he shall own justly imputed Crimes (particularly in matter of
Estate) and fence only against such as he is falsely aspersed with. The Advocate
shall fulfill his part, if he espouse just, or at least probable Causes, and
prosecute them with that fairness and civility, which becomes men and
Christians, and particularly that awful Assembly before which he speaks. As the
Judge his, if he lend a patient ear to the Evidence that is given, help out and
encourage weak but honest Witnesses, and narrowly sift crafty and reserved
ones: if, having so done, he shall duly weigh all circumstances, and, if that
be all he has to do (as in our Common Law Courts it is) recapitulate the
whole, and deliver his own sense clearly and impartially. The Jury shall do
their part, if, after a like serious consideration of the matter in debate,
they shall guide themselves in their Verdict by the opinion of the Judge in
matter of Law, and by the Evidence that is given as to matter of Fact. In fine,
those, to whom the power of Registring is committed, theirs, if they shall
faithfully record the Sentence, that is passed upon the whole by the Judge; as
they, and all others to whom the power of the execution of it belongs, if they
set their helping hand to a speedy, and faithful, and full execution of it. All
which Duties I have thus shortly laid together, without the addition of their
respective Proofs; partly because they carry their own conviction in their
foreheads; and partly because those that seem to stand in need of any, have
already had them in the foregoing Discourses; to which therefore it is but
reasonable to refer you.

From Judicial Matters pass we to Extrajudicial ones, where agreeably to those
several Falsities, which I have shown to be forbidden in the Negative, our
Duty, as well as the Affirmative part of the Commandment, must be to prosecute
those Truths that are contrary to them; particularly, that whereas Pernicious
Lies strike at our Neighbors Reputation or Estate, we, on the contrary, in
compliance with that Truth which is opposite to them, should endeavor to
advantage him in both, as the Precept of Love does manifestly enjoin. To
advantage him in his Reputation, by giving him his due commendation, by
ascribing to him those Parts, or Virtues, or Endowments, which he is really
possessed of; and remembering them, where ere we come, with all the expressions
of respect and honor. To advantage him again in his Reputation, by taking off
those Calumnies wherewith he is aspersed, and showing the either falsness or
improbability thereof. To advantage him in his Estate, by a religious
observation of our own Promises or Compacts; or, by causing those of others to
be strictly and faithfully observed. To have a regard to Truth in our
Discourses with our Neighbor, even when the contrary thereof may be
advantageous to our selves and others, unless it be in such cases, where the
common consent of mankind, the saving of an innocent persons life, or a speedy
detection of the falsehood licenseth a departure from it. But above all, that we
intend the prosecution of Truth above our own mere delight, and against the
temptation of those baits, which the pleasure of imposing upon others gives.
Truth, as it is a Duty which is owing to our Neighbors Understanding, no less
than Good Will is to his Will from ours; so being the foundation of all
pleasurable and useful Commerce, the band of Societies, and of those several
Compacts by which they are confederated, and in fine, the fulfilling of this
Commandment.

THE TENTH COMMANDMENT.
THE TENTH COMMANDMENT.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing
that is his.

PART I.
The Contents.
That the Commandment we have now before us is not two but one, as also that it
strikes not at those first stirrings or motions of Sin which we call
Concupiscence, but at the coveting of that which is the property of another. By
which account the Negative part of the Commandment is resolved to be, The not
coveting of that which is another, as the Affirmative, The contenting our
selves with that which is our own. An address to a general explication of the
former, where is shown that the thing forbidden to be coveted, is any thing of
our Neighbors, how small or inconsiderable soever; as also that the
Covetousness which is prohibited, is not such an one as includes in it a desire
or resolution to use unlawful means to compass the object of it, but such as
abides in the Mind, or at least does not prompt it to the other. An Objection
out of Mark 10.19. answered. A more particular explication of the Negative part
of the Commandment, where is shown that all coveting of that which is another
is not forbidden, but either 1. Such as is peccant in the Object; of which
nature are the coveting of such things as are not lawful for the Proprietor to
part with, as his Wife; or cannot be quitted by him without disadvantage; or
are the object of his affection no less than of ours. Or 2. Such covetings as
are peccant in their quality. Of which number are those Covetings that are not
with submission to the will both of God and the Proprietor, that are not
accompanied with a like desire of gratifying our Neighbor, or breed
perturbation in us. The criminalness of these and such like Covetings their
implying a dissatisfaction with the Divine Providence which has bestowed what
we covet upon another.

IT being sufficiently known, that, to blend the Second Commandment with the
First, the Patrons of Image Worship have divided this Commandment into two; I
made it my business, in my entrance upon the Second, to show the
unreasonableness of this Division, as well as of that conjunction or confusion.
To which therefore all I shall now add is, that as they who divide this
Commandment into two, might with as much reason divide it into more, even into
as many as there are things which are forbidden in it to covet; the formal
reason of the prohibition being one and the same in all, even the propriety
thereof being vested in another: so St. Paul in two places of his Epistle Romans
7.7. -- 13.9.
to the Romans sets it down in those general terms of, Thou shall not covet,
and so makes it but one Commandment. If there be any force in the repeating of
the word covet, which some it seems, though unadvisedly enough, have laid some
stress upon; it might be rather to show the earnestness of the Lawgiver in
forbidding them, than to prompt men to look upon the covetousness there
decryed, as distinct prohibitions of the Almighty.

The way being thus cleared to the Explication of the Commandment, proceed we
to the subject matter of it; the purport whereof is commonly conceived to be
the prohibition of those first motions or stirrings of sin, which we call
Concupiscence, arising in the sensual appetite (corrupted by Adam 's Fall, as
all other the faculties of the Soul are) before any actual deliberation of the
Understanding thereabout, or actual consent of the Will thereunto. But beside,
that there is no necessity (as Dr. Sanderson Sermon. on Phil. 4.11. Part. 1.
has well observed) for the affixing of such a sense to it, because those
motions or stirrings, supposing them sinful, are aptly enough referrable,
according to their respective objects, to those several Commandments wherein
they are forbidden; the general reason of the Commandment, and the place it
has in the Decalogue, oblige rather to understand it of the not coveting of
that, the property whereof is vested in another. For the Commandment being in
the number of those which regard our duty to our Neighbor, and moreover, as
appears both by the whole contexture of it, and the last clause in it, desinged
by the Giver of it, to take men off from the desire of that which is another;
it is in reason to be construed of such irregular desires, as become so rather
upon the Object upon which they are fixed, than by that corrupt Fountain from
which they flow. Upon which account (as the same Learned Man Sanderson. ibid.
has observed) the words of the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 13. 5. may serve
for a short, but full Commentary upon this last Commandment, both in the
Negative and affirmative part thereof. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, the Negative, and be content with such things as you have, the
Affirmative. In the mean time, though I thus depart from the received
explication of the Commandment, in obedience to a greater Authority, even that
of Reason as well as of our own Church, which delivers Church Catechism Answer
to -- What is thy duty toward thy Neighbor -- Not to covet or desire other
men's goods, but to learn, etc.
the selfsame explication; yet I shall not fail to consider of the thing it
self, when I come to entreat of Original sin, which will fall in pertinently
enough in the Discourse of that Sacrament, which was intended for its expiation
and its cure.

Now there are two things in the Negative part of the Commandment, Negative
part.
which will require a general explication before I descend to a more particular
one; the due importance of the object which the Commandment forbids us to
covet, and the general nature of that Covetousness which it condemns. Of the
first of these much need not be said, if we consider either that general clause
in the end of the Commandment, or that account which is given of it in the
parall^l place of Deuteronomy. For though the Commandment we have now before us
specify only our Neighbors House, Wife, Servant, Maid, Ox and Ass; yet, as
that parallel place in Deuteronomy adds also the coveting of his Field, as well
as of those other things before mentioned; so both the one and the other annex
the coveting of any thing that is our Neighbors, which will comprehend within
the compass of it, the coveting of his Farm, his Office, his Honor, yea of the
most inconsiderable things which appertain to him: Whether it be (as the
Ellipsis (...), etc. Intelligendum enim (...), ut maneat eadem constructio per
Accusativum -- Grot. in Decalog.
in the Septuagint version of this Commandment intimates) any portion of his
Ox, Ass, or other Cattle, or that which is yet more inconsiderable than they,
according to that of the Greek Poet, -- (...),
(...),
Let not thy desires extend themselves even to the Needle of another; or as it
is in the Greek Comedy, to that thread which is in it, (...), Grot. ibid.
The greatness or smalness of the thing coveted, making no more difference as
to the nature of the desire, than the same greatness or smalness of the thing
stolen does in the nature of the theft, but only as to the aggravation and
punishment of it. Which last piece of Morality, as many others, is thus
excellently expressed by Horace Epist. li. 1. ep. 16.
, Nam de mill fabae modiis, cum surripis unum,
Damnum est, non facinus, mihi pacto lenius isto.
From the Object which we are here forbidden to covet, pass we to the
consideration of the general nature of that Covetousness which we are under an
obligation to avoid. By which may be meant, either such a Covetousness as
includes in it a desire, and resolution to get from another that which is his
by any fraudulent or unjust courses; or such an one as proceeds no farther than
a bare desire, without any actual intention to make it ours by unlawful means.
But as I have already shown the former of these to appertain to the Eighth
Commandment, by the same reason that Anger and a lustful look or desire are by
our Savior reduced to those, wherein Murder and Adultery are forbidden, and
consequently have determined the Covetousness which is here forbidden, to be no
other than that which abides in the mind, or at least does not prompt the
party to any violent or fraudulent courses; so I know nothing which can render
that sense in any measure questionable, unless it be that of St. Mark, chap.
10. 19. where bringing in our Savior repeating the Commandments of the Second
Table, after the mention of Do not commit Adultery, do not kill, do not steal,
do not bear false witness; he adds, Defraud not or deprive not, as if that, or
at least the purpose of it, were the genuine sense of the Tenth Commandment in
whose place it seems to be fixed. But beside that a single expression, so
different from what this Commandment is commonly conceived in, ought not
lightly to give Law to more usual expressions, and such as are agreed upon to
be more suitable to the sense of the Commandment; beside that the words we
render, Defraud not, are wanting in some Greek Copies, as is evident from the
various readings in the end of the Biblia Polyglotta; I am apt to believe that
the words Defraud not, however subjoyned to the Ninth Commandment, were not
intended as an account of the Tenth, but rather as an additionary explication
of the Ninth, or to comprehend within the compass of it all injuries not before
expressed, but which are elsewhere plainly enough forbidden. And this I am the
rather induced to think, first, because St. Matthew chap. 19. 16.
, who repeats the same passage of our Savior, takes no notice at all of the
Tenth Commandment, and secondly, because that passage of St. Mark is no proper
explication of it, as which is agreed upon both by Jews and Christians to
strike at the desires of the heart, which may be inordinate enough, where no
actual defrauding of our Neighbor follows. Neither will it avail to say, That
he, who has a desire and purpose to defraud, is in the construction of
Christianity a Defrauder; by the same rule that he who looks upon a Woman to
lust after her, is by our Savior reputed an Adulterer. For the Question is not
what is the Construction of Christianity, but what was the clear and declared
purport of the Law, concerning which our Savior is there speaking, and what is
the most probable notion of the words, Defraud not, here. Now forasmuch as it
does not appear, that the Law, though it condemned inordinate desires, yet
represented those inordinate desires under the same title with the act that
commonly follows them, as it is plain Christianity does; forasmuch as the most
probable notion of the words Defraud not, is, do not actually do so; because
both the proper notion of the words, and most agreeable with those other
Prohibitions before mentioned, which strike only at inordinate actions: I
conclude, that the words Defraud not, are not to be looked upon as an account
of the Tenth Commandment, but either as an additionary Explication of the Ninth
(Defrauding being one principal end of bearing False Witness,) or to comprehend
within the compass of it, all Injuries not before expressed, but which are
elsewhere plainly enough forbidden. Which notion will be rendered yet more
probable, if (as Grotius observes in his Notes on Mat. 19.16.) the Greek word
(...) comprehend all those Injustices, which come not properly under the names
of Adultery, Murder, Stealing, and bearing False Witness: Even (as the same
Grotius does there remark) all those Crimes, which among the Latins have no
proper name, are comprehended under the title of Stellionatus and dolus malus.
All which things I have insisted so much the longer on, because that Text, to
which they are intended as an Answer, seems to me to require one; and because I
have not had the fortune, to see any thing satisfactory returned to it, by the
many Commentators of S. Mark. The result of the Premises is this, That though
the Coveting of another Goods, with an intention of compassing them by
unlawful means, be also a sin, and much greater than that which rests in the
mind, or at least does not prompt the covetous person to the taking of any
unlawful courses; yet the latter of these is the thing forbidden by this
Commandment, and therefore alone to be particularly considered by us.

For my more advantageous performance whereof, I will enquire, 1. Whether all
Coveting, or Desiring, of that which is another, is here forbidden. Or, 2. If
not, what Coveting or Desiring is: And, 3. Lastly, Wherein the Criminalness
thereof consists.


1. That all coveting, or desiring of that which is another Man's is not here
forbidden, will appear, if we consider, first, the consequences of such a
supposition, if it should be indiscriminately admitted. For is not all Commerce
between Man and Man founded in the desire of that which is another? And if so,
must not all Commerce between Man and Man cease, if all desire of that which is
another were forbidden? But how then can any Man in Reason think all Coveting
forbidden, though it be of that which is the Property of another? For take away
all Commerce, and neither shall he, who enjoys the desired benefit, have
wherewithal to make his life comfortable; nor he who desires it his: No Man
being generally so happy as to have all that his necessities require; that I
say not, no Company of Men or Nation. The great Lord of the World having for
the most part so ordered it, that that Land which abounds in some sorts of
useful things, should be as much straightened as to others; thereby both to engage
them to seek each others profit, and give them an opportunity to procure it.
Now forasmuch as without Commerce, no Person or Nation could be happy, even by
the disposition of the Almighty; to exclude all desire of that which is
another, upon which all Commerce is founded, must needs be looked upon as very
incongruous, and therefore much less forbidden by that God, who has made
Commerce necessary, and consequently that desire upon which it is founded. But
neither, secondly, will the inconvenience be less, if we consider this desire
with respect to those Commands, which God has laid upon us, to earn our living
by the sweat of our brows, or the exercise of our several more noble parts and
abiliments. For are all Men who are thus enjoined to labor, furnished with
such a proportion of Ground, as will, if duly cultivated, afford them a
subsistence? Or are even those that are, furnished with all those Instruments,
which are necessary for the cultivation of it? But how then can they procure
their own happiness, without endeavoring to procure the things of others? Or
how endeavor that, without desiring them? All endeavors arising from the
desire and hope of that, which Men employ their endeavors to procure. In fine,
take away all desire of that which is another, and you must also take away, I
do not say only, all desire or endeavor to raise a Man's self a Fortune (which
yet no Man has ever esteemed unlawful) but all desire or endeavor to do
things noble and honorable; because as the Rewards of these are those which
spur Men on to them, so they are for the most part in the Property of another.
But beside the inconveniences that attend such a supposition, as makes all
desire of that which is another's here forbidden; it would also be considered,
that all desire of that which is another, is no way destructive of that
advantage of our Neighbor, which this, as well as the other Commandments of
the second Table, oblige us to procure: For what if I desire that of him, which
however advantageous to my self, yet is, it may be, not only of no use to him,
but prejudicial to him to retain? As if, for example, I should desire of him
some of those Fish, wherewith I find his Ponds to be overstockt. Then certainly
I shall be so far from desiring the prejudice of my Neighbor, that on the
contrary I may do him a signal pleasure in it, were it only by giving him an
opportunity of doing a beneficent action, and so advantaging him in the other
World, even without any loss to him as to this. Again, what if I desire that,
which, though not without all use to him, yet is it may be not of so much use,
as the thing which I propose in exchange for it? Nay, what if I desire that of
him, which is not only less useful to, but less desirable by him, than that
boon which I propose in exchange for it? Here certainly, there is not only no
shadow of prejudice in my desire, but the manifest footsteps of benevolence and
advantage; and I do no less gratify his desires, than satiate my own. And
indeed, as Tertullian Ad Martyras. c. 2. Et si aliqua amisistis vitae gaudia,
negotiatio est aliquid amittere, ut majora lucreris.
spoke not amiss, when, to comfort Men against the loss of this Worlds
Conveniences, he told them, that it was not so much a misfortune, as a
traffic, when they only parted with this Worlds conveniences, to procure to
themselves more noble and lasting ones; so he did at the same time show both
the lawfulness and usefulness of Commerce, and of those desires of each others
Properties, whereupon all Commerce is founded. For whilst Men do thus covet the
Goods of each other, they procure each others happiness, and though both Losers
in some sort, yet are both equally Gainers; and, which is more, with the
good will of each other.

2. It being thus evident, That all desire of that which is another, is not
only not unlawful, but sometimes allowable, and consequently not within the
compass of the Prohibition; proceed we to enquire what coveting or desiring is,
which I shall judge of both by the Object and the Desire it self. In respect of
the former whereof, that Covetousness or Desire must be looked upon as unlawful,

1. Which extends it self to such things, as by the Laws of God or Man, are not
permitted to the Proprietor to part with. I instance for the former of these,
in the Desire of another Man's Wife, which is one of those things which are
expressly forbidden in this Commandment. For Man and Wife being bound to each
other, not only by mutual Compact, but by the Institution of the Almighty,
which has so joined them together, as not to be divided, even with their own
consent; there will arise from thence both an unlawfulness in the married
parties, to part with their mutual right, and a like unlawfulness in another to
desire it: He who so desires, either desiring the death of the other parry,
which is contradictory to the Law of Love; or the reversing of the Divine
Institution, which is a direct opposition to the Almighty. In like manner, if
any should Covet or Desire that House, or Land, which the Proprietor thereof,
either by his Parents, or other Superiors is forbidden to part withal, he
shall thereby fall into an inordinate Desire; because consequently desiring the
violation of those Commands, whereby he is forbidden to enjoy it.

2. But because though the things before mentioned cannot lawfully be quitted
by the Owners, and therefore neither reasonably desired, yet there are other
things that may be; therefore I shall add in the second place, That our Desire
of that which is another may also become unlawful, if, though it extend not it
self to such things as are unlawful to be parted with, yet it extend it self to
such, as cannot be quitted by the owner, without disadvantage: He, who desires
any thing of that nature, consequently desiring the prejudice of his Neighbor,
which is destructive of that love, which we are by the Laws of Nature, no less
than those of God, obliged to have for him. By which rule all those desires
must be concluded to be unlawful, which are not attended with a desire and
resolution of making a full compensation for the object of them, unless it be
in the matter of Alms; to which, as I have before shown the necessitous person
to have a right, so the giving thereof is not disadvantageous, because by the
Divine Promise, both to the temporal and eternal advantage of the Giver. But
neither,

3. Thirdly shall I stick to affirm, That all those Covetings or Desires are to
be looked upon as alike unlawful, which settle themselves upon such Properties
of our Neighbor; as, however not disadvantageous to the owners thereof to part
with, yet are the object of his affection, and it may be too more than of our
own. For beside that the Covetous person himself would not easily be induced to
part with that which is the object of his own, of which he gives no slight
indication in desiring that which is thus the object of another: he, who
desires any thing which is thus the Object of his Neighbors affection, desires
the prejudice of the Owner; because desiring that, which he cannot part with
without a prejudice to his content. And though I know the Owners themselves may
be peccant this way, in refusing to procure a great and real advantage to their
Neighbor, with the loss of a fanciful one to themselves; yet that hinders not
the covetous person from being inordinate in his Desires, by suffering them to
six themselves upon it: As because the thing he desires is the Property of his
Neighbor, so which being so cannot be transferred to him without the free
consent of the present Proprietor, which is not likely to be had where such an
affection precedes.

From those Desires which are peccant in the Object, pass we to those which are
peccant in themselves; such as are,

1. First, All those that are not with submission to the Will both of God and
the Proprietor. The former, because they are a direct opposition to his Will,
to whom all created Beings ought to be subject, by virtue of that Being which
they receive from him: The latter, because an intrenchment upon our Neighbors
Property, so far as the Desire of Man can be one. For that, which is the
Property of our Neighbor, being so his as not to be transferred, without the
Will of the Party in whom it is vested; he who desires any thing of his,
without submission to his Will, must consequently entrench upon it in his
Desires.

2. I place in the same rank, even of such Desires as are peccant in
themselves, those that are not accompanied with a like Desire of gratifying our
Neighbor, if he should desire the same or a like favor from us; such a Desire
being apparently contrary to that most equitable Rule, which commands us to do
to others as we would be done by our selves. But so also do I reckon,

3. Such Desires of our Neighbors Goods, as breed perturbation in us, and will
not suffer us to intend, as we ought, the Duties of Religion, or of our own
Profession, nor enjoy that repose and quiet which is necessary for us; these,
beside the prejudice they bring both to our spiritual and eternal welfare,
arguing a dissatisfaction with the Divine Providence for bestowing those
blessings upon others, which we but in vain desire. I place not under the same
head, though Desires far more inordinate, those that prompt Men to make use of
unlawful means to compass them; partly because they are breaches of the Eighth
Commandment; and partly because I have there accounted for them already. This
only would be added, That though inordinate Desires may contain themselves
within, or at least may not presently put Men upon the use of unlawful means to
compass them; yet they seldom fail, where they are cherished, to spur the party
on to use fraud or violence to compass them. Of which, if we wanted other
Instances, that of Ahab might suffice, after he had taken a fancy to Naboth's
Vineyard: For though at first that fancy of his put him only upon Entreaties
and Proposals, and such as were not only very reasonable in themselves, but in
all probability would have prevailed, if they had met with a Man less obstinate
than Naboth; though after that, and Naboth's flat denial of his Request, they
went no further than a sullen and melancholy behavior, which however taken up
to gratify a discontented mind, yet serves only to add more affliction to the
party that espouseth it: yet when a malicious Jezebel had put him in mind of
being a King, and of that liberty or licentiousness which that glorious Name
seems to challenge; then, I say, he could so far gratify his own inordinate
Desires and Jezebels malicious mind, as to permit her to seal Letters in his
Name, to the Elders of Naboth's City, to accuse him first of Blasphemy against
God and himself, and after that to stone him to death, that so his Vineyard
might escheat to the Crown. All which whosoever shall consider, will see Reason
enough to set bounds to his Desires, though at first they proceed no farther;
because, as all Vice stands upon a precipice, so the inordinate Desires of Men
more particularly do seldom fail to hurry them into the use of the most
unlawful means, to compass the Object of them. Which said, nothing remains to
do, but to show,

3. In the third place, The Criminalness of those Desires, which I have
affirmed to be forbidden by the Commandment. But as I knew not well how to
point out those inordinate Desires, without showing also wherein that
inordinacy consists, by which means I have upon the matter prevented my self
in that Argument, which comes now in order to be discoursed of; so having so
done, I shall only add, That the Criminalness thereof may be easily collected
from what I have before said, concerning the Criminalness of Stealth, and other
the like ways of encroaching upon our Neighbors Property. For though he, who
only Covets his Neighbor's Property, do not actually encroach upon it, nor
disturb that order which I have shown God to have instituted at first, and ever
since to have approved both by his Providence and his Laws; yet he bewrays a
manifest dissatisfaction with it, and a Will no less opposite to it, than the
Actions of the injurious person are. Which however in Humane Judicatories
without the imputation of a crime, because the motions of the Will are neither
prejudicial to that outward policy which they are to maintain, nor knowable by
them though they were; yet at the Bar of God and Nature they are alike, or more
criminal than our outward Actions, if they are also alike opposite to the Laws
of God. For whilst the thieving Hand moves only as it is guided by the Will,
and is rather the Instrument of another malice, than the Executioner of its
own; the Will determines it self to those unlawful objects upon which it
fixes, and chooses those inordinacies into which it falls.

PART II.
The Affirmative part of the Commandment, The contenting our selves with that
which is our own; upon occasion whereof enquiry is made into the nature of
Contentment, which is defined to be an Acquiescency of the Mind in that portion
of outward things we are possessed of upon a persuasion of its being sufficient
for us. This definition allotted both a general and a particular explication,
and evidenced to be true in every branch of it. An account of the grounds of
our obligation to Contentment, which are shown to be 1. The Will of the
Almighty declared by the disposition of his Providence. 2. Gods both knowing
better than we our selves what condition is fittest for us, and his readiness
to allot it. 3. The sufficiency of our own portion. The means whereby this
excellent virtue may be attained. A sober use of abundance at all times, and
sometimes a voluntary abstinence. The consideration of our own Vileness, and
particularly of our past Excesses, as in like manner of our own portions being
better than many others who are not otherwise inferior to us. An enumeration
of several other means which are alike conducible to it, and particularly of
such as are purely Religious. Of which nature are, The assurances God has
given us of supporting us under our condition, or delivering us out of it, or
making it advantageous to us. The promises of a better life, and Prayer. The
Conclusion.

OF the negative part of the Commandment, what has been said may suffice;
Affirmative part.
proceed we now to the Affirmative one, said by us (and not without reason) to
be no other than what the Author to the Hebrews advises, chap. 13.15. And be
content with such things as ye have: This as it is directly opposite to the
coveting of our Neighbors Goods, so being manifestly employed in the
prohibition of it; he who is forbidden to covet another goods, being eo ipso
obliged to be contented with his own, because there is no Medium between them.
Taking it therefore for granted, that to be contented with such things as we
have, is the thing enjoined in this Commandment, I will make it my business to
show, 1. Wherein the nature of Contentment does consist. 2. What the grounds of
its obligation are. And 3. Lastly, By what means it is to be attained.


1. Now though what Contentment is, be not difficult to define, even from the
common acceptance of it in the world; though being so, it might therefore
suffice to dispatch our account of it in a few words, as which to men not
willing to be deceived would serve to unfold the nature of it: Yet because I
have observed that they who seem well enough informed about the nature of it in
Thesi, do yet in Hypothesi, and when they come to make application of it to
themselves, willingly err in the apprehension of it; I purpose to be more
particular in the unfolding of its nature, than otherwise I should think my
self obliged. In order whereunto I will first give you a short definition of
it, and when I have done so, both explain it and draw it down to particulars.

Now Contentment is nothing else than an acquiescency of the Mind in that
portion of outward things we are possessed of, upon a persuasion of its being
sufficient for us. I call it an acquiescency of the Mind, because experience
shows it so to be, both as to that Mind to which we have attributed it, and
that acquiescency thereof, which we have affirmed it to import; Content by
whatsoever it be occasioned, yet having its seat in the Mind, and quieting the
desires of it. I call it an acquiescency of the Mind in that portion of outward
things we are possessed of, partly to intimate that there must be generally
some portion of outward things to beget it, and partly to show that whatsoever
that portion is, whether high or low, it is equally the object of it. For the
proof of the former whereof we shall need to go no farther than that of St.
Paul, 1 Timothy 6.8. for exhorting men to contentment, though they have no other
than Food and Raiment, he gives us thereby to understand, Hooker Eccl. Pol.
li. 1. sect. 10.
that those are generally necessary to the procuring of it; that destitution in
them is such an evil as, till it be removed, suffers not the mind of man to
be at quiet. Again, though some portion of outward things be absolutely
necessary to beget it, or at least is generally so; yet whether high or low is
not material, because both are the object of it: As is evident, both from the
former Text which commands us having Food and Raiment therewith to be content:
and another place of the same Apostle, Phil. 4.11, 12. where he not only
affirms himself to have learnt in whatsoever state he was therewith to be
content; but adds moreover, as a proof and illustration of the former, that he
knew both how to be abased, as well as how to abound, to be hungry, as well as
to be full, and in fine, to suffer need, as well as to enjoy the contrary
affluence. I know not whether I should add, because sufficiently employed in the
former considerations; that Contentment, about whatsoever it is conversant, is
still about that which is present; St. Paul's (...) in the place before quoted,
and the Author to the Hebrews exhorting to be content, (...) chap. 13. 5.
being an abundant evidence thereof. Though were neither the one nor the other
convictive, the necessity of being contented with our own, would infer the
being contented also with the present, because nothing can be truly said to be
our own but that which is so. Lastly, as Contentment is an acquiescency in that
portion of outward things which is present to us; so it does also include in it
as the ground of that acquiescency, a persuasion of its being sufficient for
us: this being manifestly implied in those phrases (...). Hesy. Idem sensus
(...) quod alibi usurpatur.
of the New Testament, whereby Contentment is expressed.

But because, even thus we cannot satisfy our selves perfectly concerning the
nature of Contentment, there being place for enquiry how far that acquiescency
we speak of is to be extended, and wherein limited; I will once more run over
the definition of Contentment, and draw it down to more particular
considerations. For be it that Contentment is an acquiescency of the Mind,
according as was before defined; yet is it such an acquiescency as excludes all
desires or endeavors of mending that mean condition we are in? If so, farewell
to all Industry and Providence, which yet no man has ever esteemed unlawful;
yea farewell to those Divine Promises, which, to encourage men to be content
with the present, give them hopes of Gods bringing them out of their streights:
He who gives hopes of amending our Condition, forbidding us not to desire it,
but on the contrary rather encouraging us both to desire and endeavor it. And
yet if there be place for such desires and endeavors, how can the contented
man of whom we speak, be said to acquiesce or rest in his present portion? for
how can he be said to quiet his desires in the present, who is ever extending
them beyond it? Both which Horns of this Dilemma are thus excellently expressed
by Horace Epist. li. 1. -- Epist. 17.
in the person of the Cynick Philosopher, Si pranderet olus patienter, regibus
uti
Nollet Aristippus. Si sciret regibus uti,
Fastidiret olus --
If (says he) Aristippus could content himself with a dinner of Herbs, he
would not certainly endeavor to ingratiate himself with Princes, and thereby
to amend his fortune: And if he could compass his ends upon them, no doubt he
would despise his former fare, which shows he was not before very well
satisfied with it. For the reconciling of which two together, and thereby the
discovering yet more fully the nature of Contentment, I shall desire it may be
considered, first, that inasmuch as Contentedness is nothing else than an
Acquiescency in the present; nothing hinders but a man may be at the same time
contented with the present, and yet desire an enlargement for the future,
because that Acquiescency and Desire have respect to different times, which
takes away all contradiction between them. The contented man of whom we speak,
does indeed desire an enlargement of his condition for the future; he prays to
God for it, and is not wanting in his endeavors to procure it; but in the mean
time he quiets himself with what he has, and repines not in the least at the
smalness of it. But because the present time in strictness of Speech reacherh
no farther than the (...) or present moment, within which to confine the duty
of Contentment were to pen it up in a narrower room than I conceive
Christianity and Nature intended it; and because the same Will of God which
obliges us to be content with the portion of the present minute, will equally
oblige us to continue our Contentment to the next, if God be pleased to
continue the other: for these Reasons, I say, as I deem it but just to
understand by the present time, all that time, of what continuance soever, to
which God shall be pleased to annex the same humble Fortune; so I conceive it
alike necessary to show, that those Desires and Endeavors, which we spoke of,
are no way inconsistent with that acquiescency which is commensurate to it. Now
that so they are not, or at least need not to be, will appear, if these two
Conditions be admitted, which no contented Man either did or can refuse. 1.
That whilst the Will of God is yet unknown, he submit his Desires to it, and
resolve to abide by the determination of it. And 2. That he lay aside all
Desires of an enlargement, after it shall appear to him that it is the Will of
God he should abide in that mean condition wherein he is. For acquiescency not
so much importing an exclusion of our Desires, as the quieting of them, and
bringing them into subjection to the Will of the Divine Majesty, which, as I
shall afterward show, is the principal ground of Contentment; he may very well
be said to acquiesce in his present Fortune, who submits his Desires to the
Will of God, whilst it is yet uncertain; and causes them to cease utterly,
where that Will of God is made known. The only difficulty in my opinion, (which
though of no concernment as to the present Dispute to resolve, is yet to the
understanding of the nature of Contentment) the only difficulty, I say, in my
opinion, is how to come to understand whether it be the Will of God we should
abide in that condition we are in. Now though nothing herein can certainly be
defined without a Revelation from Heaven, partly because the Scripture (which
is one way of knowing Gods Will) is silent in this particular; and partly
because his Providence (which is the only one beside) is a mysterious Book, and
not very easy to be unriddled: yet I think we may probably conjecture it to be
his Will that we should so abide, or at least that we should do so till we have
a very fair invitation from his Providence to stir; if, after many and various
attempts to amend our condition, we do yet prove unsuccessful in it: It being
not lightly to be thought (especially where our Desires are moderate, and
Attempts honest) that God, by whose Providence they are frustrated, would so
often do so, if it were not his Will we should at least for some time abide in
the condition we are in. The result of the Premises is this; The contented Man,
as such, acquiesceth in his present Fortune, and is willing, because it is
God's Will, to be what he is: He is moreover as willing to continue so to be,
so long as it shall please God to have him so. In conformity whereto, though he
do desire, and it may be endeavor an amendment; yet as he does not do so, even
when the Will of God is uncertain, without a submission of his Will to God's,
and a resolvedness to acquiesce in the determination of it; so those Desires
and Endeavors of his cease altogether, where it either certainly, or probably,
appears to him to be the Will of God, that he should abide in that condition
wherein he is. I say nothing at all at present, of the entertaining of
immoderate or anxious Desires, or using any unlawful means to compass them;
these being so apparently inconsistent with that acquiescency of mind whereof
we speak, and that Will of God which I shall afterward show to be the ground
of it, that it may suffice to have mentioned them, without either Proof or
Explication. For how can he be said to acquiesce in his present Portion, and
much more in the Will of God concerning it; whose mind is not only like the
troubled Sea in that it cannot rest, but is ever casting out mire and dirt,
both in its speeches and actions; neither knowing how to express it self
without murmuring and complaining, nor to prosecute the Object of its Desires,
without violent or fraudulent actions, which that God, in whose Will they ought
to acquiesce, has distinctly and severely forbidden?

From that acquiescency, wherein we have said contentedness to consist, pass we
to that in which it obliges us to acquiesce; which I have said to be that
Portion of outward things we are possessed of: Where again, we are to consider
it, as it imports the presence of some portion of outward things; and as it
imports that portion which we have, as well low as high, to be equally the
Object of it. Now though (to begin with the first) it be generally necessary to
Contentment, that a Man be furnished with such things as are ordinarily
necessary for his support, and particularly with Food and Raiment; upon which
account I have shown it See Explic. of the Eighth Com. Part 3.
to be lawful, in the case of extreme necessity, to withdraw so much from other
Men as will serve to supply it; yet I must also add, that we both may and ought
to be content, even when we are without those necessary things, where it
appears to be Gods Will that so we should be; because though Food and Raiment
be generally necessary to Contentment, yet they are not absolutely nor
universally such, Man, as our Savior argues out of the Law, living not by
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. The
only difficulty is, how we may discover that Will of God, which I suppose may
be these two ways. 1. When he gives us any assurance of an extraordinary
support: and 2. When he places us in such a condition as we cannot compass an
ordinary one. After either of which to repine or murmur, were as manifest a
violation of the Duty of Contentment, as to do so when we have Food and
Raiment. For contentedness (as I shall afterward show) having for the ground
of its Obligation the Will of that God who is the framer of our Fortunes; if it
be his Will (as certainly the cases before spoken of are no obscure indications
of it) that we should acquiesce in no Fortune as well as in a small one, there
is no doubt that alike ought to be the Object of it, and we to acquiesce or
rest in it. There is but little difficulty (and therefore I shall not insist on
the Explication of it) as to what I have before said concerning low and high
being alike the Object of Contentment; there being no Truth of which we have a
greater Experience, than what is said to have fallen from the mouth of Epicurus
Vid. Aelian. Vari. hist. l. 4. c. 13.
, that to whom little is not enough, nothing how great soever is so; Men's
Desires for the most part enlarging with their Fortunes, and creating to them
those wants which God and Nature never made.

Lastly, As contentedness is an acquiescency of the Mind, and an acquiescency
in that portion of outward things we are possessed of; so such an acquiescency
in it, as arises from, and includes in it a firm belief of that portion's
being sufficient for us. This as it is the natural importance of those Phrases,
whereby we have shown the New Testament to express it, so being essential to
contentedness; it being impossible for the Will to quiet it self, in that which
the Understanding does not apprehend to be sufficient. The Will may indeed, by
the impossibility of attaining more, be beaten off from desiring it; it may be
taken off from any perfect and efficacious volitions of it: but as some
velleities will ever remain, and, what naturally flows from them, a repining at
our portion; so it may rather be said to be quieted, or to speak more properly,
to be mortified by, than to quiet it self in it.

2. Of the nature of Contentment I have discoursed hitherto, proceed we in the
next place to the grounds of its obligation. Amongst which I reckon first, the
Will of Almighty God, declared by the disposition of his Providence. For
inasmuch as God, and not we our selves, is the framer of our Fortunes, inasmuch
as it is he that makes poor as well as makes rich; it is but a just
compliance with his Will, by whose disposition the several Conditions of Men
are shaped, to acquiesce in it whatsoever it is, and bring our Minds to an
approbation of it. Excellent to this purpose is that of Epictetus in his
Enchiridion, or at least may be easily adapted to it. Remember (says he c. 23.
(...).
) that thou art the Actor of a part in a Play, and such an one as it pleases
thy great Master to impose upon thee. If it be a short one, that thou art the
Actor of a short; if a long one, of a long. If he will have thee to act the
part of a poor man, remember that thou do handsomely discharge it: if a Lame
Man, a Ruler, or a Private Person, that thou accordingly behave thy self. To
thee it belongs to represent as thou ought the person which is given thee to
act, to another to make choice of it. It is true indeed, if we were or might be
chusers of our own Fortunes; if, as we are willing enough to be, so we were
actually exempted from subjection to any superior Power: so I could not with
the same reasonableness press upon you the being contented with that portion of
outward things which ye are possessed of. For why should I be contented with a
mean and despicable Fortune, when there is no restraint upon me from
prosecuting a better? But when we are not our own, but his by whom we were
created and redeemed, when our Will is no less his servant, than any of our
other Faculties or Powers; how unreasonable must it be not to acquiesce in his,
and that portion of outward things which he allots us? Especially, if we add in
the second place, which may pass for another ground of our obligation to it,
that God does both know better than we our selves what condition is fittest for
us; and, Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris;
Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt dii,
Charior est illis homo quam sibi. --
Juv. Sat. 10. v. 347. etc.
because he is also a merciful Father, will be sure to allot us that which is.
Discontentedness in this case being not only undutifulness, but ingratitude,
and a resisting of his love, as well as of his Authority. Add hereunto,
thirdly, (which may pass for another ground of our obligation) the sufficiency
of that portion which it has pleased the Divine Majesty to assign us. For what
can be more reasonable, especially when God imposes it on us, than to be
contented with that which is sufficient? The only difficulty is, how to make it
appear that all allotments of the Divine Providence are such, especially when
many of them are attended with great necessities, and such as press upon the
most importunate, as well as most reasonable desires of Nature. But as Men's
Fortunes do more often become insufficient by the exorbitancies of their
desires, than by the disproportionableness thereof to just and moderate ones;
so those which are insufficient in themselves, may become sufficient through
the Divine Grace, yea undoubtedly shall to all those that truly love and fear
him: For God having distinctly promised, that, together with the temptation,
whatsoever it is, he will make a way for us to escape, that we may be able to
bear it, he has thereby obliged himself, where he affords not the ordinary
means of support, to furnish out an extraordinary and supernatural one. Less
than that in the failure of ordinary means sufficing not to bear the
temptation, but being more than sufficient for it where it is afforded; not
only the infinity of God and his creating out of nothing the ordinary supports
of Humane life so persuading, but the assurance he has given us of an eternal
life after this, where Food and Raiment, and other such like means of our
support, shall neither be wanted nor desired.

3. From the grounds of our obligation to Contentment, pass we to the means
whereby it may be acquired, the third thing proposed to be discoursed of. I do
not mean to mention all, which were too large a task, and may with more Reason
be expected from such as entreat de industria of that Argument, but to select
such of them as seem to me to be most efficacious to produce that Contentment
which I inculcate. In the number of which I reckon, first, A sober use of
abundance at all times, and sometimes a voluntary abstinence. For were Men
careful, as they ought, to keep themselves always within the bounds of
temperance, and sometimes also (which yet were no hard task) to abstain wholly
from the enjoyment of their plenty; they would not then find it so uneasy to
content themselves with a more moderate Fortune, or repine and murmur at it
when it befalls them: he who can be without these external things even when he
has them, being much more likely to bear the want of them when they are not to
be had, and bring his mind to acquiesce in it. But when Men will not only not
abstain at any time from lawful Delights, but allow themselves in such as are
exorbitant; when, instead of denying and mortifying their appetites, they will
afford them the utmost satisfaction they are capable of, though with the hazard
of their health, and, which is of much more consideration, of their eternal
welfare: then no wonder if a meaner Fortune appear strange and irksom, and the
inconveniences wherewith it is attended insupportable; the difference between
their former enjoyments and their present straits appearing so vastly great,
that it may well stagger a resolved Understanding, and make Men sink under
their Calamity, though they were otherwise well enough disposed to bear it, and
made use of all their Reason to reconcile themselves to the undergoing of it.
Whence it is, that where such a change has sometime happened, they, who have
been the unhappy subjects thereof, have needed no other Malady to oblige them
to quit the World, and exchange this miserable life, I will not say for a
better, but what may reasonably enough be feared, for one that exceeds it as
much in sadness, as it does in the duration of it.

But let us suppose (as God knows that opportunity of learning Contentment does
often pass by us unobserved,) let us suppose, I say, that we have not been
careful to use our affluence with sobriety, and much less to abridge our selves
in the lawful use of it; yet even so there will not want means to bring us to a
contented mind, if we will but be so wise as to make use of them. Such as is in
the next place the consideration of our own vileness, and, what our former
plenty may well suggest to us, our past riots and intemperances: For how can he
think much to stoop to a mean Fortune, who has made so ill use of a more
splendid one? yea who it may be has been the Author of his own pressures, and
brought himself to penury by a prodigal wasting of his former Fortunes? It
being but reasonable, that every Man should acquiesce in that, which has been
rather his choice than his misfortune. And though it be true, that all, who
have thus fallen, are not conscious to themselves of the like Prodigality, nor
it may be of any Crimes which may be looked upon as equal to them; yet is there
none who will not find enough in himself to make him acknowledge his Calamity
to have been deserved, and accordingly to prompt him, rather to thank God for
what he has, than to repine that it is no greater than it is; especially if he
do also consider, that there are many in the world who are more necessitous
than himself, and, it may be too, who have in all things more approved
themselves to the Divine Majesty, than he himself, if he judge impartially,
will think himself to have done. And though it were but an odd consideration
which Diogenes Aelian. Var. hist. l. 13. c. 26.
solaced himself with in the extremity of his poverty, that the Mice which
played about him, pleased themselves with those crumbs, that did either fall
from, or were wiped off by him; yet it may suggest to us another which is more
likely to be attended to, and, where it is so, to induce Men to Contentment.
For certainly, notwithstanding the murmurings of discontented Men, there are
some in the world, who do not yet repine, whose Fortunes are as
disproportionable to those of the discontented person, as those of the Mice
were to the condition of the Cynick.

What should I tell you, what Experience no less than the Scripture assures us,
That our life consists not in the abundance of the things that we possess?
That Contentment is as rarely, yea more rarely, to be found in a splendid
Fortune, than in a moderate or humble one? That those gayeties, which we so
much desire, and without which it is so hard for us to be contented, are
attended with a proportionable number of inconveniences? That more cares, and
fears, and dangers wait upon the Scepter than upon the Spade? That those
pleasures, which are the Concomitants of greater Fortunes, appear more amiable
at a distance, than when they come to be enjoyed; which no Man who has ever
tasted any earthly pleasure, but will find himself obliged to confess? That
they are of no certain continuance, even when we think our selves most sure of
them? That we our selves may be taken from them, as well as they from us? In
fine, That we may be taken from them even whilst we continue in and with them?
It being no rare thing for Men to lose the sense of them, by stupidity or an
exquisite pain, and want them, even when they are possessed of them. All which
things, whosoever shall duly ponder in his mind, and allow them that weight
which they deserve, will, I doubt not, be easily induced to content himself
with an humble Fortune, and not only suffer but embrace it.

But of all the means whereby Contentment may be procured, and which therefore
it will concern us to make use of, because there can be no happiness without
it; there are certainly none more efficacious, than such as are purely
Religious, and for which we are beholden rather to the Book of God than that of
Nature. In the number of which I reckon, first, Those many assurances the
Scripture has given us of Gods supporting us under our humble Fortunes, or
delivering us out of them, or making them advantageous to us. Such as are those
that inform us, that God will never leave us nor forsake us (for so what was
spoken to Joshua in particular, is by the Author to the Hebrews extended unto
all) that his eyes are upon them that fear him, Psalm. 33.18.19, -- 34.10. Romans
8.28. Heb. 13.5.
to deliver their souls from death, and to feed them in the time of dearth;
that though the Lions do lack and suffer hunger, yet they which seek the Lord
shall want no manner of thing that is good; and in fine, that all things shall
work together for good to them that love God, to them who are called according
to his purpose. For who can well be discontented with his outward condition,
which he is assured shall be made supportable, or mended, and (which is more)
rendered advantageous to him? The like is to be said, yea with much more
reason, of the Promises of a better life, of being satisfied, however we may
now hunger, when we awake with Gods likeness, of being advanced to an abiding
City, and an incorruptible Crown, to the tasting of, or rather immersing our
selves in Rivers of pleasures, and such Rivers, as, because they are supplied
out of the Ocean of the Divine Goodness, shall run for evermore. For what
peevishness must it be, during the short time of our continuing here, not to
content our selves with a mean allotment; when he, by whom we are allotted it,
has assured us of so large a portion in that better and more enduring world?
To all which, if we add our Prayers to God, who is the giver of every good and
perfect gift, and particularly of that Contentment whereof we speak, it being
he and he alone who gives his beloved rest of body and mind, whilst others
rise up early and sit up late, and eat the bread of cares and sorrows; so (I
say) we shall want nothing (because he has styled himself a God hearing
Prayer, as well as giving success to our endeavors) which may both oblige and
enable us, to content our selves with our allotment, as well as not to extend
our Desires to those of others.

Such are the Laws of the Jewish Code, or at least of that part of it, which
contains the precepts of a virtuous life; such too, because transcribed, and
confirmed, and enlarged, by our Blessed Savior, are the Laws of the Christian
one. I wish I could also add, such are the lives of his Disciples; of those who
have been baptized into his Faith and service, and particularly into the
obedience of this Royal Law. But the carelessness of the better, and the
debauchedness of the worser sort make the contrary too evident to be either
disbelieved or denied. In consideration whereof, as it was not without great
reason, that that Church, whose Catechism I have chosen to explain, has
taught us to subjoin, both to the whole and every precept of it, an
acknowledgment of our own Errors, and a Prayer both for mercy and a better
mind; so I shall conclude my Explication of it with praying in like manner,
that God would be merciful in the pardoning of our several transgressions of
these his most Holy Laws, and for the time to come write them in our minds and
in our hearts, and incline us both more diligently and faithfully to keep them.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Title over the Pages. Page 25. and 27. for add to and confirm, read
fulfill and add to.

In the Text.
Page 8. lin. 45. after consequently add that. p. 9. l. 30. read 1 Timothy 2. p.
10. l. penult. for to r. so. p. 12. l. 32. for he has r. having. p. 23. l. 18.
entrance. p. 29. l. 40. extent. p. 39. l. 5 measures. p. 44. l. 17. For
inasmuch. p. 46. l. 37. spiritual. p. 55. l. 4. for that r. the. p. 64. l. 2.
incentive. p. 70. l. 36 for lower r. low or. p. 88. l. 33. for him r. them. p.
123. l. 2. for 4. r. 2. p. 132. l. 47. for 1. r. 12. p. 155. l. 13. for 12. r.
21. ib. l. ult. for 50. r. 15. p. 166. l. 7. for guiltiness r. guiltless. ib.
l. penult. for 23 r. 24. p. 175. l. 18. for in r. of. p. 196. l 48. for would
r. may. p. 202. l. 31. for 32. r. 31. p. 209. l. antep. for 72. r. 73. p. 222.
l. 4. for and obedience r. or obedience. p. 226. l. 10. for exalt the r. exact.
p. 233. l. 15. after forbids add the. p. 241. l. 44. for some r. a. p. 251. l.
21. (...). ib. l. 37. for themselves r. our selves. p. 256. l. 13. those
several. ib. l. 35. for to r. so. p. 258. l. 4. strongly. p. 271. l. 32. (...).
p. 275. l. 12. for does r. do. ib. 37. for power in r. power of. p. 276. l. 32.
decreed. p. 278. l. 7. Example. p. 279 l. 25. and 44. for God r Good. p. 281.
l. 7. after defend add it. p. 288. l. 8. to be appointed. p. 299. l. 27. for
difference, there r. difference there, p. 301. l. 42. in things. p. 304. l. 8.
for to r. so. p. 305. l 25. for and. r. And. p. 315. l. 21. for so r. to. ib.
l. 42. r. half of. p. 318. l. 38. for 6. r. 16. p. 323 l. 2. for happiness r.
unhappiness. ib. l. 12. after a add great. p. 324. l. 34. (...). p. 334. l. 42.
for conceal r. cancel. p. 362. l 32. Haereses p. 364 l. 20. dele as. p. 366. l.
43. after forbid add it. p. 368. l. 35. proscribes. p. 369. l. 23. all calling.
p. 370. l. 17. (...). p. 384. l. 25. Contracts a. p. 392. l. 46. Amiableness.
p. 393. l. 44 others. p. 394. l. 22. for 15. r. 35. p. 395. l. 21. for 17. r.
7. p. 401. l. 40. express. p. 402. l. 1. for 33. r. 39. p. 410. l. 25. for 30.
r. 13. p. 413. l. 11. for 18. r. 9. ib. l. 16. r. Whoremongers. p. 416. l.
antep. unwary. p. 423. l. 21. for proportion r. properties. p. 428. l. 6. r.
Act. 5.4. p. 429. l. 22. true Grace. p 432. l. 17. for who r. which. p. 435. l.
33. dele as. p. 471. l. 16. after own add or. p. 477. l. 8. proscribing. p.
488. l. 20. after also add to. p. 499. l. 46. r. For. p. 503. l. 17. for too r.
to. p. 519. l. 12. Gentlemen. p. 520. l. 8. after where add the. p. 532. l 20.
covetousnesses. ib. l. 40. for upon r. by. p. 533. l. 27. for (...) r. (...).
ib. (...)

In the Margent.
Page 36. (...) --
Verba sunt, (...), etc. p. 49. for 27. r. 37. p. 71. for Isa. r. Eze. p. 116.
l. 4. after verba dele 1. p. 203 l. 10. (...). p. 205. l. 23. (...). ib. l. 24.
(...). p. 236. l. 10. (...). l. 11. (...). 21. (...). p 237. l. 1. (...). p.
265. l. ult. (...). p. 267. l. antep. (...). p. 273. l. 1. for 2.3. r. 23. l.
6. (...). p. 278. l. antep. castella. ib. l. ult. sect. 7. p. 303. l. pen.
clavum. p. 331. l. 4. (...). p. 332. l. 5. (...). ib. l. 16. (...). ib. l. 18.
(...). p. 361. l. 1. c. 2. p. 365. l. 2. (...). ib. l. 6. (...). p. 369. l. 7.
(...). p. 374. l. 2. for 14. r. 1.4. p. 399. l. 2. Col. p. 406. l. 20. vitiis.
p. 411. l. 5. (...). ib. l. 6. (...). p. 451. for 8. r. 3. p. 460. for natural
use r. nature and use. p. 464. contendant. p. 516. l. 2. r. 32.

ADDEND.
Page 267. in margin. Post illud Strabonis, add aliud illustre testimonium ex
Dionis Hist. Romans l. 53. p. 519. quod haud ita pridem inter legendum observavi
-- (...) (...) --
(...) [Augustum nempe de quo ante dicta commemorat] (...) NO (...). Addit
autem idem Dion, quod sententiam nostram magis confirmat, (...) KOLAKEIAS (...)
ALTHEIAS (...).


