A TREATISE CONCERNING ADULTERY AND DIVORCE.

(...) -- Blastar is Syntagma Alp. L it. M. London: Printed by R. ROBERTS. 1700.

A TREATISE CONCERNING Adultery and Divorce.
ADULTERY is, say the Etymologists, Ad alterius torum accessio.
the going to another's Bed: and St. Augustine defines it to be a Fidei
conjugalis violatio.
Breach of the Marriage-Vow; A Crime so black, Refor. Leg. Eccl. Tit. Adulter.
c. 1.
that our Constitutions call it Turpitudo horribilis.
horrible Baseness; Et res Deo tam odiosa.
and a Sin so abominable in God's sight, that he could not find a fitter word
than this to express Idolatry by in the Holy Scripture: Art. Visit. Land. Tit.
4. n. 3.
And Our Church is so industrious and careful in the discovery of it, that it
is one Article in the Episcopal Visitations, Whether any have committed
Adultery, Fornication, etc. or are vehemently suspected of the Premises?

The Punishments inflicted on it all over the World, partly show how much it is
detested. By the Levitical and Civil Law of Moses it was rewarded with Death.
The Hungarians use that Punishment; the Father forcing his Daughter, the
Husband his Wife, and the Brother his Sister to the Place of Execution. Heylin.
And among the Turks, the Offending Woman is sentene'd to be Drowned, and the
Man Dismembered. The Babylonians, Arabians, Tartars, Indians, Iavans, Brazilians
and Mexicans also made it capital; so did the ancient Imperial Laws: but latter
Ages are contented with Confinement and Whipping; and the Ecclesiastical Canons
prescribe Excommunication. By a Constitution of the Church, in the time of the
Saxons, such lewd persons were compared to Murderers, and equally denied
Christian Burial. And there was a Law about the Year 1032, whereby the
Adulteress was to lose her Nose and Ears. St. Paul says, No such person shall
enter into the Kingdom of God: and as to this World, the Gospel allows us to
put her away, Matthew. 5. 33. and c. 19. 9.

If instead of Allowance I had said Precept, I think I might do it with more
reason than St. Mark had to call the Bill of Divorcement (...), when it was
only an Indulgence wrested from Moses, because of the hard hearts of the Jews,
who otherwise might have murdered their Wives, if they had not had leave to
part with 'em. They were a stiff-necked people, as God himself often called
them, inclined to slaughter, says St. Chrysostom, filling their Houses with
Relations Blood, and sparing neither their Neighbors Families, nor their Own.
On this Consideration it was, we find that permission, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. When a man
has taken a wife and married her, and it come to pass she find no favor in
his eyes, because he has discovered some uncleanness in her; then let him
write her a bill of divorcement, and give it into her hand, and send her out of
his house -- If he did not like her, he might dismiss her. The ground of this
dislike is said to be some uncleanness, or matter of nakedness; which cannot
mean Adultery, because Adultery, if proved, was punished with Death, as I said;
and if only suspected, the guilt of it was determined by the Water of Iealousy,
Numb. 5. 27. The word therefore must signify something disagreeable in her
Person, Humor, or Actions, which the Husband could not digest, and thereupon
desired to be rid of her, as Mr. Ainsworth and A lapide conceive, who cites
Origin and Chrysostom for this Interpretation; and the Assembly of Divines
explain it of the Leprosy, or some other bodily disease and blemish; and in
general, any thing else to make the Husband loath her. This fully appears in
the practice of that people, who thought it a good Foundation to build a
Divorce on, if the Wife were sterilis, deformis, rixosa, morosa, barren, ugly,
peevish or disagreeable: and in the words of Siracides, Eccl. 25. 29. If she
did not go as her Husband would have her, he cut her off from his flesh, and
gave her a bill of divorce, and let her go: As it is said of Josephus, That he
dismissed his Wife, because he did not like her Manners.

This, doubtless, was straining the Point too far, to make the uncleanness
depend more on the imagination or prejudice of the Man, than on the Wife's ill
conduct, or whatever else of like nature she was chargeable with. Yet we have
not these Examples in Iudaea alone, but in other Countries also, where Men
pretended to more Civility and a better Temper. Q. Antistius, a Noble Roman,
Divorced his Wife for talking familiarly cum libertina. C. Sulpitius used his
Wife in the same manner, because she went abroad without her Veil. Another did
the same, propter praetextum sterilitatis, on pretense of Barrenness; which was
an Objection his Wife could not help, and not her fault, but misfortune. P.
Sempronius, because his Wife went to a Play without his knowledge, put her
away. Julius Caesar dealt so with Pompeia, Quia mala laboraret fama, being
suspected to have to do with Clodius. But M. Tullius acted on much slighter
Reasons; and, Levibus de causis Terentiam dimiserit. And Augustus outdid 'em
all in this matter, for he could except nothing against Scribonia, but that he
was weary of her. I omit Montanus, the Cataphrygae, Pepusiani, Ebionitae,
Massalini, and Others in Church History, who took the same liberty. And we read
of an Ecclesiastical Law in Wales, Circa 940, which made it a sufficient Cause
of Divorce, if a Woman Kissed any man besides her Husband.

In all these Cases, I must confess, the Conjugal-Knot was not looked on so
sacred and strong as it ought to have been: And therefore our Christian
Lawgiver corrects these Abuses, and puts every one in mind of the Nature of
Marriage, which out of two makes one; and so strictly unites 'em together, that
after this Union they are not two, but one Flesh. This was it God intended in
the first Institution, to which Christ called back the Jews; and then added,
What God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

But though this Language shows what a close conjunction Matrimony makes
between a Man and his Wife, which is not rashly, or, quacunque de causa (as the
Jews said and did) to be dissolved; yet plainly our Lord's reproof of the
Pharisees is not to be taken absolutely, as if nothing in the World could
disjoint these two persons; but relatively, and with respect to them he was
disputing with, and in opposition to those Reasons they went upon for their
frequent Divorces. I say unto you, Whoever shall put away his Wife, except it
be for Fornication, and shall marry another, commits Adultery, Matthew. 19. 9.
-- So that the instance excepted is a sufficient Cause of putting away the
Wife, though the Text will not admit of any other. For though a Rule or Law is
universally binding, where no Clause is inserted to provide for particular
Cases; yet whenever such provision is made, the exception is safe, and as
strong in its sense as the Law is in the other quite opposite to it; for so we
usually speak, Exceptio ponit contraria in casu excepto. And therefore though
in the general, it is not lawful upon any pretense to lay aside one's Wife,
saving for the cause of Fornication, Matthew. 5. 33. this saving infers, That
though no Reason besides this has force enough to dissolve Marriage
consummated, yet this must be allowed a sufficient Reason for it, or else the
Exception was in vain.

They say St. Mark and St. Luke have omitted this Exception, and thereby
signified the little Stress to be laid on it. But we answer with St. Augustine,
That the Four Evangelists do Mutuas operas tradere, and quod unus brevius and
obscurius posuit, illud alter suppleat and clarius explicet.
supply one another; and where one omits, the rest make it up to complete the
Gospel. St. Matthew is copious, and full in the Matters he treats of. St. Mark
(as St. Jerome calls his Book Epitomen Evangelii a Mathaeo scripti) giving only
an Abstract of St. Matthew, he industriously let go many particulars, which
however must not lose their Evidence, because he past 'em. This is the usual
way of Abbreviators. But then it cannot be imagined that Shorthand is
plainest, or best adapted to every Reader's capacity: Or that St. Mark should
speak more intelligibly without the Exception, than St. Matthew with it;
especially considering He was one of the Disciples present at this Discourse
with the Pharisees, and so had better opportunity to know his Master's meaning.
The Rule is, Pauciora exponi debent secundum plura, and regula generalis per
exceptionem alibi traditum est limitanda. And this shows, how S. Mark and S.
Luke are to be understood in this affair.

But for further light, let us reflect on the Occasion of these words, and
debate the Question in this short Dialogue between the Pharisees and Christ.

Pharisees. Is it lawful for a Man to put away his Wife for every Cause?


Christ. No; for Marriage is Copula indissolubilis, an indissoluble Tie; and by
it two are made one flesh.


Pharisees. Why did Moses then Command to give a Writing of Divorcement, and to
put her away? This proves it Lawful.


Christ. Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put
away your Wives; but from the beginning it was not so. You confound the Laws
concerning Marriage, or rather propose a Toleration instead of a Law. The
Question between us is not de lege Forensi, of a Municipal; but de lege Morali,
of a Moral Law; and concerning the Sense of the Institution of Marriage
immediately after the Creation. The former indeed permitted Divorce, because of
your Cruelty to your Wives; but still with respect to Conscience, you cannot
safely use that liberty, for it is a Sin against the latter Law; and be well
assured, that though Moses does not punish, yet God does not approve it.


Pharisees. Do you deny then all Causes of Divorce?


Christ. No; I except what the Law punishes, and ought to punish, as a thing in
its own Nature not to be reconciled to the notion of Marriage; I mean
Fornication, which makes it impossible for the Man and the Woman to continue
one Flesh any longer: And if at any time the Penalty of the Law be not exacted
in this Case, yet the Party guilty by that Act of Uncleanness voids the
Obligation, forfeits the Interest she had in her Husband, and by joining
herself to another, becomes Morally dead to him to whom she was united before.
So that, I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his Wife, except it be for
Fornication, and shall marry another, commitetth Adultery; and whosoever marries
her which is put away, does commit Adultery.


Can words be plainer? Nothing but Fornication can untie the Marriage-Knot, and
make Divorces innocent. Fornication therefore is a just Ground and sufficient
Warrant for so doing; or else what sense is there in these words? and what End
could Christ have in making the Exception? So that in this case, and upon this
account, whenever there is a Divorce, it is not Man, but God parts 'em. No;
Homo non separat, quos poena condemnat, quos reatus accusat, quos maleficium
coarctat. The same Authority which made 'em one flesh, dissolves the Union; and
because of Fornication, makes 'em two again.

It is said, Ex matrimonio duo sunt facti una caro: and the Insinuation is,
That nothing can divide'em, but that which disjoints Soul and Body, the Death
of either Party: And this is true in the main. But the Case of Adultery shakes
the Proposition; and the Wife who goes astray, by the Carnalis copula, becomes
one flesh with the Fornicator, as he that is joined to an Harlot is one body
with her, as St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 6. 16. So that the Vinculum conjugale is
hereby dissolved, because it is not to be conceived how She can be one with her
Husband, and with the Adulterer too, for the Apostles Reason immediately
following; wherein he asserts, that only two can be one flesh. I spoke in the
Actual Tense, and said, It is dissolved, though not literally done; but there
is the Cause of dissolving it; and if a Man will not use his Right, and lay
hold on the Forfeiture, it is his own fault, and he will be much to blame. I
call it his fault, because he who Celat crimen uxoris, conceals his Wife's
fault, makes himself Turpitudinis patronum, a Patron of her Lewdness: And
herein I am of St. Chrysostom's mind, or whoever else is the Author of the
imperfect Work; That as it is a cruel and wicked thing to put away a chaste
Wife, so he is a Fool that will keep an Whore.

An Husband may, if he please, Cedere de jure suo, and forgive an unclean Wife:
but Calvin's Judgment I take to be safer, To cleanse his House and Bed of so
gross a defilement, and be rid of her and her Sin together. And hence the word
repudium has its Name, Recusatio propter rem pudendam; and I think a Man ought
to be very careful how he is accessory to any thing that will bring him shame.
This is one Reason they usually give for Divorce; namely, To secure our own
Integrity and Honor, and keep off the suspicion of being privy to the Sin. And
I must not omit another of very great Consequence, and that is, prolis
incertitudo, uncertainty of the Issue; which, without a Contradiction, brings
Bastardy into Wedlock; because though it be a Rule in Law, that, Pater est quem
nuptiae demonstrant, He is the Father who is Husband to the Wife; yet in foro
Conscientiae, the Court of Conscience, perhaps the Man, to be sure the Wife, is
convinced to the contrary: And for my part, to speak in the way of Morality and
Religion, I find no difference between these two Bastards, but that the one is
really, and the other legally so. And on this account it is, That although the
Sin of Adultery is very great both in the Husband and the Wife; Quantum ad
bonum prolis plus peccat adulterium uxoris.
yet, as to the Issue, the Wife is much more blameable: And it must be
considered, that the Wife's Incontinency ruins the Family of her Husband, who
leaves in his spurious Issue nothing but the Name, and conveys to Posterity not
one drop of his Ancestors Blood to continue the Relation between 'em.

We may observe at the Office of Matrimony, in the Exhortation to the Young
Couple, the Minister requires and charges them both, That if either of 'em know
any Impediment why they may not be lawfully joined together, that they confess
it: For, says he, be well assured, that so many as are coupled together
otherwise than God's Word does allow, are not joined together by God, neither
is their Matrimony lawful. So that in Marriage there is a conditional Contract;
Neither does God so join the Man and the Woman together, but that they may be
parted, if there be a just Reason for it; and in case of such Impediment, their
Matrimony is not Lawful. Fornication, I confess, is in this Question a
subsequent Act, and is not called an Impediment; but they differ only in point
of Time; and if the Impediment keeps the Knot untied, notwithstanding the
Ceremony is passed upon them; why, if once effectually tied, should not
Adultery have the same strength to undo it? The Tie consists in this, That they
two are made one flesh: But if the Adulteress alters the property, and becomes
the Flesh of another Man, in this case she dissolves the Bond with respect to
her Husband, and is no longer one flesh with him. Solvitur carnis unitas,
nefarie rumpitur conjugalis fides and peccatur contra ipsa matrimonii
substantialia. So that if the Gospel had been silent in this Cause of Divorce,
yet not forbidding it, it must be understood from the very Nature of the
Conjugal-Union, which supposes neither Party alienated in Affection or Duty, as
one of them must needs be in case of Fornication. This Union, I say, being the
very Essence of Matrimony, the Name is lost, when an Act is done which divides
one Party from the other. However, the Gospel of Christ does allow it, and lays
as great a stress on it, as the Church can on any other Impediment whatever;
which being proved, makes the Matrimony unlawful.

If it be Objected, That the mutual Troth given each to the other, before the
Minister, runs in this Form of Obligation, That the Husband takes the Wife, and
the Wife the Husband, for better, for worse, till Death parts them.

We Answer: 1. These words, for better, for worse, do not imply an irreligious
or immoral Sense, (for this amounts to such an Impediment as our Church
proposes to make Marriage unlawful;) but their meaning is determined by the
following Clauses, For richer, for poorer, in sickness, and in health. Si sit
jurgiosa, petulans, prodiga, rustica, ebria, deformis, stulta, and aliis mill
vitiis molesta.
If she be a scold, peevish, prodigal, clownish, drunken, ugly, a fool,
troubled with a thousand such defects; which are very ill qualities, and such
as makes Solomon confess, That it is better to dwell in the Wilderness, than
with a contentious, angry Woman, Prove. 22. 19. Si uxor sit sterilis, debilis,
caeca vel clauda, vel surda, vel siquid aliud cogitari potest, excepta
fornicatione.
If the Wife be barren, sickly, blind, lame, or deaf; or if you can think of
any thing else, says St. Augustine, except Fornication. And accordingly the
Rule of the Law is, Fortuna afflicta, si absit culpa, patienter in conjugio
ferenda est.
Adverse fortune, if there be no fault, is patiently to be born in Matrimony.
And so Aristotle concurs in his Oeconomicks, and says, It becomes a Wife to
acquit her self well toward her Husband, not only in a good, but a bad
fortune: and should his Estate suffer by ill chance or mismanagement, or his
body by sickness, or his mind by phrenzy, she is to bear the affliction
cheerfully, and retain the same respect and affection she had for him before.
And the Rule in this Case is, Quod semel placuit, displicere non potest;
meaning, non debet.

2. Till Death us do part. Does not conclude a simple Obligation, from which
there is no release, until Death makes it; because the Lord Christ pronounces
Fornication to be a sufficient reason to break the Bond, and dismiss the Wife,
if she be found guilty; but refers to the Qualities or Circumstances of the
Wife in the words before; which though bad enough, are no legal incapacities
for Cohabitation; neither is the Wife thereupon to be discharged from her
Husband without her own consent, who either must keep her at home, or otherwise
provide for her. Besides, This period of the Obligation is grounded on the
antecedent Supposition, That the Woman forsakes all other Men, and keeps only
to her Husband as long as they both shall live. And this Promise being
observed, the Bond is not cancelled till Death does it. But if the Wife
forsakes her Husband, and keeps company with others, the Condition is broken,
and the Motive ceases on which he married her. For the Condition of this solemn
Engagement was, That She forsake the rest of Men, and be from thence-forward
entirely his own.

Lastly, The Marriage-Vow, however worded, is to be taken according to God's
holy Ordinance: But the Ordinance of God, with respect to Marriage, is, To make
of two one flesh; yet with this Caution and Proviso, That there be no
Fornication; for if so, the innocent Husband has a power left him to put her
away. So that the same Ordinance which makes the Obligation, allowing this
liberty, Though where Fornication interposes not, the Husband and Wife are to
keep close to one another as long as they live; yet where Either transgress,
there is a remedy left; and if the Woman will offend, (and perhaps in a daring,
bold way, void of all shame, and in defiance of her Husband) without doubt the
Husband in this Case may lay hold of the Forfeiture, and as soon as he pleases
send her away.

And truly otherwise the Case of the Husband would be very hard, Quod inducitur
in favorem alicujus, should, facere ei prejudicium, as they say: That a thing
intended to ease the burden, should add more weight to it. The Causes for which
Matrimony was ordained, we have in the Exhortation to the Couple going to be
married, which are designed for the Comforts of life, and not to be plagues to
one another. We do not serve an hard Master. He considered our condition, and
of himself said, Genesis 2. 18.
It is not good for man to be alone, I will make him an help-meet for him. This
was the Motive he had to produce Woman, and did it out of him who was to be her
Husband, to let her see how near the Relation is between 'em, and how she ought
to cleave to him. This he did as Creator; and then as a Lawgiver, he
instituted Marriage to confirm their mutual Indearment; that as in their
Original they had one beginning, Ver. 23.
[Bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, says Adam;] so the Ordinance was
contrived to unite 'em by Consent, and engage 'em into a voluntary Promise to
love each the other. And because he foresaw it would sometimes otherwise
happen, and there be a Violation of Faith, though never so solemnly given, he
appointed a remedy, a severe, terrible one, no less than Death it self, to
signify the Violence done this Union of two Bodies, which he would have us look
upon full as strict as between Body and Soul, not to be divided till Death
parts 'em. It Is true, the Clemency of the Gospel interprets the Punishment now
into no more than putting her away; but then this is a Moral death to the
guilty Party, and it lies in his Breast who is thereby injured to put it in
Execution, as soon as he shall think fit to do it.

Ay, Obj.
but this rigor may be thought not to consist with the Patience and Sweetness
of our Christian Profession.

I must acknowledge, Ans.
That Charity suffers long, and is kind: But the same Charity does not behave
it self unseemly. Non patrat quod pudendum est, says the Syriack, (...), does
nothing foede or inhoneste, as certainly a Man must do who keeps an Adulteress
in his Bosom, and by a wicked Indulgence contributes to her Sin.

The Instance of the Adulteress, whom Christ no otherwise punishes than by
bidding her go and sin no more, John 8. is answered by that Rule of the Law,
Quod alicui gratiose conceditur non debet ab aliis in exemplum trahi.
That an Act of Grace ought to be no Example to Criminals: Besides, if this
passage be well considered, What Christ did was as much an Act of Justice as
Mercy; and though he did not condemn, yet he did not expressly forgive her.
Neither do I condemn thee: Nor indeed had he reason to do it, for he acted
judicially in this case; and if the Evidence withdrew, and would have no hand
in the stoning of her, what could he do otherwise than to discharge her?
discharge at least the Punishment at this time, though he did not fully and
simply absolve her. At most this treating her with so much Clemency, only
inclines Husbands to be merciful and tender, but obliges not: And though Men
may forgive this Offense in their Wives, if they see good; yet if upon Reasons
of Discretion and Safety they do not, it is no Sin at all, no pinching upon
Conscience to use 'em as they deserve; and in that manner the Gospel allows it.

That David took Michol again, though married to another Man, is nothing to the
purpose; because this was no Adultery in Michol, who had no design to leave
David; but being young, she was forced to accept of Phalti, the Son of Laish,
at the Command of Saul, her Father and King. And therefore David considered
this Act in her (as indeed it was) a matter of Constraint; and so without much
scruple receives her again.

These and some other such Reasons St. Augustine presses, and says, Adulteram
nec posse nec debere repudiari, sed partem innocentem de jure teneri ad
reconciliationem. The truth is, St. Augustine was a very compassionate and
tenderhearted Man, sensible of his own faults, and ready to retract 'em; so
that he was naturally led to argue for Reconciliation on any occasion, and
almost on any terms; neither could he tell how to put off a Penitent without
forgiving him. And it is good Doctrine in the general: But his Master St.
Ambrose never taught him this Lesson in particular. For as this Father asserts
three Causes for a Man to part with his Wife, so he makes the first and
principal of 'em to be Fornication. St. Jerome, who, as he could not agree with
St. Augustine in other Points, so he is directly opposite to him in this; and
avouches, Adulteram nec posse nec debere retineri, That an Adulteress neither
can nor ought to be taken again. Nay, he goes farther, and says, That not only
ubicunque est fornicatio, where there is Fornication, but fornicationis
suspicio, suspicion of it, Uxor dimittitur, the Wife is to be dismissed.

And as for Reconciliation, I think Bucer's Conclusion unanswerable; Who
reflecting on that Law in Deuteronomy 24. 2, 3. concerning the Bill of
Divorcement, whereby leave is given the Woman to marry another -- If this
Second Husband should either die, or hate her likewise, and so give her another
Bill, the First Husband must never receive her again, for this reason, Because
she is defiled -- and that is an abomination unto the Lord, v. 4. Now, as that
Author argues, if she be polluta, who was not only married to this second Man,
but did it by her former Husband's permission, and was justified in it by Law:
If, I say, notwithstanding this Allowance, she was so polluted by this Second
Marriage, as to be made ever incapable of being re-married to the First
Husband; much more polluted must that Woman be, who has committed Adultery
against both the Law, and her Husband's Will: and unfit is she either to be
retained, or in case of departure to be received again. No; David's Resolution
is a good Precedent in this Case: There shall no deceitful person dwell in mine
house; the party that tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight. I will not
dwell with vain persons, neither will I have fellowship with the deceitful. I
hate the Congregation of the wicked, and will not sit among the ungodly. And
all this not barely as a Duty, but in point of Safety; because evil
communications corrupt good manners; and though with the clean I may be clean,
yet with the froward I may learn frowardness. And therefore to secure our own
Innocence, we are bound to shun them who are Enemies to it.

But what says the Prophet? Obj.
Take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the Wife of
his youth; for the Lord God of Israel says, That he hates putting away, Mal.
2. 16, 17.

No doubt but God hates it, Ans.
when a Man deals perfide and inique with his Wife, and when he causelessly
leaves her, and not She him. Here was no crime of Adultery charged; no fault,
but that the Husband liked another better. As matters thus stood, no wonder is
it that God hated such putting away. God, who was a witness between him and his
Wife, v. 14. -- yet he ventures to break the Matrimonial-Covenant, made in the
Presence of God, who being a God of Judgment, he could not be thought to
delight in such a Man.

Well, the Apostle is express, Obj.
1 Cor. 7. 10, 11. Unto the married I command; yet not I, but the Lord; Let not
the Wife depart from the Husband, and let not the Husband put away his Wife --
And elsewhere he allows no remedy, no release but Death, Romans 7. 2, 3.

But as to the words of St. Paul in those two Epistles, Ans.
answer is made, That to speak of Matrimony in it self, or as it is in its
first Institution; and as it is abused, or with respect to those Crimes
directly against it, is very different. It is one thing to propose what is
regularly and ordinarily done, according to Law; and another, what happens in
extraordinary Cases. What the Apostle says in these Chapters, is to be taken
regulariter, and not in casu. The ordinary Tie of Marriage lasts unto Death;
and then, and not till then, it is dissolved. But Fornication or Adultery
dissolves it sooner. So that the Holy Man discoursing here of the Nature of
Marriage, and not of the Nature or Causes of Divorce, is not engaged in this
dispute; and citing him on this account, makes little to the purpose. The
Interpreters of these Passages deliver themselves warily: Let not the Husband
put away his Wife -- What? Upon no account? Yes, but let it not be done excepta
causa fornicationis, say Primasius and St. Ambrose. Non sine justa causa, says
Chemnitius, who supposes an Ellipsis in the Expression. Nisi sit legitima
causa; so Marlorate. But when there is just cause, that is, in case of
Fornication: Hammond. It must not be ultro suoque arbitrio, and without
legitima praeeunte cognitione, etc. says Beza; not arbitrarily, and without a
lawful provocation. And this Author calls them ineptissimos, who from this Text
would infer, That there can be no Divorce, no, not in the Case of Fornication;
Contra manifest expressam a Christo adulterii exceptionem, are his words. Non
sine gravi and justa causa; A lapide. Exceptionem quam Mathaeo referente
dominus expressit -- hic subintelligas; Estius. The Assembly of Divines name
not the Exception, but they refer to St. Matthew, both as to the Chapters and
Verses, where notice is taken of it; and their meaning is, That we are to
supply from thence what is omitted by St. Paul. Calvin indeed wonders why he
did not except Adulterii causam; but what Reason was there for him to mention
the Exception, when the drift of his discourse did not lead him to it?

But Marriage is said to signify to us the mystical Union between Christ and
his Church. Obj.
Now as there are many Offenses done against him, which he forgives his Spouse;
so ought we to be Followers of Christ, and of God, as dear Children: Be
merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful; and we ought to forgive, as we
desire to be forgiven. Christianus est Christi imitator. Aug.

And questionless this Divine Example is good, Ans.
and we ought to imitate it. Ut sicut ille agit cum Ecclesia, sic nos agamus,
cum conjuge; though the Case be different, yet God forbid we should do
otherwise. But be it remembered, That though God is patient, gracious, and kind,
yet he has been provoked to give a Bill of Divorcement to his best-beloved
People. And of this the Jewish Nation is an undeniable proof, with the Seven
famous Churches of Asia, which have their Candlesticks removed, and are at this
day overwhelmed with Mohammedan Darkness. God's forbearance teaches us to do as
He did, bear with many faults; but thorough-Apostacy is too black a Sin to
expect so much Tenderness; and Adultery too gross to be pardoned at all, or
easily done.

I am no more for this kind of Separation, quacunque de causa, after the
practice of the Jews, than I am for falling under the Censure of Mecaenas, who
was taxed of very great Inconstancy and Lightness, because he parted with his
Wife more than once, and received her again. For if her Faults were small, the
Usage was too severe to turn her out of doors; but if so notorious as to oblige
him to it, 'twas an unaccountable Fondness and Easiness to re-admit her.

The Law takes notice of many Causes of Divorce, besides the gross One of
Adultery. Consorting with, or entertaining Wanton Company against the Advice
and Will of the Husband; Practicing, or Consenting to Practices against his
Life or Health; Lying abroad without his Knowledge, and without any just Reason
for it; Going against his Will to Plays, or other suspected Places; Morbus
contagiosus; and some other like Causes, which must needs make a Virtuous Man
very uneasy, his Life comfortless, and his Expenses perhaps beyond his Ability.
Any of these are great Provocations. All of 'em together who can bear?
Especially when Adultery consummates 'em; Adultery publicly known, talked of,
and made the common Subject in every private House and Tavern; and, which is a
very sad Aggravation, when the concerned Party glories in the Lewdness, and
with the Harlot in Scripture, wipes her Mouth, and says, All is well. The Sin
in secret is bad enough; And if a Man be so good a Christian, has so much
Affection and Patience as to caution, entreat, admonish, earnestly seek and
persuade Amendment, and all to no effect, but the Wife will run on in her ill
way; and not only so, but laugh at, flout and threaten her Husband, and
(whereby her Tongue is indicium malae mentis) maintain Doctrines which
necessarily call his Safety into question, in case he uses his Authority and
Power to reclaim her at home; and, in a word, have so little regard to her
self, or him, as to make the Crime become a scandal to all the World; What then
remains in this Extremity, but to take the Example of God; Let her be gone;
give her wholly up to her vile Affections, the Lusts of her heart, and all
manner of Uncleanness.

Yet I am not against Repentance. I remember what the Church says, Vehementer
optamus ut integra persona damnatae veniam indulgeat and illam ad se rursus
assumat.
We earnestly wish that the innocent person would pardon the guilty, and take
her to him again: but then it must be Si credibilis melioris vitae spes
ostendatur.
when there are apparent hopes of amendment. But, alas! how will this appear?
Can a few words, extorted it may be from Necessity, or the importunity of
Friends, be called Indications or Expressions of a penitent Heart? Res magis
intuenda quam verba; Repentance is grief of mind for Offenses committed: It
rigorously chastises what is done amiss: It always punishes the crime; and
hence it derives its name: Poenitentia a poena, or qua si punientia; and if it
be sincere, Aut aequat crimina, aut excedit.
either equals or exceeds the crime, says St. Ierom. The Publican smote on his
breast, and said, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner. And the true sign of
Repentance is a thorough change, a real reformation. I take all this to be a
work of Time. Septem annis poenitentiam agat. Council. Ancyr. and Wormac.
The Council of Ancyra determined Seven years Repentance: The Thief indeed did
it in a few moments; but his life was short, and on that account the Divine
Grace the stronger.

Besides, Restitution is one necessary part of Repentance. But how? which way
shall this be expected? when, as St. Ierom speaks, it must puzzle Omnipotence
to bring it about; and though God can do every thing, I am bold to say it, He
cannot restore Chastity when a Woman has lost it: And who will go about to
propose an Equivalent for an inestimable Loss, never to be recovered?

You will say, We are to accept such Restitution as the nature of the thing
will bear; that is, an hearty sorrow for what is past, and amendment for the
future. Neither do I deny, but these are good fruits or proofs of Repentance,
and may be a means to save the Sinner in the other World, yet are not a proper
Restitution in this. The Murderer, the Traitor, the Felon, has the same Plea;
yet they must bear the present Punishment of the Law, and suffer now, though
saved hereafter.

But how shall an Husband be convinced of such a Repentance? Semel malus semper
presumitur esse malus.
Once bad, and ever so, say the Lawyers upon very good grounds. For though it
be possible for a Man or a Woman to become penitent, yet we ought to have as
good Proofs to demonstrate their Repentance, as we had Overt-Acts before of
their being Criminals.

For my part therefore, I think Periculosum post commissum adulterium inter
conjuges tentare reconciliationem.
it is dangerous to attempt Reconciliation after Adultery: And one Reason is,
Because Vulnus subinde recrudescit.
the Wound is apt to bleed afresh; and the Wound ought to be well and leisurely
healed, before we hazard the rubbing it. The innocent Party may perhaps be
thought hard of in this Case: But P. Aemilius's Answer ought to satisfy
unbiased People; who being found fault with for putting away a beautiful Wife,
excused himself thus: Neminem scire qua in part calceus licet speciosus foret,
suos premeret digitos.
No body knows where the shoe pinches but he that wears it. It appears by
this, That the crime of his Wife was somewhat secret: and as such, I believe it
one Testimony of his Kindness to her, That he rather suffered the People's
Censure, than in his own Vindication to expose her Nakedness. And in other
Cases, where the Publication is made already by her own folly, I take it for a
piece of Affection in the Husband not to divulge it further, or load the Vice
by being particular in all the Aggravations of it.

And if at length the Husband will be melted, and is contented to pass by all
Provocations, he may, and there is no injury done him: Scienti and consentienti
non fit injuria. But it behooves him to consider well what he is about; He ought
to enquire, Whether it will consist with his Happiness, his Reputation, and
other Conveniences of Life to do so: Whether it be agreeable to Conscience, and
the Duty he owes God and Religion, to give this countenance to a Crime of that
nature; and whether he can find any great difference between cohabiting with an
Adulteress, or an Harlot who is vicious through Necessity, and has not Bread to
eat without it.

I have avoided the Citation of Councils and Laws, to keep my self from being
tedious. But, in short, some of 'em allow second Marriage upon the
Reasonableness of the thing it self, which St. Paul favors, 1 Cor. 7. 9.
Others reject it for its ill consequence, as tempting people to be weary of the
first: which indeed is no reason; for a distinction is to be made between a
real and a feigned Cause; and if, on this Indulgence, Men may be tempted to
bribe Evidence against their Wives in order to be rid of 'em, so may such
Evidence take away Lives and Estates; and the Danger is full as great in the
one Case, as in the other. However, for putting away, they generally agree in
that; and where we read some Canons seemingly against it, they must be
understood absque causa, and in unlawful Cases: As Canon 48. Apostolorum; which
Excommunicates him who puts away his Wife: This is meant, says Balsamon, if it
be done (...), without Cause. And Zonaras Expounding the same Canon, has these
words, Maritus pollutam ex sedibus suis excludet.
Let the Husband send her packing.

And for Fathers, they consider Fornication a just Cause to dismiss one's Wife:
And those who oppose second Marriage, do it on a principle of Tenderness, and
to leave room for a Reconciliation after a serious and approved Repentance;
which if the Husband, for Reasons best known to himself (and of which he is the
proper Judge) will not accept, Utitur suo jure, and nulli facit injuriam.
Let him use his right, for he does no one wrong in it: And though thereby he
may seem unkind to his polluted Wife, yet he cannot be said to be unjust to
her, but she has been so to her self and him.

And this principle of Tenderness I take to be the Motive for those
Distinctions or Degrees of Divorce; a thoro, a mensa and thoro, a vinculo
matrimonii; the two first being intended in a way of opportunity to make their
peace with one another; whereas the last bars the door, and parts 'em both for
ever.

FINIS.

