A TESTIMONY Concerning the LIFE and DEATH OF Jane Whitehead, THAT Faithful
Servant and Handmaid of the Lord, who was a Mother in Israel, and her Memorial
is blessed of the Lord for ever. Concerning her Sufferings, and her
Faithfulness in her Testimony in Sufferings. With an Exhortation to turn to the
True Light, in a few words to all Backsliders from the Truth, by a Lover of
Truth and Righteousness, who has a Testimony against Oppression, Cruelty, and
Persecution, wheresoever I see it appear against the Innocent. T. T.

Thus says the Lord by his Servant the Prophet, Woe to them that decree
Unrighteous decrees, and write grievousness, which they prescribe to turn aside
the needy from Judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people,
that Widows may be their Prey, and that they may rob the Fatherless: But what
will you do in the day of Visitation, and in the Desolation that shall come
from far? To whom will you fly for help, or where will you leave your glory?

Isaiah 10.1, 2, 3. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest
from their labors, and their Works do follow them,

Rev. 13.14. London, Printed in the Year 1676.

A Testimony concerning Jane Whitehead, Wife of Thomas Whitehead of South
Cadbury in the County of Summerset, late Deceased; whose former name was Jane
Waugh, that faithful Servant and Handmaid of the Lord, whose Memorial is
blessed for ever, because of her uprightness and stedfastness of heart and mind
unto the Lord from the first to the last, who began in the true Faith, and kept
in it unto the end of her days, by which she obtained Victory, and was made
more than a Conqueror (through Christ that loved her) over all her enemies,
both within, and without, and has now finished her course in this world, and
has obtained an entrance into that everlasting glorious Rest, heavenly
Felicity, and endless Consolation that the Lord has prepared for them that
truly love him and keep their Confidence in him, and hold fast their Integrity
for him unto the end of their days, as this true and faithful follower of the
Lamb has done, and now has received of the Lord an immortal Crown of Life and
endless Glory, as the Reward of her Faithfulness from the hand of a tender
Father, who never fails any that truly trust in him, but is an exceeding great
Reward unto all the Upright in Heart.
THis Testimony is sealed in my heart by the Spirit of the Lord concerning the
everlasting Happiness, and endless Well-being of this my dear Friend and Sister
in the Heavenly Relation, unto whom my Soul was, and is truly united in the
Unity of the Spirit in the blessed Covenant of life in which in the remembrance
of her faithfulness my soul is truly refreshed: Therefore we have good cause to
say that the Memorial of the Righteous is blessed, as one said in the days of
old, that They shall be had in everlasting remembrance among those that fear
the Lord: So my dear Sister, the living remembrance of thee has often tendered
my heart before the Lord in the consideration of his goodness, and the
largeness of his Mercy in thy Preservation, who has kept thee by his mighty
power in faithfulness to himself in thy holy Testimony through all thy Trials
and Exercises that thou have met withal from a cruel and hard hearted
Generation; cruel Mockings, Scoffings, and Scorning, Beating and Reviling, and
cruel Imprisonments in nasty places in the cold of Winter, and heat of Summer.

Thus, thou Renowned of the Lord, did the cruel hearted deal with thee for thy
blessed Testimony sake, that thou brought among them in the Love of God, and
in love to their own poor souls; but they rejecting their own mercies, thus
requited thee, and evily entreated thee for thy love to them; but thy reward is
with the Lord for ever, who has blessed thy Labor and Travel, and made it
very effectual and prosperous, and very acceptable unto the honest hearted,
that were seeking after the Lord, who received thy blessed Testimony with
gladness of heart; and the Lord blessed thy Labors in his Work and Service,
who endued thee with power from on high, to speak a word in season to several
States and Conditions, and to reach the Witness of God in their Consciences, to
the awakening many to righteousness, and the blessed power of the mighty God
was with thee, and his living Presence did sweetly accompany thee in that
blessed work which he called thee to, in which thou wast faithful and diligent,
according to the measure of Grace committed to thee.

Oh thou dearest unto me of many, and never to be forgotten by me because of
thy spotless life, who has kept thy Garments clean from all manner of
defilements and spots of the wicked World! Oh thou blessed of the Lord, how
often has my heart been broken into tears of true sorrow because of the want
of thee, as to thy bodily presence, because of thy tender care over the Family
of God; for true Uprightness is very precious to me amongst those that have a
Testimony for the Lord, which is the garment of Praise; and because of thy
Uprightness was my heart joined unto thee, my dear Friend, and well beloved in
the Lord, who has now taken thee away out of the reach of all thy enemies,
thou true Jew, whose praise is not of men but of God; who did not appear
outwardly beyond what the Lord had made thee by the virtue of his Divine power,
and sanctifying Spirit, that has wrought mightily in thee, to the effecting
the work of Mortification and Humiliation, and true Self-denial in thee, and
has filled thy heart with his Love, and with the virtue of his blessed Life,
by which thou wast prepared and made a vessel of Honor in the hand of the
Lord, the sweet savor of whose precious Life abides with us, though thou art
gone from us as to the outward enjoyment of thee; but thy life, thy innocent
life is with us, and will remain with us for ever, when all the enemies that
hate it, and have hunted after it to destroy it, shall not be able to stand
before it; for it will outlive all the wrath of man, and all the fury of the
wicked, and is out of the reach of every envious mind, which length of time
shall never wear out, because it is everlasting in which thy dwelling place is,
and will be for ever, thou dear Servant and Child of the most high God, who
has blessed thee, and will not have thy Uprightness be forgotten, nor thy
Faithfulness buried in the Grave of Oblivion; for the Lord God of Life by the
word of his power has often pressed me in Spirit very weightily, and his
living Word has run through my heart in the remembrance of thee, for
Righteousness must not be forgotten, nor her Uprightness and Faithfulness be
buried in the Grave of Oblivion; for the Righteousness of the Righteous shall
be upon them, and they shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, and their
Memorial is and shall be blessed now hence forth and for ever.

Now that all People might know, unto whom this may come, that it is not in any
vain boasting or exaltation of any created excellency, or worthiness of any
mortal Creature that I thus write, but it is purely in honor to that
excellency and comeliness, beauty and worthyness of that blessed Life of
Righteousness in Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, wherewith he has
beautified his people; by the virtue of whose blessed power, and weighty Life,
I am constrained to give this Testimony for my dear deceased Friend, of whom I
have had good knowledge for fourteen years or more, who came into this County
in the Service of the Lord, an innocent Woman with her, one Frances Raunce,
that then was her Companion, who is entered into rest with her, and was a
fellow Labourer with her in the same Work and Service, and the power and
presence of the Lord was with them, who blessed their labor to the confirming
of many in the truth, and to the strengthening of the Weak, and the comforting
of the upright in heart, who were refreshed by them through the blessed power
and holy presence of the Lord which did accompany them, which was about
fourteen years ago; they traveled together, and now have their reward together
with joy in the Lord: J. R. was Wife to John R. of High-wickham, a Virtuous
Woman that feared God in her day; she dyed some years before J. W. and I can
truly say, that in all this time I never knew any evil by her neither in word
nor deed, nor never heard of any one that could justly charge her with any
unrighteousness although she had many enemies, yet it was for Righteousness
sake, and not for evil doing, but because she bore a Testimony against the
World, that the deeds thereof are evil, therefore the world hated her, and rise
up against her to persecute her, which she has received at their hands with
Patience and Meekness, truly desiring the Welfare of her Enemies, that they
might come to Repentance and amendment of Life, that they might find Mercy with
the Lord, so that their Souls might be saved from the wrath that is to come
upon all that rebel against the Light, and are enemies to the Cross of Christ,
and are haters of those which are good, and persecutors of them that truly fear
God, and live in obedience to his pure Law that is written in their hearts, and
are led by the Spirit which he has put into their inward parts, such who love
his blessed appearance in the bright shining of his heavenly divine Light to
the opening of their understandings, and making known the Mysteries of his
Kingdom unto them; I say, those that hate such, and rise up against them to
persecute them, the Lord will plead with them, and will pour out of his
Judgments, and Wrath, and Vengeance upon them, in his own season, as he has
done upon some of the Persecuters of this innocent Lamb beforementioned, whom
the Lord has taken away out of their reach, and has received up into Glory,
of whom that ungodly Generation was not worthy, because of their hard
heartedness toward her, and cruel dealings with her, as in the following
Relation may be specifyed more fully.

In the year 1655. the said Jane Waugh, an innocent Woman that truly feared
God, who in obedience to him came out of her own Country from the County of
Westmoreland, her Relations living at Hutton in the same County, whom she left
in obedience to the Lord, to travel in his Service, and to do his holy Will
wheresoever he was pleased to order her by the Word of his Power to bear
Witness against the false ways and Worships of the World, amongst whom for her
Testimony she received many reproachful Revilings, and Abuses, and Smitings
with the Fists of Wickedness, as many can witness who are yet alive in and
about Banbury in Oxfordshire; and in the year beforementioned, she came to
Banbury in Oxfordshire to visit her imprisoned Friend Anne Audtand, an innocent
Woman that feared the Lord, who was a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus, and
the Word of God; and when she came to that Town, she beholding their Cruelty,
Wickedness, and Hardheartedness, she bearing witness for the Truth, and against
their Wickedness, she was taken and brought before the Magistrates, one John
Astin Mayor, and William Allen Justice of the Peace, so called; who when they
had examined her, sent her to Prison, though no evil could be charged against
her, where she suffered five weeks Imprisonment, and then released her for that
time.

But not long after she came to Banbury again, and as she was with a Friend to
write her a Letter, the Magistrates hearing of her, being moved with envy to
Persecution, sent for her to be brought before them, who being bent to do
Wickly by her, tendered the Oath of Abjuration to her to ensnare her, who in
obedience to the Lord Jesus Christ, that says Swear not at all, refused it,
for which those cruel hearted men sent her to Prison again, where she suffered
twelve months Imprisonment, the cold Winter season in a low damp nasty place,
that sometimes would be over the shoes in water, as I have heard her often
say: Such was their Cruelty, and Hardheartedness to this tender Woman that
truly feared God, and bore a living Testimony for his holy Name, through all
these Cruelties and Sufferings which she received at their hands with Patience;
but those abuses brought her tender body into Weakness, which she has been
attended with for several years before her departure, through the Cruelty of
her Oppressors, who were not yet satisfied in their Cruelty toward her, though
no evil could be charged against her from the first to the last. When she came
to Banbury again in the fourth month, 1662. where she was at a Meeting with the
people of God, called Quakers, to wait upon the Lord in his Fear; for which she
was taken and brought before the Magistrates, one Thomas Robbins Mayor, and
William Wheatly Justice, and by them unjustly committed to that nasty Prison
again, where she suffered three months more, by the wicked Oppressors of
Banbury, which she bore all patiently, and never was slack in her Testimony,
but was bold for the Lord, and his holy Truth, notwitstanding all the rage of
the Wicked; for she would not defile her Conscience for fear of the Wrath of
man, but she feared the living God, and committed her innocent cause unto the
Lord, who pleaded for her in his own season with her Enemies and Oppressors, in
taking Vegeance upon them, by smiting some of them in an eminent manner; one of
them was suddenly smitten when he was going from home, so that he was not able
to help himself, which he never recovered till he dyed; and others of them did
the Lords hand follow till the Family of them was laid waste; so as it was said
in the days of old, the Lord shall appear to render Vengeance on them that
trouble you, but to you that are troubled, peace and rest with the Lord; so
notwithstanding all her trouble, her Soul now rests in peace with the Lord
for ever and ever.

All this was when she was unmarried that she suffered at Banbury, and after
this was over, and she at liberty again, she traveled through these parts, and
went down Westward, where the Lord gave her to an honest man, and she became
his Wife, and they lived very comfortably together, and had five goodly
Children after they were married together, which she has left behind her with
her true Husband, which has given a good Testimony for her of her
faithfulness, and also of her Sufferings whilst she was his Wife, for she was
not then free from Sufferings, because she continued in Faithfulness to the
same blessed Testimony, for which the Enemies of the Lord rose up against her
in the beginning, for she bore Witness to the Light of Christ Jesus, that he is
the true Light that lights every man that comes into the World, according to
John's Testimony, that was a man sent from God, John 1.9. to bear Witness to
the same blessed Light, who also said of him, in him was Life, and the Life was
the Light of men, so it is the Light of Jesus that is the Light of men; and
this is the Testimony that John bare of the true Light, which the World that
lies in Wickedness Hates and Persecutes, Revises and Villifies, the blind
Formal Professors, as well as open Profane, as the Jews and Pharisees. did by
our Lord and Master when he was visible upon the earth, who wickedly said he
had a Devil, and that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, so
the Servant is not greater than his Lord, as he said at that day; and the holy
Scripture bears Testimony of the same.

Here follows her HVSBAND'S Testimony concerning her.
AS concerning Jane Whitehead, my dear Deceased Wife, whose Maiden Name was
Jane Wough, this is my Testimony concerning her, That she was one that feared
God, and wrought Righteousness and did in all things both in her Life and
Conversation, endeavor to keep a Conscience void of Offense toward God, and
all men; and did endeavor, as much as in her lay, according to the Gift of
Grace given unto her, to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace,
with all the Faithful; yet still nevertheless when she did apprehend any
thing to be amiss among those that did Profess the Truth, she would in much
uprightness of heart, without Partiality, deal plainly with them, as is well
known by Friends in those parts; and when she had a sense upon her of that
Spirits entrance upon any, under any pretense or likeness whatsoever, that
would sovv Discord, and break the Concord and Unity among Friends and
Brethren: With what grief of heart and Soul have I heard her complain of it,
and seen her with Diligence endeavor to stop it! For truly it was the great
joy of her Heart, and Comfort of her Soul to be in the Company of
Upright-hearted Friends, and to keep in the Fellowship of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus, with the Brotherhood: And she was alvvayes of an open heart to
Distribute to the Necessity of the Saints; and was ready, according to Truth's
Requirings, to serve the Truth and Friends in any thing she could, and never
thought she could do too much for those that truly feared and served the Lord
in their Generation; And she being called forth near about twenty years ago,
and a necessity laid upon her from the Lord to bear VVitness unto the true
Light that lights every man that comes into the World, which had shined in
her Heart and Conscience, unto which Call of the Lord she became obedient, and
gave her Back to the Smiter, and her Cheek to them that have not spared their
Cruelty toward her; Yea she took up the Cross, and despised the Shame, for
the Joy that was set before her; For I have heard her sometimes say, that if
it might have stood with the Will of Lord, she could have rather chosed to
dye, than to have undergone those things that lay upon her; for she was many
times called forth after her first Convincement, to bear VVitness in the
Steeple Houses to the Truth, against their False Worship, where she met with
much hard Usage from the Savage People, and a great deal of Reproach from her
Relations and Acquaintance, beyond what may easily be expressed, though
afterward, they seeing her Integrity, became very Loving and Respective to
her.

And she was sometimes cast into Prisons, where she was faithful in her
Testimony, till the Lord made way for her Deliverance; And many times, as she
Traveled in obedience to the Lord on Truths account, she suffered much
Hardship in the outvvard, a great deal of hard Travel, Hunger and Cold; yet she
said in much tenderness of heart, and in the sense of the Lords Love, that he
could make a Cup of cold Water as good to her as Wine; and she said at that
time, it was as precious unto her, although it was a time unto her in which
she Traveled as in a Land unsown; yet blessed be the Lord, the effects of her
Labor, Travels, and Sufferings have in many places of this Nation been seen,
she having been an Instrument in the hand of the Lord, for the Convincing and
turning of many to Righteousness, from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power
to God; to which end the Lord endued her with his Heavenly Gift, and made her
Ministry effectual, as many can bear Witness for her, though of her self she
was weak and could do nothing, yet had Faith in Christ, who enabling her, could
do all things that he called her unto: And since she came into these parts, the
Lord has made her Ministry very effectual, through his Heavenly Gift, to the
Establishing, and Confirming of many in Gods everlasting Truth, and his
Heavenly Presence did much accompany her, and often fill her Vessel, and his
Power was in her Ministry, that the Weak were Comforted, and those that were
ready to Faint, were abundantly refreshed, as many in those parts can truly
bear her Witness; and through all her Service in the Labor of the Gospel this
was her Comfort, as I heard her several times say, That she never sought her
self, as she could appeal to the Lord, and to the Consciences of all people
where she had Traveled, but for the good of Souls, and the advancement of Gods
blessed Name, and his everlasting Truth: Yea, I may truly Testify on her
behalf, that she coveted no man's Silver and Gold, nor Apparel; for what she had
of her own she spent on Truth's account before she was my Wife, and since, when
the Lord has laid a necessity upon her to Travel in his work and Service, she
has had freely of me, and the Lord has blessed us so that we never wanted any
thing. And this I give as a Testimony against the vain imaginations that have
risen in the minds of some Carnal Professors in those parts: And truly the Lord
made her a blessing unto me in many Respects, whose secret hand did bring us
together; and now has taken her from me again, who was so near and dear unto
me; and she is out of the reach of all her Enemies and Persecuters, and those
that did hate her for the Gospels sake, and is at Rest with the Lord, with whom
is her Reward for ever and ever Yea, Blessed are the Dead that dye in the Lord,
they rest from their Labors, and their works shall follow them. And that which
remains as a desire in my heart is, That I may serve the same God to the end of
my days, who never failed her, under any Exercise or Trial that she was
accompanied with; for when the Officers sometimes were taking our Goods for to
levy a Fine for a Meeting, they asked her whether we did still intend to keep
Meetings? and she answered as it was in her heart, Yes, we resolve to follow
the Lord fully.

Moreover, under the great Exercise or weakness of Body that she was in before
her departure, she often acknowledged that the Lord was wonderful good unto
her, for though sometimes she might be under some Exercise of mind by reason of
her great Weakness, yet she was kept quiet and patient, and did often say, That
the Lord had broke in upon her, and with his Heavenly Presence did fill her to
the Comfort of her Soul, and the Joy of Heart as she did many times
acknowledge, and said, O that the (...) may never take his presence from me! It
was so (...) precious and desirable unto her; and blessed be the Lord, he was
good unto her to the very last, she was kept sensible, and did acknowledge that
she had the Testimony of his Love, and that it would be well with her, and that
she had no desire to live any longer in this World: and a little before her
departure, she had no desire to have her Children with her, though they were
very near and dear unto her; but having given them a Charge to be obedient to
their Father, and that they should mind Truth, and then the Blessing of the
Lord would be with them, so she desired to be retired; and the morning before
her Departure, she had a sense that the time of her Departure was at hand, so
she (...) a Friend that she was going to her long home; and that morning she
desired me to go about my occasions, though all along before she still desired
my Company; and I being sometime wanting, was called in again, she being now
upon Departing, our dear Friend J. Anderdon being with me, we went in unto her,
and he held her by the hand, and I held her up about the neck, and she
manifested her Sensiblenss, and her Faithful Constant Love to me unto the very
last, and so departed in the Love and Peace of God, as several had a Testimony
of it that were there present.

The 28th day of the 7th month 74. was the day of her Departure, and she was
Buried the 6th day of the 8th month. following, being accompanied with very
many Friends, and many Neighbors. -- So They that are wise shall shine as the
brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness as the
Stars for ever and ever.

South-Gadbury, the 8th day of the 8th month, 75. Thomas Whitehead.

Here follows a Relation of more of her Sufferings, the 28th day of the 9th
Month, 1671.
JAne Whitehead was brought to Ilchester Prison with a young Child Sucking at
her Breast, through the Envy and Wickedness of the Priest of North-Cadbury, one
John Atwood, who maliciously Swore against her, she being accused that she came
into his Congregation with Force and Arms, and did Interrupt him and Disturb
his whole Congregation; which was a very Lie, for she neither used Force, nor
Arms, but spoke soberly in the Fear of God, bearing her Testimony for the
Truth, against the Covetous Practices of the False Hirelings, and spoke the
words of Truth and Soberness; and we are well satisfied that no True Minister,
nor good People would be offended nor disturbed at this; yet notwithstanding,
R.H. a Justice, Committed her to Prison, from her Husband, and four small
Children, and one tender Child she carried in her Arms, and brought them again
from Ilchester Prison to the Sessions at Wells in the Winter Season, and
through the fallacious actions of the Priest, sent her back to Prison again,
where she remained until the 2d month 72. all the Cold Winter; (yet the Jailer
was civil toward her) but the Lord will plead her innocent Cause in his own
Season, with those her Enemis, as he has done with other that rose up against
her; for the Lord was with her in the time of her Exercises, who did uphold her
by the word of his power, and gave her strength and courage to encounter with
Truths enemies; and blessed be his Name for ever, he has now brought her
through the War to Peace and everlasting Rest, to sit down with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob in the Kingdom of God for ever, and has Crowned her with Victory
with a Crown of immortality and eternal Life, Glory over all to the Lord God
and the Lamb that sits upon the Throne.

Therefore, dear Friends, you that are but young and tender, who are convinced
of the everlasting Truth of the living God, and have believed in the Light of
his blessed Son, Christ Jesus our Lord, this is my Council in the Love and
Council of the Lord unto you all, That you abide in the Light, and yield all
holy Subjection by living in obedience unto it, according to the Divine
operation, and holy requirings of the Spirit of Truth in your inward parts;
that you hearken to the council of it, and be willing to be led and guided by
it, and to receive instruction from it at all times, and upon all occasions,
that the way of the Lord may become your delight for ever, and the path of the
Just the place of your footsteps, that so through righteousness you may obtain
the blessing of peace from the hand of the Lord, as your portion for ever and
ever.

Therefore travel on in the strength of the Lord, ye tender Children of the day
of Gods everlasting Love: I say, travel on with Courage, with cheerful hearts
and ready minds in the footsteps of the flock of the holy Companions, as this
our dear faithful deceased Friend has done, that so you may with the Lords
Worthies, Open ye everlasting doors that the holy Nation may come in, that so
you may come truly to be of the general Assembly of the Church of the first
Borne, whose names are written in Heaven, and to the innumerable Company of
Angels, to the Spirits of Just men made perfect, and to God the Judge of all,
to receive an Inheritance among them that are sanctified, and have fellowship
with the Saints in Light, and so come to witness life and immortality brought
to light through the Gospel of our Lord Christ Jesus, the mighty power of God,
to whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

And this is to be obtained by following the holy divine Light, that shines in
the heart in the daily Cross; and true self-denial of our own wills, in true
and holy subjection unto the will of God, who has truly loved us, and gave his
Son Christ Jesus for us, who bare the Cross, and despised the shame, who came
not to do his own will, but the will of the Father that sent him, who was made
of no Reputation, though he was Lord of all; he took upon him the form of a
Servant, and became obedient to the death of the Cross, and was Scourged for
our transgressions, and bruised for our sins, that we might receive Redemption
by him, and Salvation through Faith in his blood, and his living and ruling in
us, who has caused his heavenly Light to shine in our hearts, that by the
living virtue of it our understandings are opened, whereby we come to see him
that is invisible, and to know him that is true, and we are in him that is
true, who having finished the work that his Father sent him to do, is ascended
up on high, and has led Captivity Captive, and given gifts unto men for the
work of the Ministry, and for the perfecting of the Saints, and the edifying of
the body of Christ till all come to a perfect man to the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ, who is sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on
high, glorified with the Father for ever and ever; yet nevertheless he that
inhabits eternity also dwells with the man of a broken heart, and contrite
spirit, and trembles at his word; of this we have a living experience through
the goodness and mercy of the Lord unto us, who has begotten us again by the
immortal word of Life, unto a lively hope in Christ Jesus our Lord, who is
worthy over all to have the praises, the glory and honor everlasting renown
with living obedience from all that are made pertakers of the riches of his
grace, now henceforth and for ever.

Here follows the Testimony of John and Jane Anderdon concerning Jane
Whitehead.
THis Testimony we have to give for Jane Whitehead, that she was a good and
honorable Woman in her day and time, the Lord having poured forth his Spirit
upon her, as upon many other of his Servants and Handmaids in this the day of
his power, and she was truly called to the work and service of the Lord, in
which she was valiant for the Truth, and feared the Lord in faithfulness in her
generation, and held the Faith, and kept her Integrity to the last and was a
good Savor in her life and death, and she is blessed, and her good works do
follow her, and we never found her too forward to speak in Meetings, or to seek
the Pre-eminence, but to clear her Conscience before the Lord, which was well:
We were present at her death, and she died like a Lamb, for death was swallowed
up of life, and she is happy, and gone to her grave in peace with God, and at
her Burial her life did preach, and her memorial is blessed; and she said a
little before she dyed, that the Lord laid nothing to her charge, and that the
Lord did bear her Witness that she never sought her Self in all her Labor and
Travels, in which she met with many exercises, even to bonds and Imprisonment
for the Testimony of Jesus, and the word of God, in all which he kept and
preserved her faithful to himself, even to the end; and she spared not
iniquity, but took up the Cross and despised the shame, and is entered into
rest; and she was desirous that all should be in truth and reality, what in
word they outwardly professed themselves to be and made a show of; and she
could not endure Hypocrisy, but rejoiced in godly Society, and her dear Love
was to all Friends, whose welfare and prosperity in the Truth she much desired,
and Peace and Unity among all the Flock of God, that they might keep together
under the one Shepherd in the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Unity of his eternal
Spirit for ever.

Ilchester Prison, the 14th day of the 8th month, 1675. John Anderdon, Jane
Anderdon.

The Testimony of Jasper Butt for Jane Whitehead.
I Have known her for near twenty years past, about the time when Truth first
brake forth in the Southern parts of this Nation; she was one on whom God
fulfilled his Promise, even a Handmaid on whom he poured out his Spirit, and
accompanied with his living Presence, he having committed a Dispensation of the
everlasting Gospel to her, in which she was faithful according to the measure
received: And though she was the weaker Vessel his Power was manifested in her,
to the reaching of his own Witness, and turning many from Darkness to the
Light, and many Children may rise up and call her blessed, for she was a Mother
in Israel: She came forth near the beginning of the Lambs War in these latter
days, and was a faithful follower of him, through many Tribulations and
Sufferings: The Unity, Peace, and Welfare of the Lords People was precious to
her, and she Traveled in many Counties of this Nation in the Lords Service, in
which his Power and Blessing was with her, and minded that more than any
Self-interest: toward her latter end she had a pretty long time of Weakness,
her body being in a Consumption; I was with her a few days before her
Departure, and was well refreshed in the sense of Gods living Presence
manifested in her, which truly refreshed and comforted her in her outward
weakness, and gave her true content in the will of the Lord, in which she was
gathered to her Fathers, and laid down her head in everlasting Peace, her
memory is blessed, and her name yields a good savor; and in that life into
which she gathered whilst conversant amongst us, we still enjoy a fellowship
with her, and though dead she yet lives with us, having Fought the good Fight,
and kept the Faith, and finished her Course, she has obtained the Crown laid
up in store for them that have the appearance of the Lord Jesus.

The 29th day of the 11th month, 1575. Jasper Butt.

SO my dear Friends, all people to whom this our Testimony may come, this is my
Exhortation unto you all, that you all tread the same path, and walk in the
same way of holiness, of righteousness and faithfulness that this dear Lamb
has trodden, and mind the same thing, and obey the same Spirit, that you may
have the same blessed reward, and be made partakers of the same everlasting
happiness and blessedness, by receiving an entrance, and having an habitation
in that Inheritance that shall never fade away, that when this earthly
Tabernacle shall be dissolved, you may receive a house not made with hands
eternally in the Heavens, which is the end of all our Labor, and Travels, and
Sufferings, that the Lord may be glorified, and peoples Souls may be saved from
the dreadful day, and terrible Wrath and Vengeance of the Lord God and the
Lamb, which is due to the wicked, by reason of their Wickedness, sin and
ungodliness, and will be their portion for ever, if they do not repent and turn
to the Lord by amendment of life; Yea, Tribulation and Anguish upon every soul
that does evil, upon the Jew first, and also upon the Gentile; for if Judgment
begin first at the house of God, where shall the sinners and ungodly appear? So
you, dear Travelers, that are turned Sion-ward, run the race with patience
that is set before you, even the race of Salvation; and so run that ye may
obtain the prize, even the Salvation of your Souls; for the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong; for though Kings of Armies fly apace, yet
the woman that sits at home divides the spoil, whose feet abide in her own
house, and go not into the Chambers of Death.

Oh my dear Countrymen and Women, my near and dear Relations, Kindred and
Acquaintance, for my heart is enlarged for your lakes in the tender Love of
God, that has opened my heart by the bowels of his own Compassion, to invite
you all, and entreat you all to turn unto the Lord, and seek him while he may
be found, and call upon him while he is near, for he is not far from every one
of you; therefore turn unto him with your whole hearts, that you may receive at
the hands of the Lord, who is a merciful God, even the tenders of Life and
Salvation, which he is now holding forth freely in his Son Christ Jesus our
Lord, who delights not in the death of a sinner, but had rather that all
should turn from the evil of their ways and live: Therefore I say again,
Receive the Tenders of his Universal Love held forth in the Light of his
beloved Son, for in him are all the Promises of God, Yea, and Amen, for ever;
for in him is Salvation and plentious Redemption for all that put far from them
the evil of their doings, who cease to do evil, and learn to do well; then,
though their sins were as scarlet, he will make them as snow; and though they
were as Crimson, they shall be as Wool; therefore do not delay, but turn to the
Light of his pure Spirit in your own hosoms, that Reproves for sin in secret,
and bears witness against ungodliness; for the Scriptures do declare, that God
has not left himself without a Witness, and this is his faithful Witness, even
Christ Jesus; therefore turn unto him I beseech you all unto whom this may
come, and slight not the day of your Visitation, least you never have another;
for who knows how soon the Lord may call you out of this world? then it will be
too late to cry to the Lord for mercy, when the Gate of mercy is shut, and you
left to receive a Reward from the hand of the Lord for your evil deeds done in
the body; for there is no Repentance in the Grave, but as the tree falls so it
lies, and as Death leaves so Judgment finds, therefore while you have time
Prize it, and come down from the high Mountains of your own casting up in your
vain imaginations, and come, O come into the low Valley of Jehosaphat, where the
true Judgment of the Lord is received, for Zion is Redeemed through Judgment,
and her Converts with Righteousness; for when Judgment is set up in the earth,
then the Inhabitants thereof learn Righteousness; and the Prophet says, The
fruits of Righteousness that shall be peace, the effects of it quietness and
assurance for ever; but no peace to the Wicked, says my God; no peace to the
Persecuters of the Lords people, no peace to the Despisers of the true Light of
Christ within, no peace to the blind Seers, nor sleepy Watchmen, nor false
hireling Priests, that oppress the poor, and live by the sweat of other men's
brows; no peace to the idle Shepherds that feed with the fat, and cloth with
the wool, and make a prey upon the Flock, who pull the sheaf from the hungry,
and the fatherless from the breast, such are they that rebel against the Light,
who cry peace, peace unto people while they put into their mouths, but when any
for good Conscience sake refuse to put into their mouths, then they prepare War
against them, and fly to the Law to recover treble, or other damage against
them; no peace to the Backsliders and proud boasters, who have Apostatized from
the Truth; and no peace to the false hearted, nor double minded, and
rebellious, that never yet came to the Truth: No Peace to any of the wicked,
unless they Repent, and cease to do wickedly.
But true peace is the portion of the Righteous, who in faithfulness follow the
Lord; and peace to those that love Uprightness, who take delight to walk in the
way of the Lord, which is a way of holiness; and without holiness none can see
the Lord; therefore turn unto him I beseech you all, and embrace the light of
his Spirit, and make no longer delay; let not his Locks be wet with the drops
of the night, whilst he stands knocking at the door of your hearts, but open
unto him that he may come in and sup with you, and you with him, that so you
may come by living experience to witness the fulfilling of those weighty
sayings that stand upon Record in the holy Scriptures, and those Prophesies
spoken of by the Prophets in the days of old, who said, Thus says the Lord, I
will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, upon Sons and upon Daughters, upon
Servants and upon Handmaids, and they shall Prophecy; I will write my Law in
their hearts, and put my Spirit in their inward parts; I will be their God, and
they shall be my people; I will be their Father, and they shall be my Sons and
Daughters: This is our God, and in whom we have believed, that is good and
gracious unto the Children of men, who gives gifts unto the Rebellious; for
thus says the Lord, I gave them my good Spirit to instruct them, but they
rebelled against it: and some there were of old that did despite to the Spirit
of Grace, and such there are in this Age, but if they do not obey the Spirit of
Grace, their end will be miserable.

A few words to those that have Apostatized from the Truth, and so Conclude.
ANd now you Backsliders, let your eye be turned unto the Lord in the light of
his Son, from whom you are fallen, and look for his fiery indignation to take
hold of the transgression to destroy the Adversary of your souls, that has
drawn you aside from the Lord, and be willing to bear his indignation because
you have sinned against him that through Judgment you may be redeemed to your
first Love, and to do your first Works, lest the Lord come unto you quickly,
and take vengeance upon you to the full, and grind you to powder ye fallen
Stars that have lost your light, that are drawn down from Heaven to the earth
by the strength of the Dragons power: O consider in time where you are
wandering like Fugitives and Vagabonds in the earth, and be not high-minded,
but fear and consider from whence you are fallen, and how you have forgotten
the days of your tenderness, and have let hardness of heart come over you
again: O behold the desolation, the ruin, and the breaches that are come upon
you, by reason of your Wanderings from your first tenderness, when the Lord
broke in upon you and tendered your hearts in his everlasting loving kindness,
but you have not prized his love, but have wandered from his pure light: O
consider the goodness of the Lord, and turn again unto him, that he may show
you mercy; remember how the Lord showed John things that were to come, how that
there should be War in Heaven, Michael and his Angels against the Dragon and
his Angels; and John saw to the end of the war, that the Dragon and his Angels,
could not prevail against Michael and his Angels, but was overcome, and was
cast out of Heaven to the earth, and their place was no more found in Heaven;
and this made them rage because they had no place in heaven; so the Dragon was
wrath with the Woman that brought forth the Man-Child, and he cast out his
floods after her, even the floods of Persecution, and made War with the remnant
of her Seed, that kept the Testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God, and in
their Wrath they blasphemed the Name of God, his Tabernacle, and them that
dwell in Heaven; and this John saw in the Spirit, which reaches unto this
present time; for have we not seen the day in this our age, that many of you
entered into the Heavenly Profession, and had for a time a small part in the
heavenly fellowship of the knowledge of God; but after you had known him, not
glorifying him as God, nor liking to retain him in your knowledge, but growing
heady, and high-minded, and giving your power to the Dragon to make War with
the Saints, those that have kept their habitation in the Truth here begins the
War, for they have labored with you, and sought you with much tenderness, that
you might not be utterly driven away, that you might not be cast out of the
heavenly fellowship, and fall into utter desolation; but you still joining with
the Dragon to make War with them, so there was no help for you, but that you
must be overcome, and so be cast out of heaven into the earth, and this has
been the cause of your rage and anger, because you were cast out by them that
have kept the word of their Testimony in faithfulness; for this was that which
John saw, that they overcame by the word of their Testimony, and the blood of
the Lamb: and O with what diligence, care and patience have the faithful
Brethren strove with you, seeking your Return, but O how has their care been
flighted by you, and had in derision among you, who have given reproachful
terms to those Meetings that have been set apart on this account, for the
repairing of Breaches, and building up the waste places, and gathering into
Peace and Unity where the Faithful Brethren have been very diligent to build up
the Ruins and Desolations; but O how have they been by some set at naught, and
ill requited for their labor of Love, even by such who have been ready to lay
waste, and make Breaches, and sow Dissension, and cause Divisions among
Brethren; but said the Apostle, Mark them that cause Divisions amongst you, and
avoid them, for they that gather not with us, scatter abroad; and I right well
know that none that abides not in the unity of the Spirit ever gathers to God,
let them pretend never so fair; but it is possible that they may gather to
themselves by their feigned words and fair speeches, but they shall not long
continue, but their folly shall be made manifest; those that are heady and high
minded, and will not take counsel of the Lord, nor hearken to the voice of his
Servants, but are ready to say in a way of contempt, as Miriam did in the days
of old, Has the Lord spoke only by Moses, has he not also spoke by us? but
the Lord brought her to Judgment that spoke contemptuously of his Servant
Moses, as some are ready to say at this day of the Ancients of Israel, by
reason of their care over the flock and family of God; the same spirit also is
ready to rise up against them, as it did in the days of old in them that said,
You Sons of Levi, you take too much upon you, and so now, such as are careless
themselves, and idle themselves, are ready to say of others, they take too much
upon them, and so slight the labors and travels of the Ancients of Israel, who
have the care of the Churches upon them, and have born the burden and heat of
the day, and have been in perils by Sea, and perils by Land, taking care that
things might be well among Friends every where, and that true love and unity
might be increased, and that which is evil kept down; and this is well pleasing
unto the Lord, and this work the Lord has blessed and prospered, and made it
effectual for good, and those who abide in the truth, have seen a service in it
for the Lord, notwithstanding all the opposition; for this we know that such as
oppose the work of the Lord will not prosper, let them cover themselves with
never so fair pretenses, with greater enjoyments of the Lord, this covering
will prove too narrow to hide them from the wrath of the Lord, when they are
appostatized from the truth, and from the comely order in the Unity of the
Spirit, and from the followship of the Gospel of peace, such as came forth with
us, but were not of us; So they went forth from us that it might be manifest to
all people, that they are not of us.

But oh ye backsliders that have appostatized from the truth, and have
crucified the Lord afresh, and put him to open shame, you that have not wholly
sinned out your day, Return, return unto the Lord that he may heal your
backslidings, and show mercy unto you, and love you freely for his own names
sake, who has moved in my heart, in the bowels of his own compassions to call
upon you to return unto him, that he may show you favor, before his anger break
forth against you, and his decree be sealed, that you perish not in your
gainsaying and Apostasy, and the earth swallow you up, and you become
miserable for ever; therefore Consider, if it be not too late, for there is
mercy with him, and bowels of compassion for all that truly seek him in
uprightness of heart. Thus I have cleared my Conscience whether you will hear
or forbear, from one that travels for the prosperity of Sion, and loves Unity
and peace among brethren; truly desiring the welfare of all people that they
may come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved; and that these that do
already know it may abide in it for ever and ever. which is the true and hearty
sincere desire of your true Friend, that seeks for peace and Unity.

Cyrencester the 2d day of the 9th month, 1675. Theophila Townsend.

THE END.

