Treason and Murder DISCOVERED.

Being a True and Perfect RELATION OF THE Trial and Condemnation OF James Alsop
the Father, and William Alsop his Son for Treason and Murder; At the Assizes
held at Chelmsford for the County of Essex, on Wednesday the 25th of March,
1674.

ALSO The wonderful Discovery both of the Treason and Murder; with the
Sentence of the Court for the manner and places of their Execution.

Written by a Person who was present at the Trial.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 16^^.

Treason and Murder Discovered, etc.
UPon Wednesday, March the 25th, 1674. The Court being sat, William Alsop
alias Thomas Topham, was called to the Bar, and Two Indictments read against
him; The One of Treason for Clipping of Money; The other for Murder. That of
Treason to this Effect, That he the said William Alsop alias Thomas Topham, and
James Alsop senior, and Others, of West-Ham in the County of Essex, had
Traitorously and Feloniously against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King,
his Crown and Dignity, with certain Iron Instruments, Sheers, Scissers, and
other Tools then and there found, Clipped Filed, and Diminished the Kings Coin,
viz. Forty pieces of Silver, each of them of the value of 12 d. commonly
called Queen Elizabeth's Shillings, and Clipped from off them silver to the
value of three pence; Forty other pieces of Silver commonly called King James
his Shillings, and Clipped off silver to the value of three pence; Forty pieces
of Silver called King Charles the First his Shillings, and clipped off from
them silver to the value of three pence; And Twenty other pieces of Money,
called King Charles the First his half Crowns, and clipped silver from each of
them to the value of Eight pence, etc. (according to the usual Form of
Indictments.)

To these Two Indictments William Allsop pleaded Guilty, and seemed to Excuse
the rest, viz. his Father, Mother, and Brother.

William Allsop being set by, James Allsop the Elder, and Dorothy Allsop the
Wife of James Allsop the Elder, and James Allsop junior, was called to the
Bar, and the Indictments to the same effect with the former was read; to which
they pleaded Not Guilty, and submitted themselves to their Trial by God and the
Country: Upon which, the several Witnesses was called and sworn; viz. First the
Bell-Man, Two Constables of West-Ham, and several others. The Constables and
Bell-Man gave in their Evidence thus; The Bell-man declared* That upon the
Tuesday morning, the time that the Murder was committed, he passed by the
house of James Allsop senior, and gave him the usual Salute, and the time of
the Night, and was answered again by the said James Allsop, and that he saw no
light in the house; neither did he hear the dogs bark as they use to do
oftentimes to his Affrightment: which dogs, as he was afterward informed, were
shut up in the Barn; and, as it was supposed, to prevent any disturbance by
their noise, to their intended bloody design. In the morning, the Murder being
noised about, several people, as well Officers as others, flocked to the house
to enquire about it; amongst which, he enquired of James Allsop senior, and his
Wife, about the Murder; they both told him, That they had been robbed that
night, and the persons that robbed them, had done the Murder: But the Officers
was not sufficiently satisfied with their answer, but made a farther search
into the house, and found a Chest in the Chamber, where the Murder was
committed, empty; which they said was their Daughters Chest, wherein was Plate
and wearing Clothes; but searching their Chamber, they found the Clothes which
they pretended to be stole; and also found in their Daughters Chamber a Silver
Spoon, and a Silver Cup standing by the Bed; so that if Robbery was the
intention, they would have taken away those things.

Next, the Constable agrees in a great part of the Evidence of the Bell-Man,
but gives this farther, That when he was about to carry James Alsop before a
Justice of the Peace, he desired to go into his house, pretending to make fast
his Doors; which the Constable granted; but he would have gone into his Chamber
by himself, which the Constable would not agree to: Then he desired that he
only would go along with him; which he did, and being alone, he pulled out of
his Breeches a Bundle tied up in Leather, in which was several Clippings of
Money. He tells the Constable, That this Bundle he found last Night coming home
between Mile-End, and Bow, and knowing, that upon this unhappy Accident (as he
called it) these things being found about him, it might do him a great
prejudice, he would therefore give him Ten pounds if he would conceal these
Clippings; but the Constable told him, he dared not do it, and brought him out
to the Company, and showed what he found about him: Upon this they make
narrower search, and find in a Chamber where Wool used to be laid up, in the
Wool was hid several Sheers, and a Whetstone with several furrows in it,
supposed to be for the smoothing of the money after it was clipped. (Here the
Sheers, Scissers, and other Tools, and Whetstone, with the Clippings bound up
in Leather, were shown in Court, and handled and viewed by the Judge, and most
of the Jury.) That when they first heard of these Clippings found, they went to
the house, and searched narrowly the parts of the same, in order to make
further discovery; and in a Window in one of the Chambers, they found Clippings
and Filings, and the Impression of the Tools, and spyed in a Crevice something
glyster, upon which they took up the boards, and there found hanging in the
Cobwebs several small Clippings and filings of Silver, some of which he showed
in Court

The next Evidence was the other Constable, which was much to the same effect
with his Partners, and agreed in the same Circumstances.

Then there was called one that had peen a Servant in his house, and lived so
near to the Chamber where they were supposed to Clip, that he and his Wife
often heard a Tinckling-Noise; He declares, That he never saw any thing of
their Clipping, but his Wife and he had often been discoursing about the Noise
they heard, and she told her husband, That when she lived in Yorkshire, she
lived next to a house where she heard such Noises in the Night, and that
afterward there was a Discovery made of clipping of money; and she-wished this
might not prove so. He declared also that he had taken several times Clipped
many of him for wages, and thought sometimes it looked as if it was but new
done; Whereupon he once said to his Master, when they were drinking together,
Master; I do not like this Tink-a-tink-tink we often hear in your Chamber,
pray God you be John; Upon which he was very inquisitive to know what he meant
by the Tink-a-tink-tink; he told him, he would say no more. A while after James
Allsop arrested this Servant in a vexatious suit, but told him if he would
talk no more of Tink-a-tink-tink, he would release him; And that after he was
apprehended, and the Clippings discovered, he told James Allsop, That now was
come to pass what he long feared and expected. And Afterward when he visited
his Master in the Gaol, He told him, That if he had bin worthy to know of his
Observations and suspicions of him before, he would have given him two or three
hundred pound to have Concealed what he observed.

Next was called and sworn a Goldsmiths, that bought the melted silver of this
James Allsop, he declared that about two years, or two years and half since,
this James Allsop came to his shop, and showed him some burnt Silver, and asked
him what he would allow him, an ounce for it, And told him that a Friend of
his, had a house burnt down in Yorkshire, and that all his plate and money was
melted and burnt in the fire; and told him, if he would give him as much as it
was worth, he could help him to more; for as fast as they found it, and got it
out of the ruins, it would be sent to him; the Gold smith allowed him four
Shillings Ten pence an ounce, and bought at that time about four pound weight
of him; and said, that this James Allsop sold to him about four or five times
afterward, of melted silver about three or four pound weight at a time; and
that he ordered letters to be left for him at his shop, and showed him some
subscribed by one Nich. Campion, who was pretended to be the Person that sent
this silver out of Yorkshire; the Goldsmiths produced some part of the silver
and showed it in Court.

Then Allsop was called and asked what he had to say for himself, he made a
long, tedious, and impertinent discourse in his defense, endeavoring to lay't
all upon his Son William, that had Confessed, and brought a Boy or two that
lived in his house to say, That the Tinking noise in his house was pointing of
Nails to hang Leather on, and several other idle excuses he made.

Then Dorothy Allsop was called, the evidence against her for this Indictment
was only, That she had bin with her husband at the Goldsmiths.

James Allsop Junior was called, and little could be fastened upon him by the
evidence.

Then the second Indictment was read against Jeames Allsop junior for Clipping,
and there was Produced in Court a Portmantle, in which was clippings, and
Sheeres, and other Instruments, with some letters subscribed by Nich. Campion,
which was after found to be done and Contrived by James Allsop Junior, and
William Allsop who personated this Nich. Campion, sometimes went for his man:
This was found in an Alehouse in Moore-fields, where a person that went by the
name of Campion lodged, and this Portmantle was brought thither by this young
Allsop, who went there as Campions man; There was several Circumstances to
prove this Portmantle to be made in young Allsops house, and that they there
contrived it, and carried it from thence to Moor-fields, but nothing positively
could be proved.

Then there was read the Indictment of Murder against James Allsop, the Elder,
and Dorothy Allsop, his Wife, the evidence was first by the Coroner, who said,
That when he had, viewed the body, and had examined Allsop and his wife, who
told him, That their house had bin Robbed, and the Thieves had murdered their
daughter in bed; the Coroner demanded of them which way the thieves came in,
they told him, That they came in at such a window, The Coroner went into the
yard, and viewed the place, and found the glase lying behind a hedge, and as
Carefully set as any Glasier could set it; there being no part broken: he could
likewise discover no footsteps either in the grass, which was high, or print
of any foot or toe in the wall, by which they should ascend to the window; And
viewing the window, they found it full of Cobwebs, which went Cross it, and not
a part above the breath of a hand broke in them, so that it was impossible for
any person to come in there, the Cobwerbs remaining whole.

A little Child was then brought, which was the daughter of the young woman
that was murdered; she said, that she saw some body go out of the chamber in
the night without any light she thought, about the height of her Grandmother;
and that she found her self wet in bed, but knew not what was the reason of it;
but in the morning she went and told her Grandfather, That her Mother was
killed; who answered, God forbid; and that was all she could declare.

The next was the Surgeons Evidence, who declared, That hearing of the Murder,
he came to the house, and viewed the Wound, and came down and found Mris.
Allsop smoking a Pipe of Tobacco by the fire; he asked her, Who did the
Murder? She answered, The Lord knows. He enquired for her husband, She told
him he was gone out just before he came in. The Surgeon went after him, and
over-took him about a Bow shot from his house, and told him he must know
something of this Murder; and (the Constable being by) he charged Allsop with
the Suspicion of this Murder.

Then a Person of Quality declared, That he went to view the place, and found
it according to the Coroners Evidence; and that there was shown to him a Vizard
Mask found in Allsops Trunk, having a drop of a Candle newly done, on the
outside, and on the inside a spot of blood, like the print of a Thumb; and
that when he caused Allsops Sleeve to be turned up, and found a spot of blood
upon his shirt, which Allsop said, was caused by bringing home some Meat the
Night before; and on Mrs. Allsops Neck-kercher there was a spot of blood, which
she said, was an Iron-mold; but a Basin of Water being brought to try it, the
blood washed clear out, which no Iron-mould would. Other Circumstances was
proved against Old Allsop, as that he was observed in the morning when he rose
to have black Breeches on; and that afterward he had changed them, and put on
other Clothes. To this Evidence, Allsop answered, That his Son William had been
a Treacherous Son, and had done this to destroy him; and talked a great deal,
but nothing to any purpose. The wife likewise denied that she knew any thing of
the Murder. Upon which the Jury went out, and returned with this Verdict, That
Old Alsop was guilty of Clipping, and the Murder; and the Wife and James Alsop
Junior, not guilty. William Alsop was guilty by his own Confession.

William Alsop received Sentence to be drawn upon a Sledge from the Gaol in
Chelmsford, to the place of Execution, and there to be hanged by the Neck till
his Body be dead. Old Alsop to be conveyed to Stratford Gaol, and to be drawn
upon a Sledge from the same Gaol, to the place of Execution, which shall be
before his own house in West-Ham; where he is to be hanged upon a Gibbet by the
Neck, till his Body be dead.

FINIS.

