The Traitors CLAIM; OR A A Clear and Impartial CONSIDERATION OF THE Security
as to Life,

Claimed by the Condemned TRAITORS now Prisoners in the Tower of London, who
Rendered themselves, according to his Majesty's Proclamation, of the 6th of June
1660. by Advice of the Lords and Commons, then Assembled in Parliament.

IN A LETTER Written August 20th 1661. to a Honorable Member of the House of
Commons, now sitting in Parliament.

1 Kings 2. 36, 37. And the King sent and called Shimei, and said unto him,
Build the a house in Jerusalem, and go not forth from thence any whither: for
it shall be on that day, when thou go out, and passest over the Brook
-Kidron, thou shall know for certain, thou shall surely die; thy blood shall be
upon thine own head.

Prove. 20. 28. Mercy and Truth preserves the King: and his Throne is
established by Mercy.

Justin. Spectandum, an in conventione fulem Medorum Elegissent.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1661.

The Traitors Claim of Security, etc.
Honored Sir,
AT your return into the Country, I received yours of the 10th instant, which
signified your serious Debates, and Union in Parliament, in the matters which
concern this Church and State. For this I thank you, and in this I rejoice with
you.

In your Letter you are pleased to put on me a task which you (knowing me so
well) cannot but know, must needs be unpleasant to me, viz. To consider the Case
of the Condemned Traitors now in the Tower, waiting for Execution; and
impartially to communicate to you my thoughts, concerning the Security as to
their Lives, which they challenge, and some on their behalfs plead; the
Question you have thus stated.

Whether the Condemned Traitors, who rendered themselves according to the
Proclamation of his Majesty, and on trial stand Condemned, may with Justice and
Honor to the King and Kingdom, be Executed upon a Bill or Act of Parliament to
be past for that purpose.

Sir, I do not a little wonder you should charge this work on me, who indeed am
yours to my power, but at such enmity with all Agents in that Barbarous Murder
of our late King of glorious Memory, that I could with Tertullus accuse them,
better then with Gamaliel make the least Apollogie (though never so Rational)
for the Security of any one of them; How often have I imprecated God's
vengeance on them? and attended the healths drunk to their confusion; triumphed
in their Conviction and Condemnation; and fretted at the Reprieves of their
Execution? Must I now by your Command be constrained to appear Advocate for
their Blood, which spilt many years since might have prevented the spilling
much Gallant, Noble, English Blood? yea (and what is ten thousand times more
precious) the Royal Blood of the only Protestant King and Prince.

And really Sir, I should adventure a denial of your Demands (your desire deing
so contrary to my Judgment) were I not awed into a compliance, by the
transcendent splendour of his Majesty's Clemency, conjuring down the spirit of
revenge, and all vindictive thoughts, raised by the late Rebellion; but
(presuming your enquiry to spring from the same Principle) I dare not but
endeavor your Resolution.

Sir, I must in this undertaking enquire, in what sense, you understand the
term Justice? If strictly and propperly as opposed to Wrong Who knows not that
a Parliament (which may dispose of all our Lives at pleasure) may justly
Execute those, whom the Law, by a judicial and regular process, has condemned?
But forasmuch as summum jus, warranted by our Laws, may seem (Jure Civili) to
be summa injuria; (as it was in the Case of the renouned Tho. Cromwell,
concerning whose attainder by Parliament, a judicious Lawyer has advised, ^
Cook.
auserat oblivio si potest, si non ut cunque silentium tegat) I must conceive
by Justice you mean Equity, the Bridle of summum, jus, or Truth opposed unto
breach of Faith; Your concomitant Honor is my Conduit to this interpretation,
and then your Querie is,

Whether the Condemned Prisoners, who rendered themselves upon the Proclamation
of his Majesty, published by the Advice of his Parliament, being on Trial
Convict, and Condemned, may with Equity, Truth, and Honor in King and
Parliament, be Executed, on a Bill passed for that purpose.

Sir, the Resolve (my Judgment on deliberate thoughts does compel me to give)
to this Querie, is Negative, so repugnant to my former fervor, and expressed
desire, that I am reduced to the strait of the Lord Digbie in the Case of the
late unhappy Earl of Strafford, and must express it in his words, I am still
the same in mine opinions and affections ^ Dig^ Speech ^e House. ^ Com^s, 21.
^l, 1641
to the Earl; I confidently believe him (them) the most dangerous Minister of
State, the most unsupportable to free subjects that can be Charactered; I
believe his (their) Practices in themselves as high as ever Subject ventured
on; I believe him (them) the grand Apostate to the Commonwealth, who must not
expect to be pardoned it, in this, till dispatched into another World; And yet
let me tell you Sir, my hand must not be to that dispatch; I protest as my
Conscience stands informed, I had rather it were off.

Verily Sir, though these men's Crime is more obvious and notorious, (I humbly
conceive) the reasons which supercede their Execution, are more weighty then
were or could be by any pleaded in the Case of that Honorable Person, whose
quallity and singularity, with the Popular outcry, might (had his Conviction
been just and clear) have necessitated his Execution, who had no security for
his Life save his Princes favor; whilst our condemned Prisoners cling close to
the Faith and Honor of their Sovereign, to keep them from the Gallows; which
Sir, I must (in sobriety and plainness) tell you (if right reason must direct
their Execution) will prevent their being turned off the Ladder, though they
were tied up to the tree; and cause them to be led back to Prison, to be
otherwise disposed at his Majestis pleasure. But to come to the pinch of the
Case, and Crisis of the Querie.

I read Sir in Justins History, the Medes (the Empire not yet obtained) Lib. 4.
^
made certain Cities tributary, and conceded to them Immunities and Liberties,
larger than the Empire would allow; which once possessed, it was disputed,
Whether in Justice and Honor the former indulged Privileges must be
maintained? to resolve which, this rule was dictated, Spectandum est, an in
Conventione fidem Medorum elegissent. It is to be considered, Whether they
chose, confided in the Faith of the Medes.

Sir, the Public Faith of any People and Nation is the most sacred and
inviolable Security that can be given; as the only Bond of humane Society, in
so much that the Chosen, confided in sense thereof, beyond the intent of the
persons plighting, or the strict constructions of the Words, must be maintained
and oblige; as is evident in the case of the Gibeonites, on which a late
Prelate of our Church does Comment; Joshua might have taken advantage of their
own words, and have said, Bishop^ Contemplations, Page 91^ Grotius ^ jure Bell^
Paeis. L^ 2. Cap. 1^ Page 22*
you are come from a far Country, these Cities are near, these are not
therefore the People to whom we are engaged; Israel had put in a direct Caveat
against Vicinity; Joshuah's heart was far from making a League with a
Canaanite: Yet were these Gibeonites (condemned in the directions given by God
concerning the Canaanites) secured as to their Lives; though not other
Concernments and their Execution 300 years after by the authority of King Saul,
judged a perfideous murder, avenged by the Lord, and only expiated by the
blood of the Executioners posterity.

If Sir, these have on any probable ground Chosen, confided in the Faith and
Honor of our King and Kingdom; yet (whatsoever I have said in the heat of
revenge) I cannot but (in cool blood) commend the deliberation of his Majesty
and the Parliament, in the weighty matters of men's Lives, and confess, Secundae
cogitationes sunt meliores.

For Sir, being put (by your Command) to consider these Traitors claim, I am
constrained to conclude for, and not against their Lives; of which they must
needs be judged unworthy.

The ground of these men's claim as to the security of their Lives, is the
Proclamation of his Majesty the sixth of June, 1660. by advice of the Lords and
Commons then in Parliament assembled, the tenor whereof is thus.

Whereas Owen Roe, Augustine Garland, Robert Tichbourne, etc. being deeply
guilty of that most detestable and bloody Treason, in sitting upon, and giving
Judgment against the Life of our Royal Father; and out of a sense of their own
guilt, have lately fled and obscured themselves, whereby they cannot be
apprehended and brought to a personal Trial for their said Treasons, according
to Law. We do therefore by the advice of our Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, Command, Publish and Declare, by this our Proclamation, That all and
every the persons before named, shall within fourteen days next after the
publishing of this our Royal Proclamation, personally appear, and render
themselves to our Speaker, etc. UNDER PAIN OF BEING EXCEPTED FROM ANY PARDON OR
INDEMNITY, BOTH FOR THEIR RESPECTIVE LIVES AND ESTATES.

To this Proclamation these men have Conformed, and within the time limited,
according to the directions given, they rendered themselves to Trial; Confiding
in the Faith and Honor of the King on the advice of his Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, as their security to escape the penalty, so as not to
be excepted from all Pardon; but that their Estates being taken, their Lives
(being the all left them, and liable to Execution) they doubt not, the Grace of
this Proclamation intended to preserve, to run out their course in Nature.

It must Sir, be granted, this Proclamation contains no positive express
terms, which might fully speak the intention of his Majesty, and his
Parliament, toward the Lives of these Miscreants, and give an absolute
indisputable security for them; nor indeed is this the Question; for this
granted, voideth not their claim; which is only this, Fidem Anglorum in
conventione Elegimus, we chose, confided in Englands Faith, in the Proclamation
of the King on advice of Parliament. ^tius de ^e belli and ^s lib. 2. ^ 13.
page ^. cap. 16. ^. 251.


Sir, all Civilians determine, the words of any Covenant to bind in that sense
which they understand and believe who are in them concerned, and to whom the
security is by them engaged; otherwise ambiguous terms would fallaciously void
all Covenants; and truly all human security, this (as I have before noted) was
the case of the Gibeonites, beyond the intention and seeming expressions of
Joshua and his Princes.

Sir, resolving my self into their Condition, to give a faithful and impartial
Judgment (without passion or prejudice) on these men's claim; I humbly conceive
there are many considerable things, which concur and constitute this Royal
Proclamation a full Moral security for their Lives, viz.

First, the Proclamation is penned in a style of Clemency, and the words bear
to these men a most favorable Aspect, being varied from the expressions usual
in a mere summons to Judgment. For

1. It complains they were fled, obscured themselves, whereby they could not be
apprehended and brought to a Personal and Legal Trial; (not that they had
escaped from Justice, the proper Plaint of a mere Summons) as if their
Conviction and Condemnation were all intended, whereupon they are required to
appear and render themselves to Trial (not to Justice) for this Proclamation
can exspect no answer beyond what it charge.

2. The Proclamation is Sub paena, under pain of being excepted from Pardon,
says the Title; any Pardon both for Life and Estate, says the Body of it;
with terms of discrimination, implying the one being accepted, the other might
be avoided on due personal appearance. Seeing to be drawn, hanged, and
quartered, was the due pain assigned by the Law for their Offense and Treason,
exception from Pardon was a new pain, on the new Offense of their Latency and
Escape from Trial, which if it imply not an immunity on their appearance, I
must confess I am to seek what it signifies, or intended to express; and the
Speech of King and Parliament must not be (vox and preterea nihil,)
insignificant.

Sir, so rational is this ground of Claim, made by these Condemned persons,
that the whole Parliament have on serious and mature debates (without once
hearing these Delinquents Pleas) in a full formal Act of Parliament declared,
That there were some conceived doubtful Act of demnity page 32
words in the said Proclamation; upon which the Persons who rendered themselves,
and appeared according as was directed, did pretend to some Favor: Now Sir,
who knows not that the doubtful terms of any Law must be expounded in favor
to the Delinquent, Favores sunt ampliandi.

Sir, the terms in this Proclamation propound a new pain, on a new offense,
corrigible within 14 days; and plainly imply some Favor, and an immunity
from, and avoidancy of the pain; but to have their Lives spared, is the least
of Favors which can be employed, expected or pretended unto, by the conceived
doubtful words, which bear a favorable sound and Aspect, and so clearly engage
a public Faith for the security of their miserable Life.

Secondly, Lex currit cum praxi, the Concomitants of this, Proclamation make
the public Faith a security for these men's Lives much more legible, by
spelling and putting together these several Observations.

1. His Majesty's Royal Declaration (in the time of his unjust Exile) ever
excepted out of the general Pardon by him graciously offered, only some few
(not all) of the chief Authors (not secondary ^laration ^ Dum^linge 16 ^g. 1650.
Instruments) of the Murder of his Royal Father; importing grace to be extended
to others under the same strict and general Guilt; and to whom if not to these?

2. These few were referred to the Exception of Parliament; yea ^laration ^
Breda ^ April ^0.
of that adopted Parliament, in respect of which these men are denominated the
Parliaments Prisoners; concerning whom I have been informed his Majesty would
never yet order one particular Circumstance.

3. The Commons in this Parliament, with His Majesty's knowledge and consent
(as it has been reported) did Vote seven and no more of the men of this
capacity, to be wholly excepted from Mercy, both to Life and Estate.

4. Considering many did obscure themselves, so as that their Conviction
(desirable as to the Justice and Honor of the Nation) could not be effected,
the Lords and Commons advised, and on their advice his Majesty published this
Proclamation for their personal appearance to Trial only, and that on pain of
being excepted from any Pardon, (the business then under Consideration of
Parliament) they having in their hands such chief Authors of the Kings death,
who were most obnoxious to Guilt, and proper Objects for severity of Justice.

5. These persons then Latent, securing their own Lives, hearing of this
Proclamation, did, (notwithstanding the sense of the Vulgar, that appearance
would secure their Lives,) demur to their appearance; until their Friends,
(assured by many Honorable Members of Parliament, who best understood the
Proclamation) advised, that Indemnity to Life was intended to such as should
appear as was directed; in confidence whereof (waving other means for their
preservation, within their own power) they appeared, rendered themselves in
time and manner advised; putting their Lives under the protection of the
public Faith, the most certain security which could be imagined.

6. John Dixwell, and some others of this Confederacy, incapable by sickness,
or late intelligence, of appearing within the time limited, petitioned the
Parliament for some few days more, in which to appear; but the grace of this
Proclamation was denied to be extended one day longer, which sure was some
grace, to such as in time conformed to it.

7. The House of Commons (Principally concerned, Chief and first Advisers of
this Gracious Proclamation) having determined the number of Persons to be made
Examples of Dread, and undergo the utmost of the Law, Engrossed, Passed, and
Transmitted to the Lords, the Bill for Indemnity with a full and Express
pardon as to these men's Lives; to which the Lords demurred, yet the Commons in
three several conferences, asserted the Public faith and honor engaged by
this Proclamation; which was accutely and solidly argued by Sir Heneag Finch
his Majesty's Soliciter General, and Sir William Wild Recorder of London, and
other Honorable Members managing that Conference;) and being resolved never to
break the same, and thereby suggest to the World, the Proclamation was advised
as a plausible (not to say Perfideous) duckoy to flying birds: at last yielded
to pass the Act, with a proviso, They not to be Executed when Condemned,
without an Act of Parliament or Bill to be passed for that purpose; which they
resolved should never be by that Parliament, and it was more then probable,
would never be by another; simple Execution being too odious for their debates,
and determinations, and the security by the Proclamation given, being by these
debates made so legible, that all men might Run and Read, These men could not
suffer without high scandal, if not open violence, unto the Public faith of
the Kingdom.

8. Every of these men well documented (by the Parliaments debates and
Declaration in the Act of Indemnity) did on their araignment, Convict
themselves, and in open Court plead the Proclamation, (as the benefit of
Clergy) which was admitted; and so far declared by Sir Orlando Bridgman Lord
Chief Justice in that Commission; that the spectators (most fit and proper
Expositors in all Judicial proceedings, which has ever caused Courts of
Judicature to be open) did understand, and conclude, though these men were
Condemned, yet their lives were secured unto them.

If Sir, these eight Considerations being put together, do not spel this Octo
Sillabon, PUBLIQUE-FAITH-SECURING-THEIR-LIVES, as a thing legible to them and
all sober men resolved into their case, to be rationally chosen, concluded and
confided in, I must go again to School to learn my A. B. C. and will advise
Baxter, Goffe, Whaley and others, not trusting to the Proclamation, but
securing their own lives, to write over every Gate, under every Quarter of
these men, when executed, CREDULOUS FOOLS: And Dixwel and his fellow
Petitioners to write over the door of the House of Commons, who admitted not
their surrendering themselves BLESSED SEVERITY: The Condition of these men by
confidence of grace, b^ing rendered worse then theirs that fled from it.

But some Zealous and Royal hearts, grudging the least grace to such Regicides,
will object (that with which I have this long time passionately deceived my
self and others) and say, Sir, you discourse of the nature of a Covenant, and
plead for these Miscreants lives, as if his Majesty and the Parliament had
passed with them a formal and positive contract; whereas the Proclamation is a
bare summons for such (who in conscience of their guilt) were fled, and
obscured, that they appear and abide the Trial of the Law, which was their
duty, without being directed by this Proclamation. To such I crave leave to
answer, I grant the Proclamation is a Summons to what was duty without it, nor
can they deny it is Sub-paena which must necessarily imply a Condition whereby
the Pain may be voided, otherwise it is in vain expressed.

Sir, Civilians tell us of a Pactum vetans a Covenant of Prohibition Grotius de
jure bell. and pa. lib 2. cap. 16.
used in humane society, and declare pactum vetans magis vincit jubentem, quam
positive jubens; it more strongly obliges the Superior, then a positive
precept; All Summons is a Covenant of this nature, and therefore most sacred
and inviolable; So as that a Cessation from the thing forbidden, must
necessarily void the penalty. Nature teaches the Mother, with a rod in her
hand, to call in the wild wanton child, on pain of being whipped, if overtaken
and fetched in; The Child confiding in her words, returns with speed and
escapes the corrction; the General to summon a Garrison to be yielded within
24. hours, on pain of burning to the Town, and slaughter to every man; They
yield to the Summons, and are saved: Our Law directs a Proclamation on pain of
an Outlaw, the defendant appears and has liberty of plea. His late Majesty
(as do all Princes in like case) summoned such as followed the Earl of
Proclamation from York, Aug. 9. 1642.
Ess^x to lay down their Arms, and repair to their houses within six days, on
pain of being judged Rebels and Traitors; some accordingly returned and
avoided the penalty; in these and the like cases the penalty could not be
inflicted without barbarous breach of faith and high dishonor.

The nature, usage, and obligation of A pactum vetans, is commended by many
examples in Holy Writ, as Joabs Summons of the City of Abell to render
rebellious Sheba to Justice, on pain of being sacked: And Solomon's confinement
of Abiathar to his City Anathoth, and Shimey to his house on pain of Death;
Abell did escape by the head of Sheba, nor had Shimey dyed if he had kept
within his bounds as did Abiathar.

This Proclamation is a summons of duty but sub poena; and so a Covenant though
vetans, to the future Latencie of these men; the nature of the pain is their
advantage; had it been (what is usual in cases of this nature) a Summons to
appear on pain of being concluded guilty, and to suffer without mercy; their
appearance had secured to them a due and fair trial, in which to plead for
their lives; but the pain of being excepted from pardon both for life and
estate must needs secure them the one; otherwise what is the pain to be avoided
by obedience to the prohibition?

This pactum vetans is so natural to men, so suitable to Sovereign Majesty, a
security so sacred and inviolably obliging in humane society, that God himself
makes it his first transaction with his creature man; In the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall die the death, was the form and tenure of the first
Covenant; Will any man deny the same to assure life on the condition of the
prescribed abstinency from the forbidden fruit?

Civilians render three (I shall make them four) reasons why a pactum vetans, a
Covenant of prohibition should more firmly oblige the prescriber, than a
positive precept, and more express Covenant; every of these reasons concur in
our Traitors case, to Corroborate their claim:

1. The matter thereby prohibited is special, not general, Cicero lib. 2.
Grotius de jure bell. and pac. page 262.
[obscure not your selves from a legal Tryal] and their rule is, peculiare and
quod ad rem propius accedit, magis obligat quam generale, what is special, and
comes nearest the matter, does more bind, than what is general and more remote.

2. The time in such Covenants is limited, which being slipped, they may sit down
and sing that Cyrene song, Front capillata post est occasio calva, Oh that we
had known in that our day the things which concerned our peace, but are now hid
from our eyes. [appear and render your selves within fourteen dayes] Hence
Dixwell and his fellow Petitioners, could not procure one day, to the grace
exhibited in the Proclamation; the rule is quod faciendum est certo tempore,
magis obligat quam quod quovis tempore fieri potest; what is to be done in a
certain time, binds more than what is to be done at any time.

3. This kind of Covenant usually passes sub poena; implying immunity and
escape; [on pain of being excepted from any pardon both for life and estate]
the rule is (quod poenam adjunctam habet, magis obligat quam quod poena vacat)
a prohibition with penalty binds more than that without; they could be but
drawn out of their Dens to Tyburn, if they had not appeared according to the
Proclamation.

4. The condition of the pactum vetans is prescribed, not capitulated, imposed
by Majesty and Authority, condescending to mitigate severity, and release
rigor; leaving the liberum arbitrium of the men concerned, to this bare
choice, Come and appear within fourteen days, or be excepted from any pardon
both for life and estate: (more than which cannot befall those that are fled,
and refused to appear) and this rule cannot be denied authoritate praescripta,
magis obligant quam capitulata; terms imposed by authority do more strictly
bind; than terms capitulated upon a fair and equal Treaty.

Sir, on the serious consideration of these men's claim, I see not how it can be
denied, they have the public faith of the Kingdom engaged for their lives; the
violation whereof must be greatly dishonorable to the King and Parliament;
yea, though by a Bill to be passed for their execution; which I humbly conceive
is below a Parliament; who may (with more justice and honor) by their
Legislative power, on politic and prudent grounds, take away the life of one
whom the Law cannot Convict and Condemn, than direct the execution of them over
whom the Law had full power, until barred by the force of public faith,
Rationally claimed to supersede this last Act.

To pretend they were not a Parliament (who gave this security) according to
the strictness of our Law, and Nations Constitution, will not make an objection
of any strength: For

1. The question is not about an ordinary process in our Law; but a transaction
purely determinable by the Civil Law; the rules of Common justice and honor
among men.

2. They were a full and free Convention, and Collective body of the Kingdom,
capable to represent the Nation, and engage the faith thereof, though convened
by a defective erroneous Writ, through the necessity of the times, and estate
of the Kingdom.

3. They were the first free Parliament, the fruit of all the Convultions and
Commotions occasioned by our desired liberty, and we were to be ruled, and in
all cases resolved by our own reasons, declared by representatives of our own
choice.

4. They were His Majesty's Parliament, convened for his sake, to his happy and
honorable return; (by which our Land has been revived) legitimated by his
adoption, annimated by his presence, and corroborated by his concurrence;
pardon being the eminent and undisputable prerogative of his Imperial Crown;
whose Royal Faith hereby engaged, inviolably secureth some grace to these poor
wretches.

These things do evidence that Parliament to have been sufficiently capacitated
to give an assurance by public faith; which cannot be avoided by defect of a
punctilio, or circumstance peculiar to our Law; but does so strengthen these
Prisoners Gates and Bars, that I cannot but profess, I see not how they can
ever be drawn to execution, without drawing the guilt and disgrace of cruelty,
revenge and perfidie on a Faith-keeping Prince and Parliament, though by a Bill
to be passed for that purpose.

Honored Sir, Did these Traitors want this claim, or their claim want reason,
yet common prudence, and the honor of His Majesty's Clemency now seems to me
to be a confiderable supersedeas to the execution of them: For Sir,

1. The splendour of His Majesty's Clemency (the ^^esse say the Graecians, the
honor of a Just man say the Romans) being much clouded by the Universality of
the Object (many singulars thinking they needed no Act of Grace, and some
resolved against an Act of Oblivion) does sparkle with such Orient brightness,
by the superseding the execution ^stum^le ^uia d^ ^.
of these Defamed, Convicted, Condemned Individuals: it hereby existing in its
full proportion and very formality, (which Favorin^ thus defines (...). And
Grotius does thus Translateth, ^ea quae di itur clementia apud homines est ^e
jure l. and pa^, lib ^. (...) 20 ^g 307.
te^pest^ca relaxatio summi juris, and I must English, Clemency is to save the
life of a Malefactor tied up to the Gallows) that I cannot desire to see it
darkened by such an Act as revenge may justly provoke, but the vulgar judging
by sense will not discern.

2. The quality of these persons, and their present Estate does abate the fury
conceived against them, they seem to be so weak in their Naturals, that their
being Parliament men (which lead them into temptation) may be almost judged
their greatest Crime; they appear too simple to have been first Imaginers of
that Horrid Regicide, or Agitators of that High Court (or to use his Majesty's
phrase) chief A^^^^^s of that Murder: And then Sir, they are not the intended
objects of the declared expectation from his Royal Grace and pardon; I cannot
without smiling, remember how the poor men's Consciences were troubled at the
Terms, Traitorously maliciously, in their Indictment, (on which the Solicitor
did accutely gloss; My Lord, they think they might Sentence the King to Death,
Meekly, Innocently, Charitably and Honestly) which certainly did so far bespeak
their simplicity; that had our Law allowed Accessaries in Treason, Judge and
Jury would have saved them by their Clergy: How tremblingly did they beg to
wave their Plea, (as if run into a praemunire, by pleading not guilty) that they
might confess and be hanged, without this grace interposed? no doubt the Court
was well pleased with their Profound Apologies; one pleading, I was young, in
Infancy, eating sower Grapes, not knowing they would set mine much less my
Childrens teeth on edge, Another, I withstood, gainsaid that wicked Sentence*
yet was simply drawn in to Sign and Seal the same; A third, I looked but over
the Hedge, I appeared once and again, among, and as a Member of that wicked
P^^k with an intent to prevent their Mischief, against which I got an Assembly
man to pray with me. Yet Sir, Are these weak men condemned, attainted in Blood,
their estate confiscate, and by spending their miserable lives in Prison, as it
were hanged in Chains, as mee^ loving Monuments, of God and the Kings Justice
(which has already swallowed up the Capital Offenders) and more lasting
Spectacles of Dread to future Regicides, then their withering Quarters are
capable of; being a lively Comment on Psalm. 59. verse. 11. Slay not them, least
my people forget it. For my part, I think Justice is not more orient by that
restraint of Clemency, sparing to those men that little which is dearest to
them; then by the merciful reserve of such dreadful Spectacles for men to
behold and consider; insomuch that I could almost envy their very nature, and
death it self, which ere long will remove them from a piece of pity, so
prudently severe.

3. The end of punishment must be Caution, not Revenge; Excellent Sen. de
Clemen. chap. 1^.
is the saying of Plato, (...): and again, (...).

Which the serious Seneca thus renders, Nemo prudens punit quia peccatum est,
sed ne peccatur; revocari enim praeterita non possent, futura prohibentur; and
again, ne homini quidem noce^im^^ quia peccavit, sed ne peccet, nec unquam ad
praeterittum, sed ad futurum referetur poena; non euim ira scitur sed cavet.
The God of Justice has prescribed punishment, that others might hear and fear,
and do no more so wickedly; so far as the Execution of the same looks back,
it is revenge, and only punishment by looking forward, at this end it must be
levelled, and accordingly squared; poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes, is a rule
directing all Executions; Justice is ordinarily satisfied by the Execution of a
few chief Offenders; the cutting off the Multitude under the same guilt, is
over Sanguinary and revengeful; Martial Law allows equal Mutiners in an Army,
the chance of a Dice on a Drum Head, for the single Example of their Mutiny.
Prudent Princes ever proclaimed their Justice by the Execution of a few of the
many Condemned Malefactors; Shebas Head was judged a sufficient Sacrifice for
the many Rebels he had seduced. Our King Henry the seventh made his Justice
Triumph more in Lambert Symnels turning his spit; and Speeds Hist.
Perkin Warbeck looking through the Iron Grates, then by the turning the one or
the other over the Ladder, though both were Counterfeit Pretenders to the
Crown, unto bloody and dangerous Rebellions: His late Marryred Majesty charged
his Son should not Revenge (whilst he could not but punish) his Death; and his
Majesty as obedient to the Charge, declared to except from all pardon, some few
chief Authors of that Murder, the which the Commons first computed to be seven
^^ a sufficient number.

Sir, These things considered, were not the Faith and Honor of this Kingdom
engaged to secure the Lives of these Condemned Persons; I could not but adore
his Majesty's Clemency in their thus long reprieve, which I now desire may
continue; being convinced that such who shall provoke our David, to cut off
these Shimois (most wisely confined to their proper places) will be found
Abishas, sons of Zerviah, too hard for him, and Adversaries to him; who hereby
makes all the world to know he is King in England, graciously holding the
sword of Justice which justly hangs over, from falling on the neck of these
Regicides.

Sir, pardon my plainness and prolixity in this rude Discourse, for which if I
be called to the Bar of the House, for intermedling with the A^^anae Imperii, I
must plead your Command as my Commission, and expect your defense of

August 20. 1661. Your most Humble and Obliged Servant, Philopater Philoroy.

FINIS.

