Christian ETHICS: OR, Divine MORALITY. Opening the WAY to BLESSEDNESS, By the
RULES of VIRTUE AND REASON.

By THO. TRAHERNE, B. D. Author of the Roman Forgeries.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1675.

TO THE READER.
THE design of this Treatise is, not to stroke and tickle the Fancy, but to
elevate the Soul, and refine its Apprehensions, to inform the Judgment, and
polish it for Conversation, to purify and inflame the Heart, to enrich the
Mind, and guide Men (that stand in need of help) in the way of Virtue; to
excite their Desire, to encourage them to Travel, to comfort them in the
Journey, and so at last to lead them to true Felicity, both here and hereafter.

I need not treat of Virtues in the ordinary way, as they are Duties enjoined
by the Law of GOD; that the Author of The whole Duty of Man has excellently
done: nor as they are Prudential Expedients and Means for a man's Peace and
Honor on Earth; that is in some measure done by the French Charron of Wisdom.
My purpose is to satisfy the Curious and Unbelieving Soul, concerning the
reality, force, and efficacy of Virtue; and having some advantages from the
knowledge I gained in the nature of Felicity (by many years earnest and
diligent study) my business is to make as visible, as it is possible for me,
the luster of its Beauty, Dignity, and Glory: By showing what a necessary Means
Virtue is, how sweet, how full of Reason, how desirable in it self, how just
and amiable, how delightful, and how powerfully conducive also to Glory: how
naturally Virtue carries us to the Temple of Bliss, and how immeasurably
transcendent it is in all kinds of Excellency.

And (if I may speak freely) my Office is, to carry and enhance Virtue to its
utmost height, to open the Beauty of all the Prospect, and to make the Glory of
GOD appear, in the Blessedness of Man, by setting forth its infinite
Excellency: Taking out of the Treasuries of Humanity those Arguments that will
discover the great perfection of the End of Man, which he may atchieve by the
capacity of his Nature: As also by opening the Nature of Virtue it self,
thereby to display the mavelous Beauty of Religion, and light the Soul to the
sight of its Perfection.

I do not speak much of Vice, which is far the more easy Theme, because I am
entirely taken up with the abundance of Worth and Beauty in Virtue, and have so
much to say of the positive and intrinsic Goodness of its Nature. But besides,
since a strait Line is the measure both of it self, and of a crooked one, I
conclude, That the very Glory of Virtue well understood, will make all Vice
appear like dirt before Jewel, when they are compared together. Nay, Vice as
soon as it is named in the presence of these Virtues, will look like Poison and
a Contagion, or if you will, as black as Malice and Ingratitude: so that there
will need no other Exposition of its Nature, to dehort Men from the love of it,
than the Illustration of its Contrary.

Virtues are listed in the rank of Invisible things; of which kind, some are so
blind as to deny there are any existent in Nature: But yet it may, and will be
made easily apparent, that all the Peace and Beauty in the World proceeds
from them, all Honor and Security is founded in them, all Glory and Esteem is
acquired by them. For the Prosperity of all Kingdoms is laid in the Goodness of
GOD and of Men. Were there nothing in the World but the Works of Amity, which
proceed from the highest Virtue, they alone would testify of its Excellency.
For there can be no Safety where there is any Treachery: But were all Truth and
Courtesy exercised with Fidelity and Love, there could be no Injustice or
Complaint in the World; no Strife, nor Violence: but all Bounty, Joy and
Complacency. Were there no Blindness, every Soul would be full of Light, and
the face of Felicity be seen, and the Earth be turned into Heaven.

The things we treat of are great and mighty; they touch the Essence of every
Soul, and are of infinite Concernment, because the Felicity is eternal that is
acquired by them: I do not mean Immortal only but worthy to be Eternal: and it
is impossible to be happy without them. We treat of Man's great and sovereign
End, of the Nature of Blessedness, of the Means to attain it: Of Knowledge and
Love, of Wisdom and Goodness, of Righteousness and Holiness, of Justice and
Mercy, of Prudence and Courage, of Temperance and Patience, of Meekness and
Humility, of Contentment, of Magnanimity and Modesty, of Liberality and
Magnificence, of the ways by which Love is begotten in the Soul, of Gratitude,
of Faith, Hope, and Charity, of Repentance, Devotion, Fidelity, and Godliness.
In all which we show what sublime and mysterious Creatures they are, which
depend upon the Operations of Man's Soul; their great extent, their use and
value, their Original and their End, their Objects and their Times: What
Virtues belong to the Estate of Innocence, what to the Estate of Misery and
Grace, and what to the Estate of Glory. Which are the food of the Soul, and the
works of Nature; which were occasioned by Sin, as Medicines and Expedients
only: which are Essential to Felicity, and which Accidental; which Temporal,
and which Eternal: with the true Reason of their Imposition; why they all are
commanded, and how wise and gracious GOD is in enjoining them. By which means
all Atheism is put to flight, and all Infidelity: The Soul is reconciled to the
Lawgiver of the World, and taught to delight in his Commandments: All Enmity
and Coffeehouse must vanish as Clouds and Darkness before the Sun, when the
Beauty of Virtue appears in its brightness and glory. It is impossible that
the splendor of its Nature should be seen, but all Religion and Felicity will
be manifest.

Perhaps you will meet some New Notions: but yet when they are examined, he
hopes it will appear to the Reader, that it was the actual knowledge of true
Felicity that taught him to speak of Virtue; and moreover, that there is not
the least tittle pertaining to the Catholic Faith contradicted or altered in
his Papers. For he firmly retains all that was established in the Ancient
Councels, nay and sees Cause to do so, even in the highest and most
transcendent Mysteries: only he enriches all, by farther opening the grandeur
and glory of Religion, with the interior depths and Beauties of Faith. Yet
indeed it is not he, but GOD that has enriched the Nature of it: he only
brings the Wealth of Virtue to light, which the infinite Wisdom, and Goodness,
and Power of GOD have seated there. Which though Learned Men know perhaps far
better than he, yet he humbly craves pardon for casting in his Mite to the
vulgar Exchequer. He has nothing more to say, but that the Glory of GOD, and
the sublime Perfection of Humane Nature are united in Virtue. By Virtue the
Creation is made useful, and the Universe delightful. All the Works of GOD are
crowned with their End, by the Glory of Virtue. For whatsoever is good and
profitable for Men is made Sacred; because it is delightful and well-pleasing
to GOD: Who being LOVE by Nature, delights in his Creatures welfare.

There are two sorts of concurrent Actions necessary to Bliss. Actions in GOD,
and Actions in Men; nay and Actions too in all the Creatures. The Sun must
warm, but it must not burn; the Earth must bring forth, but not swallow up; the
Air must cool without starving, and the Sea moisten without drowning: Meats
must feed but not poison: Rain must fall, but not oppress: Thus in the
inferior Creatures you see Actions are of several kinds. But these may be
reduced to the Actions of GOD, from whom they spring; for he prepares all these
Creatures for us. And it is necessary to the felicity of his Sons, that he
should make all things healing and amiable, not odious and destructive: that he
should Love, and not Hate: And the Actions of Men must concur aright with these
of GOD, and his Creatures. They must not despise Blessings because they are
given, but esteem them; not trample them under feet, because they have the
benefit of them, but magnify and extol them: They too must Love, and not Hate:
They must not kill and murder, but serve and pleasure one another: they must
not scorn great and inestimable Gifts, because they are common, for so the
Angels would lose all the happiness of Heaven. If GOD should do the most great
and glorious things that infinite Wisdom could devise; if Men will resolve to
be blind, and perverse, and senseless, all will be in vain: the most High and
Sacred things will increase their Misery. This may give you some little glimpse
of the excellency of Virtue.

You may easily discern that my Design is to reconcile Men to GOD, and make
them fit to delight in him: and that my last End is to celebrate his Praises,
in communion with the Angels. Wherein I beg the Concurrence of the Reader, for
we can never praise him enough; nor be fit enough to praise him: No other man
(at least) can make us so, without our own willingness, and endeavor to do it.

Above all, pray to be sensible of the Excellency of the Creation for upon the
due sense of its Excellency the life of Felicity wholly depends. Pray to be
sensible of the Excellency of Divine Laws, and of all the Goodness which your
Soul comprehends. Covet a lively sense of all you know, of the Excellency of
GOD, and of Eternal Love; of your own Excellency, and of the worth and value of
all Objects whatsoever. For to feel is as necessary, as to see their Glory.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. OF the End, for the sake of which, Virtue is desired. Chap. II. Of
the Nature of Felicity; its excellency and perfection. Chap. III. Of Virtue in
general. The distribution of it into its several kinds. Its definition. Chap.
IV. Of the Powers and Affections of the Soul: What Virtues pertain to the
estate of Innocence; what to the estate of Grace; what to the estate of Glory.
Chap. V. Of the necessity, excellency and use, of Knowledge: Its depths and
extents; its Objects, and its End. Chap. VI. Of Love and Hatred. The necessity
and sweetness of Love. Its general use and efficacy. The several kinds of Love.
Of the power, inclination and act of Love; its extent and capacity. Chap. VII.
What benefit GOD himself does receive by his eternal Love: That when our Love
is made complete and perfect, it will be like his, and the benefit of it will
be eternal. Chap. VIII. Of the excellency of Truth, as it is the object and
cause of Virtue. The matter and form of Virtuous Actions. That their form is
infinitely more excellent than their matter, and the Heathen Morality
infinitely defective and short of the Christian. Chap. IX. Wisdom is seated in
the Will; it attaineth best of all possible Ends by the best of all possible
Means. Chap. X. Of Righteousness, how Wisdom, Justice, and right Reason are
shut up in its Nature. What God does, and what we acquire, by the exercise of
this Virtue. Chap. XI. Of Goodness natural, moral, and divine; its Nature
described. The benefits and Works of Goodness. Chap. XII. Of Holiness: Its
nature, violence and pleasure. Its beauty consists in the infinite love of
Righteousness and Perfection. Chap. XIII. Of Justice in general, and
particular. The great good it does in Empires and Kingdoms; a token of the more
retired good it does in the Soul. Its several kinds. That Gods punitive Justice
springs from his Goodness. Chap. XIV. Of Mercy. The indelible stain and guilt
of Sin. Of the Kingdom which God recovered by Mercy. The transcendent nature of
that duty; with its effects and benefits. Chap. XV. Of Faith. The faculty of
Believing implanted in the Soul. Of Nature its Objects are. The necessity of
Faith: Its end; its use and excellency. It is the Mother and fountain of all
the Virtues. Chap. XVI. Of Hope. Its foundation: its distinction from Faith;
its extents and dimensions; its life and vigor; its several kinds; its
sweetness and excellency. Chap. XVII. Of Repentance. Its original; its nature;
it is a purgative Virtue; its necessity; its excellencies. The measure of that
sorrow which is due to Sin is intolerable to Sense; confessed by Reason, and
dispensed with by Mercy. Chap. XVIII. Of Charity toward God. It sanctifies
Repentance, makes it a Virtue, and turns it to a part of our true Felicity. Our
Love to all other objects is to begin and end in God. Our Love of God has an
excellency in it, that makes it worthy to be desired by his eternal Majesty. He
is the only supreme and perfect Friend; by Loving we enjoy him. Chap. XIX.
Charity to our Neighbor most natural and easy in the estate of Innocence:
Adams Love to Eve, and his Children, a great exemplar of our Love to all the
World. The sweetness of Loving. The benefits of being Beloved. To love all the
World, and to be beloved by all the World, is perfect security and felicity.
Were the Law fulfilled, all the World would be turned into Heaven. Chap. XX. Of
Prudence. Its foundation is Charity, its end tranquillity and prosperity on
Earth; its office to reconcile Duty and Convenience, and to make Virtue
subservient to Temporal welfare. Of Prudence in Religion; Friendship, and
Empire. The end of Prudence is perfect Charity. Chap. XXI. Encouragements to
Courage. Its Nature, cause, and end. Its greatness and renown. Its ornaments
and Companions. Its objects, circumstances, effects, and disadvantages: how
Difficulties increase its virtue. Its Victories and Triumphs. How subservient
it is to Blessedness and Glory. Chap. XXII. Of Temperance in matters of Art, as
Music, Dancing, Painting, Cookery, Physic, etc. In the works of Nature;
Eating, drinking, sports and recreations: In occasions of passion, in our lives
and Conversations. Its exercise in Self-denial, measure, mixture and
proportion. Its effects and atchievments. Chap. XXIII. Of Temperance in God.
How the Moderation of Almighty Power, guided in his Works by Wisdom, perfecteth
the Creation. How it has raised its own Glory and our Felicity beyond all that
simple Power could effect by its Infiniteness. Chap. XXIV. Of Patience. Its
original. How God was the first patient Person in the World. The nature, and
the glory, and the blessed effects of his eternal Patience. The Reason and
design of all Calamities. Of Patience in Martyrdom. The extraordinary reward of
ordinary Patience in its meanest obscurity. Chap. XXV. The cause of Meekness is
Love. It respects the future beauty and perfection of its object. It is the
most supernatural of all the Virtues. The reasons and grounds of this Virtue in
the estate of Grace and Misery. Its manifold effects and excellenlencies. Of
the Meekness of Moses and Joseph. Chap. XXVI. Humility is the basis of all
Virtue and Felicity, in all estates, and for ever to be exercised. As Pride
does alienate the Soul from God, Humility unites it to him in adoration and
amity. It makes infinite Blessedness infinitely greater, is agreeable to the
truth of our condition, and leads us through a dark and mysterious way to
Glory. Chap. XXVII. That Contentment is a Virtue. Its causes, and its ends: Its
Impediments, Effects, and Advantages. The way to attain and secure Contentment.
Chap. XXVIII. Of Magnanimity, or greatness of Soul. Its nature. Its foundation
in the vast Capacity of the Understanding. Its desire. Its objects are infinite
and eternal. Its enquiries are most profound and earnest. It disdaineth all
feeble Honors, Pleasures and Treasures. A Magnanimous Man is the only Great
and undaunted Creature. Chap. XXIX. Of Modesty. Its nature. Its original. Its
effects and consequences. Chap. XXX. The excellent nature of Liberality. Rules
to be observed in the practice of it. Regard to our Servants, Relations,
Friends and Neighbors must be had in our Liberality, as well as to the Poor
and Needy. How our external acts of Charity ought to be improved for the
benefit of men's Souls. Liberality makes Religion real and substantial. Chap.
XXXI. Of Magnificence in God. Its resemblance in Man. The chief Magnificence of
the Soul is Spiritual. It is perfectly expressed in the outward life, when the
whole is made perfect, and presented to God. God gives all his Life to us: and
we should give ours all to him. How fair and glorious it may be. Chap. XXXII.
Of Gratitude. It feeds upon Benefits, and is in height and fervor answerable
to their Greatness. The Question stated, Whether we are able to love GOD more
than our selves. It is impossible to be grateful to GOD without it. A hint of
the glorious Consequences of so doing. Chap. XXXIII. The Beauty of Gratitude.
Its principal Causes. Amity and Communion are the great effect of its Nature.
The true Character of a grateful Person. Gods incommunicable Attributes enjoyed
by Gratitude. All Angels and Men are a grateful Persons Treasures, as they
assist him in Praises. He sacrifices all Worlds to the Deity, and supreamly
delights to see him sitting in the Throne of Glory. An APPENDIX. Of Enmity
and Triumph: Of Schism and Heresy, Fidelity, Devotion, Godliness. Wherein is
declared, how Gratitude and Felicity inspire and perfect all the Virtues.
To the Reader.
The Author's much lamented Death happening immediately after this Copy came to
the Press, may reasonably move the Readers charity, to pardon those few
Errata's which have escaped in the Printing by so sad an occasion.

CHRISTIAN ETHICS OR DIVINE MORALITY. Opening The Way to Blessedness By The
rules of Virtue and Reason.
CHAP. I.
Of the End, for the sake of which, Virtue is desired.

IT is the Prerogative of Humane Nature to understand it self, and guide its
Operations to a Known End: which he does wholly forfeit, that lives at random,
without considering what is worthy of his Endeavors, or fit for his Desires.

THE End is that which crowns the Work; that which inspires the Soul with
Desire, and Desire with a quick and vigorous Industry. It is last attained, but
first intended in every Operation. All Means which can be used in the
Acquisiton of it, derive their value from its Excellency, and we are encouraged
to use them only on the Account of that End, which is attained by them.

IT is the Office of Morality to teach Men the Nature of Virtue, and to
encourage them in the Practice of it, by explaining its use and Efficacy.

THE Excellence of Virtue, is the Necessity and Efficacy thereof in the Way to
Felicity. It consists in this, Virtue is the only Means, by which Happiness
can be obtained.

SINCE the Consideration of the End is that alone, which does animate a Man, to
the use of the Means, they that treat of Virtue do worthily propose the End in
the beginning, and first show the Excellency of Bliss before they open the
Nature of Virtue. For it is a vain thing to discover the Means, unless the End
be desired by those to whom the Nature and use of them, in their tendency to
that End, is taught and commended; for if the End be despised, all endeavors
are but fruitless, which instruct us in the Means; and the Knowledge of them
vain, if they never be used or improved.

THAT Reason, whereby Man is able to Contemplate his End, is a singular
Advantage, wherein he is privileged above a Beast. It enables him not only to
examine the Nature and perfection of his End, but the Equity and fitness of the
Means in Order thereunto and the singular Excellency of his first Cause, as its
Glory and Goodness appears in the Design and Contrivance: Especially in
making man's Happiness so complete and perfect.

THE Heathens, who invented the name of Ethics, were very short in the
Knowledge of Man's End: But they are worse then Heathens, that never consider it.

THE more Excellent the End is, the more prone by nature we are to pursue it,
and all the Means conducive thereunto are the more Desirable.

REASON, which is the formal Essence of the Soul of Man, guides Him to desire
those Things, which are absolutely supreme. For it is an Eternal Property in
Reason to prefer the Better, above the Worse: He that prefers the worse above
^he Better acts against Nature, and ^wervs from the Rule of Right Reason.

WHATEVER Varieties of Opinion there are concerning Happiness, all conclude and
agree in this, that Man's last End is his perfect Happiness: And the more
Excellent his Happiness is, the more ought his Soul to be enflamed with the
Desire of it, and inspired with the greater Industry.

THE more perfect his Bliss is, the greater is the Crime of despising it. To
pursue an infinite and Eternal Happiness is Divine and Angelical; to pursue a
Terrene and Sensual Felicity, is Brutish; but to place Felicity in Anger and
Envy is Diabolical: the pleasures of Malice being Bitter and Destructive.

TO live by Accident, and never to pursue any Felicity at all, is neither
Angelical, nor Brutish, nor Diabolical: but Worse then any Thing in some
respect in the World: It is to act against our own Principles, and to wage war
with our very Selves. They that place their Ease in such a Carelessness, are of
all others, the greatest Enemies and Disturbers of themselves.

IT is Madness and folly to pursue the first object that presents it self,
und^^^ Notion of felicity: And it is (...) to content ones self in the
Enjoyme^^ of a mean estate, upon a suspicion there is no true happiness,
because the nature thereof is so much doubted in the World. The Disputations
concerning its nature argue its existance. And we must cease to be Men, before
we can extinguish the desire of being Happy. He only is truly Generous, that
aspires to the most perfect Blessedness of which God and Nature have made him
Capable.

BY how much Greater the Uncertainty is, by so much the more Heedful ought we
to be, lest we should be seduced and deceived, in the Choice of Happiness: For
the Danger is the Greater. And by how much the more Eager Men are in their
Disputations, concerning it, by so much the more weighty is the Nature of the
Theme to be presumed.

HASTINESS in catching at an unexamined Felicity, is the great Occasion of all
the Error about it, among the Vulgar: who are led, like Beasts, by their Sense
and Appetite, without discerning or improving any other faculty. The lip of the
Cup is anointed with Honey, which, as soon as they taste, they drink it up, tho
the liquor be nothing but Gall and Poison. Being deluded with a show, instead
of Pleasure, they rush hand over head on their own Destruction.

IT is as natural to Man to desire happiness, as to live and breath: Sense and
Instinct carry him to Happyness, as well as Reason: only Reason should
rectify and direct his Instinct, inform his Sense, and complete his Essence,
by inducing those perfections of which it is capable.

THINGS Good in themselves, when they stand in Competition with those that are
better, have the notion of Evil: Better Things are Evil, if compared with the
Best; especially where the Choice of the one hinders the Acquisition of the
other. For where Good, Better, and Best, are subservient to each other, the one
is the better for the others sake; but where they interfere, and oppose each
other, the Good are bad in comparison of the Better, and the Better worse than
the Best of all. This is the Cause why Reason cannot acquiesce in any Felicity
less than the Supreme: which must needs be infinite, because Almighty Power,
which made Reason active, is illimited in its Operations; and never rests, but
in the production of a Glorious Act, that is infinite in Perfection.

IF Felicity be infinite, the Loss is as great, that attends our Miscarriage,
and the misery intolerable, that follows our Loss. For (our eyes being open) a
Loss that is incomprehensible must needs produce a Grief unmeasurable, an
Anguish as infinite as our Damage.

ALL inferior felicities are but Miseries compared with the Highest. A
farthing is good and pleases a Beggar in time of distress: but a piece of Gold
is Better. An Estate of a thousand pounds a year is better than a Piece of
Gold; but our Ambition carries us to Principalities and Empires. An Empire is
more desirable than a Province; and the Wider, the Richer, the Better it is,
the more Desirable. But the Empire of all the Earth is a Bubble compared to the
Heavens: And the Heavens themselves less than nothing to an infinite Dominion.

PERFECT Felicity is not Dominion, nor Pleasure, nor Riches alone, nor
Learning, nor Virtue, nor Honor; but all in Perfection. It requires that every
Soul should be capable of infinite Dominion, Pleasure, Learning, and Honor for
the full and perfect attainment of it.

IF all these be infinite and Eternal in that Felicity which is prepared for
Man, those Actions are of inestimable Value, by Virtue of which his Felicity is
gained; and it becomes his Wisdom and Courage to suffer many Things for so
noble an End: Especially if in this Life it may in any measure be thereby
acquired and enjoyed.

THE Great Reason why GOD has concealed Felicity from the Knowledge of man, is
the enhancement of its nature and value: but that which most conceals it, is
the Corruption of Nature. For as we have corrupted, so have we blinded our
selves. Yet are we led by Instinct eagerly to thirst after things unknown
remote and forbidden. The truth is, our Palates are vitiated, and our Digestion
so Corrupted, that till our Nature be purified by a little Industry, to make
felicity Known, is but to Expose it to Contempt and Censure. It is too Great
and Pure for perverted Nature.

THE Concealment of an object whets our Appetite, and puts and Edge upon our
endeavors, and this carries some thing of Mystery in it; For whereas the
Maxim is Ignoti nulla Cupido, All Love comes in at the Eye, we affect an
Object to which we are Blind, and the more Blind we are, the more restless. We
are touched with an unknown Beauty which we never saw, and in the midst of our
Ignorance are actuated with a Tendency, which does not abate the value of our
Virtues, but put Life and Energy into our Actions.

THO Felicity cannot, perfectly be understood, because it is incomprehensible
to Men on Earth, yet so much of it may be discerned, as will serve to meet our
Instinct, and feed our Capacity, animate our Endeavor, encourage our
Expectation (to hope for more then we enjoy) enable us to subdue our Lusts,
support us in temptations, and assist us in overcoming all obstacles whatsoever.

INFINITE Honors and Pleasures, were there no more in Felicity, are enough to
allure us: but the fruition of all in the Best of Manners, in Communion with
God, being full of Life, and Beauty, and Perfection in himself, and having the
certain Assurance that all shall be included in his Bliss, that can be thought
on; it is a Thing so Divine, that the very Hope of it fills us with Comfort
here, and the Attainment with perfect Satisfaction hereafter.

HE that can enjoy all Things in the Image of GOD, needs not covet their
fruition in a Baser Manner: Man was made in GODS Image, that he might live in
his Similitude.

I am not so Stoical, as to make all Felicity consist in a mere Apathy, or
freedom from Passion, nor yet so Dissolute, as to give the Passions all their
Liberty. Neither do I persuade you to renounce the Advantages of Wealth and
Honor, any more then those of Beauty and Wit: for as a Man may be Happy without
all these, so may he make a Happy use of them when he has them. He may be happy
with Difficulty without them, but Easily with them. If not in Heaven, yet
certainly on Earth, the Goods of fortune concur to the Completing of Temporal
Felicity, and therefore where they are freely given, are not to be despised.

THAT which I desire to teach a man is, How to make a Good use of all the
Advantages of his Birth and Breeding; How in the Increase of Riches and Honors,
to be Happy in their Enjoyment: How to secure himself in the temptations of
Affluence, and to make a man glorious in himself, and delightful to others in
Abundance: Or else if Affliction should arise, and the State of Affairs change,
how to triumph over adverse Fortune, and to be Happy notwithstanding his
Calamities. How to govern himself in all Estates so as to turn them to his own
advantage.

FOR tho felicity be not absolutely perfect in this World, nor so complete in
Poverty, as in a great and plentiful Estate; you are not to believe that wealth
is absolutely necessary; because sometimes it is requisite to forfeit all for
the sake of Felicity. Nothing is absolutely necessary to Bliss, but Grace and
virtue, tho to perfect Bliss, Ease and Honor be absolutely necessary.

THERE are many degrees of Blessedness beneath the most Supreme, that are
transcendently Sweet and delightful: And it sometimes happens, that what is
most bitter to Sense, is pleasant to Reason.

RATHER then make Shipwreck of a good Conscience, we must do as Mariners in a
storm, cast our riches over board for our own Preservation. It is better losing
them, then our selves.

VIRTUE is Desirable and Glorious, because it teaches us through many
Difficulties in this Tempestuous World to Sail Smoothly, and attain the Haven.

CHAP. II.
Of the Nature of Felicity, its Excellence and Perfection.

THE Peripateticks, so far forth as they contemplated the Nature and Estate of
man in this World, were Wise, in defining the Goods of the Body, Soul and
Fortune to concur to Man's perfect Happiness. For Difficulties and Conflicts are
not Essential to the Nature of Bliss, nor confistent with the fruition of its
fullness and Perfection.

THERE is the Way, and the journeyes end.

IN the Way to Felicity many things are to be endured, that are not to be
desired. And therefore is it necessary, to make a Distinction between the way
to Felicity, and the Rest which we attain in the end of our Journey.

THE Goods of the Soul, are absolutely necessary in the Way to Happiness; the
Goods of the Body are very convenient, and those of Fortune Commodious enough.
But the latter of these are not with too much eagerness to be pursued.

THE Goods of the soul are wisdom, Knowledge, Courage, all the Virtues, all the
Passions, Affections, Powers and faculties. And these you know are absolutely
necessary.

THE Goods of the Body are Health, Agility, Beauty, Vivacity, Strength and
Liberty: and these shall in Heaven it self, together with those of the Soul,
he enjoyed. By which you may discern that the Goods of the Body are real Parts
and Ingredients of Happiness.

THE Goods of Fortune are food and Raiment, Houses and Lands, Riches, Honors,
Relations and Friends, with all those convenient Circumstances without the
Body, that are subject to chance. By which virtue is assisted, and of which a
noble use may be made, in Works of Justice, Hospitality, Courtesy and Charity,
which may redound to our greater Felicity here and in heaven.

THE more Honor and pleasure we enjoy, the Greater and more Perfect is our
present Happiness: Tho many times in the Way to Felicity, we are forced to quit
all these, for the Preservation of our Innocence.

GALLANT Behavior in flighting all Transitory things for the Preservation of
our Virtue, is more conducive to our future Perfection, then the greatest ease
imaginable in our present condition.

IT is incumbent upon us, as a special part of our Care, to take heed, that we
be not ensnared by the easiness of Prosperity, and that we do not set up our
Rest in the Way to Happiness, nor deceive our selves in thinking the Goods of
Fortune Essential: nor discourage our selves, by thinking it impossiable to be
Happy without them. Our Thoughts and Affections must be always disentangled,
that we may run, with Alacrity the Race set before us, and close with the
Sublimest Perfection of Bliss, as our only portion and Desire.

FELICITY is rightly defined, to be the Perfect fruition of a Perfect Soul,
acting in perfect Life by Perfect Virtue. For the Attainment of which
Perfection, we must, in the Way to Felicity, endure all Afflictions that can
befall us. For tho they are not Parts of Felicity themselves, yet we may
acknowledge them great Advantages for the Exercise of Virtue, and reckon our
Calamities among our Joys, when we bear and overcome them in a virtuous Manner,
because they add to our Honor, and contribute much to our Perfection, both
here, and hereafter.

FOR this purpose we are to remember, that our present Estate is not that of
Reward, but Labor: It is an Estate of Trial, not of Fruition: A Condition
wherein we are to Toil, and Sweat, and travail hard, for the promised Wages; an
Appointed Seed Time, for a future Harvest; a real Warfare, in order to a
Glorious Victory: In which we must expect some Blows, and delight in the
Hazzards and Encounters we meet with, because they will be crowned with a
Glorious and joyful Triumph; and attended with ornaments and trophies far
surpassing the bare Tranquillity of idle peace.

WHEN we can cheerfully look on an Army of Misfortunes, without Amazement we
may then freely and Delightfully contemplate the Nature of the Highest Felicity.

ARISTOTLE never heard of our Ascension into Heaven, nor of sitting down in the
Throne of GOD, yet by a lucky Hit (if I may so say) fell in point blanck upon
the Nature of Blessedness. For a perfect fruition by perfect virtue, is all
that can be thought of: It implies our Objective, and our formal Happiness.

OBJECTIVE Happiness is all the Goodness that is fit to be enjoyed either in
GOD or in his Creatures: while Formal Happiness is an active Enjoyment of all
Objects by Contemplation and Love, attended with full Complacency in all their
Perfections.

PERFECT Fruition implies the Perfection of all its Objects. Among which GOD
himself is one, Angels and Saints are next, the World also with all the variety
of Creatures in it, the Laws of GOD, and his ways in all Ages, his Eternal
Counsels and Divine Attributes are other Objects of our Content and Pleasure.
Unless all these be perfect in their Nature, Variety, Number, Extent, Relation,
Use and Value, our fruition cannot be simply perfect, because a Greater and
more perfect fruition might, upon the production of better Objects, be
contrived, and no fruition can be truly perfect, that is not conversant about
the highest things. The more Beautiful the Object is, the more pleasant is the
enjoyment. But where Delight may be increased, the Fruition is imperfect.

A Perfect Soul is a Transcendent Mystery. As GOD could not be Perfect, were it
possible there could be any Better Essence then he; so neither would the Soul
be perfect, could any more Perfect Soul be created.

IT is a Soul in which no Defect, or Blemish can be discerned; perfect in the
variety and Number of its Powers, in the fitness and Measure of every power, in
the use and value of every Endowment. A perfect Soul is that whereunto nothing
can be added to please our De^^re. As all its Objects are perfect, so (...) it
self. It is able to see all that is to be seen, to love all that is Lovely, to
hate all that is Hateful, to desire all that is Desirable, to honor all that
is Honorable, to esteem all that can be valued, to delight in all that is
Delightful, and to enjoy all that is Good and fit to be enjoyed. If its Power
did fall short of any one Object, or of any one Perfection in any Object, or of
any Degree in any Perfection, it would be imperfect, it would not be the Master
piece of Eternal Power.

PERFECT life is the full exertion of perfect power. It implies two things,
Perfection of Vigor, and perfection of intelligence, an activity of life,
reaching through all Immensity, to all Objects whatsoever; and a freedom from
all Dullness in apprehending: An exquisite Tenderness of perception in feeling
the least Object, and a Sphere of activity that runs parallel with the
Omnipresence of the Godhead. For if any Soul lives so imperfectly, as to see
and know but some Objects, or to love them remisly, and less then they deserve,
its Life is imperfect, because either it is remiss, or if never so fervent,
confined.

PERFECT Fruition, (as it implie^ the Perfection of all objects) more nearly
imports the intrinsic Perfection o^ its own Operations. For if its Object be
never so many, and perfect in themselves, a Blemish lies upon the Enjoyment, if
it does not reach unto all their Excellence. If the Enjoyment of one Object be
lost, or one Degree of the enjoyment abated, it is imperfect.

PERFECT Virtue may best be understood by a consideration of its Particulars.
Perfect Knowledge is a through complete understanding of all that may be Known.
Perfect Righteousness is a full and adequate Esteem of all the value that is in
Things. It is a Kind of Spiritual Justice, whereby we do Right to our selves,
and to all other Beings. If we render to any Object less than it deserves, we
are not Just thereunto. Perfect Wisdom is that whereby we choose a most perfect
end, actualy pursue it by most perfect Means, acquire and enjoy it in most
perfect manner: If we pitch upon an inferior end, our Wisdom is imperfect; and
so it is, if we pursue it by feeble and inferior Means, or neglect any one of
those Advantages, whereby we may attain it. And the same may be said of all the
Virtues.

NOW if all Objects be infinitely Glorious, and all Worlds fit to be enjoyed,
if GOD has filled Heaven and earth, and all the Spaces above the Heavens with
innumerable pleasures, if his infinite Wisdom, Goodness, and Power be fully
Glorified in every Being, and the Soul be created to enjoy all these in most
perfect Manner; we may well conclude with the Holy Apostle, that we are the
children of GOD, and if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of GOD, and joint heirs
with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified
together. That our light Affliction, that is but for a Moment, works out for
us, a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory: That beholding as in a
Glass the Glory of the Lord, we shall at last be transformed into the same
Image from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. For all his
Works, of which the Psalmist says, They are worthy to be had in remembrance,
and are sought out of all them that have pleasure therein, are like a Mirror,
wherein his Glory appears, as the face of the Sun does in a clear fountain.
We may conclude further that Virtue, by force of which we attain so great a
Kingdom, is infinitely better then Rubies, all the Things thou can desire,
are not to be compared to her: So that with unspeakable comfort we may take
Courage to go on, not only in the study, but the Practice of all kind of
Virtues, concerning which we are to treat in the ensuing Pages. For as the
Apostle Peter tells us, He has given to us all things that pertain to Life
and Godliness, through the Knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and
virtue: whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises; that
by these you might be Partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the
Corruption that is in the World through List. And besides this, says he,
giving all diligence, add to your Faith virtue: and to virtue, knowledge; and
to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience
godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness
Charity. For so an Entrance shall be Ministered to you abundantly into (...)
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Which Kingdom being
so Divine and Glorious as it is, we have need to bow our Knees, to the GOD and
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth
is named, that he would grant us according to the Riches of his Glory, to be
strengthened with might, by his Spirit in the inward Man, that Christ may dwell
in our Hearts by Faith, that we being rooted and grounded in Love, may be able
to comprehend with all Saints, what is the Breadth, and Length, and Depth, and
Height, and to know the love of Christ which passes Knowledge, that we may be
filled with all the fullness of GOD.

TO be Partaker of the Divine nature, to be filled with all the Fullness of GOD,
to enter into his Kingdom and Glory, to be transformed into his Image, and made
an Heir of GOD, and a joint Heir with Christ, to live in Union and Communion
with GOD, and to be made a Temple of the Holy Ghost; these are Divine and
transcendent things that accompany our Souls in the Perfection of their Bliss
and Happiness: the Hope and Belief of all which is justified, and made apparent
by the explanation of the very nature of the Soul, its Inclinations and
Capacities, the reality, and greatness of those Virtues of which we are
capable, and all those objects which the Univers affords to our Contemplation.

CHAP. III.
Of Virtue in General. The Distribution of it into its several Kinds, its
Definition.

BEfore we come to treat of particular Virtues, it is very fit that we speak
something of VIRTUE in General.

VIRTUE is a comprehensive Word, by explaining which we shall make the way more
easy to the right Understanding of all those particular Virtues, into which it
is divided. Forasmuch as the Nature of Virtue enters into knowledge, Faith,
Hope, Charity, Prudence, Courage, Meekness, Humility, Temperance, Justice,
Liberality, etc. Every one of these has its essence opened in part, by the
explication of that which enters its Nature, which is VIRTUE in General.

THE Predicament of Quality contains within it either Natural Dispositions or
Habits: Habits may be either Virtuous or Vicious; Virtuous Habits are either
Theological, Intellectual, Moral, or Divine And these are branched into so many
Kinds of Virtue, as follows.

THE Theological Virtues are generally divided into Three, Faith, Hope, and
Charity: which are called Theological, because they have GOD for their
Principal Object, and are, in a peculiar manner, taught by his. Word among the
Mysteries of Religion. To which we may add Repentance; forasmuch as this
Virtue, tho it be occasioned by sin, is chiefly taught by the Word of GOD, and
respects GOD as its Principal Object. For which reason we shall account the
Theological Virtues to be four, Faith, Hope, Charity and Repentance, to which,
if we making them more, we may add Obedience, Devotion, Godliness.

THE Intellectual Virtues are generally reckoned to be five, Intelligence,
Wisdom, Science, Prudence, Art. Which, forasmuch as the Distinction between
them is over-nice and curious (at least too obscure for vulgar Apprehensions)
we shall reduce them perhaps to a fewer number.

INTELLIGENCE is the Knowledge of Principles; Science the Knowledge of
Conclusions. Wisdom, that knowledge, which results from the Union of both
Prudence and Art, have been more darkly explained. The Objects of Wisdom are
always Stable; Prudence is that knowledge, by which we guide our selves in
Thorny and uncertain Affairs; Art is that Habit, by which we are assisted in
composing Tracts and Systems, rather then in regulating our Lives, and more
frequently appears in Fiddling and Dancing, then in noble Deeds: were it not
useful in Teachers for the Instruction of others, we should scarce reckon it in
the number of Virtues.

ALL these are called Intellectual Virtues, because they are Seated in the
Understanding, and chiefly exercised in Contemplation. The Virtues that are
brought down into action, are called Practical, and at other times Moral,
Because they help us in perfecting our Manners, Minners in Latin are called
Mores whence the English word Moral is derived.
as they relate to our Conversation with Men.

THE Moral Virtues are either Principal, or less Principal. The Principal are
four: Prudence, Justice, Temperance, and Fortitude. Which, because they are the
Hinges upon which our whole Lives do turn, are called * Cardinal, Cardo is a
^^ing.
and are commonly known by the name of The four Cardinal Virtues. They are
called Principal, not only because they are the chief of all Moral Virtues,
but because they enter into every Virtue, as the four Elements of which it is
compounded.

THE less Principal Virtues are Magnificence and Liberality, Modesty and
Magnanimity, Gentleness of behavior, Affability, Courtesy, Truth and
Urbanitie, all these are called less Principal, not because they are
indifferent, or may be accounted useless, for then they would not be Virtues:
but because, tho their Practice be of extraordinary Importance in their places,
they are more remote, and less Avail in the Way to Felicity, and are more
confined in their Operations.

DIVINE Virtues (which we put instead of the Heathenish Heroical,) are such as
have not only GOD for their Object and End, but their Pattern and Example. They
are Virtues which are seen in his eternal Life, by Practicing which we also are
changed into the same Image, and are made partakers of the Di(...) Knowledge
and Truth, in the Sublimest Height we confess to be Three: but we shall Chiefly
insist upon Goodness, and Righteousness, and Holiness. All which will appear in
Divine Love, in more peculiar manner to be handled.

BESIDES all these, there are some Virtues, which may more properly be called
Christian: because they are no where Else taught but in the Christian Religion,
are founded on the Love of Christ, and the only Virtues distinguishing a
Christian from the rest of the World, of which sort are Love to Enemies,
Meekness and Humility.

ALL these Virtues are shut up under one common Head, because they meet in one
common Nature; which bears the name of Virtue. The Essence of which being, well
understood will conduce much to the clear Knowledge of every one in particular.

VIRTUE (in General) is that habit of Soul by force of which we attain our
Happiness. Or if you please, it is a Right and well ordered Habit of mind,
which Facilitates the Soul in all its operations, in order to its Blessedness.
These Terms are to be unfolded.

1. VIRTUE is a Habit: All Habits are either Acquired, or Infused. By calling
it a Habit, we distinguish it from a Natural Disposition, or Power of the Soul.
For a Natural disposition is an inbred Inclination, which attended our Birth,
and began with our beings: not chosen by our Wills, nor acquired by Industry.
These Dispositions, because they do not flow from our Choice and industry,
cannot be accounted Virtues. It Is true indeed that virtuous Habits are sometimes
infused in a Miraculous Manner, but then they are rather called Graces then
Virtues: and are ours, only as they are Consented to by our Wills, not ours by
choice and acquisition, but only by Improvement and exercise. Tho they agree
with Virtues in their Matter and their end, yet they differ in their Original
and form. For as all Humane Actions flow from the Will and the Understanding,
so do all Virtues, when they are rightly understood; whereas we are Passive in
the reception of these, and they flow immediately from Heaven.

AND it is far more conducive to our Felicity, that we should conquer
Difficulties in the attainment of Virtue, study, choose, desire, pursue, and
labor after it, acquire it finally by our own Care and Industry, with Gods
Blessing upon it; then that we should be Dead and Idle, while virtue is given
us in our Sleep. For which cause GOD ordered our state and Condition so, that
by our own Labor we should seek after it; that we might be as well pleasing in
his Eyes, and as Honorable and Admirable in the Acquisition of virtue, as in the
Exercise and Practice of it. And for these reasons GOD does not so often infuse
it, and is more desirous that we should by many repeated Actions of our own
attain it.

GOD does sometimes upon the General Sloth of mankind inspire it, raising up
some persons thereby to be like salt among corrupted men, least all should
putrify and perish: Yet is there little reason why he should delight in that
way, without some such uncouth and Ungrateful necessity to compel him
thereunto.

FOR any man to expect that GOD should break the General Order and Course of
Nature, to make him Virtuous without his own Endeavors, is to Tempt GOD by a
presumptuous Carelesseness, and by a Slothful abuse of his Faculties to fulfill
the parable of the unprofitable Servant.

THE Powers of the Soul, are not virtues themselves, but when they are clothed
with virtuous Operations, they are transformed into Virtues. For Powers are in
the Soul, just as Limbs and Members in the Body, which may indifferently be
applied to Virtues and Vices, alike be busied and exercised in either.

AS the Members are capable of Various Motions, either comely, or Deformed, and
are one thing when they are naked, another when attired, and capable of being
modified with several Habits: so are the Powers and Faculties of the Soul. As
they are in the Nature of Man without Exercise, they are void and Naked: But by
many acts of Vice or Virtue, they put on a Habit, which seems chiefly to
consist in an Inclination and Tendency to such Actions, a Facility of Working,
an Aquaintance with them, a Love to them, and a Delight in them; For by long
Custom it turns to a second Nature, and becomes at last as Necessary as Life
it self; a confirmed Habit being taken in and incorporated with the Powers of
the Soul by frequent exercise.

2. IN the second Definition we add, that Virtue is a right and well ordered
Habit. A Habit is something added to that, which wears it, and every Power of
the Soul is naked, without the Quality wherewith long Custom clothes it. Much
of the Formal Reason of Virtue is shut up in those Words, Right and well
ordered. For confused, irregular, and careless Habits will be always erroneous
and Deformed, and must consequently end in Dishonor and Miseries. He must aim
at the Mark, that hits it, for only those actions that are well guided, produce
right and well ordered Habits, which right and well orderd Habits alone can
carry us to our Sovereign end.

A Mind in Frame is a Soul clothed with Right Apprehensions: Thoughts and
affections well ordered, Principles and Contrivances well proposed, Means and
Ends rationaly consulted, all considered, and the Best chosen. [Long Custom in
uring us to the Benefit and Excellence of these, disposes the Soul into a right
and well ordered Habit, or Frame of spirit, which regards that Glorious End for
which we were created.

BY force of which we attain our Happiness. Idleness and virtue are as
Destructive to each other, as fire and water. In all virtue there is some
force, and in all Force much action. A virtuous, Habit cease to be virtuous
unless it actually incline us to virtuous Operations. As the Powers of the Soul
when they are well exerted turn into Virtues, so is it by that Exertion that we
attain our Happiness. Virtue is that right and well ordered Habit by force of
which we attain our Happiness.

ITS force is never expressed but in exercise and operation. Yet even when we
are asleep, it may tacitly incline us and make us ready, when we awake, to be
Virtuous. Perhaps the Habit Sleeps and awakes with the Body: But if the Habit
and its Energie be the same thing; it still sleeps when its energie cease:
if they be Diverse, the Habit may continue for some time without the force of
its Operation.

BUT not to Divert into Blind and Obscure Corners: Whether the Soul of a man a
sleep may be styled Virtuous ^r no; Whether the Habits continue in him at that
time without their Acts, is nothing to our purpose. It is Sufficient, that when
he is awake, he, that has a Virtuous Habit, is in all his Actions inclined and
Carried to his own Felicity, unless he falls into an oblivion worse, than
Sleep, because without some such Damnable and vicious Lethargy, he is always
mindful of his Last End, and tends toward it in a Direct Line.

ALL his Actions derive a Tincture from the first Principle, that Habit of Soul
by which he is carried toward his own Felicity. All those Actions, that Spring
from that Habit tend to Bliss, and by force of that Habit are made Virtuous,
and with facility performed.

ALL the Difficulty is in the Begnining. Virtues in the beginning are like
green fruits, four and imperfect, but their Maturity is accompanied with
sweetness and delight. It is hard to acquire a virtuous Habit at first, but
when it is once gotten; it makes all Virtue exceeding Easy, nor Easy alone,
but Happy and delightful. For a virtuous Habit as certainly acts according to
its own nature, as the Sun shines, which is light by Constitution. It acts
freely, yet when it does Act, it must needs act Virtuous, and can do nothing
else. For it is no virtuous Habit; but some other Principle that exerteth
vicious and bad Operations.

HAPPINESS is with so much Necessity the end of Virtue, that we cannot take a
Due Estimate of the Excellence of Virtue without considering the tendency which
it has to Felicity. For as the Means are extravagant (and indeed no means) that
have no Relation nor Proportion to their End: so would all the Virtues be inept
and Worthless (no Virtues) if they did not in some Sort conduce to our
Happiness. For Happiness is the adequate End, which by nature we seek Wether it
be Glory, or pleasure, or He nor that we design, or wealth, or Learning; all
that is Delightful, and Grateful to our reason, is comprehended in our
Happiness. If we desire to glorify GOD, or to please the Angels, or be
grateful to men, it is because we love our selves and delight in our own
Happiness, and conceit all those action whereby we so do, either a Means, or a
part of it. So that in the Partition and Distribution of Virtues we must take
another Course to display their Glory, by exhibiting them in such a prospect,
as that is, wherein their Place and office will appear in their Tendency
toward man's last End, his Blessedness and Glory.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Powers and Affections of the Soul; What virtues pertain to the Estate
of Innocence; what to the Estate of Grace; what to the estate of Glory.

TWO things in Felicity are apparent to the Eye, Glory and Treasure; and the
Faculties of the soul do in a several manner affect both. The Understanding was
made to see the value of our Treasure; and the freedom of Will, to atcheive
Glory to our actions; Anger, to stir us up against all Difficulty, and
opposition, that might stand in our way; Appetite, to pursue the Pleasure in
either; Fear to heighten our concernment, that we might more dread the danger
of losing that Happiness, wherein no less then Glory and Treasure are
infinitely united: Reason it self, to compare Felicities and weigh which is the
most perfect. Desire, to covet it; Hope, to encourage us in the pursuit of it;
Aversion, for the avoiding of all Temptations and Impediments; Love, to the
goodness of it; Joy, for its fruition; Hatred, to keep us from the Misery which
is contrary thereunto; Boldness, to attempt it; Sorrow and Despair, to punish
and torment us, if we fail to attain it. For these two, being unpleasant
affections, serve to engage us in the pursuit of Happiness, because we are
loath to experience the Sense of such Troublesome passions.

AMBITION and Covetousness are Inclinations of the Soul, by the one of which we
are carried to Glory, by the other to Treasure. And as all the rest, so may
these be made either Virtues, or Vices. Virtues when they are Means conducive
to the Highest end; Vices when they distract and entangle us with inferior
Objects.

THE Inclinations and affections of the Soul may be Defective or excessive in
their exercise toward Objects. In relation to the Highest Object there is no
danger of excess. We can never too violently either love or desire our Supreme
Happiness; our Hope can never exceed its greatness, we can never too much
rejoice in the fruition of it; Nor can we exceed in Anger or Hatred against
those Things, that would bereave us of it; or too much fear the Misery of that
Life, which will be ever without it; or be affected with too much Sorrow and
Despair at the Loss of it. But if we look upon inferior Things, which are
merely Accidental to the nature of Fe^icity, such as the Favor of men,
Injuries, Crosses, Temporal successes, the Beauty of the Body, the goods of
Fortune, and such like; our affections and passions may be too excessive,
because ^he good or evil of these is but finite; whereas the Good of Sovereign
Bliss is altogether infinite, and so is the evil of Eternal Misery.

WHEN our own Actions are Regu^ar, there is nothing in the World but may be
made, conducive to our highest Happiness: Nor is there any value in any Object,
or Creature in the World, but ^s it is Subservient to our Bliss. No member of
the Body, no sense or endowment of any Member, no Inclination or Faculty of the
Soul, no passion or affection, no Virtue, no Grace, no Spiritual Gift, no
Assistance, no Means of Grace, nothing (how great or Precious soever) can be of
any Value, but in order to Felicity. In real truth, nothing without this can be
Great or Estimable. Every Virtue therefore must have this, in common with all
the Laws and Ordinances, and Works of GOD, they must all directly or Obliquely
tend to our supreme Happiness; upon this depends all their Excellency.

SOME Virtues are necessary in the Estate of Innocence, some in the Estate of
Grace, some in the Estate of Glory.

WITHOUT seeing, it is impossible to enjoy our Happiness, or find out the Way
unto it; therefore is Knowledge necessary in all estates: without Loving it is
impossible to Delight in its Goodness. The Office of Righteousness is to render
to every Thing a Due esteem; And without this it is apparent that no Treasure
can be to us, (tho in it self never so great) of any value. Holiness is the
conscience that we make of discharging our duty, and the Zeal wherewith we
avoid the Profaneness of its Contrary. Goodness is necessary, because we our
selves cannot without that be Amiable, nor unless we be Delightful to others,
enjoy our selves, or acquire Glory. The office of Wisdom is to choose, and
pursue the Highest end, by the Best of all means that can be chosen.

THESE are Transcendent Virtues, whereby even GOD himself does enjoy his
Felicity. They are incumbent on us by the Law of nature, and so essentially
united to our Formal Happiness, that no Blessedness or Glory can be enjoyed
without them. Therefore are we to look upon them as the Life and Soul of
Religion, as Eternal Duties in all Estates for ever to be exercised. They are
all Exercised in the very fruition it self, as will more apparently be seen,
when we come to every one of these Virtues in particular. They were enjoined in
the Estate of Innocence, without any need of a positive Law, by the very nature
of GOD and the Soul, and of things themselves, and must be exercised in the
state of Grace and will abide for ever in the State of Glory.

THAT Virtues might be ours, in being wrought by our selves; and be Virtues
indeed, in being wrought with Difficulty; that we might be so much the more
Laudable and Glorious in our eternal Condition, GOD gave us Liberty, in the
beginning, that we might choose what we would, and placed us in such an Estate;
that, having in us only the Seeds and Principles of all Virtue, we might
exercise our natural Powers of our own Accord, for the Attainment of that
actual Knowledge, Wisdom and Righteousness, wherein the Perfection of our soul
consists, and by which the Perfection of our Bliss is to be enjoyed. That
being Naked by Nature, tho Pure and clean, we might cloth our selves with our
own Habits, attain the Glory of those Ornaments, in our own Acts, for which we
were created; And work our own Righteousness, in such a Way as GOD had
appointed.

FOR the Glory which we were to attain, is that Goodness which we are to show
in our own voluntary Care and obedience; and that Goodness is chiefly expressed
in the kind and Genuine Exercise of our own Liberty, while we are tender of
Displeasing him, to whom we are Obliged, and so Good as to gratify his
Desires, tho we had no restraint upon us.

TO make our selves amiable and beautiful, by the Exercise of our own Power,
produces another kind of Beauty and Glory, than if we were compelled to be good
by all his preventing Power. All Goodness is spoiled by Compulsion. Our own
Actions, springing from an interior Fountain, deep within the Soul, when
voluntarily and freely exerted, are more acceptable; and the Will, whence they
spring, is more excellent and perfect. This I would have you to note well, for
the intrinsic Goodness and Glory of the Soul consists in the Perfection of an
excellent Will, and without this it might be a piece of Dirt surrounded with
Gold; but no imputed or annexed value could make it a Jewel.

THE Actions of GOD, or of the Angels, or of other men toward it, add no value
to the Soul, if it will do nothing of it self. If it be Idle or unactive, the
more excellent the Actions of GOD, and of all other Creatures are toward it,
so much the more deformed and perverse is the Soul: nor will all the Glory of
its Powers and Inclinations excuse it, but the more Great and Divine they are,
the more abominable will it make it self by abusing them, in frustrating their
Inclinations.

FOR the removing of all Constraint, and the infusing of greater Excellency and
Beauty into these holy Actions; which he required from them, it pleased GOD to
make Men obnoxious to Temptations, that having obstacles to overcome, and
disadvantages to strugle with, Man's Righteousness might be more full of Virtue,
and himself made capable of Victory and Triumph. For this End he seated him in
a low Estate; even in an Estate of Trial: wherein was the Occasion of
Exercising Faith and Hope, because his Felicity was distant from him: Faith in
believing the Promises of God, and Hope in waiting for the Accomplishment of
his Bliss: He had Occasions for Fear also, in in relation to Gods Power and
Justice, who was able to remove his Happiness, upon the least offense, and to
bring upon him that Misery that was denounced for his Transgression. In this
Estate of Trial, Prudence, which is conversant in nice Affairs, was to watch,
and consider, and direct his Behavior, in the midst of those Dangers and
Temptations, that might possibly be expected: His Temperance was to be
exercised in the Government of his Appetite; so that all inferior
satisfactions, and sensual Pleasures might be limited and ordered, as it most
consists with his highest Happiness: Humility, in the acknowledgement of his
own Unworthyness, who was taken out of Nothing; and Gratitude in a kind of just
Retribution to his Benefactor, for all the Glory to which he was advanced.

ALL these Virtues are in themselves Delightful, and Easy in their Exercise;
they immediately respect Felicity, and are by nature necessary to Man's
enjoyment of it, they are consonant to Reason, and agreeable to the
Circumstances of his Happy Condition: His Fear and Humility, which were in
Paradise the severest, were aided and comforted, with a Transcendent Hope and
Assurance, that upon his Diligent Care, he might be Eternally Blessed; and with
the Sweet Sense of his Happy Change, and a Glorious Admiration resulting from
the Comparison between his present Estate, and the Estate to which by his
Creator he was to be exalted.

I will not say but there were more Virtues than these to be Exercised in Eden:
But by these you may discern of what nature they all are, and conjecture they
must be such as obedience to God, and Charity to one another.

ALL Harsh and Sour Virtues came in by Sin: and we are to look upon them, not
as Virtues intended by God and Nature, but occasioned afterward, because their
Use and Existence is accidental.

WHEN we fell into Sin, we let Death and Misery into the World, contracted
shame and guilt upon our selves, defiled our Nature with Deformities and
Diseases, and made many Things upon that Occasion, necessary to our Happiness,
that before were not so: And whereas they have a Mixture of Bitterness and
Advantage in them, we may thank our selves for the Bitterness, and GOD for the
Advantage: For as we, by Sin forfeited our Happiness, so a new Obedience,
consisting in the practice of proper Virtues, was necessary to recover it.
Virtues, whose Names and Natures were of another kind, and never heard of
before: All which we must look upon, not as Food, but Physic, and considering
them under the notion of Remedies, not admire that there should be something in
them Distasteful to Sense, tho they are now, when their Occasions are known,
infinitely agreeable to Reason.

THEY are but an AEquivocal Offspring of the Fall: Sin could never beget such
beautiful Children, as Meekness, Repentance, Patience, Alms-Deeds, Self Denial,
Submission and Resignation to the Divine Will, Fortitude, Contentment in all
Estates, etc.

WHILE there was no Sin, there was no need of Penitence; while there was no
Pain or Misery, no Patience; Without wrongs and Injuries there is no use of
Meekness; nor place for AlmsDeeds, where there is no Poverty: no Courage, where
are no Enemies. In Eden there was no ignorance, nor any Supernatural Verities
to be confirmed by Miracles; Apostles therefore and Prophets, Ministers and
Doctors were superfluous there, and so were Tithes and Temples, Schools of
Learning, Masters and Tutors, together with the unsavory Duty incumbent on
Parents to chastife their Children. For as all would have been instructed by
the Light of Nature, so had all been Innocent, and Just, and Regular: Whereupon
no Magistrate had been needful to put any to Shame, no Courts of Judicature,
nor Lawyers in the World. No Buying and Selling, and thereupon no commutative
Justice, because the Blessed Earth had naturally been fertile, and abounded
with rich and Glorious Provisions: Nakedness had been the Splendour and Ornament
of Men, as it will be in Heaven: the Glorious Universe had been their common
House and Temple, their Bodies fited for all Seasons, no Alien or Stranger, no
Want, Distress, or War, but all Peace, and Plenty, and Prosperity; all
Pleasure, and all Fellow Citizens throughout the World. Masters and Servants
had been unknown, had we continued in that Estate, all had enjoyed the Liberty
of Kings, and there had been no Dominion, but that of Husbands and Fathers, a
Dominion as full of sweetness, as so gentle and free a Relation imports. I
can see no Use that there had been of Trades and Occupations, only the
pleasant Diversion that Adam had in dressing the Garden, and the consequents of
that: I am sure there had been no Funeral Pomps, no Sickness, Physic, or
Physician. There had been no Faith in the Incarnation of the Son of God,
because no occasion for that Incarnation, no Ceremonial Law of Moses, no
Baptism, nor Lords Supper, because there were no supernatural Mysteries to be
Typified, but the clear Light of a Diviner Reason, and a free Communion with
God in the Right discharge of those Virtues, Divine and Moral, which naturally
belong to the Estate of Innocence. All which Original and Primitive Virtues
ought now to continue, as it were the Face of Religion beneath that Mask or
Vizor of Ordinances and new Duties, which Sin and Corruption has put upon it;
Tho we have forgotten the Virtues of our first Estate, and are apt now to
terrify our selves with that Disguise, wherewith we have concealed their
Beauty, by regarding only the Virtues, that were occasioned by. Sin and Misery.

IT is a great, Error to mistake the Vizor for the Face, and no less to stick
in the outward Kind and Appearance of things; mistaking the Alterations and
Additions that are made upon the Fall of Man, for the whole Business of
Religion. And yet this new Constellation of Virtues, that appears aboveboard,
is almost the only thing talked of and understood in the World. Whence it is
that the other Duties, which are the Soul of Piety, being unknown, and the
Reason of these together with their Original and Occasion, unseen; Religion
appears like a sour and ungrateful Thing to the World, impertinent to bliss,
and void of Reason; Whereupon GOD is suspected and hated, Enmity against GOD
and Atheism, being brought into, and entertained in the World.

FOR it is an Idea connatural to the Notion of GOD, to conceive him Wise and
Good: And, if we cannot see some Reason in his Ways, we are apt to suspect
there is no Deity, or if there be, that he is Malevolent and Tyrannical, which
is worse then none. For all Wisdom and Goodness are contained in Love: And if
it be true that GOD is Love, he will show it in our Beings, by making us Great
and Excellent Creatures; in his Gifts and Bounties, by surrounding us with real
and serviceable Treasures, in all his Laws, as well as in all his Works, by
consulting our Welfare in the one and in the other. And as he makes the World
Glorious and Beautiful for us to dwell in, so will he make such Actions and
Virtues only needful to be exercised by us as are excellent and Divine: he will
impose no Duties but such as are full of reason, and lead us more
Advantageously to Bliss and Glory.

We are apt to charge our own Faults on God, by confounding all things: and
because we see not how Penitence, and Meekness, and Acts of Charity, in
rolieving the Poor, directly and immediately bring us unto Bliss, are apt to
repine at their Imposition. But when we see all these Virtues in their several
Places and Offices, their Objects and their Uses, the Ends for which, and the
occasions on which they were introduced, all are Delightful to the Reason of
man's Soul, and highly Eligible, while GOD is adored and admired for the depth
of his Wisdom and Goodness, and beloved for the Equity and Excellency of his
Proceedings. For all these Occasional Virtues are but Temporary, when our Life,
and this present World are past and gone as a Dream, Love, and Joy, and
Gratitude will be all that will continue for ever, in which Estate, Wisdom and
Knowledge, Goodness and Righteousness, and True Holiness shall abide, as the
Life and Glory into which the Souls of all that are Blessed will be
transformed. Repentance shall be gone, and Patience cease, Faith and Hope be
swallowed up in fruition, Right Reason be extended to all Objects in all
Worlds, and Eternity in all its Beauties and Treasures, seen, desired,
esteemed, enjoyed.

Let it be your Care to dive to the Bottom of true Religion, and not suffer
your Eyes to be Dazzled with its Superficial Appearance. Rest not in the Helps
and Remedies that it brings, but search for the Hidden Manna, the substantial
Food underneath, the Satisfaction of all Wishes and Desires, the true and
Celestial Pleasures, the Causes of Love, and Praise, and Thanksgiving founded
in the Manifestations of Gods Eternal favor, especially in the Ends, for the
sake of which all Helps and Remedies are prepared. For it is exceeding true,
that his Laws are Sweeter then the Honey and the Honey Comb, and far more
precious then thousands of Gold and Silver.

CHAP. V.
Of the Necessity, Excellency, and Use of Knowledge; its Depths and Extents,
its Objects and its End.

KNOWLEDGE and Love are so necessary to Felicity, that there can be no
Enjoyment or Delight without them. Heaven and Earth would be Dark and obscure,
Angels and Men vain and unprofitable, all the Creatures base and unserviceable,
Felicity impossible, were there no Knowledge. Nay GOD himself, without
Knowledge and Love, could not well exist; for his very Essence is seated in
infinite Knowledge.

GOD is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all; He is Love by nature and there
is no hatred in his Essence. His very Godhead is all Perfection, by the
infinite Knowledge and Love in his Nature.

THE Original of our Knowledge is his Godhead, His Essence and his will are the
Fountain of it; and the stream so excellent, that in all Estates it is for ever
to be continued, as the Light and Glory of the whole Creation.

THE understanding Power, which is seated in Soul, is the Matter of that Act
wherein the Essence of Knowledge consists: Its form is the Act it self,
whereby that Power of knowing apprehends its Object.

ITS nature is invisible, like that of all other Spirits, so simple and
uncompounded, that its form and matter are the same. For all Powers, when
transformed into Act, are Acts themselves. And the faculty of understanding, in
a Complete and Perfect Act of Knowledge attains its Perfection, and is Power
exerted, or an Act in its Exercise. For every Act is Power exerted.

THE Power of Knowing is vain if not reduced into Act; and the Soul a
melancholy and Dreadful Cave, or Dungeon of Darkness, if void of Knowledge.
Had GOD himself a Power of Knowing Distinct from its Operation, if he never
exercised that Power, it would be useless to him. His Glory and Blessedness are
seated in the Light of that Knowledge, whichto us upon Earth appeaeth
Inaccessible.

IF we would be perfect, as our Father which is in Heaven is perfect, our Power
of knowing must be transformed (into Act,) and all Objects appear in the
interior Light of our own understanding. For tho all Eternity were full of
Treasures, and the Whole World, and all the Creatures in it transformed into
Joys and our Interest to all never so perfect; yet if we are Ignorant of them,
we shall continue as poor and Empty, as if there were nothing but Vacuity and
Space. For not to be, and not to appear, are the same thing to the
understanding.

WERE a Man a Seraphim by his Essence, or something by nature more Glorious and
Divine then the Highest Order of the most Blessed Angels, nay the greatest
Creature that Almighty power was able to produce, his Soul and Body would
signify nothing, if he were unknown to himself, and were not aware of his
Excellence.

IF you would have a solid Prospect of any Virtue, you must understand, that
Virtues are Powers transformed into right, wise, and regular Acts, avoiding all
extremes of remissness on the one hand, and excess on the other. The Extremes
of Knowledge are Ignorance and Error.

FOR ought you know Heaven and Earth are as full of Treasures, as Almighty
Power was able to create them, and you by Nature, the best and highest of all
possible Creatures, made like GOD, for the highest and best of all possible
Ends, and called to live in Communion with him, in all his fruitions: but being
vilely corruptted, you have lost the sense of all these Realities, and are
ignorant of the Excellences of your own Estate and Nature.

I am sure that GOD is infinite in Wisdom, Goodness and Power, and nothing is
wanting on his Part, to perfect your Desires: But yet you may be blind, and
idle, and ignorant, and dead in a manner, while you are wanting to your self,
and have need of nothing, but clear and perfect apprehensions, but because they
are Sottish and Erroneous at present, they may make you miserable, and Poor,
and Blind, and Naked.

IF Sin had been like Circe's Cup, and changed the shape of Man's Body, to that
of a Swine or Dragon, the Depravation of his Nature had been plain and visible;
yet without knowing what kind of Form he had before, it, would not appear,
because we should be unsensible of his first Form, and unable to compare the
one with the other: But Sin is a Moral Obliquity, and the change it produces
in the Soul is Spiritual. It makes a man to differ far more from himself, than
any alteration of Body can do; but withal so blinds his Understanding, that he
does not remember what he was in his first Parent; Tho the first Man (who had
experience of both Estates) was able to compare them, because in his
Corruption, he might possibly retain a Sense of that Nature, and Life which he
enjoyed in his integrity: Yet all his Posterity, that are born Sinners, never
were sensible of the Light and Glory of an Innocent Estate, and for that cause
may be wholly ignorant both of GOD and themselves, utterly unable to conceive
the Glory of the World, or of that Relation, wherein they should by Nature have
stood toward all the Creatures.

IT is impossible to conceive, how great a change a slight Action may produce.
It is but pressing the Wick a little with ones Finger, and a Lamp is
extinguished, and Darkness immediately made to overspread the Room. The Glory
and Splendour of the whole World would vanish upon the Extinction of the Sun:
And one Instants Cessation from the Emission of its Beams would be its
Extinction. A Soul is a more Glorious Thing than the Sun: The Sphere of its
Activity is far Greater, and its Light more Precious, All the World may be
filled with the splendour of its Beams; Eternity it self was prepared for it!
Were there but one Soul, to see and enjoy all the Creatures, upon the
suspension of its Light all the Creation would be rendered vain. Light it self
is but Darkness without the Understanding.

THE Existence of many Souls is so far from abating the value of one, that it
is by reason of their multitude more useful and Excellent. For the value of the
Objects, imputes a Luster and Higher value to the Light wherein they are
enjoyed. And if Souls themselves are more excellent than all other Creatures,
and arewith, and above all other, to be enjoyed, that Power, whereby this Soul
is able to enjoy them, is more to be esteemed, upon the account of those Souls,
than for all the other Creatures, which are made for the same: GOD himself and
his holy Angels are Objects of the Understanding. Those Felicities and Glories,
which the Sun cannot extend to, the Soul can comprehend. All which, since their
Fruition depends upon that Act of the Understanding by which they are
considered, reflect a Luster, and add a value to that Knowledge by which the
Soul does attain them. Whereupon it follows that the infinite value of all
these is seated in the intellect; and as the Power, so the Act of Knowledge, on
which their Fruition depends, is of infinite use and Excellency. As the loss
is infinite, when the Soul is bereaved of them, so is the mage, which it
suffers by failing of its Light, whether that Defect be voluntary, or imposed
by some outward Impediment.

AS for the Use of Knowledge, it is apparent enough. For the Relation between
the Use and Excellency of things is so near and intimate, that as nothing
Useless can be at all excellent, so is every Excellence in every Being founded
in its usefulness. The use of Souls is as great as their Excellency: The use of
Knowledge as endless in Variety, as in Extent, and Value.

KNOWLEDGE is that which does illuminate the Soul, enkindle Love, excite our
Care, inspire the mind with Joy, inform the Will, enlarge the Heart, regulate
the Passions, unite all the Powers of the Soul to their Objects, see their
Beauty, understand their Goodness, discern our Interest in them, form our
Apprehensions of them, consider and enjoy their Excellences. All Contentments,
Raptures, and Extafies are conceived in the Soul, and begotten by Knowledge,
all Laws, Obligations and Rewards are understood by Knowledge: All Virtues and
Graces of the Mind are framed by Knowledge, all Advantages are by it improved,
all Temptations discerned, all Dangers avoided, all Affairs ordered, all
Endowments acquired; all the Ornaments of Life, all the Beauties of the inward
Man, all the Works of Piety are affected by Knowledge. In the Light of
knowledge all Pleasures arise, and as Fruits and Flowers are begotten in the
Earth by the Beams of the Sun, so do all kinds of Joy spring from the
Creatures, and are made ours, by the help of that Knowledge, that shines on
them; its last Off spring are Eternal Thanksgivings and Praises. The Divine
Image and the Perfection of Bliss are sounded in Knowledge, GOD himself
dwells in the Soul, with all his Attributes and Perfections, by Knowledge: By
it we are made Temples of the Holy Ghost, and Partakers of the Divine Nature,
And for this cause it is that St. Paul prays, That we might be filled with
the Knowledge of his Will, Col. 1: 9, 10, 11, 12.
in all Wisdom and Spiritual Understanding, that we might walk worthy of the
Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every Good Work, and increasing in
the Knowledge of GOD, strengthened with all Might according to his glorious
Power, unto all Patience and long-suffering, with Joyfulness giving Thanks to
the Father, who has made us meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light: who has delivered us from the Power of Darkness, and
translated us into the Kingdom of his Dear Son.

THE Sun is a glorious Creature, and its Beams extend to the utmost Stars, by
shining on them it clothes them with light, and by its Rays exciteth all their
influences. It enlightens the Eyes of all the Creatures: It shines on forty
Kingdoms at the same time, on Seas and Continents in a general manner; yet so
particularly regards all, that every Mote in the Air, every Grain of Dust,
every Sand, every Spire of Grass is wholly illuminated thereby, as if it did
entirely shine upon that alone. Nor does it only illuminate all these Objects
in an idle manner, its Beams are Operative, enter in, sill the Pores of Things
with Spirits, and impregnate them with Powers, cause all their Emanations,
Odors, Virtues and Operations; Springs, Rivers, Minerals and Vegetables are all
perfected by the Sun, all the Motion, Life and sense of Birds, Beasts and
Fishes depends on the same. Yet the Sun is but a little spark, among all the
Creatures, that are made for the Soul; the Soul, being the most High and Noble
of all, is capable of far higher Perfections, far more full of Life and Vigor
in its uses. The Sphere of its Activity is illimited, its Energy is endless
upon all its Objects. It can exceed the Heavens in its Operations, and run out
into infinite spaces. Such is the extent of Knowledge, that it seems to be
the Light of all Eternity. All Objects are equally near to the splendour of its
Beams: As innumerable millions may be conceived in its Light, with a ready
capacity for millions more; so can it penetrate all Abysles, reach to the
Center of all Nature, converse with all Beings, visible and invisible,
Corporeal and Spiritual, Temporal and Eternal, Created and Increated, Finite
and Infinite, Substantial and Accidental, Actual and Possible, Imaginary and
Real; All the Mysteries of Bliss and Misery, all the Secrets of Heaven and Hell
are Objects of the Souls Capacity here, and shall be actually seen and known
hereafter.

WERE Almighty Power Magnified by filling Eternity with created objects, and
were all the Omnipresence of God full of Joys, it is able, when assisted by his
Divine Knowledge, to look upon all: and tho every one of them should have an
infinite Depth within, an Endless variety of Uses, a Relation to all the rest
of the World, the Soul, as if it were able to contract all its strengths, from
all the expansions of Eternity and space, and fix them upon this Moment, or on
this Center, entirely beholding this alone, in all its fullness, can see its
Original, its End, its Operations, Effects and Properties, as if it had nothing
to consider but this alone, in a most exquisite and perfect manner.

IT is not to be denied, that every Being in all Worlds is an Object of the
Understanding: nor can that of the Psalmist be doubted, In his Presence there
is fullness of Joy, and at his right hand there are Pleasures for evermore: that
is, his Omnipresence is full of Joys, and his Eternity of Riches and Pleasures:
nor is it to be denied, that the Soul is by its Creation intended for the
Throne of GOD. For it is made capable of his Omnipresence and Eternity, and, as
the Apostle speaks, may be filled with all the fullness of GOD, which fullness
is adequate to the Immensity of his Eternal Power (of which you will see more
in the Virtues of Love, Wisdom, Righteousness and Holiness:) This only is here
to be noted, that Nature never made any Power in vain, but ever intends the
Perfection of what it produces; and prepares objects for the understanding,
the Perfection of which Power is the actual attainment of that Knowledge of
which it is capable.

THE principal objects of our Knowledge are GOD, and a Man's self: The Kingdom
of GOD, his Laws and Works, his Ways in all Ages, his Counsels and his
Attributes, Man's Interest and Duty, Transactions of the World, the Thoughts and
Actions of Angels and Men are considerable; which tho they may be styled less
material Objects of the understanding, yet in relation to GOD and a Man's felf,
are of great Importance.

GOD as he is the Life and fountain of all Felicity, the End of all Perfection,
and the Creator of our Being, Almighty in Power, infinite in Wisdom and
Goodness, Author of the universe, and Lord of all the Creatures, is most fit to
be Known. Plato makes him the very Light of the understanding, and affirms,
that as three Things are necessary to Vision, the Eye rightly prepared, the
object conveniently seated, and Light to convey the Idea to the Eye; so there
are three things required to complete and perfect Intelligence, an
understanding Eye, an Intelligible Object, and a Light intelligible in which to
conceive it: Which last is GOD. Nor is the Royal Psalmist and Divine
Philosopher David far from the Notion, while he says, In thy Light we shall
see Light. For GOD is the Light of the understanding. His Nature is the Light
of all the Creation. Therefore it is said by Christ himself that the Knowledge
of GOD is Life Eternal. For his Light is the Life of men, and without him we
can do nothing. Till we Know his Nature, we cannot apprehend the Excellency of
his Works: For all their Goodness is derived from him, and ends in him. His
Love, moved him to create the World, and the principal End for which it was
made, is the Glory of the Creator in the Felicity of his Creatures. The Glory
of the Creatures is seen in his. By his Wisdom and Goodness we are guided to
the Hope, and Investigation of their Excellence. His infinite bounty made them
all our Treasures, that for the Perfection of their Beauty and Worth we might
celebrate his Praises.

HE that would not be a stranger to the Universe, an Alien to Felicity, and a
foreiner to himself, must Know GOD to be an infinite Benefactor, all Eternity,
full of Treasures, the World it self, the Beginning of Gifts, and his own Soul
the Possessor of all, in Communion with the Deity. That the Business of
Religion is Complacency in GOD, and that GOD never laid aside his Wisdom in any
Operation of his Power, never forgot to make the least of his Works agreeable
to his Goodness. Nay rather he is so perfect, that his infinite Goodness,
Wisdom, and Power, are exerted wholly and wholly Conspicuous in every Operation.
It is the Beauty of Truth that makes Knowledge of such infinite Value. For if
all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowing be ordained for a Wise and Knowing Man,
if all Objects in the clear Light of Heaven and Eternity be laudable and
Glorious, if Divine Wisdom has so far obtained, that the number and Value of
GODS Gifts is accurate, and exactly answerable to the nature of its causes; if
every Soul, that will live in his Image, may be the friend of GOD, and acquire
the Empire of the World, and be Beloved of Angels, and admired of Men; if
fruition be the End of Knowledge, and all Things made that they may be enjoyed:
Knowledge is the only Thing that enriches the Soul, and the Knowing Man is the
friend of GOD. The Exercise and Pleasure of this Divine Amity is the End of the
Creation, and the Perfection of the Soul.

The Knowledge of a Mans-self is highly conducive to his Happiness, not only as
it gives him Power to rejoice in his Excellencies, but as it shows him his End,
for which he was created. For by Knowing what Inclinations and Powers are in
his Soul, he discerns what is agreeable with, and fit for his Essence; what
objects and what Operations are couducive to his Welfare, what means he is to
use for the Attainment of his End, and what that is, wherein his Perfection
consists. If the Powers of his Soul are illimited, his Desire infinite, and
his Reach Eternal, if he be able to see and enjoy all Worlds, and all that is
above all Worlds in the Image of GOD. If his Ambition carry him to be Pleasing
to all Angels and Men, and to be Glorious in the Eyes of all Kingdoms and Ages;
if his Abilities are indeficient for the fruition of all that is Excellent in
eternity it self, it is a token that he is ordained for GOD, and the enjoyment
of his Kingdom: and a wicked folly to restrain himself to the miserable
Contentment of a Cell, or Cottage, and to delight in nothing but some fragments
of the Creation, that in Comparison of the whole are infinitely Defective.

OF all other things I would have this most deeply engraven in the mind, that
GOD has exceeded all Imagination in the Works of his Hands, that he that
overcomes shall be the Son of GOD and inherit all Things, that there is an
infinite end why the secrets of all hearts shall at last be revealed, that in
Heaven all Thoughts and Things shall be Known, that the Kingdom of Heaven is
so Glorious, that all the blessed are Perfect Sovereigns, every one the
Possessor and End of it all: that all Things proceeding immediately from GOD,
are the Best that are possible: that the best and the worst things as ordered
by him, are perfectly amiable, and subservient to Felicity, that he himself
alone has a Proper Right to all that is excellent, and that GOD is in every
Thing to be enjoyed, that he is enjoyed only when his essence and his Works
satisfy the Desires of perfect reason, and exceed all Wishes in filling and
delighting the soul: That having filled the soul with infinite Wisdom, he has
laid infinite Obligations upon us, and set infinite Rewards before us, made
Laws in finitely amiable, and given us Duties infinitely Desirable: for which
he deserves eternal Adorations and Thanksgivings.

CHAP. VI.
Of Love and Hatred. The necessity and sweetness of Love. Its General use and
efficacy. The several kinds of love. Of the Power, Inclination and act of Love.
Its extent and capacity.

BECAUSE Love is the most Desirable Employment of the Soul, the Power of Loving
is to be accounted the most High and Noble of the Faculties. It is not seated
by it self in the mind, but attended with a mighty Proneness and Inclination.

THERE is no Creature so unsociable and furious but it is capable of loving
something or other. Wolves and Tygres live at peace among themselves, Lions
have an Inclination to their Grim Mistresses, and Deformed Bears a natural
Affection to their Whelps, expressed in their Rage, when they are bereaved of
them. Things must either be absolutely Dead, or live in misery, that are void
of love. Whatsoever is endued with Life and sense delights in easy and
grateful Operations. Love is a necessary Affection of their Souls, because it
is impossible to apprehend any thing Delightful, but it must be pleasing; and
what is Pleasing must be Lovely. For to be Pleased, and to love are the same
thing. If there be any difference, the pleasure we take in any Object is the
root of that Desire, which we call Love; and the affection, whereby we pursue
the pleasure that is apprehended in it, is part of the Love that we bear unto
it; the end of which is the Completion of that pleasure which it first
perceives: All is Love variously modified, according to the Circumstances
wherein the Object is represented.

AS Love is the only Easy and Delightful Operation, so is Hatred of all other
the most troublesome and tormenting. Displeasure and Enmity are the Ingredients
of its nature; and the fruits of it (allied to their Root) as Bitter as Gall,
and Wormwood. Murder, and Vexation, and Grief are the offspring of the one,
with Separation, Contention, and Horror; Peace and Embraces are the Fruit of
the other, with Praises and Complacencies, Honors, Services, Benefits and
Pleasures. These are the little Cupids that fly about this celestial Venus,
when it is, what it ought to be, the Mother of Felicity, and the Daughter of
GOD.

ALL Creatures that are sensible of Pain or pleasure, must of necessity be
addicted to Love and Hatred; to the Love of what is pleasing, to the Hatred of
what is Painful. And if any Question be made, which of these Twins is the First
born? the answer is; that they may seem Twins in respect of Time, but in nature
Love is the first born, and the Mother of Hatred. For where nothing to be hated
does at all appear, pleasant Things are Beloved for their own sake: whereas if
there were no pleasant thing to be beloved, nothing could be hated, because
nothing could be Hurtful, which appears by this, because where there is no
Love, there is no Interest, and where there is no concernment, there can be no
Affection, no Fear, or Hope, or Joy, or sorrow.

AS Fire begets Water by melting Ice, so does Love beget contrary passions in
the soul of a living creature, Anger, Malice, Envy, Grief and Jealousy: not by
its own nature, but by the accidental Interposure of some Obstacle, that
hinders or endangers the fruition of its Object. Were there no Love of Ease and
Pleasure, there could be no Anger or Quarrel between Competitors; no Emulation
or Desire, no Aversion or Endeavor. All Enmity and Hostility Springs from a
Contention, who shall enjoy what is Desirable; or from some other Principle of
Envy or Revenge, in relation to what is Good: as is Obvious to Daily Experience.

LIFE and Love are so individualy united, that to live without Loving something
is impossible. Even in Hell, where their whole Life seems to be spent in
Detestation and Hatred, and actual Love is, like fire under those Embers,
covered and continued, Could they put off self Love, all Love of Felicity, and
Interest, their Torments would be gone: Punishments and Rewards are things
impossible, where there is not selfLove: For without Love to something, Pains
and Joys are equally Grateful.

AS Love is the Root of Endeavor, so is it the Spring of all the Passions: They
all depend upon Love alone. We are Angry at that which stands in our Way,
between our Love and its object: We Desire an absent Good, because we Love it:
We Hope for it, when we conceive its Attainment feasible: We rejoice in it,
when we have it: We fear to lose it: we grieve when it is gone: we despair, if
we cannot get, or recover it: We hate all that is opposite to it. And for this
Cause is our Love, when well regulated, the greatest Virtue, because upon the
right Choice of its Object, and true Government of it self, all the Powers and
Affections of the Soul are well employed; and when we Love all that we ought as
we ought to do, we fulfill all Laws, Hope and Fear, and Hate, and Grieve, and
Desire, and Rejoice, and do every thing in a regular Manner.

THERE is a Sensual and Brutish Love, there is a Humane and Divine: Brutish
Love is of two sorts, the one Springs from a Harmony of Complexions and a
Sympathy of Bodies, the other from the Consideration of Pleasure abstracted.
The First of these is occasioned by a secret and unexpressible Agreement of
Tempers, by which upon the presence of each other, the Senses are delighted, we
know not why; it being a mystery in nature; and perhaps founded in a grateful
Transpiration of Spirits from one to the other.

THE Consideration of Beauty seems peculiar to the Love of Men; because no
Beast is observed to make any Distinction between Lineaments and Features, nor
upon any account of shape and Colors to be delighted with each other. Wherein
Man exceeds the Capacity of Beasts, in being able to note and admire the
Workmanship of GOD in the decent Order of Symmetry and Proportion.

HUMANE Affection and Divine Love are near allied, yet of several Kinds. If you
take the Love of Reason in its utmost Height, it is always Divine. For it is
comformable to the Love of GOD in its measures and Degrees, in its Effects and
Causes. For the Love of GOD is it self the Love of perfect Reason. And as the
Reason of his Love is Infinite and Eternal, so is its Operation. But in a lower
Acceptance Humane Love differs from Divine; it being founded upon Temporal
Causes, Vivacity, Wit, Learning, Beauty, Behavior, Moral Honesty, Fidelity,
Kindness, Goodness, Power, Majesty, Wealth, Nobility, Worth, Virtue, and the
like. But all these may be exalted, when they are Sanctified, and made Divine
by the superadded concurrence of Celestial Causes. For when a Man loves
another, because he is made in the Image of GOD, and by the Beauty of his Soul
is something more than Humane, this Love is made Sacred, and receives a Grace
from the Influences of Religion.

DIVINE Love strictly so called, is founded on Eternal Causes, agreeable to the
Life of Heaven, Delightful to GOD, and Pleasing to the Angels.

IF Divine Love be taken in the highest Sense, there is none but in GOD. For it
is his Peculiar Prerogative to Love without Obligation or Reward, to be the
Sole Author of all Felicity, and to overflow with Goodness of himself freely,
without any Motive, to prevent the Beauty and Existence of his Object, and to
Love from all Eternity in an immutable manner: And this is the nature of Divine
Love. Howbeit even here, are infinite Ends and Causes of his Love, tho they are
all in Himself: For he Loves, that he may Love, and begets that Love which is
his Essence. His Love is the foundation of all his Treasures, the Cause and End
of the whole Creation, and that alone by which he proceeds from himself (to all
his Creatures, and by those) to himself again for ever. All his Kingdom and
Greatness and Pleasure, all his Wisdom and Goodness, all his Life and
Perfection is seated in Love, which is his Beauty and his Holiness, his Bounty
and his Godhead. He Loves therefore that he may be all Beauty and Goodness, and
Holiness, and that he may enjoy himself and the Eternal Pleasure of his Essence
in Glory and Blessedness for ever.

IT is GOD alone that Loves by his Essence, Angels and Men may Love by
Inclination, but their Affection is Accidental to their nature, begins in time,
may alter and cease. It is subject to Chance, Obligation and Reward, and ought
to be guided according to the Pleasure of an Higher Agent. In this it differs
from the Love of God, but in many things there is a great Agreement and
proportion between them. For GOD has made the love of Angels and men so like
his own, by extending their Knowledge to all objects, that infinite Perfections
are contained in their love. It is as GODLIKE as any Thing created is capable
of being; for Almighty Power and infinite Wisdom are employed in the
production of it.

FOR the better understanding of this Love, we will consider it in the power of
Loving, in the inclination to Love, in its act and Perfection. It may seem a
surprising verity; but the Power of Loving is as necessary to Blessedness and
Glory as life it self; an inclination to love as necessary as the Power; and
the act of Love as necessary as the Inclination. The world is useless without
Life, and Life without Love, the Body without the Soul, the Soul without the
Power of Loving, the Power of Loving, without the Inclination, the Inclination
without the Act.

IN the Power of Loving I shall note nothing at present, but its Extent and
Capacity. In Beasts it is confined, but in Men it is Endless. As a Beast is
unable to examine what spaces are above the Heavens, so is it unable to extend
its Affections beyond the memory of things perceived, for a Beast cannot
represent to it self the Idea's of its Progenitors; nor see into Ages that are
before its birth, nor contemplate Objects that will be after it is Dead. But
man can see, and know, and love any object, in any Age or Kingdom in the World.
He can look into any Region, tho it be never so far removed and be as familiary
conversant with any Person or Transaction there, when represented once in a
clear Light, as with any Object in his own country. He can look into Eden
consider Adams Dust in its first Creation, survey the Procedure of God in his
Six Days Works, pass out of Time into Eternity it self, run up to the Original
and fountain Head of all existence, ponder the nature of GOD, search in his
Bosom for his Eternal Counsels, pierce into the Center of the Earth, and survey
the Circumference of all Immensity. His Love can follow his Knowledge in all its
flights, while in spirit he can be present with all the Angels. He is able to
Love not only his Family and Relations, but all the City and Country where he
lives, all the Kingdom, all the Cities and Kingdoms in the world, all the
Generations in all Kingdoms, all the Spirits of Just men made perfect, all the
Cherubims and Seraphins, and GOD blessed for ever. This is the extent: The
capacity of Love is so alsufficient, that his Affection is not diminished, but
the more he loves one, the more he is able, and the more inclined to love all
that are united to him. As in ordinary friendship, the more we love the Father,
the more we love his Wife and all his children. For the more we love any
Person, the more we love all that love him, or are beloved by him. As the
reasons of our Love increase, so may our Love it self; the capacity of Love
being so indeficient, that it never can be exceeded, or surmounted by its
Object.

THE Capacity of Love being so exceeding vast, multiplies and heightens in the
Soul of man, that is apt to overflow of its own Accord. For nothing is so prone
to communicate it self as that Active Principle of Love; that Soul which is
Generous and Divine, being disposed to the exercise of Love, because therein it
finds its Proper Element. The very Sun is not more inclined to communicate
its Beams, then the Soul to love. For the Soul being made in the Image of GOD,
who is Love by his Essence, must needs be like him in Power and Inclination,
and is made for nothing else but the Attainment of its perfection, so that it
can never rest, till it actually love after his similitude. Some Operation it
must of Necessity have. For as all Life, so all pleasure is founded in Action.

IF Love in its Perfection be considered, all that is lovely is Beloved by the
soul; all the Capacity of Love is filled with its objects, and all the Goodness
of the Creator and his Creatures, at once enjoyed. It is the Life and pleasure
and enlargment of the Soul, it is the Wisdom, and Goodness, and Glory of the
Soul. I confess there be many Errors and Diseases in Love; and that Love is
always miserable, in its Effects, that is vicious: yet it so bewitches the
Senses, that the Soul being captivated by the Force of present Delight is
violently carried in an irresistible appetite to those Things which Reason
condemns, and advises to shun as Evil. Medea's faction most prevails in the
World.

-- Video meliora proboque,
Deteriora Sequor.
LOVE is then a vice, when it is irrational and illegal, rebellious and
Sensual, Blind, Defective, Unjust, Absurd. When Evil things are beloved, when
Good things are preferred above the Better, and the Best neglected.

VIRTUOUS Love is that which proceeds from a well governed understanding, and
is seated in a Will that is guided by Reason. It renders to all things their
just Due, and is the Powerful Parent of all Kind of Virtues. This Love may be
considered either in its Properties, or Effects, the last of which relate to
the Soul it self, to the Conversation of the whole man, to all its Objects,
when it is well understood, it will be found the proper and immediate Means by
which we attain our Perfection and Felicity.

CHAP. VII.
What Benefit GOD himself does receive by his Eternal Love. That when our Love
is made complete and Perfect, it will be like his, and the Benefit of it will
be Eternal.

BEFORE we can fully discern the Benefit of Love, or see the Glory of it in all
its high and admirable Effects, we must consider what Love is and does in GOD.
For as we have said, The Life of GOD is Love; nay the Apostle says, GOD is
Love: By Loving he begot his Love. And if his Love be his Godhead, his Essence
is an infinite and Eternal Act of Love, by extending which through all
infinity, and by Loving Eternally, he begot his infinite and Eternal Essence:
which is the Love that fills all Worlds with Beauty and Glory. When you
consider it well, An Act of Love is begotten by Loving: And if his Wisdom, and
Goodness, and Blessedness, and Glory be seated in Love, his Love is his Wisdom
which is the Son of GOD, and his Goodness, and his Glory, and his Blessedness.
For all these, tho we conceive them diversely, are the same Thing: and of the
Son of GOD it is said, that he is the Wisdom of the Father, and the Brightness
of his Fathers Glory. He is the Life of the Father, by whom also he made the
Worlds, and the Love of the Father for whom all Things were created, that are
in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: all Things were created by
him, and for him. Col. 116.
For GOD enjoys all Things by his Love, which is his Eternal Son; and made
them as perfect and delightful as it was possible for things created to be,
that he might take Pleasure in them. As he himself is made Glorious and
Delightful in the Eyes of all Angels and Men by Love, so does his whole Kingdom
arise and Spring from Love; the Beauty and felicity of all his Creatures, their
Joys and Praises, their Uses and Perfections are founded in his Love', by his
Love he begets all his pleasures in himself, by his Love he made his
Treasures infinite, and by that alone does he take infinite Pleasure and
Delight in himself and his Kingdom. Thus useful is the Love of GOD.

Had not GOD from all Eternity Loved, had he never desired, nor delighted in
any thing; he had never exerted his Almighty Power, never communicated his
Goodness, or begot his Wisdom, never enjoyed Himself, never applied himself to
the Production of his Works, never appeared in his Glory to any eye whatsoever.
Removing his Love we remove all the Properties and Effects of his Essence, and
are utterly unable to conceive any Idea of his Godhead. For his Power, tho it
be Almighty, yet if it be Dead and idle, is fruitless and Deformed. Idle Power
is not the Essence of the Deity, but a mere Privation and Vacuity; or at least
a positive Being as ignoble as it is unactive. The Reason of his Works is
founded in Love, so are all the Obligations, that are laid upon his Creatures
to adore him. All their Rewards are founded in Love, and by Love prepared: All
his Laws are the Laws of Love, all his Attributes and Counsels are Love, in
several forms, acting upon several occasions. When his Love communicates it
self in Joys to innocent Creatures, it is Goodness; when it attains the most
perfect End by the most perfect means, it is Wisdom; when it rescues guilty
Creatures from Hell, it is Mercy; when it punishes the Rebellious it is
Justice; when it inspires Obedience into any obstinate Person, it is Grace;
when it delights in the Beauty of all its Works, it is Blessedness; when it
appears in the perfection of its works, it is glory. For Glory is the
perfection of Beauty, that arises from, and is seated in the luster of
excellent Actions, discovering the internal Properties of an excellent Agent,
which is by those his Properties and Actions made Delightful to all Judicious
Spectators.

NOR is it only in GOD, but in us also that the fruits and Benefits of Love
are ineffable. For by loving, as it ought to do, the Soul acquires its own
Perfection, and is united to all its Objects. By loving as it ought to do, it
is made Holy, and Wise, and Good, and Amiable. Only by Loving does it embraces
the Delights of which it is capable. Love is the root and Soul of those Actions
for which a Creature is desired, and praised by others.

IT is an infinite Advantage, that we are able to live in GODS Image, if we
please: For if GOD alone be infinitely Glorious and Blessed, there is no way
for us to become Glorious and Blessed, but by being made, either by our selves,
or some other, like unto him.

BY nature he has implanted the Similitude of his power: which we are to
improve by Grace, turning it into Act after his Similitude. To be able to Love
is neither Grace nor virtue, but a mere Gift of GOD, a natural Endowment, which
may be Blasted, or completed. Actually to love is the Work of virtue; for by
that Act we enjoy our Felicity.

HAD GOD limited and confined our understanding, our power of Loving had been
shut up in Bounds. Had he made it infinite, but not prepared objects for the
same, our Love had been deluded, and had lost its force. Had he made some
Objects, but not so many as it was capable of Loving, it had been Superfluous
and dissatisfied; Had he prepared Objects innumerable and Endless, but made
them evil, our Love had been irrational, had he commanded us to Love them; Had
he made more Objects then we were able to love, we had been discontented: But
having made all Objects infinitely Amiable and Glorious, and filled his
Immensity and Eternity with himself, and with the Luster of his Actions, Love
is an infinite Virtue, because nothing is wanting, but an Act of Love to enjoy
them.

IF they are all Amiable in all Respects, they are all according to our Hearts
desire, in their Natures, Places, Durations, Ends, Occasions, Causes, Uses,
Service, Relations, Properties, Operations, etc. All things, as they immediately
proceed from him, are in all respects most perfectly pleasing. And if we have
an Eye to see and discern this, and a Soul able to resent the Benefit; if our
nature be so vast and perfect, as to see and take pleasure in all their
Circumstances; it is the most unreasonable and brutish thing in the world to
withdraw our Affection from them, nay it is worse then Diabolical. For we Kill
our selves, we blast our Felicity, we offend GOD, we slight the Beauty of all
his Creatures, we break his Laws, we act against nature, we darken the Light
and Splendour of our Souls, we deface his Image, we grieve his Love, we do the
most vicious and abominable thing that is imaginable. But if we excite and a
waken our Power, we take in the Glory of all objects, we live unto them, we are
sensible of them, we delight in them, we transform our souls into Acts of Love
and Knowledge, we proceed out of our selves into all Immensities and
Eternities, we render all Things their Due, we reap the Benefit of all, we are
Just, and Wise, and Holy, we are Grateful to GOD, and Amiable in being so: We
are not divided from, but united to him, in all his Appearances, Thoughts,
Counsels, Operations; we adorn our souls with the Beauty of all objects
whatsoever, are transformed into the Image of GOD, live in communion with him,
nay live in him, and he in us, are made Kings and Priests unto GOD, and his
sons forever; There is an exact and pleasant Harmony between us and all the
Creatures: We are in a Divine and spiritual Manner made as it were Omnipresent
with all Objects (for the Soul is present only by an Act of the understanding)
and the Temple of all Eternity does it then become, when the Kingdom of GOD is
seated within it, as the world is in the Eye; while it lives, and feels, and
sees, and enjoyes, in every object to which it is extended, its own and its
objects Perfection.

IF by our voluntary Remisness, or Mistake, or Disorder, we dote upon one
Object, or suffer some few things to engage our Souls so entirely, as to forget
and neglect all the rest, we rob all those we desert, of their due Esteem, and
abridge our selves of that Liberty and Extent, wherein the greatness of our
soul consists. As if the Sun, that is made to shine upon all the World,
should withdraw its Beams from the Stars and the Heavens, and choose to shine
upon nothing else but a Spire of Grass, a grain of Dust, or a little sand. We
lose innumerable Objects, and confine our selves to the Love of one, by
sacrificing all our Affection to that, become guilty of Idolatry in one
respect, of Atheism in another. For we elevate that Creature which we love
alone, into the place of GOD, and we rob the Creator of that supreme affection
which is due unto him: And in so doing bereave our selves of the Sovereign
Object, in the fruition of which all the rest are happily enjoyed. Thus when a
man so Loves his Wife, or Children, as to despise all mankind, he forfeits his
Interest in all Kingdoms, and the Beauty of all Ages is taken from his Eyes, his
Treasures are contracted, and his Felicity is maimed, and made Defective. When
a Covetous man doteth on his Bags of Gold, the Ambitious on Titles of Honor,
the Drunkard on his Wine, the Lustful Goat on his Women, the foolish Hector on
his Dice and Duels, they banish all other Objects, and live as absurdly, as if
a King should relinquish his Crown, and confine his Thoughts and Care to a
Country Manor.

I will not deny, but that there are many Disorders and Evils in the World,
many Deformities, Sins, and Miseries: but I say two things; first that in the
Estate of innocence, wherein all things proceeded purely from GOD, there was no
Sin, nor sickness, nor Death, nor Occasion of Complaint or Calamity. Secondly,
that all the Evils that are now in the world, men brought on themselves by the
Fall: And there is great need of distinguishing between the works of GOD, and
the works of men. For all that GOD did is Lovely and Divine: nothing is bitter
and distasteful, but what we have done: himself surveyed the whole Creation,
and pronounced concerning every Thing, that it was exceeding Good. So that he
was in all his Works an Object of Complacency. To these we add two
Considerations more; That of all the Evils and Mischeifs which men have
introduced, there is not one left uncorrected in his Kingdom. Secondly, that
GOD brings Order out of Confusion, Light out of Darkness, Good out of Evil,
and by a Providence irresistible, and a Power infinite, so limiteth and
divides all, that even Evils themselves become the Matter of his Victory, the
Ground of his Triumph: They are all improved; and he makes the Greatest Evils
Objects of Joy and Glory.

NOW if all Things before GOD are fit to be enjoyed, all Good Things perfect,
all Evil overcome; if without any Change of Place or Situation, all Things are
naked and open before his Eyes, and there be no Walls to exclude, or Skreens to
hide, no Gulf to pass, nor Distance to over come, but all things equally near
and fair; there is some Hope, that the same Felicity is prepared for the soul
which is made in his Image and that every thing, being fit for GOD is full of
infinite Depth and Beauty. For which Cause St. John being in Spirit saw all the
Kingdoms of the World, become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, and
heard every Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth,
and such as are in the Sea, and all that is in them, saying Blessing, and
Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto him that Sits upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb for evermore. This we are the rather induced to believe, because the
Faithful Servant is commaned to enter into the Joy of his Lord, and our Masters
Joys are the Rewards of Believers. Our Savionr tells us his Lord will make
his Wise Servant Ruler over all his Goods, in one-place, and over all that he
has in another.

TO see beyond all Seas, and through all interposing Skreens and Darknesses, is
the Gift of the Understanding, and to be able to Love any Object beyond the
Skies, any Thing that is Good from the Center of the Earth to the Highest
Heavens, is the Property of the Soul; which it exercises here by Parts, and
Degrees, but shall at once exert at the Day of Consummation. The Infinity of
the Father in the Son, and the Godhead of the Son in the Holy Ghost will
entirely be enjoyed.

IT is the Glory of man, that his Avarice is insatiable, and his Ambition
infinite, that his Appetite carries him to innumerable Pleasures, and that his
Curiosity is so Endless, that were he Monarch of the World, it could not
satisfy his Soul, but he would be curiously inquisitive into the original and
End of Things, and be concerned in the Nature of those that are beyond the
Heavens. For having met with an infinite Benefactor, he would not be sit for
his Bounty, could any finite Object satisfy his Desire: and for this Cause is
his Reason so inquisitive, to see whether every thing be Delightful to his
Essence; which, when he finds agreeable to his Wish, and to exceed his
Imagination, it is impossible to declare how his Avarice and Ambition will both
rejoice, how much his Appetite will be satisfied, and his Curiosity delighted.
To sit in the Throne of GOD and to enjoy Communion with him, in those Things
which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entered into the Heart
of Man to conceive, is no mean thing: the Advancement is infinitely Greater,
then we are able to understand. No young man can gaze upon a Beauteous face
with greater Pleasure, no Epicures Sense he ravished with more Delight, than
that which he apprehends in so Glorious a fruition.

THE very sight of other men's Souls, shining in the Acts of their Understanding
throughout all Eternity, and extending themselves in the Beams of Love through
all Immensity, and thereby transformed (every one of them) into a Sphere of
Light comprehending the Heavens, every Angel and every Spirit being a Temple of
GODS Omnipresence and Perfection; this alone will be a ravishing Spectacle to
that Goodness, which delights to see innumerable Possessors of the Same
Kingdom: Much more will the Perfection of the Kingdom it self, which by
infinite Wisdom is so constituted, that every one is the Sovereign Object, the
First born, and Sole heir, and End of the Kingdom; Every one the Bride of GOD,
every one there a King, yet without Confusion, or Diminution, every one
distinctly, enjoying all, and adding to each others fruition.

TO understand all this, and not to delight in it, is more miserable then not
to understand it. To see it, without being able to enjoy it, is to pine away in
a prison, from whence we see the Glory of a Palace, and repine in our misery at
the Pleasures of those that are about it: To delight in these Things, without
being affected with them; is impossible. Nor is there any Affection but that of
Love, whereby we can enjoy them.

THE Angels see the Glory of GODS Kingdom and delight in it; the Damned see the
Joys of the Blessed, and are tortured by them; the Wicked upon Earth neither
see, nor are affected with them; the Saints on Earth apprehend them in part,
and believe them, desire and endeavor after them; they wait with Expectation
for the whole, and by certain degrees, as it were in a Glass, enjoy the Image
and Reflection of them: As many as they comprehend, they actually delight in:
for their love is awakened, and extended to the goodness of all they
understand, which it feeds upon by meditation, and turns into Nourishment, for
the Beneffit of their Souls, which are made more Great, and Strong, and
Vigorous by their Fruitions. But without Love, it is easy to see, that no
Goodness can be at all enjoyed.

GOD does desire Love from us, because his Wisdom very well knows, that without
Love the World would be in vain, and the End of the Creation frustrated: his
Goodness is diffusive and infinitely desires to communicate it self, which it
cannot do, unless it be Beloved. To receive it, is the highest service we can
do unto it, nothing being more agreeable to the Nature of his Goodness, then
that it should be enjoyed. His Blessedness consists in the pleasure he takes
in the Felicity of others, and brancheth it self out into two Parts, the
Pleasure of Communicating all to others, and the pleasure of receiving all from
others, in the satisfaction which he takes to see others Blessed, in the
Returns of those joys and Praises, which are offered up to his Goodness and
Glory. His Glory desires to be seen, and delighted in: To be esteemed and
beloved: to be honored and admired, is natural to Glory, the Brightness of
whose splendour is more Sensibly Pleasant in the Reflection of its face, and in
the Joy that it makes in another Soul. His Holiness takes Pleasure in pure and
upright Actions, of all which Love is the fountain. There is an Objective
fitness and Excellency in Love, for which it is infinitely valued by him. It is
one of the first and immediate Properties of Love to desire to be beloved, to
make its object most Amiable and Beautiful, as well as Blessed; to be united to
it, to have its own Goodness acknowledged, its Essence approved, its excellency
desired, admired and delighted in; to see all its Actions, Appearances, Gifts
and Tokens esteemed; and to feel its own Efficacy, in the Grateful Acceptance
it finds in the Raptures it occasions, in the flames it enkindles in another
Soul. Now Love is the fountain of all Honor, Gratitude, Praise and Esteem: By
Love the Soul is transformed into the Similitude of GOD, by love made Bright
and Beautiful, all its Blessedness and Glory are founded in its Love, it is by
Love it self made Communicative and Diffusive, and Great, and Rich, and as the
Scripture speaks, fit for Delights. All Obedience and service are founded in
Love; And if a Creature, that is Beloved, must freely give up it self to
another Pleasure, before it can show its Love, or entirely be enjoyed; Love is
of all other things in the World most fit to answer Love, because the very
heart and Soul is given thereby to the Person that desires it.

LOVE is the Fountain of all Benefits and Pleasures. House, Estate, and Lands,
Authority, Wealth, and Power, Life it self is consecrated and Devoted by a
Lover to his Object. So that on our side all is given to GOD by Love, as well
as by Love it is received from him. The Heavens and the Earth and all the
Creatures are Gifts and Tokens of his Love, Men and Angels are a Present of his
Love, which he has infinitely adorned, and made endlessly serviceable to every
Soul that is Beloved. All these his Love would have us to receive with a due
Esteem and therefore, is it than of his Love he will have us to exercise our
reason aright, and Love them as much as their Goodness deserves. When we see
and understand their Excellence, and Esteem them according to the transcendent
value that appears in them, we adorn our selves with their fair Ideas, we
enlarge and beautify our Souls with Bright and clear Apprehensions, and which
is much more, with regular and well ordered Affections, we enrich our selves,
and increase our Greatness (in the fruition of his Gifts) we are lively, and
pleasant, and vigorous Creatures, full of Knowledge, and Wisdom, and Goodness,
and fit to offer up all these things unto him again, while we empty them as
Helps and Advantages in that Service which we pay unto him: For our Love to
himself is enkindled by these Incentives, and while we sacrifice our selves and
them unto him, we delight in nothing more then to see him, that is so Great in
Love and Bounty, the Author and Possessor of all his Glories.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Excellency of Truth, as it is the Object and Cause of Virtue. The
Matter and form of Virtuous Actions. That their form is infinitely more
Excellent then their Matter, and the Heathen Morality infinitely defective and
short of the Christian.

I do not see that Aristotle made the End of Virtue any other then a finite and
temporal Felicity, which is infinitely short of that felicity which is here
begun, and enjoyed for ever. He did not make GOD the Object and End of the
Soul, and if all Acts are distinguished into their Kinds by their Objects and
their Ends, those Virtues must be infinitely base, that have no other Objects
or Ends, but Creatures; and those only Divine and Noble, that flow from an
infinite and Eternal Original, respect an infinite and Eternal Object, rest in
an Infinite and Eternal End. His Difinition of Felicity imports all this, but
his Behavior makes me to fear he did not understand it: As Seneca luckily hit
upon that saying, Deus me solum dedit toti mundo, totum Mundum mibi soli, GOD
gave me alone to all the World, and all the World to me alone; yet could not
understand it. For had he Known what it was he said, he would have made a
better use of it, and been more copious and explicit in the Illustration. An
actual Respect had to infinite Obligations and Rewards, a Desire in every
action to please an infinite and eternal Lover, to Glorify a Divine and
Endless Benefactor, to bring forth the fruits of infinite Benefits, and to be
truly Grateful for all the Advantages of a man's Creation, that is made to have
Dominion over all the World; these are higher and better Qualifications of
those Virtuous Actions which Christians perform, than Heathens understood. And
yet if nature were divested of its Corruption, the Natural Man, that is, no
Christian, might, by the Light of Nature, be fitted to understand them. And the
Truth is, I wonder much, (the World being so Beautiful and Glorious in every
Eye, so really deep and valuable in Worth, so peculiarly applied to the use and
service of every person;) that the Heathens did miss the fruition of it, and
fail to measure themselves and their Felicity, by the Greatness of its Beauty,
and the Joy which all the Creatures ought to produce in the mind of Man by
their real Services. For the Earth is really better than if all its Globe were
of beaten Gold, the Seas are better than if all their Abysses were full of
Diamonds, the Air is better, than if all the space between us and the Skys were
full of Scepters, and the Sun alone a greater Treasure then all the wealthy
Mines in the Indies: every man is surrounded with all the Light of their
Advantages, and so much served by them, as if no man but himself were alive in
the World. So that it is a natural and easy Investigation, even for Heathens
themselves, to discern the mystery of Bliss, and to discover the misery of
Humane Nature to be founded in some Disease of the Will, or Understanding: And
to return from Inadvertency and Sloth, to Truth and Righ Reason, which was the
ready Way to true Felicity. For they Knew not the Arcanum or Hidden mystery of
Divine Laws, nor the Excellency and Perfection of immortal Souls, which make
every one a Sovereign and Transcendent Creature; yet they might easily observe
the miserable Effects of Eternal Solitude, and in external Services, how useful
and comfortable men were ordained by Nature to be to one another.

EVERY man Loves to have many Eyes fixed on his Beauty, and to have many
Delightful Objects and Transactions for his own. Be the Theater never so
Magnificent, the Actions and the Actors, are more Delightful to the Spectators
than the Gildings, and Dead Engravings. Were all other men removed out of the
World to make room for one, the empty Theater would remain, but the Spectacle
be lost, all the Cities, and Kingdoms, and Ages would be removed, with all that
was lively, and rare, and Miraculous in all their Occurrences. Palaces, and
Temples had been prevented, Houses and Villages, Fields and Vineyards! The
World had been a Wilderness overgrown with Thorns, and Wild Beasts, and
Serpents: Which now by the Labor of many hands, is reduced to the Beauty and
Order of Eden. It is by Trades and Occupations that a man gets him Corn, and
Wine, and Oil, etc. all which he would have been without had he never seen any
Company but himself; condemned to Idleness and melancholy. Virtues and Praises
had been things unknown, Admiration and Honor, Love and Knowledge the mysteries
of Religion and Piety, all the speculations of Wisdom, for want of Education
had been lost, at least the Sense and Exercise of these Bright and Glorious
Things, for wont of Conversation: Corrupted Nature being prone to afford no
other fruits but Barbarism and Ignorance in that Solitary Condition. For the
Powers of the Soul are improved by Tradition: and it is by the Information of
others that our minds are awakened to perceive the Dignity of our own Nature,
the Value of all the Creatures, and our Interest unto them.

But Religion teaches us far more, the Beginning and the End of the World, how
highly we are honored, and beloved of GOD, the Manner wherein we are to
converse with him, the transcendent Excellency of Souls, and the Divine
Perfections of the Deity, What his Omnipresence and Eternity is, how we are to
be enlarged in our Apprehensions and Desires, and prepared for infinite and
Eternal fruitions; in what Quality, and Capacity, we are to live in the world,
and Exercise Virtue, how we are to spend our Time, and employ our Powers on all
Objects, every one as Lord of the Creation and the friend of GOD! How all
Angels and Men are commanded to Love us as themselves, and by that Love to
serve and delight us more, than by all other Actions and Offices whatsoever:
That every Soul is a more excellent Being than the visible World, more nearly
allied to God, and more precious in it self than any Treasure whatsoever: That
it is endued with Powers, Inclinations and Principles so fitly subservient and
conducive to Blessedness, that any one of these is more Delightful then all
inanimate Things; in the Contemplation and Enjoyment of which we may justly be
lost in Wonder and Ecstasy. All this by the Light of Nature is asserted, but
covered with so Gross a vail, that we discern it not, till it is newly revealed
by the Ministry of Men. And upon all these Accounts are Men themselves, (which
are generally mistaken to be Impediments) Means and Assistances of our Happy
living.

BUT however familiar, and near, and easy these Great and evident Truths
appear, it so happened, that the Heathen Philosophers were Blind unto them, and
in the midst of their Searches after Felicity; failed of the Discovery; they
became vain in their Imaginations, placing felicity in a mere Apathy, or
conceited (...) a self-sufficiency, or in a brave Contempt of all misfortunes,
in a forced Contentment Dark and empty, or in Sensual Pleasures, or in the
Goods of fortune, either alone, or conjoined with those of the Soul and Body,
which they lamely enumerated, and knew not how to employ; as if the Discovery
of the highest and best Truths in nature, had been reserved for him that
redeemed Nature, and the Plainest Truths had been appointed to honor and attend
that Religion which brought supernatural My steries to Light, by the Preaching
of the Gospel.

BY this last the Qualifications of an humble and pious Soul, a Penitent and
Grateful Person, sensible (at once) of his infinite Guilt and Grandeur, were
introduced: Another foundation laid upon the Meritorious Death and Passion of
GOD, the Son of GOD, a Second Love continued in the Deity to the miserable
after an infinite forfeiture; all the Oracles, and Visions, and Miracles, by
which the Nature of Man is magnified, and Ages enlightened, the Ministry of
Angels, and the Dispensations of Providence, by which the Care and Tenderness
of GOD is shown, the infinite measures and Violences of his Love, the infinite
Variety and Number of Obligations, the present Advantages and Benefits, the
Eternal Rewards, the Relation of GOD to Man as a Father and a friend, a
Bridegroom and a King, a Light and Example, the sweetuess of our Union and
Communion with him, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven; all
these Things, which the Angels desire to look into, were by the Christian
Religion (with the rest before mentioned) plainly revealed, with our victory
over Death, the Resurrection of our Bodies, and Life Eternal.

IN the Light of these Circumstances the Interior form of Virtuous Acts more
evidently appears. For to exercise Virtue in the Quality and Capacity of a Son
of GOD, is another sort of Business, than to exercise Virtue as an ordinary
Mechanic: and to do all things being clothed with a Sense of our Celestial
Grandeur, as we are Heirs of the World, infinitely Beloved of GOD, ordained for
his Throne, Delightful in the Eyes of all, Angels and Men, Beloved and honored
by all the Creatures, made Partakers of the Divine Nature, intending and
designing to Please all Spectators in Heaven and Earth (by the excellency of
our Actions;) This makes every little Deed as it were infinite within; while
the Matter of the Action seems nothing; it renders the Form Divine and
Blessed.

THE best Actions of the prophaner Heathen fell under the notion of Dead Works:
By which name the Apostle calls all wicked Deeds, to intimate the Privation
of all that excellency that ought to be in Humane Actions. Every Deed and
Thought, of ours ought to be Inspired with Life from Heaven. The Light of the
Understanding, and the vigor of the Will is the Soul that informs it. When it
is void of Knowledge, and springs not from that series of GODS infinite Love,
that ought to animate it, nor regards those Eternal Joys that are set before
us, nor at all considers those Obligations that are laid upon us, it is
bereaved of its Vital and Essential form, it is like a fair Carcass without a
Soul, unsensible of those Interests and Concerns, that ought chiefly to be
valued and promoted. And by this you may see clearly, that the Matter of a Good
act falls infinitely short of that Perfection wherewith it ought to be
inspired, if this Soul, or Form be wanting; which tho less visible to the Eye
of flesh, is of as much greater Excellence and Importance, as the Soul in
nature is above Body.

THUS when a Heathen gives to the Poor, the matter of the Act is the very self
same which a Christian man does: So is an Act of Courage, or Patience, in
encountering Death; the subduing of the Appetite, and the Denial of a Lust, a
piece of Justice against Interest and friendship, an Act of Prudence,
Temperance, or Fidelity: In all these, if we respect the Matter of them,
Heathens have acted (in a manner) as high as any Christian, and consequently
appear to vulgar Apprenhensions as Heroic and Stupendous. But consider the
inside, the Heathen did it that he might satisfy his Conscience and and please
the GODS, that he might acquire honor and immortal fame, or please the generous
Inclination of his own Soul, which delighted in Honor and Worth, or assert his
own Principles, or five his friends, or preserve his Country. And doubtless
these are Great and brave considerations, but they are limited and finite: and
Sick of two Defects, (for the most part) that are incurable. They were
Sacrifices of Obedience to false Gods, plain Idolatry, and attended with an
ignorant Loftiness and Height of Mind, that confided in them: and besides this,
they aspired to little more then a Glorious name in following Ages.

WHEREAS the Christian makes all Kind of Graces to meet and concentre in every
Action, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Courage, Temperance, Prudence, Humility,
Penitence, Patience, Meekness, Liberality, Cheerfulness, Gratitude, Joy in the
Holy Ghost, Devotion, Piety, Faith, Hope, Charity, all Kind of Holiness, And
his Action extends to all the Objects of these Graces, and includes their
Causes. He remembers the infinite Obligations that are laid upon him by that
Deity, which infinitely Loves him; the Benefit of the Creation, and the Glory
of the Divine Image, the Guilt of fall, and that blot and misery that lies upon
him, the Wonder of his Redemption, and the Love of Christ, his Death and
Passion, the Miraculous Pains and Endeavors of GOD in all Ages, to reclaim him,
the Giving of the Holy Ghost, and his holy Baptism, the New Covenant which he
is in with GOD, the Height and Glory of his Place and station, the Beauty of
the World, and his Dominion over all the Living Creatures, the Joy and Amity of
all the Angels, the Benefit and Welfare of all his Neighbors the Joy and
Prosperity of future Ages; the Glory of GOD, the Honor of his Church, and the
Propagation of Religion, the Salvation of others Souls, and the Eternal State
and condition of his own, the Acquisition of a Celestial and Eternal Kingdom,
and the Delight he takes in an infinite Sphere of Eternal Joys, the fervent
Desire he has to be Grateful to the Almighty; all these by the Light of his
Divine and Celestial Knowledge enter into the Act, for want of which the other
work, that is wrought by an Ignorant Heathen, is in a Manner rightly called a
Work, of Darkness.

I do not speak this, as if I would discourage a Heathen from doing the Best
that he is able; or condemn those reasons upon which he proceeds in his
Virtuous Deeds; No, nor as if all this were necessary to the Acceptance of an
Action. But to show how highly Christianity does ennoble the Soul of Man, how
far more sublime its Principles are, and how far more perfect it makes his
Actions: When they are what they may be: And withal to provoke Christians to a
more Intelligent and lofty Practice of Christian Virtues, lest they differ not
in their Morals from the better sort of Heathens. All these things are
necessary to the perfection of an Action, tho not to its Acceptance; And GODS
Omnipresence, and Power, and Wisdom, and Love ought to be considered in all
places, among all Persons, upon all occasions; And the Blood of Christ, and the
infinite Glory of Eternal Bliss. But that which above all I chiefly intend, is
to show what influence the great Perfection of Felicity has upon all our
Virtues: not only to stir us up to do them, but by entering their Constitution,
to inspire them with their Beauty and form for their fuller Luster, Glory and
Perfection: That we may see also, how Great and Transcendent that Life must be,
wherein every Act is capable of so much Majesty and Magnificence, if I may so
speak, by reason of the variety of its Ends and Causes. And how abominable and
absurd they are all that exclude GOD out of their Thoughts and Considerations;
Who is alone the Fountain of all the Beauty in every Virtuous Deed, and the
proper fullness, Cause and End of all its Perfection!

HOW Ambitious we ought to be of Knowledge, which is the Light wherein we are
to adorn and complete our selves, we may learn and collect from all that is
said. It is rightly called the Key of Knowledge, it admits us into the spacious
Recesses of every Virtue, opens the Gate by which we enter into the Paths of
Righteousness, that lead to the Temple and Palace of Bliss. Where all the
Treasuries of Wisdom are exposed to the Eye of the Soul, tho hidden from the
World. How Great and Amiable every Virtue is, how Great and Perfect it may be
made, is only discerned by the Eye of Knowledge; It is by this alone that men
come to discern how full of Reason Religion is, and with what Joy and Security
and Sweetness it may be practiced.

CHAP. IX.
Wisdom is seated in the Will, it attaineth best of all possible Ends by the
best of all possible Means.

KNOWLEDGE, how excellent soever it may be conceived, is without Wisdom like
skill without Practice; which whether, it be in Music, or Painting, or in any
other Art, as Government, Navigation, Preaching, Judicature, is altogether vain
and fruitless, if it be not reduced into Act and Exercise. For Wisdom is that
Excellent Habit of Soul by which we choose the most Excellent End of all those
which may be Known, and actually prosecute it, by the best Means that are
conducive thereunto.

TO Know the best of all possible Ends and not to embrace it, is the greatest
folly in the World. To choose and embrace it, without Endeavoring after it, is
a folly contending with the other for Eminence. To choose any means less then
the best in Order thereunto, is a new piece of solly, even then when we pursue
what Wisdom requires. For no less than the best of all possible Means is
requisite to the Acquisition of the best of all possible Ends. And by all this
we discern, that Wisdom is not a mere Speculation of Excellent Things, but a
Practical Habit, by Virtue of which we actually atchieve and complete our
Happiness. For it is impossible for the best of Means (when they are well used)
to fail; we may grow remiss, and suspend our Endeavor, which is another Kind of
folly, and so be diverted from the best of all possible Means by some strong
Temptation, or cease from using them through our own Inconstancy, or yield to
some Light and easy Allurement, or be discouraged by some terrible Danger, and
thus may abandon the Best of all Ends, but without some such folly it can ever
be lost.

POSSIBILITIES are innumera^le, so that nothing less than infinite Wisdom can
find out that which is ^bsolutely the Best. But when the best ^f all possible
Ends is by infinite Wisdom sound out, it is an Easy thing for Wisdom to
discover that End to the Knowledge of others, to whom it is able to communicate
it self by way of Gift and Participation.

WHAT the best of all possible Ends is, only GOD fully comprehends. But in
General it is such, that it includes all Kind of Goods in the highest
Perfection, infinite varieties and Degrees of Possibility turned into Act, all
Sweetness and Beauty Empire, Dominion, and Power, all Riches, Pleasures, and
Honors Victories, and Triumphs, and Possessions, will be in it, and nothing
possible or Desirable be wanting to it. GOD alone is the Best of all possible
Ends, who includes all things in himself as then Cause, and End: the
Perfection of his Will is his Blessedness and Glory, and his Essence the only
Means by which he can attain unto it. By himself it is that we come unto him in
a manner afterward more fully to be explained. His Essenc^ is the Best of all
possible Means; by which he attains himself, and by which he is enjoyed. Our
Conformity to h^^ Essence is our Way, by a Wise Application of our Souls to
that Eternal A^^ which is his End.

THAT Sweetness and Beauty are Attributes of the best of all possible Ends, is
evident and clear: As it is also that these must be infinite in their Degree
and Measure, because nothing but what is infinitely convenient, is absolutely
Eligible. Now what is infinitely convenient is infinitely Sweet and Beautiful.
What is infinitely Desirable is infinitely Good, because it is Agreeable to
that Love wherewith every Existence intends it self, and pursues its own
sublime Happiness.

IT is easy to conceive how GOD should be the End of his Creatures, but how he
should really be his own End is difficult to understand: Because his Creatures
are Defective, and have something besides themselves to aspire after: but GOD
from all Eternity is infinitely perfect, and being all that he can be, needs
nothing that he can endeavor to attain. But if we consider the nature of
Wisdom, which is a voluntary Act, we may be freed from the Despair of
understanding the Mystery. For Wisdom must of necessity intend it self in its
Operations, because it becomes Wisdom by doing the Best of all Excellent
Things; and does them all that it may be Wisdom, or Wise in doing them. It
implies Deliberation and Freedom; being a Virtue seated in the Will and
Understanding, It implies a Power of Knowing, and Choosing, and Doing all
Things, it consists not in the Power of Knowing only, nor in Power of
Choosing, nor in the Power of Doing. Nothing else is Wisdom, but to choose and
do what we Know is absolutely most Excellent. Wisdom then is founded in the
Act of Doing, nay it is the Act of Doing all that is Excellent. And if it be a
free and voluntary Act, as it must needs be, because nothing is Wisdom, but
that which guides it self by Counsel freely, to a Known End, which it
discerns to be most Excellent, it implies an Ability to forbear, in him that
is wise, by choosing to do what he might forbear. Had it forborne to do what is
most Excellent, it had turned into folly, because it had by that means lost the
most Excellent End: but by choosing to do all that was best, it became an act of
Wisdom; which being most Lovely, it chiefly desired to be. And so by Choosing
and Doing the most Excellent of Things, begot it self; and by it self proceeded
to all its Operations, which must needs be infinite, if Wisdom be so, because
any thing less would (if rested in) be infinitely Defective.

THAT Riches and Pleasures may be infinite, is evident from the Nature and
extent of space, which is illimited and Endless, from the Omnipresence and
Eternity of GOD, in which there is infinite Room for innumerable varieties,
especially from his Wisdom and Goodness which are Infinite Treasures. It
appears also from his Almighty Power, which is able in all Parts of his
Omnipresence and Eternity, to work without any Bound or Period, without
cessation at once to work in all Places of his Dominion, and throughout all his
Immensity to act, and do what he will. So that in one Instant he can fill both
Eternity and Time with enjoyments, Every Part and Particle of which shall be
infinitely Delightful, because of the vigor of his Eternal Power in very
Operation. Thus is he entirely Acting in Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, at the
same time, and at all conceivable Distances beyond all Heavens ever Acting,
because he is Willing Decreeing seeing and ruling there, and every where
accomplishing his Counsel and Pleasure. His Essence and his Will are both the
same, his Essence is his Act, and his Act his Pleasure.

BY exerting his Almighty Power he begot that Act, which is the Means and End
of all his Endeavors. An Act of Wisdom infinite and Eternal is his Blessedness
and Glory. We must take heed of conceiving GOD to be one Thing, and his Act
another, for all his Wisdom and Goodness, all his Blessedness, and Life, and
Glory are in the Act, by which he became the Fountain and the End of all
Things. He became so freely, and yet was so by his Essence from everlasting,
for Eternity is an infinite Length of Duration, altogether present in all its
parts in a Stable manner. To fill one part of space with Treasures, and leave
another Empty, was not Wise. Common Reason will instruct us, that it is better
to have all spaces full of Delights, than some sew or none. And by his infinite
Wisdom it is that he Knows how to enjoy, what he never needed, and to improve
his Enjoyments by giving them away.

INFINITE and Eternal Wisdom does not only imply the Possibility, but the
certain Reality and Existence of Eternal Treasures. Where least you should
wonder how such should be infinite, you must needs be informed that God is his
own best and most perfect Treasure. For if Treasures are by nature those
precious Things, which are Means whereby we acquire our Ends, or those Things
which we most Esteem, as the Sovereign Objects of our Joy; GOD is in both those
respects his own Wealth, because his Essence is the Means by which he
atchieveth all his ends, and the Sovereign End of all those Means which he by
his Wisdom uses for his Ends. For of him, and by him and to him are all
things: As the Scripture witnesses. Matter is the Dreg of Nature, and Dead
without Power; Power is the Abyss of Nature, but void without act: Act is the
Top and Perfection of Nature, it is the fullness of Power, the fountain and the
means of all that is; for Power by transforming it self into Act, becomes, an
act, and by that Act produces and perfecteth all its Works both outward and in
ward; so is it the Means of all its Productions: being so infinitely Simple and
various together, that nothing but Power exerting it self is in the Nature of
the Act by which it is exerted. All the Essence of that Act is the complete
Exertion of Eternal Power, and yet to it alone we ascribe the Original and
Means of all: it is the Cause, and Means and End of it self, as well as of
other Things, which for its own sake, are Produced by it. For idle Power can do
nothing: Mere Power is neither the Cause, nor the Means, nor the End of any
thing. Power not Idle, but exerted, and thoroughly employed, is all Act: And
this is the Cause of all its Productions, because of this Power exerting it
self they spring: and the Means of all, because by this Power exerting it self,
they are; and the End of all, because it did all, that it might be not Idle,
but Power Exerting it self, or a Glorious Act in its full Perfection.

IT was an effect of infinite Wisdom, wherein GOD by one Act acquired himself,
and all his Dominion, prepared his own, and his Creatures blessedness, made
himself and all his Kingdom Glorious. But this is scarcely intelligible,
because the manner of his Life is incomprehensible: we cannot tell how to
conceive, what the Learned constantly affirm, that all Eternity is at one Time.
All I shall observe in Order to the explaining of this Mystery, is only this,
that tho the World begins and Ends with Time, yet Eternity does immutably
include Time, and the Operations of Divine Wisdom are various, and exactly
fitted to their several Seasons, yet all the parts of Eternity are filled with
Operations, which, tho they are one in GOD, like that of shining in the Sun,
are manifold in Effects, as the Beams of the Sun in their different Works among
all the Creatures.

IT is a natural Effect of infinite Wisdom to make every of its Treasures
suitable to its own excellence. And that the Wisdom of GOD has done, by making
every the smallest Thing in his Kingdom infinitely serviceable in its Place,
and station, for the manifesting of his Wisdom Goodness, and Glory to the Eye
of a clear Beholder And this he has done by making all his Kingdom oneIntire
Object, and every Thing in it a Part of that Whole, Relating to all the
innumerable Parts, receiving a Beauty from all, and communicating a Beauty to
all, even to all objects throughout all Eternity. While every one among
Millions of Spectators, is endued with an Endless Understanding to see all, and
enjoy all in its Relations, Beauties, and Services.

I cannot stand to enlarge on this, otherwise I might illustrate it by a
familiar Example. No single Part of a stately Monument is so Beatutiful out of
its Place, as it is in its Place: because if it be seen alone, it is not
understood; for the Beauty that results from all, consists in Order and
Symmetry, which by any Division is broken to pieces. He Knows nothing as he
ought to Know, who thinks he Knows any thing, without seeing its Place, and
the Manner how it relates to GOD, Angels and Men, and to all the Creatures in
Earth, Heaven, and Hell, Time, and Eternity.

IT is an Act of Wisdom to prize and enjoy, what is by Wisdom prepared, and
Because infinite Wisdom includes all Wisdom, infinite Wisdom at once
Knows, Chooses, Does, Esteems, and Enjoys, all that is Excellent. It is
an Act of Wisdom to make ones self Good and Delightful to others, because
Honor, and Peace, and Amity, are founded therein. It is infinite Wisdom to
become infinitely Good and Delightful to others, and for that cause to be
infinite in Bounty. For what is infinitely Good is infinitely Glorious. And
therefore is it, that GOD needing Nothing in himself, gives all Things to
others, Gives them in enjoying them, enjoys in Giving them, while his Goodness
delights in the Felicity of others, and in being the Felicity of others. For by
making them Great and Blessed he magnifieth himself; and by replenishing them
increases his Treasures.

HOW little soever of this you are able to conceive, you may understand, that
to be like GOD is the way to be Happy: And that if GOD has put it in your
Power to be like him, it is the extremest Madness in the World to abuse your
Power, and to neglect his Treasures, but it is infinite VVisdome by the best of
all possible Means to embrace and enjoy them, Because an infinite End is
thereby attained, even GOD himself, who is thereby made the portion of the
Soul, and its Reward forever.

THE best of all possible Means whereby we can acquire his Eternal Treasures,
is to imitate GOD in our Thoughts and Actions; to exert our Powers after his
Similitude, and to attain his Image, which is after GOD in Knowledge,
Righteousness, and true Holiness. For by Knowing all Things, as GOD Knows
them, we transform our Souls into an Act of Knowledge, most Bright and
Glorious: By Loving all Things as GOD Loves them, we transform our Wills into
an Act of Love, which is most Sweet and Blessed. We enrich and Beautify our
selves with the Image of his Goodness, while we communicate our Souls (in our
Powers) to all Objects in his whole Eternity. We magnify our selves by
magnifying Him in all his Works: We do right to our selves by doing right to
GOD, and all other Things. Which for as much as we must here on Earth learn by
Degrees, and can never perfectly accomplish the Work, till it is given us in
Heaven, it is VVisdome to walk in the Paths of Righteousness as far as we are
able, and to do those Things here, tho small and defective, which he will
recompense with a Reward so perfect hereafter.

IF ever we be so happy as to come to Heaven, his VVisdome shall be our
Wisdom, his Greatness our Greatness, his Blessedness our Blessedness, his
Glory our Glory, All his Joys and Treasures shall be ours, his Life and Love
ours, and Himself ours for evermore.

HIS VVisdome is made ours because it is the Light in which we shall see Light,
and learn thereby to inherit all Things: the Exemplar and Original of our
VVisdome, the Fountain and Pattern of all our Joys, the Author and Inventor of
all our Delights, the End and Sum of all our Desires, the Means of all our
Felicity, our very Blessedness and Glory.

CHAP. X.
Of Righteousness. How Wisdom, Justice, and Right Reason are shut up in its
Nature. What GOD does, and what we acquire, by the Exercise of this Virtue.

RIGHTEOUSNESS and VVisdome are near allied. For to be Just toward all Objects
is to render them their spiritual Due, their Due Esteem. It is VVisdome,
because thereby we attain our End, and enjoy their Excellency. It is Right
Reason, because to value all Things just as they are, tendering to them neither
more nor less then they deserve, is to do Right to our selves and them, it is a
Virtue, because by force thereof we attain our Happiness.

For the better understanding of this Virtue we must Know that there is a
Righteousness of Apprehension, a Rightteousness of Esteem, a Righteousness of
Choice, and a Righteousness of Action. Righteousness of Thought is that Habit
by Virtue of which we think aright; forming and framing within our selves
aright Apprehensions of all Objects whatsoever. This, tho it be the First and
smallest Part of Righteousness, is of Great importance; because no man can use
that aright, the Nature of which he does not apprehend. He that mistakes his
Hand for his Meat, will rise hungry from Table. He that mistakes a Fiddle for
an Axe, will neither cut Wood well, nor make good Music. The Misapprehension
of Great and Transcendent Objects, whether visible or Spiritual, is not perhaps
so Gross, but more pernicious and Destructive. He that apprehends GOD to be a
Tyrant, can neither honor GOD, nor Love him, nor enjoy him. He that takes
Virtues to be vices, and apprehends all the Actions of Religion unpleasant will
loath and avoid them. He, that conceits Nothing in the World to be his own but
his low Cottage and course diet, will think it needless to praise his Maker,
and will deny himself to be happy in those narrow and Mean enjoyments. He that
thinks all the wealth is shut up in a Trunk of Gold, will little regard the
Magnificence of the Heavens, the Light of the Sun, or the Beauty of the
Universe.

RIGHTEOUSNESS in esteem is that Habit, by Virtue of which we value all things
according as their Worth and Merit requires. It presupposes a right
Apprehension of their Goodness, a clear Knowledge of all their excellencies. It
is a Virtue by which we give to every thing that place in our Soul which they
hold in Nature. It is wonderful both for its extent, and Value. For there is
Room enough for all Objects in the esteem of the Soul, and it is by esteem that
they are honored, perfected and enjoyed.

A wise man will actually Extend his Thoughts to all Objects in Heaven and
Earth, for fear of losing the Pleasure they afford him, which must necessarily
spring from his esteem of their excellency.

HONOR and Esteem are near a kin. How the Creatures are honored by esteem,
needs not to be unfolded: but how they are perfected by it, is a little
Misterious. A thing is then perfected when it attains its End. Now the End for
which all things were made is that they may be seen and enjoyed. They are seen
that they may be esteemed, and by an intelligent and right esteem are all
enjoyed. In our esteem therefore they find and attain their end, and by
attaining that are consequently perfected. The Application of Actives to
Passives is a mystery in Nature of very great and General Importance; In all
Pleasures, Cures, and Productions. All satisfactions, Joys, and Praises are the
happy offspring of Powers and Objects well united. Both the one and the other
would lie void and barren if they never met together: and when they meet their
Union must be regular, wise and holy.

GOD is an Object of Man's Esteem: Which unless it were able to render him his
Due and Quadrat with his Excellencies, a man could never be Righteous toward
GOD. For that Esteem is void of Righteousness, that either exceeds, or falls
short of its Object. If it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness, it becomes
GOD, to endue us with the Power of Esteeming all, that is Good and Excellent,
according to the Worth and Value thereof. For which cause he enables us to
Esteem all that we can see in Heaven and Earth, and in the Heaven of Heavens.
For this Esteem is the Foundation of that choice which is the Original Spring
of all excellent Actions. Even GOD himself meets his Honor in the esteem of
our Souls. He is injured by the Sacrilegious Impiety that robs him of his
Esteem; being infinitely Quick and Tender in apprehending, he is more jealous
of his Honor, and more grieved when he loses it then any other. His Wisdom
and his Love are infinitely offended, when they are slighted and profaned; but
pleased extremely when they are sanctified and honored: and that they are by a
just Esteem. And for this cause he has made us able to attend him in all his
Works, and in all his ways, and to have Communion with him in all his Counsels
and Perfections that as our Savior says, Joh. 3. 35.
The Father loves the son, and has given all things into his hand, And again,
The Father loves the Son, Joh. 5. 20.
and shows him all things that himself does: so we might become the Sons of
GOD and see his Love and to delight in all that he has done for us. Joh. 15.
15.
For which cause he afterward says, Henceforth I call you not Servants, for
the Servant Knows not what his Lord does. But I have called you friends, for
all Things that I have heard of my Father, I have made Known unto you.

THE Omnipresence and Eternity of GOD are so far from filling the Soul, that
they fit it only to be filled with infinite Objects. For by the Indwelling of
GOD all Objects are infused, and contained within. The Spiritual Room of the
Mind is Transcendent to Time and Place, because all Time and Place are
contained therein: There is a Room in the Knowledge for all Intelligible
Objects: A Room in our Esteem for all that is worthy of our Care and Desire. I
confess this Room is strange and Mysterious. It is the Greatest Miracle perhaps
in Nature. For it is an infinite Sphere in a Point, an Immensity in a Center,
an Eternity in a Moment. We feel it, tho we cannot understand it.

WHATEVER we close our Eye against, we exclude out of our Knowledge. Whatsoever
we Hate, we reject, tho we Know it. We give a Place in our Heart only to that,
which we receive and embrace with a Kind Affection.

ETERNITY it self is an Object of Esteem, and so it is the infinity of Almighty
GOD: there are infinite Causes for which they ought to be Esteemed. Our Esteem
of these cannot be abridged, for upon the least substraction of the smallest
Part, Infinity is lost, and so is Eternity. We must be able to esteem the
utmost Extent of every Perfection of GOD, or our Righteousness in relation to
that will be infinitely Defective. The Proportion, between our Esteem and its
Object, is that wherein Righteousness is seated, if our Esteem be finite, it is
utterly destroyed: for where the Object is infinite, instead of Proportion,
there is infinite Disproportion.

FROM Righteousness in Esteem we proceed to Righteousness in Choice. We weigh
and consider what is fittest to be valued, and what we find of greatest Esteem,
we most desire. To prefer the Better above the worse is a righteous Choice; but
to prefer the Worse, is abominable Impiety. The Election of GOD may be more
strictly, or Generally conceived. His Election of particular persons from the
Rebellious Mass of Mankind to be employed, as Ministers, in restoring the
residue, is a matter of Grace; which as Arbitrary and free, is occasioned by
the Accident of their General Rebellion, and his Mercy thereupon. Howbeit it is
Righteous: for he does Right to himself, and to all his Creatures, and
Perfections therein. For thereby notwithstanding the universal Apostasy of the
World, he upholdeth and continues his Righteous Kingdom. But the Primitive
Election (by which, when he had considered the nature of all Possible Things,
he chose the fittest and the Best) was wholly Natural. For according to the
Merit of all Objects he chose them, which Merit nevertheless was to be infused
by himself, in their first Creation. Whether a star were a Thing fit to be
made, Whether the Sun should be limited, whether his Image should be infinite,
whether naked Spirits, or Bodies should be created, or Bodies and Spirits
personally united: Whether Men should at first Instant be placed in Glory, or
in an Estate of Trial, whether when they fell into Sin they should be redeemed
or no, what Laws were most fitting under the Covenant of Works, what conditions
were most proper for the Covenant of Grace; What Helps and Assistances Men
should have, what Impediments and Obstacles; all these and many Millions of
Objects more passed his Examination, in order to the Perfection of his
Kingdom: as it did also whether he should Create a Kingdom or no? and look
what surpassed in Esteem, as best and most Eligible, that he chose to create,
and Perform. To fail in a Tittle had been an infinite fault, because had he in
any one particular preferred the Worse above the better he had contracted a
Blot upon his own Wisdom and Goodness, and made the whole Creation deformed.
For there is such a Love to Righteousness implanted in our Natures, that should
GOD be unjust to a poor Indian beyond the Seas, we should be grieved at the
Blemish, and any Blemish in him would blast our Felicity. For the Justice of
the Soul is an impartial Thing, and its Severity Greatest, where its
Expectations is the Highest. It is more easy with GOD to be infinitely Wise
then with Man to be any thing; He may be Exact and perfect in every action with
Greater Ease, then any other of his Creatures can, because he is Almighty,
Omniscient, and Omnipresent: all the Advantages of his Wisdom, and Knowledge,
and Goodness, and Power, would be Aggravations of his fault should he Sin
against himself. The least offense would be an infinite Blot in him because
committed against all Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, and a misery to us, because
it would tend to the Ruin of his Creatures: The Accurate Perfection which he
acquires in all his Ways, (having to do with so many millions of Objects)
becomes our infinite Joy, our Amazement and Wonder, a Transcendent Cause of
Complacency and Adoration, it fills Eternity with Delights and Praises. The
possibility of doing otherwise, in him that is Subject to no Laws awakens our
Concernment: But the prevention of our fear, by the establishment of our
Security, supplies our contentment, he is an Absolute and free Agent, and
therefore we may fear a miscarriage in his Choice: but as from all Eternity he
has determined himself, and is by his Essence an Eternal Act of Wisdom and
Righteousness, he secures our Felicity and makes it more Great, because he is
not imposed on by another, but freely of himself, delights in the most
Excellent things.

THIS relates to the Righteousness of action, whereby GOD did execute all his
Decrees, and does Eternally. For Nothing is past, but all things in him are
immediately near and present for ever. If you desire further Information,
concerning the Nature of Righteous Actions, Those Actions are properly called
Righteous, that are adequately fitted to their ends and Causes. And in this
respect there is in every being under several Circumstances a several
Righteousness.

THE Effect of Righteousness with men is Peace and Assurance for ever: because
Righteous men are Agreeable to GOD and all his Creatures: rightly answer all
their Natures, and assist in the Harmony of the whole Creation. It is Fruition
and Blessedness, because all the perfection and Goodness of GOD is, with his
Kingdom, received into the Soul, by the Righteous esteem of all Objects. It is
the Beauty and Glory of the Inward Man, because a voluntary Agent, that does
incline himself to such excellent Actions, is highly Amiable and and Delightful
to be seen; Not only because his soul is transformed into an Intelligible
World, transcendent to all that is created, by the Ideas of GOD, and his Works
erected in the mind, but his Affections are framed in a living and incomparable
Order, according as every Cause and Object requires. There is something in the
Soul of a Righteous man, that fitly answers all Obligations and Rewards, It is
transformed into the Image of GOD in such a sort, that in the Righteous Act,
which it becomes, GOD for ever dwells and appears.

THE Effect of Righteousness in GOD is so Great, that whereas all Impossibles
are stark naught, all things which it is possible for GOD to do, are fair and
excellent, all the Best are made actual, by the execution of his Righteous
Decree. By this the Son of GOD is in the bosom of the Father, and the Spirit of
GOD proceeds throughout all Eternities to his own perfection. For the
Righteousness of GOD is not like the Righteousness of Men, that may be
permitted to sleep, and intermit their Operations, an Accidental Habit,
distinct from their Essence, which may sometimes exist, when it does not work
but it is Quick and Powerful, and ever in action and is indeed the Act it self
which is his eternal Essence and his Son begotten of it self for ever. Wis. 7.
For Wisdom is more moving then any motion, she passes and goes through all
things by reason of her Pureness, It is the Breath of the Power of GOD, and a
pure Influence flowing from the Glory of the Almighty, the Brightness of the
Everlasting Light, the unspotted Mirror of the Power of GOD, and the Image of
his Goodness. Being One it can do all things, and remaining in it self, makes
all things new, and in all Ages entering into holy souls, she makes them
Friends of GOD, and Prophets. GODS Righteousness is the end and effect of it
self. His Essence is an infinite and Eternal Act of Righteousness and Wisdom,
which fills his Kingdom with the Majesty of its Glory, and by coming into
Being in a voluntary Manner gives to all Things their Essence, and Perfection.
Because it comes into Being in a voluntary manner it is mysterious and
incomprehensible.

THE Glory of this Act is derived from himself, and springs purely from the
Perfection of its pleasure. Of its Pleasure it is what it is, and as the Son of
GOD is LIGHT of LIGHT, so he is Wisdom of Wisdom, Righteousness of
Righteousness, Life of Life, and Goodness of Godness. For it is infinite
VVisdome that found out the Perfection of this Act, and Eternal Righteousness
that first atcheived it. The Righteousness atcheived could not spring from any
but Eternal Righteousness in it self atcheiving it, which is unbegotten in the
Person of the Father, Begotten in the Person of the Son, and Proceeding in the
Person of the Holy Ghost to all its Creatures and Operations, in its Actions,
existing and abiding Perfect for ever.

IN GOD, to Act and to Be, are the same Thing. Upon the suspension of his act,
his Essence would be gone; whereas our Essence may without its Act, or
Operation, remain. And if his Act existeth, by Acting, his Righteousness is,
and existeth of it self, and by it self compleateth its Essence forever. It is
not the Power of being Righteous, but the Exertion of that Power, which is the
Parent of Eternal Righteousness.

GOD, having such an infinite Delight in the Righteous Act, which himself, is,
designed to make us such Righteous Acts as himself is. And when we perfectly do
what we ought, we shall in Operation and Extent be like unto him, being
perfect, as our Father which is in Heaven is perfect, for we shall see as we
are seen, and Know as we are Known. In the mean time GOD has taken care to
endue us with Power, to make our particular Actions completely Righteous. Every
little Act we perform is a fruit and Offspring of the whole Creation, infinite
Love is delighted by it, infinite Glory and Blessedness acquired. A Creature of
infinite Value is preserved, the Crown is put upon all GODS Works, and all the
Spectators, Angels and Men, are Eternally pleased. For being done it is
admitted into Eternity, and shall remain in its Place, and be visible forever.
1 Cor. 4. 5.
For the Lord will Come, who both will bring to Light the hidden Things of
Darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the Hearts: And then shall
every man have Praise of GOD. All that was done shall be remembered forever, and
be praised and admired by the Holy Angels, Esteemed by all Saints, and Crowned
with Acceptance by GOD Almighty. Which will turn to the Joy of the Righteous,
because of the innate Goodness of their Souls, which moves them to delight in
nothing more then in becoming (in all their Righteous Actions) Objects of
Complacency to GOD and his Creatures.

CHAP. XI.
Of Goodness Natural, Moral and Divine; its Nature described, The Benefits and
Works of Goodness.

GOODNESS is a virtue of the first Estate, a Divine Perfection in GOD by which
he is, and enjoys his Blessedness. In Men it is an Habit or an Act of the Soul,
by force of which they Love, and delight in all that is Blessed. It Is that by
which all Creatures Communicate themselves to others Benefit, all Living
Creatures affect others, and delight in doing Good unto them. In GOD it is that
infinite and Eternal Act from which all other Goodnesses spring, and on which
they depend. The Nature of Goodness is founded in a Convenience, between that
which is Good, and that to which it is profitable. If we consult its several
Kinds, there is a Natural Goodness, a Moral, and a Divine.

NATURAL Goodness is the Aptitude of Corporeal Beings, to produce such
profitable and healing Effects as the enjoyer desires. The Nutritive Power in
Aliment, the Medicinal Virtue in Herbs, the Pleasing Quality in Perfumes, the
Grateful Luster in Precious Stones, the Comfortable. Heat in fire, the
Beautiful splendour in the Sun, the Refreshing Moisture in the Sea, the Reviving
Nature of the Air, the solid Convenience and fertility of the Ground, all these
are Physically Good. But this is Goodness in the meanest Degree, being no more
then the natural fitness of Dead Agents that are made to act by a Fatal
Necessity, without sense or Desire; tho their Action be answerable to the
several Exigencies of other Creatures.

MORAL Goodness includes all the Perfections of the former, and something
more. For Life and Liberty enter its Existence; and it is Wisely exercised in
Love and Virtue. A clear Understanding and a free will are the principles of
those Actions that are Morally Good: they must flow from Ingenuity and Desire;
tho the Person doing them be subject to another Empire, and made to give
Account of his Actions. The Nature of its Excellence is very deep and retired,
because it consists more in the Principal and Manner of its Operation, than the
Thing that is Done; and is measured more by the Intention, then the Benefit. A
mad man, or a fool, may by accident save a man's Life, or preserve an Empire,
yet be far from that Goodness which is seated in the Will and Understanding
Which plainly shows, that the Goodness chiefly regarded is in the Soul of him
that does any thing convenient, not in the Benefit received, but in the Mind of
the Benefactor. And the Truth is that the External Benefit, tho it saves the
Lives, and Souls, and Estates, and Liberties, and Riches, and Pleasures, and
Honors, of all mankind, acts but Physically by a Dead or passive Application,
the root of its influence and value is seated in another place, in the Soul of
him whose Goodness was so Great as to sacrifice his Honor, and Felicity for the
Preservation and Welfare of those whom he intended to save. It is feated in the
Counsel and Design of the Actor. It is a hard matter to define it, but it is
something like a willing Conformity to the Interests and Affections of his
fellow Creatures, attended with a voluntary Convenience in a person Obliged and
subject to Laws, to all those Obligations that are laid upon him, and to all
the Rewards that are set before him, but especially to the Desires and Commands
of his Superior, to whom he Naturally owes himself and desires to be pleasing.
To Act upon Great and Mighty Principles, in a vigorous free and Genorous
Manner, for the sake of those that obliged him, and for the sake of those to
whom his Kindness is shown, increases the Measure of Moral Goodness: but its
Perfection is seated in a Loyal Respect, and Perfect Gratitude to GOD Almighty.
Who, by being infinitely Good to us, has infused and created such a Goodness in
the Soul, that its principal Joy and Delight is to please him. For tho all
Creatures consult themselves and their own Preservation, yet the force of
Gratitude upon an Ingenuous Soul is very powerful. Moral Goodness is an
Alacrity and Readiness of the Will, to sacrifice it self, upon consideration of
the Benefits a Man has received, to another Benefit, Enjoyment, Comfort,
Satisfaction.

DIVINE Goodness is an Active and Eternal Principle, stirring up it self
without Obligation or reward, to do the best and most excellent Things in an
Eternal manner. It is proper only to GOD; Its Excellency is Supreme, its Beauty
infinite, its Measure endless, its Nature ineffable, its Perfection
unconceiveable. It has no Cause, but it is the Cause of all other Things
whatsoever. It is a Living and Eternal Act of free and undeserved Love, an
indeficient Ocean of Bounty, which can never be fathomed, or (by finite Degrees
be) wholly received. It is Invisible in its Essence, but Apparent in its
effects, Incomprehensible, but manifest enough, to be believed and adored. It
is an infinite and Eternal Essence, which is Good to it self, by being Good to
all, infinitely Good to it self, by being without Bound or Measure Good to all
its Objects. It is an infinite and Eternal Act, which continually ponders, and
entirely intends the Welfare of others, and establishes its own (in a voluntary
manner) by that intention: An Act whose Essence is seated in the Preparation of
all Delights and the Communication of all its Glories. Its Felicity is Eternal
and Infinite, yet seated entirely in the Felicity of others. It does infinite
Good, to all its Recipients Merely for the sake of the Excellency of the Act of
Doing Good. It delights in the Excellency of that Act, and uses all its
power in doing Good, that the Act in which it delights might be infinitely
perfect. And the perfect Act in which it finally rests is the Goodness which
all adore and desire. Its Sovereign Joy and Pleasure, is to be delightful to
others. All its Creatures are Delightful to it self, only as they imitate, and
receive its Goodness. Should we run into its Properties, they are innumerable
and Endless; but as infinite in Beauty, as variety and greatness. It is the
utmost Height of all Goodness as well as the Original, and end of all. It
exceeds Moral Goodness, as much as that exceeds Natural, and infinitely
more. In Physical Goodness there is a Mechanical fitness, and Dead convenience:
but all it can pretend to, is the Benefit and Pleasure of Moral Agents. For the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and Trees, and Seas, and Minerals are made for Men.
Whereas Moral Goodness is made to enjoy all Physical Goodness, that in a higher
sphere it might be pleasing to GOD and is immediately subservient to his Divine
and Essential Goodness.

THIS Divine Goodness is the first Perfection of the efficient Cause of the
Worlds Creation, which of necessity derives an immediate Excellency into all
the Creatures, because it is the most Communicative and active Principle that
is. But the Necessity is attended with a Liberty no less then infinite. For it
freely pleases it self in all its operations, and its Pleasure is to delight
it self in the Acquisition of Felicity for others. Its freedom is a necessary
Circumstance of its operation. For the Glory of its inclination and Kindness
could not be, much less be seen, did it act by Necessity of Nature, Imposition,
Chance or Accident. When the Act is in Being it works Physically, and it is
no Wonder that such an Act should produce such Effects, and be so Beneficial.
For when it is done it cannot be otherwise, but that such and such Effects must
follow its Existence; They are as Natural as if they were Essential to it: All
the, Wonder is, what should determine the Liberty of the Agent at first to do
such Great and Mighty Things for others sake, and all that can be said, is his
own Goodness and the Excellency of the Action. For it is not with GOD as it is
with Men: few men will be at the expense of Doing, what all admire: all that
receive the Benefit, applaud and delight in the Action; and so much the more by
how much the more Hazzardous, and great, and Painful it was; but scarcely one
will endure the Difficulty of an Heroic Deed for the sake of others. GOD on
the contrary takes infinite Delight in the Action which all admire, and because
it is infinitely great and Heroic, and perfectly Divine, finds his Liberty and
Ease in that Act, and is so taken with the Beauty of the Work, that his
infinite Pleasure exceeds all the necessity and fate in Nature.

THAT Pleasure, which he takes in promoting the Happiness of all Existences
created and increated, is his Goodness. It is the infinite use of Perfect
Liberty freely Delighted in: as Pleasant to himself as to all Intelligent
Spectators and all Enjoyers. It is easy to discern that this goodness is the
Foundation and Essence of his Happiness and glory.

BY it he becomes Delightful to himself, by it he becomes Delightful to others.
By it he communicates all his Powers and Perfections with pleasure, and
receives the Services of all the Creatures with high Satisfaction. By it he is
concerned in the Joy of others, and enjoys their Blessedness. By it he is
capable of all their Affections, and of the Services which his Laws require. By
it all Angels and Cherubims are moved to admire and adore his Glory. By it all
Creatures visible and invisible are made his Treasures. By it he is multiplied
and magnified in every Soul, as the same Object is in several Mirrors, being
entirely represented in every living Temple of his Eternal essence. By it he
becomes his own end, and the Glorious Author, and the King of Heaven. By it he
lives a Divine and a Blessed Life, and by it he is what he is for ever By it
all the Graces, Exaltations, and Virtues of all his Creatures are made his Joys
and their Persons and Praisers are Delightful to him. Of all his Laws and
Decrees, and Counsels his Goodness is the fountain. It is the Original and
final Cause of all our Thanksgivings. Our ease, and repose, and Satisfaction,
our Bliss and enjoyment are founded in it, and caused by it. For its own
Pleasure all our Delights are made exquisite in their place, and the most of
them Eternal. For its own Glory it makes all its Creatures Glorious, and
prizeth its own Glory, because it is the Sovereign Delight of all its
Creatures. It is every way complete and perfect, as infinitely Convenient, as
it is Great in Bounty, as Good to it self as to all others. There is no End of
all its Perfection, and for that Cause it is Incomprehensible.

TO be made Partaker of the Divine Nature, without having the Goodness of
Almighty GOD is impossible. Nor can we enjoy his Goodness, or bear the
similitude of his Glory, unless we are good in like Manner. We enjoy the
Goodness of GOD, and may be said to have it, either when we have its Similitude
in our selves, or the Pleasure of it in others. Since the Goodness of GOD is
the great Object of our Joy, its Enlargment is our Interest; and the more there
are to whom he is Good, and the more he communicates his Felicity to every one
the Greater Pleasures he prepares for us, and the more is our goodness therein
delighted. To see innumerable Millions in Communion with him, and all of them
made Glorious and Blessed, and every one seated in his throne, is the greatest
Elevation of our Souls, and the highest Satisfaction in the World. When our
Goodness meets his in all Places, and congratulates the Felicity of every
person, we may then use the Words of our Savior, because we are endued with
the same Mind and Affection: And as he accepts all the Good that is done to his
Members as done to himself, saying Inasmuch as ye have done it to the least of
these my Brethren, ye have done it to me. Our Souls will reply, Inasmuch as
thou have done all this to the least of these my Brethren, thou have done it to
me, for loving our Neighbors as our selves, all Angels and Men will be our
fellow Members, our Brethren, our other selves! As we delight in all Acts of
Goodness for their own sakes, that are done to us, so shall we delight in all
the Bounties of GOD for theirs, who are the partakers of them, and in GOD for
this very reason, Because he is good to all. We shall be as Happy in others, as
in our selves; and Esteem the Goodness of GOD our Felicity, because it has
prevented our Goodness, and done all for them, which were it undone, we should
desire to do our selves. because our Goodness is a principle that carries us to
delight in their perfect Felicity. Which that we may do the more Sweetly, and
with more full Satisfaction and perfect Reason, his Goodness to all others is
but the Perfection of Goodness to us, for they are all made Blesed for our
fuller and greater Felicity.

HAD GOD withheld, or withdrawn his Goodness from all others, it had not been
Greater to us, but less. The Stars are no hindrance to our Enjoyment of the
Sky, but the Light and Beauty of the place which we contemplate. Were they all
annihilated, the Heavens would be obscure. They do us many Services, of which
we should be bereaved, by their Absence and Destruction. GOD by giving Beams
and influences to them! made our Treasures more rich and fair, which are
increased and multiplied by their Beauty and Number. Did the Sun shine upon us,
and upon Nothing else, it would be less beneficial to us, than now it is. Its
Beams that are scattered, seem to be lost; yet were they contracted upon one,
his Body would be consumed, and all the rest of the World be dark about him;
those Rays which fly from the Sun to the utmost parts of the World, illuminate
all Objects, and from them more conveniently return to the Eye with their
Beauty and Glory, which by those Rays that are dispersed become visible and
Profitable. They fall not all upon every single man, but work for him in other
places, begetting Herbs, and Fruits, and Flowers, and Minerals, and Springs,
and Trees, and Jewels, with all that is rich and delectable in the World for
his fruition. It serves Beasts, and Fowls, and Fishes, for my sake, and for my
sake does it serve even Men and Angels: That they, being more Divine and
Glorious Creatures, might adorn Heaven and Earth with their Persons, which
without them would be void and Empty. For we all desire to be seen, and Known,
and Beloved, and for that Cause, without Living Agents, should be very Desolate
and discontented.

THUS you see, if GOD had given all Eternity and Immensity to a man, if he had
made no other Creatures but him alone, his Bounty had been defective: Whereas
by the Creation of these he has filled Eternity and Immensity with Treasures.
All which he has made ours by commanding them to Love us as themselves; fit to
be enjoyed, and beloved by us, by filling them with his Goodness, and making
them in his Image. For every one of them is to Love all his Creatures as he
does, and to delight in the Beauty and Felicity of all, and to be the joy and
Delight of all, as as he is: And the Greater, and the Richer, and the fairer
they are, the more Great and Happy are we, because they are made our Lovers and
Friends, our Brides and Brethren, our Sons and Daughters, our Fathers, and our
Servants, which the more Honorable and Excellent they are, the more
Delightful: the more Glorious and Blessed these are, their Love is the more
precious and Acceptable. True Goodness removes all Envy and Contention out of
the World, and introduces nothing but Peace, and Bounty, and Joy, unspeakeable
and full of Glory.

WE Love nothing more then to be Delightful to others, and to have our Glory
seen is a natural Desire, which our Savior has countenanced by his own
Petition. It is our Interests; that the Eyes should be innumerable, that see and
admire the Glory which we had with the Father in some Sense before the World
was; that they should see (I mean) how much we are Beloved of GOD from all
Eternity; that there should be Millions of Blessed Persons to whom we may
communicate our selves, concerns our Glory, as it does also that, that they
should be Great and Perfect, that are made to Admire and Delight in us. If we
enter Into his Eternal Glory, as the Scripture says, and our Bliss be
individually one with his, or so perfectly like his, as is promised, it is no
fault to desire Glory, for it is Goodness it self that desires Glory and
Esteems all those its Best and Sovereign Treasures, that are capable of
Loving and Delighting in it.

THERE is in the Goodness of GOD, and Men, and Angels, a Living Power, that is
exquisitely tender in Sense and and feeling, which as it feels and apprehends
it self, does also feel its Object, and apprehend both its own, and its Objects
Excellences. By Virtue of which Living Power, it is able to delight in its own
Goodness, and its Objects Glory. The Apple of its Eye is not more tenderly
regarded, than the Person which it Loves. It is afflicted in all our
Afflictions, and crowned and delighted in all our Prosperities. It tends by
its nature to the Benefit of others, and cannot endure the least Damage or
Detriment to any. It infinitely hates the least Defect in it self, or in its
Creatures. Nothing can be Evil to it, but what is Evil to another. Its
Interests, and its Objects are so united, that it entirely lives, and sees, and
feels, and enjoys, in others. All its inclination is to be doing Good, and it
has no other Element than the Felicity of its Creatures. In friendship it
appears, and from Love it proceeds, it ends in felicity. It has many
Great and Glorious Designs, all contending with each other for Supremacy. It
cloths it self with Glory, and adornes its Essence with all Kind of Beauties.
It endures all Afflictions and Hazzards, It undertakes all Labors, It builds a
Palace, and provides a Kingdom for its Beloved. And yet when all is done
nothing can exceed the Delight which it takes in the Person of its Beloved.
All the Honor, and Esteem, and Glory it desires, it finds there, the Use and
Value of all its Treasures consists in the Benefit they do to its. Beloved.
Infinite Goodness can be seated no where but in Love alone, for that only is
capable of infinite Benevolence and Complacency.

THE Liberal Soul devises Liberal Things, and by Liberal Things shall he
stand. The more Good it does, the more Good it is, and the more Good, the more
Great and Honorable, the more perfect and Happy. There can be no Excess in
Goodness; because the more Delightful it is to its Object, and the more Divine
and Glorious its Object is, the more abundant Pleasure it takes in
communicating all Felicities to its Object, and the more Great and manifold its
Treasures are, the more Sweet and Precious the Things are which it gives away,
and the more its Beloved delights in them; by so much the more Admirable and
Divine it is, its Goodness and its Blessedness are both the Greater. There is
no Inconvenience which it can possibly meet, but a stop or Impediment. It
cannot be hurt by it self, because its Essence is always overflowing, and the
only Evil it can fear from others is the unkindness of its Object, or the Wrong
that it may receive from free Agents. For Angels and Men being made free, that
they may Love, and Honor, and Praise in a voluntary manner, and be, and become
Good of their own Accord, (because they cannot be made Morally or Divinely
Good, without the Liberty of their Concurrence, and their own Consent.) there
is some fear, that they may abuse their Power, because for the more Illustrious
use of it, they are left in the Hand of their own Counsel. Howbeit he has
endeavored as much as as is possible, without prejudicing their Excellence, to
secure their Duty; he has infused into them the greatest Inclinations to
goodness imaginable, and the Greatest principles of Honor, he has shown them
the Glory and felicity of Goodness by his one Example, he has commanded them
by the Severest Laws that are possible, to be Good, he has founded their Peace
and Pleasure in Goodness, he has made the suspension of Goodness uncouth and
unnatural, all evil Actions Dark and disagreeable, he has laid infinite
Obligations upon them to exercise Goodness, and set Eternal Rewards before
them. He has made the Object unto which they must show it extremly amiable, he
has given them all Advantages, Helps and Assistances. He has prepared the
Severest Penalties and Torments to punish the Omission of it. And for a
Complement of all, will extremely be grieved, if they fail to show it. This in
the Estate of Innocence. Since the fall indeed we must be kind and Good to
injurious Persons: but this is founded in his own Goodness toward us Sinners,
and tho it be a difficult. Work in the first Appearance, Carries us to higher
and more Perfect Glory.

THAT such a Goodness as this should be, cannot be incredible to them that are
acquainted with the Nature of the Universe: tho it seems hard at least, if
not impossible to them that converse with peevish men. Being corrupt in their
Understandings, they are narrow and base and servile in their Affections. They
start at a shadow, and boggle at a feather. Sin has transformed them into
slaves and Cowards. They misapprehend the Nature of their Duty like Fools; that
were made to be great and Mighty as Kings. They think they shall be undone, if
they become too Great and Good: they fear they shall grow weak and Contemptible
by Goodness: whereas nothing makes them so Amiable and Glorious as Excess of
Goodness.

TO show that there is such a Goodness as that, which infinitely delights in
pouring out its Glory upon all Creatures, the Sun was made: Which continues
Night and Day pouring out its Streams of Light and Heat upon all Ages, yet is
as Glorious this day as it was the first Moment of its Creation. To show this
the Stars were made, that shine in their Watches and Glitter in their Motions
only to serve us. The Moon was made to show this Goodness, which runs her race
for ever to serve us. The Earth was made to support us, Springs and Rivers
expend their Streams to revive us. Fruits, and Flowers, and Herbs, and Trees
delight us. All corruptible Things wast and consume away, that they may
sacrifice their Essence to our Benefit. For if they were made Stiff and
unalterable they could not feed us, nor communicate their Essence and
Perfection to us. The Emanations and Effusions of Minerals are unknown, but
that of Spicies and Odours is well understood. And if these by Disbursing their
proper sweetness, become more sweet and enlarge themselves, if they are made
Bright and fair for our sake, if they enjoy any Light and Pleasure in their
Service, as the Sun and Stars do, as Herbs and Flowers do, as Beasts, and
Birds, and Fishes do; the Goodness of the Creator is abundantly more clear and
apparent herein, for in all those Creatures that perfect themselves by the
Service which they do, the Service it self is a sufficient Recompense: while
those upon which we feed, being more Corruptible, are exalted in their Beings,
by being turned into ours. And the Trade of Bees, in the Honey they make for us,
and the Warmth of sheep, in the fleeces they bear for us, the Comfort of Birds
in the feathers they wear, and the Nests they build for us, and the pleasures
of Beasts in the offspring they beget and bring up for us, these things show
that GOD is Good to all, and that his mercy is over all his Works. And if any
perish in our Service, the Bloody Characters of his Love and Goodness are the
more Stupendous. All Nature is sacrificed to our Welfare, and all that we have
By pure Nature to do (till Sin marres all) is to admire and enjoy that
Goodness, to the Delight of which we sacrifice our selves in our own
Complacency. Note, All this is spoken for Encouragement and Imitation.
And in real truth, if it be a great Wonder that any Goodness should be thus
infinite, the Goodness of all other Things without that Goodness, is a far
Greater, If it be Wonderful, admire and adore it.

CHAP. XII.
Of Holiness: Its Nature, Violence, and Pleasure. Its Beauty consists in the
infinite Love of Righteousness and Perfection.

THE infinite Love of his own Goodness is the Holiness of GOD. There are
infinite Pleasures and perfections in its Nature, that Merit an infinite Esteem
and Desire. His Goodness is all Beauty, and his Holiness all Fire and flame in
pursuing it. His Holiness is all Beauty, and his Goodness all Fire and flame to
enkindle it. The infinite Excess of his Eternal Goodness is its own Holiness,
and the Beauty of Holiness is Excess of Goodness. For if Righteousness and
Holiness be well distinguished, Righteousness is that Virtue by which GOD does
apprehend affect and Esteem all Excellent Things according to their value, and
choose and do always the Best and most Excellent: Holiness is the Love which he
bears to his own Righteousness: Which being infinite, makes him infinitely
enflamed with the Love of the most perfect Actions; and carries him with an
infinite Ardor to the performance of them. For tho it be a Righteous Thing to
esteem the Righteousness of GOD in an infinite manner, yet there is as much
difference between Righteousness and the Love of Righteousness, as between an
Object and the Affection embracing it. Tho here also the Affection and the
Object are the same Thing: For this Holy Esteem and Love of Righteousness is
Righteousness it self: for it does but render Righteousness its due, tho the
Affection be infinite which it bears unto it.

HOLINESS (if it be strictly defined) is that Virtue in GOD, by which he Loves
the most Perfect Things, and infinitely delights in them. For by Virtue of
this Affection he shunneth and hates all that is profane, pursuing and
delighting in all that is Holy. For the Object of Holiness may be Holy, as well
as the Affection, Whereupon it follows, that Holiness is of two kinds, either
the Holiness of the Affection, or the Holiness of the Object They bear a
Relation to each other, yet are absolute Perfections in themselves. For the
Hatred of all Defects, Imperfections, Blemishes and Errors is a Glorious thing
in itself, yet relates to the Perfection of those Objects from which it would
remove those odious Imperfections. The Perfection of all Objects when they are
free from all Blemishes is a Glorious Thing in it self too, yet is Acceptable
to that Affection, that desires to see a Compleatness and Perfection in every
Object. And all is resolved into the same Goodness of which we have been
speaking

FOR infinite Goodness must needs desire with an infinite violence, that all
Goodness should be complete and Perfect: and that Desire, which makes to the
Perfection of all Goodness, must infinitely avoid every slur and Miscarriage as
unclean: and infinitely aim at every Grace and Beauty, that tends to make the
Object infinitely perfect, which it would enjoy. It cannot desire less then
infinite Perfection, nor less then hate all Imperfection, in an infinite
Manner. All Objects are made, and Sanctified by the Holiness of GOD. It is the
measure and strength and Perfection of Goodness.

THE Holiness of GOD is sometimes, called in his Oracle, The Beauty of
Holiness. As if all the Beauty of GOD were in this. It extends to all Objects
in Heaven and Earth, from the Highest to the Lowest, from the Greatest to the
Meanest, from the most Pure to the most profane, with a Goodness and Wisdom so
infinitely perfect disposing all, that some way or other every Thing might
answer its infinite Affection. It infinitely hates all that is Bad, and as
infinitely desires to Correct the same. The Influence of that Affection, by
which GOD abhors the least Spot in his Kingdom, reaches to the Perfection
of every Object, and the is real and proper fountain of all the Perfection of
Life and Glory. And for this Cause in all Probability, do the Angels so
continually cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord GOD of Hosts; because the Brightness of
his Infinite Glory and Perfection appears in his Holiness, the violence of
his Eternal Love, and the Excess of Goodness. It may be, also because all the
Heights of Created Perfection owe themselves to this Holiness, all the Raptures
and Ecstasies of Heaven depending on the Zeal wherewith GOD is carried to
perfect Blessedness. All which are occasioned by those pure and Quintessential
Joys, those most sublime and Perfect Beauties, which they see and feel every
where effected by the irresistible Strength of that Eternal Ardor.

SINS of Omission have an unknown Guilt and Demerit in them. They unsensibly
bereave us of infinite Beauty. To let alone that Perfection which might have
been infinite, to pass by, or neglect it, to exert Almighty Power in a remiss
and lazy manner, is infinitely Base and Dishonorable, and therefore unclean
because so Odious and Distastful. Lukewarmness is Profane, as well as Malice.
And it has pleased GOD to brand it with a worse and more fatal Censure. No
folly or iniquity can dwell with him; Omission is both. To be hated is to be
rejected; but to be beloved Lukewarmly is to be embraced with polluted and
filthy Arms. And for this Cause, the fire of his Jealousy burns most
devouringly about the Altar. He will be sanctified in all them that draw nigh
unto him, and but to touch his Ark irregularly, is to be consumed. Nor is this
any other then a concomitant of his Holiness, and an evident Testimony of his
Love to perfection, For it First shows, that on his own Part, he makes our
Powers Perfect, that we may be able to see and adore him worthily; and next
that he delights in no Adoration but the most Worthy. It moreover shows that he
infinitely delights in the Perfection of his own Actions, for otherwise he
would not be so severe against the Imperfection of ours.

NOR is the reason of his Love to the utmost Perfection less then infinite: You
Know that all impure Things upon Earth are dull and Obscure; as Vile in Esteem,
as Base and faint in their Operations. Neither will a Lump of Dirt shine like
the Sun, nor a Mudwall be Resplendent like polisht Marble. All Glorious Things
have a Height of Intensness in them; and owe most of their Beauty to the Motion
of their Strength and Activity. But GOD is a more High and Necessary Thing than
these. Perfection is his Essence, and he could not be himself upon any
Abatement. It is a great Wonder I But the smallest Thing in the world may spare
somewhat of it self rather than that which is infinite. Upon the least
substraction, that which is infinite is made finite, and the Loss is infinite.
We cannot be at all Beloved by Almighty GOD unless we are infinitely Beloved.
For to Love and neglect us at the same time is impossible, and to be able to do
infinite Things for us, and yet to do but some of them, is to Love and neglect
us at the same time. It Is Love in what it does, and neglect in what it leaves
undone. The Reason why it is our duty to Love him infinitely, is because he
infinitely Loved us. Did he not exert all his Power himself, he would never
command us to exert ours. The Love of all Perfection is his Essence and must be
infinite for its own Perfection. The least flaw in a Diamond abates its Price:
one Tooth awry, or wanting in a Clock, does make it useless. Dead flies corrupt
the Apothecaries Ointment, so does a little folly him that is in Reputation for
Wisdom and Honor. The Greater his Reputation and Wisdom is, the more
Grievious a Disparagement is any Srain. Nor is GOD above these Rules, for his
Essence it self is the Ruled of ours: and the Higher his Divinity is the more
Exquisite is its Care of its own Perfection. There is no Danger of being Severe
in our Expectations, for GOD does infinitely hate any Defect in himself, more
then we, tho we infinitely hate it; and enjoys himself only as he is an Object
Worthy of his own infinite Love and Honor.

FROM GODS Love of Righteous Action it proceeds, that he made ours so
completely capable of becoming Righteous, and that he adventured a Power into
our Hands of offending. It is a strange thing, that the Excess of the Hatred of
all Sin should make Sin possible, and that the most perfect Righteousness
should be the Accidental Cause of Unrighteousness. But yet it is so, an
infinite Love to the Best of all possible Things made the worst of all things
that could be possible, excepting those that are impossible, which yet we need
not except.

TO read these Riddles aright, you must understand, that even Impossibles
themselves are conceiveable Things, and may be compared with Possible, and
Actual. That the Highest and Best of all that are Possible, are the most Easy
with GOD, and most near to his Nature; that inforior Possibles are more remote,
and only thought on in the second place; that Things Impossible are the worst
of Evils, and Things Actual the Best of GOODS. For nothing is impossible but
that GOD should lie, or Dishonor, or displease, or deny himself, or abuse his
Power, or suspend his Goodness, or injure his Creatures, or do some such thing,
which is contrary to his Nature, yet very conceiveable, because he is a free
Agent; and has a kind of Power, were it not prevented by his Eternal Act,
whereby he is able to do these Impossible things. Nothing is Eternally Actual,
but the Goodness, and Wisdom, and Holiness of GOD, or some such Thing; as his
Righteousness, and Blessedness, and Perfection. All which spring from his Will,
and are Eternally his pleasure, as well as his Essence. In the idle Power of
being, and doing all Excellent Things, there is much Hazard and danger; but he
freely and voluntarily became all these from all Eternity. He wrought all
Righteousness and Wisdom, and Goodness from everlasting, and by so doing became
the fountain of all that is Glorious from all Eternity. The Worst of all
Possible Evils are the Sins of Men: Which have an infinite Demerit and Vileness
in them, yet are truly possible. And the reason of their Possibility is thus
accounted. Impossible, which are worst of all, are Sins in GOD.

TO make Creatures infinitely free and leave them to their Liberty is one of
the Best of all Possible Things; and so necessary that no Kingdom of
Righteousness could be without it. For in every Kingdom there are subjects
capable of Laws, and Rewards, and Punishments. And these must be free Agents.
There is no Kingdom of Stones nor of Trees, nor of Stars; only a Kingdom of
Men and Angels. Who were they divested of their Liberty would be reduced to the
Estate of Stones and Trees; neither capable of Righteous Actions, nor able to
Honor, or to Love, or praise; without which Operations all inferior Creatures
and mere Natural Agents would be totally Useless. So that all the Glory of the
World depends on the Liberty of Men and Angels: and therefore GOD gave it to
them, because he delighted in the Perfection of his Creatures: tho he very well
knew there would be the Hazard of their abusing it, (and of Sin in that abuse)
when they had received it. The abuse of it he infinitely hated yet could not
prevent it, without being Guilty of a Greater Evil. He infinitely hated it,
because those Actions of Love and Honor which should spring from the right use
of it, were the only fair offspring, for the sake of which the whole World
was made, and without the right right use of their Liberty all Creatures,
Angels and Souls would be in vain: he could not Prevent it without being
himself Guilty of what in them he abhorred.

FOR himself to be Guilty, was the worst of Evils, and absolutely impossible.
It Was better let them make their Power vain themselves, then do so himself. For
the Author of that vanity, be it who it will, is the Author of the Sin. If they
would make it vain, He could not help it, for him to divest them of the use of
Liberty after he had given it, was as inconsistent with himself, as it was with
their Beauty to abuse it: the Act of giving it by taking it away being made
vain. He infinitely hated that the Liberty should be frustrated, which he gave
unto men, for their more perfect Glory: he laid all Obligations upon them to
use it well, and deterred them (as much as was possible) from abusing it, but
would not transfer their fault upon himself, because he fore saw they were
about to do it; which he certainly had done, had he made their Power vain
himself, after he had given it. Either to refuse to give the Power, or Having
given it, to interpose and determine it without their Consent, was alike
detrimental to the whole Creation. For indeed it is impossible, that he by
determining their Wills, should make them the Authors of Righteous Actions,
which of all things in the World he most desired. There is as much Difference
between a Willing Act of the Soul it self, and an Action forced on the Will,
determined by another, as there is between a man that is dragged to the Altar,
whether he will or no, and the man that comes with all his Heart with music
and Dancing to offer sacrifice. There is Joy, and Honor, and Love in the one,
fear and constraint, and shame in the other. That GOD should not be able to
deserve our Love, unless he himself made us to Love him by violence, is the
Greatest Dishonor to him in the World: Nor is it any Glory or Reputation for
us, who are such sorry Stewards, that we cannot be entrusted with a little
Liberty, but we must needs abuse it.

GOD adventured the possibility of sinning into our hands, which he infinitely
hated, that he might have the Possibility of Righteous Actions, which he
infinitely Loved. Being a voluntary and free Agent, he did without any
Constraint Love and desire all that was most high and Supreamly Excellent of
all Objects that are possible to be thought on, his own Essence which is a
Righteous Act is the Best: and the Righteous Acts of Saints and Angels are the
Highest and Best next that which Creatures could perform: The very utmost
Excellence of the most noble Created Beings, consisted in Actions of piety
freely wrought: which GOD so Loved, that for their sake alone, he made Angels
and Souls, and all Worlds. These Righteous Actions he so Loved, that for their
sake he prepared infinite Rewards and Punishments. All the Business of his Laws
and Obligations are these Righteous Actions. That we might do these in a
Righteous Manner he placed us in a mean Estate of Liberty and Trial, not like
that of Liberty in Heaven where the Object will determine our Wills by its
Amiableness, but in the Liberty of Eden, where we had absolute Power to do as
we pleased, and might determine our Wills our selves infinitely, desiring and
Delighting in the Righteous use of it, hating and avoiding by infinite Cautions
and Provisions all the unjust Actions that could spring from it. If we Love
Righteous Actions as he does, and are holy as he is holy, in all manner of
Wisdom and Righteousness; then shall we delight in all Righteous Actions as he
does, shall Love Virtue and Wisdom as he does, and prefer the Works of Piety
and Holiness above all the Miracles, Crowns and Scepters in the World, every
Righteous and Holy Deed will be as pleasing to us, as it is to him: all Angels
and Men will be as so many Trees of Righteousness bearing the fruit of Good
Works, on which we shall feast in Communion with GOD; Or if our Righteous Souls
be vexed, as Lots Soul in Sodom was, in seeing and hearing the unlawful Deeds
of the wicked, they shall be recreated and revived with the sight of GODS most
Righteous Judgments, and with the Beauty of his holy Ways, by which he
rectifies the Malignity of the Wicked, overcomes the evil of their Deeds, and
turns all the vices of men into his own Glory, and ours, in the Kingdom of
Heaven. The Delights of Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Holiness are suitable
to their Nature as those of Goodness are to the nature of Goodness: Which no
man can enjoy, but he that is qualified for them, by the Principles of Goodness
and Holiness implanted in his Nature. For as he that has no Eyes, wants all
the Pleasures of sight, so he that has no Knowledge wants all the pleasures
of Knowledge, he that is void of Holiness, is void of the Sense which Holiness
inspires, and he that is without Goodness must needs be without the Pleasures
of Goodness, for he cannot delight in the Goodness of GOD toward other
Creatures. To be Good, to be Holy, to be Righteous is freely to delight in
Excellent Actions which unless we do of our own Accord no External Power
whatsoever can make us, Good, or Holy, or Righteous: because no force of
External Power can make us free; whatever it is that invades our Liberty,
destroys it. GOD therefore may be infinitely Holy, and infinitely desire our
Righteous Actions, tho he does not intermeddle with our Liberty, but leaves us
to our selves; having no Reserve but his Justice to punish our ofences.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Justice in General, and Particulars. The Great Good it does its Empires and
Kingdoms, a Token of the more retired Good it does in the Soul. Its several
Kinds. That GODS Punitive Justice Springs from his Goodness.

THO following the common Course of Moralists, in our Distribution of Virtues,
we have seated Justice among the Cardinal Moral; yet upon second Thoughts we
find reason to reduce it to the number of Divine Virtues, because upon a more
near and particular Inspection, we find it to be one of the Perfections of GOD,
and under that notion shall discover its Excellence far more completely, then
if we did contemplate its Nature, as it is limited and bounded among the
Actions of Men.

THE Universal Justice of Angels and Men regards all Moral Actions and Virtues
whatever: It is that Virtue by which we yield Obedience to all righteous and
Holy Laws, upon the Account of the Obligations that lie upon us, for the
Public Welfare of the whole World. Because we Love to do that which is Right,
and desire the fruition of Eternal Rewards. There is much Wisdom and Goodness,
as well as Courage and Prudence necessary to the Exercise of this Virtue, and
as much need of Temperance in it, as any. For he that will be thus just must of
necessity be Heroical, in despising all Pleasure and Allurements that may
soften his Spirit, all fears and dangers that may discourage and divert him,
all inferior Obligations and Concerns that may entangle and ensnare him, he
must trample under foot all his Relations and friends and particular Affections
so far as they incline him to partiality and sloth; he must be endued with
Great Wisdom to discern his End, great Constancy to pursue it, great Prudence
to see into Temptations and Impediments, and to lay hold on all Advantages and
Means that may be improved, he must have a Great Activity and Vigor in using
them, a Lively sense of his Obligations, a transcendent Love to GOD and
felicity, a mighty Patience and Long-suffering, because his Enemies are many,
his Condition low, his Mark afar off, his Business manifold, his Life tho short
in it self, yet long to him, his undertaking Weighty, and his nature corrupted.

THEY otherwise define Justice to be that Virtue by which we render unto all
their Due. Which is of large Extent if the Apostles Commentary comes in for
Explication, For this Cause pay you Tribute also, for they are GODS Ministers
attending continually on this very thing: Render therefore to all their Dues,
Tribute to whom Tribute is Due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear,
Honor to whom Honor: One no man any thing, but to Love one another for the he
that Loves another has fulfilled Law. Kings, and Magistrates, and Ministers,
and Parents, and Children, must have all their Due, and so must GOD, Blessed
for ever: Adoration, to whom Adoration is due, and Obedience, to whom
Obedience. In strict Justice we must render Hatred to whom Hatred is Due, and
Love to whom Love. Hope is due to certain Grounds of Encouragemeut, and Sorrow
to certain sorrowful Objects. But all our Passions must still be guided by the
Rule of the Law, and all our Actions as Honor and Equity require.

PARTICULAR Justice is conversant in the Distribution of Rewards and
Punishments, or else it observes the Rules of Equity and Reason in Buying and
Selling. It is called particular, because the Exercise of it is not allotted
to all, the Power of rendering Rewards and Punishments being committed to a few,
namely to the Magistrates: and among Private persons many not at all accustomed
to Buying and Selling. This Virtue, being to be exercised by some particular
men, is particular Justice. However it has occasioned a Distinction in the
Thing, whereby Justice is divided into Distributive and Commutative: the one
being used in Courts of Judicature, the other in the Market.

IT was a notable Observation of Plato, that by reason of our Dim Eyes we are
not able to see immediately what Virtue does in Secret in the Soul. And
therefore he says, that as an Old man that is blear-eyed if he has something
given him to read in little Characters, finds it necessary first to see the
same in Capital Letters; so to observe first what Virtue does in a
Commonwealth, is expedient to him, that would understand what it does in his
own Soul. The Throne is upholden by Justice, the Majesty of Kings, and the
Glory of Kingdoms is preserved by Justice. When Virtue is rewarded, and Vice
suppressed, the City flourishes, as the Laws are the Rampart of Men's Estates,
Justice is the Rampart of the Law, the Guardian Angels of every family, State
and Kingdom. Kings and Counselors, and Priests, and Soldiers, and Tradesmen,
have all their several Office, and proper Duty in a Kingdom: and that Nation
is blessed (with order and Beauty) where every one contains himself in his
proper Duty. But where Tradesmen invade the Priests office and defile the
Altar, the Soldiers turn Counselors, and every Consellor deposes the King,
nothing but Confusion can follow in such a State. The Senses and Members of the
Body are like Tradesmen they traffic with sensible Objects, the Irascible
passions of the Soul are Soldiers, and very apt to rebel and Mutiny; the
Conscience is the Priest in the Temple of the Mind; Right Reason is the King,
and the Concupiscible Affections or smoother Passions, especially Avarice and
Ambition may pass for Counselors. They may do well to put a man in mind of his
Interest, but when they depose Right Reason, and usurp the Throne, Ruin must
follow in the Soul, the Passions will turn Consellors, the Tradesmen invade
the Temple, and all Rights (Sacred and Profane) be blended together. To sell
offices of Trust and Places of Judicature, is for a King to do that himself
which Rebels attempt in violence; to put unworthy men in places of Trust
promiscuously, that will sell Justice by Retail, as they bought it by Whole
Sale. Justice is a a Severe Virtue, and will keep up all the Faculties of the
Soul upon hard Duty. For otherwise it would not pay to Felicity its Due: But
where its Care is remiss in taking an Account, and solid Goods are barterd away
to counterfeit false Commodities, the Soul will grow loose and poor in a
moment: All its Powers subordinate and Superior will forget their Duty, and the
Healthy Estate of the Mind fall into Anarchy and Confusion. All its Hopes and
Felicities will be lost, for want of that Justice which Distributes to every
Power its proper office.

THERE are two passages that I mightily desire to be imprinted in the Memory of
all the World: and they are both of our Savior. The one is, He that is
faithful in a little, shall be Ruler over much: The other is this, Who then is
that faithful and Wise Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over his
Household, to give them meat in due season: Blessed is that Servant, whom his
Lord when he comes shall find so doing. He that is faithful in a little, is
faithful also in much. To be Just in a little Silver and Gold, and accurate in
deciding Causes between a Man and his Neighbor, are Actions that in their own
Nature seem to have little tendency to Bliss and Glory. But when we consider
that we are Servants for a time, entrusted by a Lord, that will come and
examine what we have done, we are not to measure our Hopes by those little
Acts, as they determine in a Moment, but in relation to the Recompenses which
our Lord will give when he comes. For our Savior has added, Blessed is that
Servant etc. Verily I say unto you that he shall make him Ruler over all his
Goods. But and if that evil Servant shall say in his Heart my Lord delayeth his
Coming; and shall begin to smite his fellow Servants, and to eat and drink with
the Drunken, the Lord of that Servant shall come in a day when he looks not
for him, and in an hour that he is not ware of, and shall cut him asunder, and
appoint him his portion with Hypocrites, there shall be Weeping and gnashing of
Teeth.

IF GOD should be loose and careless in his Kingdom, as it is infinitely
Greater then all other Dominions, so would it quickly be more full of
confusions: Especially Since the King would then himself be so loose and
Careless. For License and profaness are of a spreading Nature, and such as the
King is, such is the people. The vices of Kings do always punish themselves in
the Imitation of their subjects, especially where the Distinction between
Profane and Holy is lost, and there is no Hope and Fear of Punishments or
Rewards. If GOD should declare it by any Act of his, to be a Thing indifferent
whether men did well or ill; it would mightily abate the Rectitude of his
nature, and Eclipse his Majesty. His Sovereignty would be slighted, and his
Will despised, which ought infinitely to be dreaded. While Justice is infinite
and there is an infinite difference put between Good and Evil, his Creatures we
see are apt to abuse their Liberty, and Rebel, and become Apostates; tho they
have an infinite pleasure to aspire after, and an infinite destruction, or
Wrath to fear. What would they do, if the Divine Will were feeble and remiss,
and exacted no reverence to its Law and Pleasure? It is the Height and Glory of
GOD, that he sets an infinite Rate upon Excellent Deeds, and infinitely detests
and abhors the Wicked. Their last ends are not more distant then their first
Beginnings; in his Esteem, and Displeasure. Because he is infinitely Offended
and displeased at Evil Deeds, he guards and fortifies his Law, deterres men
from displeasing him by the fear of infinite Punishments; Encourages men to
please him by proposing infinite Rewards, and the Truth is the infinite
Approbation and Esteem which he has for Wise and Holy Deeds, produces a
Delight and Complacency in them, which is the principal Part of the Reward.
Nothing is more honorable then to be Praised and honored by the King of
Kings; The infinite Hatred of Evil Deeds is the very Torment it self, that
afflicts the Wicked. It Is but to see how much we are hated of GOD, and how base
the Action is, no other fire is needful to Hell: The Devils chiefest Hell is in
the Conscience. They are obdurate and feared that cannot discern and feel. --
The Wound which they inflict on themselves, who grieve and offend their
Creator. It is easy to see, the Necessity of that Justice which springs from
Holiness, and that GOD could not be infinitely Holy, were he not infinitely
Just in like manner.

THAT his Punitive Justice springs from his Goodness, is next to be observed.
He punishes them that are hurtful to others. He is most severe in pleading the
Cause of the Fatherless and the Widow. Himself is persecuted when his Saints
are molested: and he faults for which the untoward servant was punished, are
particularly those of beating his fellow Servants. A good man by how much the
more tender and compassionate he is, by so much the more is he provoked at any
gross Affront or abuse of the Innocent. Every soul is the Bride of GOD: and his
own infinite Goodness, which deserves infinite Love, is infinitely Beloved by
him. He infinitely tenders it and avoids its least Displeasure: but its
Displeasure is infinite at every Sin, and consequently his Anger, when such a
Sovereign Beauty as his infinite Goodness, is offended by it.

THE foundation of his Righteous Kingdom, and of the Room prepared for his
Eternal Justice to act in, is infinitely deeper, and must in other Discourses
more full and copious (on that Theme) be shown. And to those we refer you. All
we shall observe here is, that this Punitive Justice being GODS infinite Zeal
whereby he vindicates his abused Goodness: His Goodness must of necessity
proceed it, and be abused, before he can be Angry, and before his Anger can be
accounted Justice. His Dominion is infinite, but cannot be Arbitrary (in a
loose Construction) because it is infinitely Divine and Glorious.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Mercy, The indelible Stain and Guilt of Sin. Of the Kingdom which GOD
recovered by Mercy, The transcendent Nature of that Duty, with its Effects and
Benefits.

SUCH is the infinite Justice of God, and the Severity of his Displeasure at
Sin, his Holiness so Pure, and his Nature so irreconcilable, his Hatred so real
and infinite against it, that when a Sin is committed, his Soul is alienated
from the Author of the Crime, and his infinite Displeasure will ever see the
Obliquity, and ever loath the Deformity therein.

THE Person of a man is concerned in (and always represented in the Glass of)
his Action. Union between him and his Deeds is Mavelous. It Is so close, that
his Soul it self is hated or Beloved in his Actions. As long as it appears in
that deed which is Odious and Deformed, he can never be Beloved.

HOW slight soever our Thoughts of Sin are, the least Sin is of infinite
Demerit, because it breaks the Union between God and the Soul, bereaveth him
of his Desire, blasteth his Image, corrupts the Nature of the Soul, is
committed against infinite Goodness and Majesty, being as the Scripture
speaks Exceeding sinful, because it is committed against infinite Obligations
and Rewards, displeasing to all the Glorious Angels, abominable to all the Wise
and Holy, utterly against all the Rules of Reason, and infinitely Opposite to
the Holiness God, who is of purer Eyes then to behold the least Iniquity. So
that unless there be some way found out to deliver the Soul from the Guilt of
Sin, to blot out the Act and to purify it from the Stain, there can be no
Reconciliation between GOD and a Sinner. That an offense so infinite should be
Eternally punished, is the most reasonable thing in the World.

NOTHING but infinite power and Wisdom is able to wash away Leprosy of guilt,
and to restore the Soul to its former Beauty and Perfection. Without which all
Pardon is vain, and the Soul dishonorable, and sick unto Death, as long as the
shame and Confusion of its Guilt does lie upon it. Which cannot be removed by
feeble Tears, nor by Acts of Indignation against our selves, nor by any
Penitence or Sorrow of ours. For if these could prevail, the Devils might
repent, and be cleared of their Trespasses; long ago.

THAT no Law of Works can justify Sinners is evident enough from that of the
Apostle, For if there had been a Law given which could have given Life, verily
Righteousness should have been by the Law. Gal. 3. 21
GOD was not so prodigal, as without an infinite Cause to expend the Blood of
his Son. And the principal Cause for which he came, was that he might be made a
Curse and Sin for us, that we might be delivered from the Curse of the Law, and
be made the Righteousness of GOD in him. 2 Cor. 5. 21.


THE reason why the Devils cannot he saved, is because the Son of GOD took not
upon him the Nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. And there is no other
name given under Heaven among men whereby we may be saved, but only the name of
Jesus, who offered up himself a sacrifice for us, that he might purify to
himself a peculiar people Zealous of Good Work. He pacified the Wrath of God by
his Death, and satisfied his Justice in our nature, and washed us in his Blood,
and made us Kings and Priests unto GOD. To him be Glory and Dominion forever.
Amen,

IT was the Design of Christ, and it became the Mercy of GOD in our redemption,
to take away all the filth and Deformity of Guilt, in which the Perfection of
his Love and Power appears. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
Even as Christ also Loved his Church, and gave himself for it,; that he might
Sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water, by the Word, That he might
present it to himself a Glorious Church, not having Spot, or Wrinkle, or any
such thing, but that it might be holy and without Blemish. For the Church of
GOD being his Bride, and we Members of his Body, and of his Flesh, and of his
Bones; it was meet that we should be restored to the Perfection of Beauty, and
if not recover the same, enjoy a Better Righteousness than we had before. Ephesians.
5. 30.


THE Light of Nature could discover nothing of all this, and therefore it was
taught by Revelations, and Miracles, and Oracles from Heaven.

AS all things before his fall were subservient to man's Glory and blessedness,
so all things after his fall became opposite to him; all creatures up braided
him with his Guilt, every thing aggravated his Sin and increased his Damnation.
The glory and Blessedness which he lost was his Torment, the Honor which he
had before, was turned into shame; the Love of GOD which he had offended,
increased his Guilt, Eternity was a Horror to him, his Conscience a Tormentor,
and his Life a Burden; Nothing but shame and Despair could follow his Sin, the
Light of nature it self condemned him, and all that he could see was, that he
was deformed, and hated of God. For that of the Psalmist is an Eternal verity,
Thou art not a GOD that has pleasure in Wickedness, Psalm. 5. 4, 5, 6.
neither shall Evil dwell with thee: The Foolish shall not stand in thy sight,
thou hate all Workers of iniquity: Thou shall destroy them that speak
leasing: The Lord will abhor the Bloody and Deceitful man.

THE Express Declaration of GOD assured Adam, that his Recovery was impossible,
In the Day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the Death. For not being
able to dive into the Secret Reservation, which depended absolutely upon Gods
holy Will and pleasure, as an Act of Sovereignty above the Tenor of the Law,
all that he could see was, that he must die the Death, because the Veracity of
GOD (as well as his nature) obliged him to fulfill the Denunciation of the
Sentence: at least as Adam conceived.

IN the midst of this Black and Horrid Condition, the Mercy of GOD appeared
like a Morning Star, and the Redeeming Love of GOD was that alone which was
able by its Discovery to dispell the Mystes of Darkness that were round about
him.

AS all things were before turned into Evil, by the force of Sin, and conspired
to sink him lower into the Bottomless Pit; so all the Evils of his present
condition were, by this infinite Mercy, turned to his Advantage, and his
Condition in many Respects far better than before.

IT is fit to see how Sin enfeebled his Soul, and made him unable to serve GOD;
that we might the better understand the Manner of his Recovery, and how his
Spiritual Life and Power is restored, in the new strength which he received in
his Savior.

THE Atcount of it is this: By his self Love he was prone to desire all that
was Profitable and Delightful to him: While therefore GOD infinitely Loved him,
being apparently the fountain of all his Happiness, he could not choose, (as
long as he considered it) but Love GOD and Delight in him, it was natural and
Easy to celebrate his Praises. But when he was hated of GOD, tho he could not
choose but acknowledge that hatred Just; yet his Self Love made him to look upon
GOD in a Malevolent manner, as his Greatest Enemy and his Eternal Tormentor.
All that was in GOD was a Terror to him. His power, his Eternity, his Justice,
his Holiness, his Goodness, his Wisdom, his Unalterable Blessedness, all was a
grief and Terror to his Soul, as long as the Hatred of GOD continued, against
him it made him desperate to think it would continue forever, and reduced him
to the miserable slavery of hating GOD even to all Eternity.

BUT when the Love of GOD toward Man appeared, the Joy wherewith he was
surprised, was, in all Likelihood, so far beyond his Expectation, and his
Redemption so far above the Powers of Nature, that his very Guilt and Despair
enflamed him with Love. GOD appeared now so Welcome to him, and so Lovely above
all that was before, that it was impossible for him to look upon GOD, and not
to Love him with Greater Emazement and Ardor then ever. Self Love, that Before
compelled him to hate GOD, carried him now most violently to the Love of GOD;
and the Truth is, the Love of GOD in the Eye of the Understanding, is the
influence of the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father by the Son into the Soul
of the Spectator. For GOD is Love, and we therefore Love him, because he first
Loved us. A fallen man is Still a reasonable Creature, and having more reason to
Love GOD then he had before, is by the pure Nature of his Essence infinitely
more prone to Love GOD and delight in him, and praise him for ever, because he
is so mercifully and so Strangely restored. Thus are we in Christ restored to
the Exercise of that Power which we lost by Sin: But without him we can do
Nothing.

WHEN all the Kingdom of GOD was at an End by the fall of man, and all the
Labor of the Creation lost, by the Perverseness of him for whom the whole World
was made; GOD by his Mercy recovered it, and raised it out of the Rubbish of
its Ruins, more Glorious than before. Which is the chief reason for the sake
for which we introduce the Mercy of GOD, as our best pattern. For when a man
has injured us, by Nature there is an End of all the Lovely Exercises of Peace
and Amity. If natural Justice should be strictly observed; but then the Season
of Grace arrives, and the Excellency of Mercy shows it self in the Luster of
its Wisdom, and so our Empire is continued, our loss retrived: For by showing
Mercy we often recover the Love of an Enemy, and restore a Criminal to the Joy
of our freindship. We lengthenout our Goodness, and Heighten its measure; we
make it victorious, and cloth it with a Glory above the course of Nature. And
all this we are enabled to do by Coming of Jesus Christ, who has restored us
to the Hope of Salvation, and taught us a Way to increase our own Goodness by
other men's Evils, to turn the vices of others into our own Virtues, and to Live
a Miraculous Life of Worth and Excellency in the midst of Enemies, Dealing with
men better than they deserve, adornig our selves with Trophies by the
Advantages of their vileness, making our selves more Honorable by the Ignominy
they cast upon us, more Lovely and Desirable by the Hatred which they bear
toward us.

THE foundations upon which we Exercise this Virtue, are wholly Supernatural. To
be kind to the innocent is but Justice and Goodness, but to be Kind to the
Malevolent is Grace and Mercy. And this we must do, because our Father which is
in Heaven Causes his Sun to rise on the Just and the unjust and his Rain to
descend on the Righteous and the Wicked. Because Mercy is the Head Spring of
all our Felicities, therefore should we show Mercy, as we have obtained Mercy.
As the Blood was sprinkled upon the Tabernacle and all its Utensils; so is the
Blood of Christ upon the Heathens, and the Earth, and all our Enjoyments. They
are Daily Monitors of Mercy to us, because they are purchased by the Blood of
Christ. For of him it is, that the Heavens declare the Glory of GOD, and the
firmament shows his Handy work to us sinners at this day. The Salvation of
Sinners being the only End for the sake of which we can be permitted now to
enjoy them.

THE Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ is an incredible mystery to them,
that do not consider the Love of GOD toward Men, in the Creation of the World.
But they that measure it by his Laws and works, and see it in the value of
their own Souls, would think it very Strange, if that Love which appears so
infinite in all other things, should be defective only in its Ways of
Providence. They easily believe, it may express it self in the Incarnation.
Especially Since all Ages are Beautified with the Effects and Demonstrations of
this verity, that GOD so Loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have Everlasting Life.
For Love is apt to transform it self into all shapes, that the necessity of its
Object requires; and as prone to suffer as rejoice with it, as apt to suffer
for it, as with it. Many fathers have died for their Children, many for their
Country, but the Love of GOD exceeds them all. To be beloved in our Guilt is
exceeding Wonderful: but this also is in the Nature of Love, it may be provoked
with the Guilt, or moved with Compassion at the misery of a Sinner.

WHERE the Love is extremely violent, and the weak Estate of the Object fit for
Compassion, it is more inclined to Pity than Revenge: Tho where the Object is
strong, and endued with all advantages, it is more offended at the Outrage of
its Rebellion.

WHETHER we consider the Nature of Man, or his Estate before the Fall, we have
some reason to believe that he was more Beloved then the Holy Angels for there
was more exquisite Care and Art manifested in the Creation of his Person, and
his Condition was fitted for a more curious Tenderness and Compassion, if he
offended.

IF you look into the Nature of Angels and Men you will find this mighty
Difference between them, Angels are more Simple Spirits, Men are Images of GOD
carefully put into a Beautiful Case. Their Souls would seem equal to the Angels
were they not to live in Humane Bodies, and those Bodies are Superadded,
certainly for unspeakable and most Glorious Ends; the visible World was made
for the sake of these Bodies, and without such persons as men are, it would be
utterly useless. The Hypostatical Union of two Natures so unspeakable different
as the Soul and Body are, is of all things in the World most mysterious and
Miraculous. Man seems to be the Head of all Things visible, and invisible, and
the Golden clasp whereby Things Material and Spiritual are United. He alone is
able to beget the Divine Image, and to multiply himself into Millions. His Body
may be the Temple of GOD, and when it pleased GOD to become a Creature, he
assumed the Nature of Man. Angels are made Ministering Spirits for the sake of
Man, and by him alone GOD and his works are United.

IF you respect his Condition he was made a little lower than the Angels, that
he might be crowned with Glory and Honor; Lower for a Time, that he might be
Higher for ever. The Angels were placed in such an Estate, that if they fell,
it would be with more shame; yet if they stood, it would be with less Glory:
For having the Advantages of Greater Light and strength, to Sin against them
was more Odious, and to stand in them less Wonderful. While man, being more
remote from GOD, was more Obnoxious to Dangers, and more Weak to resist them;
His Want of Clear Light if he fell, would lessen his offense; And the
Difficulties wherewith he was surrounded, if he stood, would increase his
Virtue, which by consequence would make his Obedience more pleasing, and much
augment his Eternal Glory. All which put together, when Angels and Men both
fell, fitted Man rather to be chosen and redeemed; he being the Greater Object
of Compassion and Mercy.

THE Degrees and measures of that Mercy which was shown to Man in his
Redemption, are very considerable. When he was Weak and unable to help himself,
when he was Guilty, when he was an Enemy, when he was Leprous and deformed,
when he was Miserable and Dead, before he desired, or Thought of such a Thing,
God freely gave his Son to die for his Salvation, and condescended to propose a
reconciliation. Which should teach us, tho higher then the Cherubims, and more
pure then the Light, tho our Enemies are never so base, and injurious, and
ungrateful, nay Obstinate and Rebellious, to seek a reconciliation by the most
Laborious and Expensive Endeavors, to manifest all our Care and kindness toward
them, pursuing their Amendment and Recovery. For the same Mind ought to be in
us that was in Christ Jesus: who being in the form of GOD thought it no Robbery
to be Equal with GOD, yet took upon him the Form of a Servant, and being found
in fashion as a man, humbled himself to the Death, of the Cross: Wherefore GOD
also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name that at the
Name of Jesus every Knee might bow. The very reason why we so infinitely adore
him, being the incomparable Height and Perfection of his Mercy, expressed in
his Humiliation and Abasement for us. If we would enter into his Glory, we must
walk in the Way which he has trod before us, for that only will lead us into
it.

THO GOD has in his infinite Mercy redeemed us from the unavoidable Necessity
of being Damned, yet has he with infinite Prudence ordered the Way and Manner
of our Redemption: in such sort that we are not immediately translated into
Heaven, but restored to a new Estate of Trial, and endued with Power to do new
Duties, as pleasing to him, as those which he required from us in Eden. For he
Loved a Righteous Kingdom from the Beginning, wherein his Laws were to be
obeyed, Rewards and Punishments expected, and administered in a Righteous manner.

THE Great and necessary Duties in this second Kingdom are Faith and
Repentance introduced by his Wisdom, and occasioned by Sin, necessary for our
Justification, and Sanctification, and Superadded to the former.

THIS Kingdom of Evangelical Righteousness, being founded on the Blood of
Christ, is by Death and Sin, and by the Supernatural Secrets of Love and Mercy,
made infinitely more Deep and mysterious than the former.

CHAP. XV.
Of Faith. The Faculty of Believing implanted in the Soul. Of what Nature its
Objects are. The Necessity of Faith; Its End, Its Use and Excellency. It is the
Mother and Fountain of all the Virtues.

FAITH and Repentance are the Principal Virtues, which we ought to exercise in
the Kingdom of Evangelical Righteousness: because by them alone a Sinner is
restored to the Capacity and Power of living in the Similitude of GOD, in the
Practice of his Divine and Eternal Virtues. For without Faith it is impossible
to please GOD, because we can never believe that he is the Rewarder of all
those that diligently seek him, without that Credit which is necessary to be
given to the Discovery of his Love to them that are defiled by the Guilt of
Sin. For as long as we think GOD to be an infinite and Eternal Enemy to all
Offenders, we cannot use any Endeavor to please him, because we Know there is
no Hope of Reconciliation, and the vanity of the Attempt appears like a Ghost
that always haunts us, and stands in our Way to oppose and discourage us, in
the Archievment we would undertake. For to Fight with Impossibility is so
Foolish a thing that Nature it self keeps us back from doing it. Till therefore
we believe our Reconciliation possible, we have no Strength at all to endeavor
our Salvation. Our Despair oppresses and frustrates our Desires, with the
inevitable Necessity of our Eternal shame, and Guilt, and misery.

TO believe that GOD will be so Gracious, as to pardon our horrible Apostasy
and Rebellion, is a Work so Great, that GOD accepts it instead of all other
Works of Innocence and Piety: to believe that he has given his Eternal Son to
die for us, and that he so Loved us as to come down from Heaven to suffer the
wrath of GOD in our stead, is so much against the Dictates of Nature and
reason, that GOD imputes this Faith alone for Righteousness, not as if there
were no Good Works necessary beside, but by this alone we are justified in his
Sight, and out Justification cannot be ascribed to any other Work of ours
whatsoever. Howbeit that which makes Faith it self so Great a Virtue, is that
we thereby receive a Power and an Inclination with all, to do those Works of
Love and Piety, the Performance and the Reward of which was the very End of our
Saviors Coming.

THAT there is implanted in Man a Faculty of believing, is as certain as that
his Eyes are endued with the Faculty of seeing, or his Soul with Knowledge, or
any other Faculty. And that this Power implanted is of some Use in Nature, is
as sure, as any Thing in the World. For nature never gave to any thing a Power
in vain, this therefore being one of the Powers of the Soul, must have a
certain End ordained for it: And its use is the Exercise of Faith, in order to
that End.

OBJECTS of Faith are those Things which cannot be discovered but by the
Testimony of others. For some things are known by Sense, some by Reason, and
some by Testimony, Things that are Known by Sense, are present, some time or
other, to the Senses themselves. Those Things which Reason discovers, are
Known, as Effects are by Causes, or as Causes by Effects; a Good and rational
Demonstration being made by the Concatenation of Causes and Effects depending
upon each other, whereby Things remote from Sense are evident to Reason,
because the one is necessarily implied by the existence of the other. But some
Things there are, which have no such necessary Dependence at all: such are the
fortuitous Occurences that have been in the World, with all those Actions of
free Agents that flow merely from their Will and pleasure. For of these, there
can be no certain Knowledge when they are past, but by History and Tradition.
That the World was made so many years ago, that Man was created in an estate of
Innocence that he fell into Sin, that GOD appeared, and promised the seed of
the Woman to break the Serpents Head; that there was a Flood, that Sodom and
Gomorrah was burnt by fire, that all the World spoke one Language till the
Confusion at Babel, that there were such men as Julius Caesar, or Alexander the
Great, or such as Abraham, and Moses, and David, that the children of Israel
were in Egypt, and were delivered from thence by Miracles; that they received
the Law in the Wilderness, and were afterward settled in the Land of Canaan,
that they had such and such Prophets, and Priests, and Kings: that Jesus Christ
was born of the Virgin Mary, that he was GOD and Man, that he died and rose
again, that he ascended into Heaven, and sent the Holy Ghost down upon his
Apostles. Nay that there is such a City as Jerusalem; all these things can no
other Way be understood but only by Faith, for no Light of Nature nor principle
of Reason can declare such verities as these, among which we may reckon these,
that all the Nations in the World, except that of the Jews, were Pagans and
Idolatrous, till the Gospel began to come forth from Jury; that by the
Miracles, and Persuasions, and Faith, and Patience, and Persecutions, and
Deaths of the Martyrs, they were converted, and forsook their Dumb Idols, and
erected Temples to the GOD of Heaven; that his Eternal Son was crucified in
Judea; that such Emperors made such Laws, that such Councils were held in such
Ages, that such and such Fathers sprung up in the Church; that there is such a
Place as Rome, and Constantinople: these and many Millions of the like Objects,
to them that live in this Age, and never stirred any further then the English
Coast, are revealed only by the Light of History, and received upon Trust from
the Testimony of others. Nevertheless there is as great a Certainty of these
Things, as if they had been made out, by Mathematical Demonstration, or had
been seen with our Eyes.

FOR tho there are some false and some Doubtful Testimonies, yet there are also
some that are True and Certain. And least all Faith should be utterly blind,
and vain, and uncertain, there are External Circumstances and inward
Properties, by which those Testimonies which are true and infallible are
distinguished from others.

ALL those Things that are absolutely necessary to the Welfare of Mankind, the
Knowledge of which is of general Importance, that are unanimously attested by
all that mention them, and universally believed throughout all the World, being
as firm and certain, as the Earth, or the Sun, or the Sky it self. We are not
more Sure that we have Eyes in our Heads, then that there are Stars in the
Heavens; tho the Distance of those Stars are many Millions of Leagues from our
Bodily Organs.

THE Objects and Transactions which in former Ages occur to our Eyes, (I mean
the Spiritual Eyes of the intelligible Soul, that are seated within) are by
Faith received, and brought to the understanding. When they are transmitted to
our Knowledge, their Nature is apprehended immediately by the Soul, and their
existence examined by Reason. There being certain clear and infallible Rules,
by which their Truth or falsehood may be discerned. And for this Cause is it
that we are commanded, to Try all Things, and bold fast that which is Good; 1
Pet. ^15.
It is our Duty, to be ready always to give a reason of the Hope that is in us.
For Reason is a transcendent faculty, which extends to all Objects, and
penetrates into all mysteries, so far as to enquire what probability may be in
them; what Agreement or repugnance there is in the Nature of the Things
revealed; what Harmony or Contradiction there is in the Things themselves, what
Correspondence in all the Circumstances, what consistence between those Things
which we certainly Know, and those which we are persuaded to believe, what
Authority the Relation is of, what is the Design and integrity of the Relators,
what is the Use and End of the things revealed, whether they are important or
frivolous, absolutely necessary, merely convenient, or wholly Superfluous,
things to be abhorred, or things to be desired, Absurd or Amiable, what
Preparations went before, what Causes preceded their Existence, what Effects
followed, what Concomitants they had, what Monuments of them are now left in
the world, How the Wise and Learned judge of them, what Consent and Unity there
is in all the Relations, and Histories, and Traditions, of the Things reported.

WHERE there is no Repugnance between the Objects offered to our Faith and the
Things we already know, no Inconsistance in the Things themselves, no
difference, no Contention between the Relators, no fraud in promoting, nor
folly (discernable) in the first Embracing of the Things that are published, no
Want of Care in Sifting and examining their Reality, nor any want (in the
Hearers) of Industry, Skill and Power to detect the Imposture, there is a fair
Way laid open to the Credible of such Objects attested and revealed with such
Circumstances. But if the Things attested were openly transacted in the face of
the World and had Millions of Spectators at the first, if they were so public
as to be taken notice of in all Kind of Histories of those times and places, if
they were founded on great and weighty causes, if they were pursued by a
constant Series, and succession of affairs, for many Ages, if they produced
great and public alterations in the World, if they overcame all suspicious
oppositions, obstacles, and impediments, if they changed the state of Kingdoms
and Empires, if old Records, and Monuments and Magnificent Buildings are left
behind, which those Occurrences occasioned; our Reason it self assists our
Belief, and our Faith is founded upon Grounds, that cannot be removed: Much
more if the Things be agreeable to the Nature of GOD, and tend to the
Perfection of Created Nature, if many Prophesies and long Expectations have
preceded their Accomplishment, if the mysteries revealed are attested by
Miracles, and painted out many Ages before, by Types and Ceremonies, that can
bear no other Explication in Nature, nor have any Rational use besides; if all
the Beauty of former Ages is founded in and compounded by their Harmony, if
they fitly answer the Exigencies of Humane Nature, and unfold the True
Originals of all the Disorder and Corruption in the world, if the Greatest and
Best Part of Learning it self consists in the Knowledge of such affairs; if the
Doctrines on which they attend, be the most pure, and Holy, and Divine, and
Heavenly; if the most of them are rooted in Nature it self, when they are
examined and considered, but were not discerned nor Known before; if they
supply the Defects of our Understanding and lead us directly to felicity, if
they take off our Guilt, and are proper Remedies to heal the Distempers and
Maladies of our Corruption; if they direct and quiet the passions of Men and
purify their Hearts, and make men Blessings to one another; if they
exterminate their vices, and Naturally tend to the Perfection of their Manners,
if they lead them to Communion with GOD, and raise up their Souls to the
fruition of Eternity, enlarge their Minds with a Delightful Contemplation of
his Omnipresence, enrich^^ them with infinite varieties of Glorious Objects fit
to be enjoyed, if they perfect all the Powers of the Soul, and Crown it with
the End for which it was was prepared: Where all these Things meet together,
they make a Foundation like that of the Great Mountains which can never be
moved. But if there be any flaw, or Defect, in these Things, if any of them be
wanting, our Faith will be so far forth lame and uncertain, as our Reason shall
discern its Cause to be failing.

NOW of all the Thingsthat the World does afford, the Christian Religion is
that alone wherein all these Causes of Faith perfectly concur. Insomuch that no
Object of Faith in all the World is for Certainty Comparable to that of
Religion. Never had any Truth so many Witnesses, never any Faith so many
Evidences, they that first taught and published it, despised all the Grandeurs
and Pleasures in the World, designed nothing but their Eternal Felicity, and
the Benefit of men, trampled all Honors and Riches under feet, attested the
Truths they taught and revealed, by Miracles wrought, not in obscure Corners,
but in the Eye of the Sun, many Nations far distant from each other were in a
Moment reduced, and changed at a time. Millions of Martyrs were so certain of
the Truth of these Things, that they laughed at Persecutions, and Flames, and
Torments. The Jews that are the great enemies of Christianity, confess those
Histories, and Prophesies, and Miracles, and Types, and Figures upon which it
is founded. They reverence the Book wherein they are recorded above all the
Writings in the World, confess that they had it before our Savior was born,
and glory that it was theirs, before it was ours. Their whole Faith and
Religion is made up of Such Materials, which being granted, it is impossible
the Christian Religion should be false, Turks acknowledge the Historical Part.
The Artifices of Corruptors have been all detected, and must of necessity so be
as long as there are inquisitive Men in the World: All Schismatics and
Heretics have cavilled and disputed about the true Interpretation of certain.
Texts, but never so much as Doubted, much less shaken the foundation. Nay when
you look into Matters well, the very Certainty of the one was the occasion of
the other. The great Moment of what they took for granted made the strife the
more Eager.

THIS Advantage our Faith has above all, it is suspected only by Lazy and
Profane, half witted men that are as Empty as self conceited, as rash as
Wanton, and as much Enemies to Felicity and Virtue, as to Truth and Godliness.
But the more you search into it, the more Light and Beauty you shall discern in
the Christian Religion, the Evidences of it will appear still more deep and
abundant, as endless in Number, force, and Value, as they are unexpected.

AMONG other Objects of Felicity to be enjoyed, the Ways of GOD in all Ages are
not the least considerable and Illustrious. Eternity is as much Beautified with
them, as his Omnipresence is with the Works of the Creation. For Time is in
Eternity, as the World is in Immensity: Reason expects that the one should be
Beautiful, as well as the other. For Since all Time may be Objected to the Eye
of Knowledge altogether, and Faith is prepared in the Soul on purpose, that all
the Things in Time may be admitted into the Eye of the Soul, it is very
Displeasing to Humane Reason, that Time should be horrid, and Dark, and empty,
or that he that has expressed so much Love in the Creation of the World, should
be Unmindful of our Concerns in the Dispensations of his Providence. Especially
Since the World, how Glorious soever it is, is but the Theater of more Glorious
Actions, and the Capacity of Time as Great and Large as that of the Universe,
Ages are as long and as Wide as Kingdoms. Now if GOD have altogether neglected
the Government of the World, all Time will be Dark and vain, and innumerable
Bright and Delighful Objects, which were possible to be desired, denied to the
Soul, and the better half of GODS Love be removed. But if GODS. Will and
Pleasure be Uniform in his Operations, and Time it self Beautified by this
Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, as well as the World, our Faith will have a
peculiar Excellency because, it is that by which all the Beauties in Time and
Providence are enjoyed: Especially if it be able to see and feel them in clear
Light, and in as lively a manner as the Reason of the Soul can do, when most
fully informed. It is evident that without this Faith, the Greater half of our
Felicity can never be enjoyed.

TO Know that we are Men, encompassed with the Skies, and that the Sun and
Moon, and Stars are about us, with all the Elements and Terrestrial Creatures,
is matter of Sense and Reason; as it is also, that we have the Dominion and use
of them; and that such Excellencies and Degrees of Goodness are Connatural to
them: But their utmost Perfection is discovered only by the Truth of Religion;
that alone discloses their first Cause, and their last End, without which all
their Intermediate uses are Extremely Defective: It is for more Pleasant to see
the Infinite and Eternal GODHEAD from the incomprehensible Height of his Glory,
shooping down to the abyss of Nothing, and actually making all these
Transcenent Things out of Nothing for our sakes, then to see our selves at
present surrounded with them. This is the first Act of all the Ornaments of
Time and Nature. Which tho it be founded on clear Reason, yet is it an Object
of our Highest Faith, as it is revealed by the Word of GOD: and therefore it is
said, Through faith we understand that the Worlds were made. For Faith and
Reason are not so divided, but that (the formally Distinct) they may enter into
each others Nature, and Materially be the same. The very same Object (I mean)
that is Known to Reason, may by Faith be believed: Reason not destroying but
confirming Faith, while it is Known upon one account, and believed on another.
For there is a Mutual Convenience between these two, Faith is by Reason
confirmed, and Reason is by Faith Perfected.

TO see GOD stooping down to Create the World, and Nothing follow, is not so
Beautiful, as to see him afterward in the Act of making Man, and Giving him
Dominion over all the Creatures. It is more pleasant to see Man made in GODS
Image, then to see the World made for the use of Man. For the End of the
Creation is that, upon which all the Perfection of its Glory does depend, and
the more Noble Man is, for whose use the World was made, the more sublime and
Glorious its End is. To see him placed in the Estate of Innocence, Light, and
Glory, wherein he was secure from Death, and Sin, and Sickness, and Infelicity,
if himself pleased, is very Delightful; so it is to see, that Nature never
intended any of those Abortive Errors, that now so confound us: But to see the
End why man was placed in such an Estate, to be his Trial, and the End of that
his freindship with GOD, whose Exercise consists in voluntary Acts of
Gratitude and Amity; and the End of those the Beauty of his Life, and his
fuller Exaltation to Bliss and Glory; this is far more Pleasant then the other.
To see him fall is infinitely Displeasing, but the fault is entirely charged on
himself: And had GOD Eternally destroyed him, tho we perhaps had never lived to
see it, yet we confess it would have been just in it self, and the Justice
Adorable. But to see GOD exalting his mercy in pardoning the offense, and for
all our sakes redeeming Man by the Death of his Son is sweet still: as it is
also to see his infinite Justice and Holiness in the Manner of our Redemption.
To see him lay the foundation of our Hope on a certain Promise, seconded with
his Longsuffering, yet defer the Accomplishment of it for our greater Benefit,
wisely forbearing to send his Son till the fullness of Time, is very
transporting, but the Reason of it is very Difficult to understand. His
foresight of our Obstinate Blindness and Incredulity was the Cause of His
Dealy. That he might gain Time, before our Savior came, to speak of him, to
paint him forth, to make him the expectation of the World, and the Hope of all
Nations; To see him for that End reveal himself to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and bringing down their Posterity into the Land of Egypt, that he might make
that Nation, out of which our Savior was to spring, Famous by Miracles, and by
his Conduct and Government of them, more Glorious then all Nations, to appear
himself among them, and give his Oracles unto them, and to make them
conspicuous to the Eye of all the World, by mighty Signs, and Wonders, and
Judgments, punishing them for their offenses, yet Graciously continuing a Seed
among them, that christ might be raised up according to the Prophesies, that
went before concerning him. To see all the Mysteries of the Gospel painted out
in so Lively a Manner, in all the Types and Figures of the Ceremonial Law, and
that Service with so much splendour and Glory continued, before he came by the
Space of two thousand years, wherein all the mysteries of his Kingdom are
exhibited; to see the Volumen of the Book in which it was written of him, so
highly magnified and exalted, by them that crucified him after it was written,
and that now continue so much to oppose him as the Jews do; To see the Prophets
at various Times, and in Diverse manners, so clearly to describe all the
particulars of his Life and Doctrine, his Eternity, his Godhead, the
Hypostatical Union, his Incarnation in the Virgins Womb, his Poverty, his
Meekness, his Miraculous Life, his Death and Passion, his Resurrection and
Ascension into Heaven, the Sudden and Miraculous Conversion of the Gentiles,
compared to a Nation's being born at once, the very Town where he should be
born, and the City from whence the Law should go forth into all the World, and
the Temple in which the Gospel should begin to be preached. To see the
Accomplishment of all these Things attended with so many Glorious and
Transcendent Wonders, and the utter subversion of that Nation, for their
Incredulity when they had slain him; To see Kings and Queens become the Nursing
Fathers and Mothers of the Church, and so many Glorious Empires receive his Law
that was hanged on a Tree; To see Temples erected over all the World to a
Crucified GOD, and Nations upon Earth adoring his Glory in the Highest Heavens;
Especially to see the manner of his satisfaction, by way of Sacrifice in our
stead, the laying of our Sins upon his Head, and the sprinkling of his Blood
upon all Nations so lively represented, the Necessity of such a Savior
exhibited by the Rigor and Severity of the Law, his Person and his Office being
pointed out in so particular a Manner; all this as it is sweet and Heavenly, so
does it enrich the Contemplation of the Soul, and make it meet to walk in
Communion with GOD in all Ages, adoring his Wisdom, and Goodness, and Power,
admiring and delighting in the fullness of his Love, And all these most Great
and Transporting Things we receive into our souls by Faith alone.

BUT that which above all other Things is most satisfactory is to see Jesus
Christ the end of the Law, and the center of time, the main Business of all the
Dispensations of GODS Providence, and the only Hinge upon which all mysteries
both of the Law and Gospel Principally turn.

HAD he come in the Beginning of the World, there had been no Room nor Place
for all these Prophesies, and Figures, and Expectations, and Miracles,
Precedeing his Birth, we had had nothing but a bare and naked Tradition, that
he had been in the world, which by the carelessness of men had passed away like
a Dream, and died unprofitably; As we may plainly see by their Backwardness to
believe these Things, notwithstanding their strength and Beauty, and the
reiterated Appearances of GOD to excite and awaken Mankind, notwithstanding
his care to erect a Ministry among us, for this very end, that Jesus Christ
might be Known.

HAD he not been GOD and MAN in one Person, had no satisfaction been necessary
for our sins, had he not made satisfaction for us; there had been no Necessity
of believing on his name. The light of nature had been sufficient to guide us to
sorrow and Obedience; all this trouble and care might have been spared, all
this Economy might have been changed into a Government of less expense, and
the most of these proceedings had been impertinent and superfluous. For they
all receive their Attainment and Perfection in Jesus Christ, who is the
fullness, and substance, and Glory of them.

NOR is it, the excellency of Faith alone, that it looks back upon Ages past:
it takes in the Influences of all these, that it may bring forth fruit, in our
Lives for the time to come. For what is it but the Faith of these things,
attended with the Glory which is intimated by them, that made so many Divine
and Heavenly persons, so many Wise and Holy Heroes, so many Saints and Martyrs!
What can inflame us with the love of GOD, inspire us with Courage, or fill us
with Joy, but the Sense of them! A true and lively Faith is among Sinners the
only Root of Grace and Virtue, the only Foundation of Hope, the only Fountain
of excellent Actions. And there fore it is observed by the Apostle Paul, Heb.
11.
that by Faith Abel offered a more Excellent sacrifice than Cain, by Faith
Enoch walked with GOD, by Faith Noah prepared an Ark, in which being warned of
GOD, he saved himself from the general Deluge; by Faith Abraham did such
Things, as made his Seed to multiply above the Stars of Heaven; by Faith Moses
despised the Honors and Treasures of Egypt, and endured, as seeing him that
was invisible; What should I say more (says the Apostle) For the time would
fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jeptha, of
David also, and of Samuel, and of the Prophets: who through Faith subdued
Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, Stopped the mouths of
Lions, Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the Edge of the Sword, out of
Weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies
of the Aliens. Women received their Dead raised to Life again; and others were
tortured, not accepting Deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection. and others had trial of cruel Mocking and Scourges, yea moreover
of Bonds and Imprisonments. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder were
tempted, were slain with the sword, they wandered about in Sheepskins and
Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented; of whom the World was not
worthy, they wandered in Deserts and Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the
earth. All these things were done through Faith, while yet there were but a few
Things seen to encourage them. But the whole Accomplishment of mysteries and
miracles is far more fair, and vigorous, and enflaming; the Beauty of the whole
Body of GODS Dispensations fitly united in all its Parts, being an eternal,
Monument of his Wisdom and Power, declaring the Glory of his Love, and Kingdom
in a more Eminent manner, and making us more then conquerors in and thorrow
Jesus Christ, who loved us, and gave himself for us.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Hope. Its foundation, its Distinction from Faith, its Extents and
Dimensions, its Life and Vigor, its Several Kinds, its Sweetness and Excellency.

JANUS with his two Faces, looking backward and forward, seems to be a fit
Emblem of the Soul, which is able to look on all Objects in the Eternity past,
and in all Objects before, in Eternity to come. Faith and Hope are the two
Faces of this Soul. By its Faith it beholds Things that are past, and by its
Hope regards Things that are to come. Or if you please to take Faith in a
more large and Comprehensive Sense, Faith has both these Faces, being that
Virtue by which we give Credit to all Testimonies which we believe to be true
concerning Things past present and to come: Hope is a Virtue mixed of Belief and
Desire, by which we conceive the Possibility of attaining the Ends we would
enjoy, and are stirred up to endeavor after them. Faith respects the
Credibility of Things believed to be True; Hope, the Possibility and Goodness
of their Enjoyment. The Simple Reality of Things believed is the Object of the
one, the facility of their attainment, and our Interest united are the Object
of the other.

HOPE presupposes a Belief of the Certainty of what we desire. It is an
Affection of the Soul of very general Importance. Which forasmuch as it is
founded on Faith, and derives its strength from the Sure Belief of what we hope
to attain, and there can be no fruition of that which is not really existent,
to lay the foundation of our Hope more firmly, we will again consider the
Objects of Faith in the best Light wherein their apparent certainty may be
discerned.

THE Objects of Divine Faith revealed in the holy Scripture may fitly be ranked
into three Orders. For the Matter of the Bible being partly Historical, and
partly Prophetical, and partly Doctrinal, the Objects of Divine Faith fall
under these three Heads, of Doctrine, History, and Prophecy.

THE Doctrine of the Scripture is of two sorts: for some Doctrines are Natural,
some are Supernatural. The Natural are again divided into two. For some of them
are Laws that teach us our Duty, some of them Propositions only, or bare and
Simple Affirmations, which we call Articles guiding our Apprehensions in the
Truth of those Things which are meet to be Known. Speculation is intended in
the one, and Practice in the other.

NATURAL Doctrines are Objects of Divine Faith, only as they are revealed by
the Word of GOD. For the Authority of the Witness is that which makes our
Faith Divine. They are called Natural, because how ever Blind any man is, in
his present condition; upon a diligent Search, those Things may be clearly
discerned by the Light of Nature. Those Doctrines which are Objects of Divine
Faith, and yet may be found out by the Investigation of Reason, are such as
these. That there is a GOD, that the World was made, that man was created in
GODS Image, that he has Dominion over the works of his Hands, that he is or
ought to be tenderly Beloved of all mankind, that he is to be good, and full of
Love to others: that he is to render all Objects their Due Esteem, and to be
Grateful for the Benefits he has received of his great Creator: that the first
Estate of the Worlds Creation was pure and perfect, that Sin came in by the
Accidental abuse of the Creatures Liberty, that Nature is Corrupted, that Death
was introduced as the Punishment of Sin, that the Soul is Immortal, that GOD is
infinitely Just, and Wise, and Holy; that he will distribute Rewards, and
Punishments according to Right; that there is such a Thing as Eternity and
Immensity; that the Body is frail and subject to Diseases; that we receive all
Things from GOD, and depend in the fruition of all upon his Power and
Providence; that it is Wife to please him, and foolish to displease him; that
Punishment is due to Sin, and that GOD hates it; that Reward is due to Virtue,
and GOD delights in it; that there is a Conscience in the Soul, by which it
feels and discovers the Difference between Guilt and Innocence. That man is a
Sinner, that he is prone to Evil, and Obnoxious to GODS Wrath, that
nevertheless he is spared by the Long-suffering of GOD, and that GOD Loves
him, and desires his Salvation. That there is a felicity and a Supreme
Felicity appointed for man: that he is a free Agent, and may lose it, if he
pleases: that misery is the Consequent of the Loss of Felicity: that GOD
delights in all those that Love and practice Virtue: that he hates all those
that drown their Excellencies in any Vice: that Sorrow and Repentance are
necessary for all those that have offended GOD: that there is Hope to escape
the Punishment of Sin, if we endeavor to live as piously as we ought. All
these things are evident in themselves by the Light of Nature, because they may
either be clearly deduced from the principles of Reason, or certainly discerned
by plain Experience: And are therefore taught by the Word of GOD, either
because they had need to be revived and raised up to light from under the
Rubbish of our Fall, or because GOD would sanctify Nature by his express
Consent, or make its Dictates more remarkable and Valid by his Approbation, and
confirm all by the Seal of his Authority: or because a fair Way is laid open by
these to more retired and Celestial Mysteries.

FOR when we know these Things we are prone to enquire what GOD has done, what
Way there is to recover our ancient Happiness, what Remedies are prepared for
the corruption of Nature, how the Guilt of Sin may be removed, how we may be
aided and assisted in the works of Virtue, by what Means our Reconciliation
with GOD is wrought, and in what manner we ought to demean our selves that we
may be accepted of him? for the knowledge of our former health is necessary for
the clear apprehension of our present Sickness, and the sense of our Infirmity
fits us for the Physician. When we know all that Nature can teach, and see
something needful, that Nature cannot, unfold; when we are condemned by our
Conscience yet feel our selves beloved, find that we have forfeited all, yet
see the Glory of the creation continued (for our use and service,) stand in
need of an Atonement, yet Know not where to get it; our Exigency meeting with
the grace of GOD, the sense of our Misery and Hope united, our own Guilt and
GODS Mercy (of both which we have the feeling and experience,) adopts us for
the Reception of the Holy Gospel, wherein those thing are revealed that come in
most fitly to answer our Expectations. Satisfaction for Sin by the Death of
Christ, and the Incarnation of his GODHEAD above the course of Nature, for that
End; His active and passive Obedience in our Stead, our Justification thereby,
the application of his Merits to our souls by faith, the Glory which we owe him
for so great an undertaking, the coming down of the Holy Ghost to Sanctify our
Nature, and the dignity of Both these Persons by reason of their Unity in the
eternal Essence; for the manifestation of which the Mystery of the Trinity is
largly revealed, these supernatural Points come in so suitably and are so
agreeable to Nature, so perfectly fit in their places, so marvellously
conducive to the perfection of the Residue, that the very Harmony and
sweetneess of altogether is enough to persuade us of their Credibility; and
then the Matter of fact comes in with the Testimony and Authority of GODS Word,
assuring us that these Things are so, by History and Prophecy. The Miracles at
our Saviors Birth alone one would think enough to clear the business: much
more if we take in all the Miracles of his life; wherein his Glory appeared, as
of the only begotten of the Father; more fully yet, if we take in the Miracles
of his Death; and abundantly more, if the Glory of his Resurrection and
Ascension be added. But especially the Coming down of the Holy Ghost, and the
Power the Apostles received from heaven, all the Prophesies that went before,
and all the successes that followed after, all the Faith and Learning of the
Fathers, all the Canons and Decrees of Councils, all the Transactions of the
World drawn down to our own Age in a continued series, illustrate and confirm
all that is revealed.

BUT you will say, How shall we know such Histories to be true, and that such
Prophesies and Prophets were in their several Ages; Since we never saw the same
with our eyes, and there are many sleights and Fables in the World: How do
thou know there are any Antipodies? Thou did never see them! Or that there is
any Sea, which thou did never behold! Or that the next River has a Fountain
Head? Is not the Universal Tradition of all the world (wherein the Church of
Rome, nay the Catholic Church, is but a little Part) a clear Light for a
matter of Antiquity, attended with a Stream of Effects and clear Monuments
concurring together, without any Dissonancy in the Things themselves, or
Contention of Parties? How do thou know that there was such a man as King
James, or William the Conqueror. Is he not a mad man that will doubt, or
Dispute it? All that thou have to confirm thee in the certainty of these, and
infinitely more, conspires together, to confirm thee in the certainty of the
other, The History of the Bible is confessed by Turks, and Jews, and Infidels,
and which is far more, by the Testimony of the Church, which deserves to be
believed above them all. And if the History be true, there were such Persons as
Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Joseph, Moses, Samuel, David, Solomon, Elias,
Elisha, Josiah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the rest of the
Prophets; such persons as Jesus Christ, and his Apostles in such Ages; such
Prophesies, and such Accomplishments at vast Distances; such Acts, and such
Miracles, and such Doctrines upon such occasions: And if all this Matter of
fact be true, it is impossible but these Doctrines must be Divine, which the
Devil and wicked men so much Oppose and Blaspheme in the World. And if these
Doctrines are true, then all the Promises of GOD are true, and there is a large
foundation of Eternal Hope prepared for the Soul: because if all these
Preparations be not Eternally disgraced by the feebleness of their End the
Glory and Felicity which is designed by them, is infinite and Eternal.

THAT all these Things are intended for thy Benefit, thou may clearly see, by
thy very Power to see them, and by the Natural Influence which they have upon
thy Estate and condition. For tho it may happen by some succeeding Accident,
that thy Power to see and enjoy all may be bereaved of its Objects, when thine
Interest is Eclipsed and forfeited by thy Rebellion, and the Influence of all
may at last through thine own Default be ineffectual and Malevolent to Thee;
yet thou art assured by the Nature of GOD, and of thy own Soul, that it could
not be intended Evil from the Beginning; nay the very Order and disposition of
the Things themselves imports the Design to be Felicity and Glory. For all
these Things were written for our Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the world
are come: And the Apostle expressly says, that whatsoever Things were written
aforetime, Romans 15. 4
were written for our Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the
Scriptures might have Hope. This Hope makes not ashamed, because the Love of
GOD is shed abroad in our Hearts. We Delight in Beauty, and by that very
Inclination that we have unto it, are apt to Delight in any Thing that is
Amiable. We delight to see the Order and Perfection of GODS Ways, and GOD
himself takes Pleasure in manifesting his Wisdom and Goodness, for the Behoof
of our Souls, because he is Great in Bounty, and infinite in Love by his very
Essence: Nay further we are every one Capable of all the Benefit that accrueth
thereby, and by Nature fitted to celebrate his Praises for all the Advantages
that by any of his Dispensations are imparted to us, and have Liberty to
improve them all for the Acquisition of that Glorious End to which we are
ordained. The Nature of GOD, which is hereby manifested to be Love to his
Creatures, is that which enableth thee by this very means to honor and adore
him, and by so doing to enter into his Kingdom, where he, that did all these
Things for a farther End, will appear in Glory, and show thee a Perfection of
Life and Bliss, that is worthy of all this Care and Providence, being as great
as thy Heart can Wish or desire.

HOPE is for its Extent and Dimensions vast and wonderful. All the Honor,
Advancement, Exaltation, Glory, Treasure, and Delight, that is concievable in
Time or Eternity, may be hoped, for: all that the Length, and Breadth, and
Depth, and Height, of the Love of GOD, which passes Knowledge, is able to
perform; All that Ambition or Avarice can desire, all that Appetite and
Self-Love can pursue, all that Fancy can imagine Possibles and Delightful; Nay
more then we are able to ask or think; we are able to desire, and aspire after
(if it be promised to us) the very throne of GOD, and all the Joys of his
Eternal Kingdom. And the more Sublime its Objects are, the more Eagerly and
violently does our Hope pursue them, because there is more Goodness in them to
ravish our Desire.

TO fall from the Height of ones Hopes, where the Kingdom and Glory was
infinite, to which we aspire, is to fall from the Height of Heaven into the
Depth of Hell, it produces a misery and Anxiety in the Soul, an Indignation
and Sorrow, answerable to all the Greatness of our Objects, and the
expectancies of our Hopes: Especially where the Hope is Lively and Tender, and
Strong, and Sensible of all it conceives.

FOR it is the property of a true and lively Hope to Elevate the Soul, to the
Height of its Object: tho dull and drowzy Hopes make no Impression or
Alteration in the Mind. The Soul extends it self with a kind of Pleasure in its
Wishes and in touching. The Possibility of such Goodnesses, as it proposes to
its self in its own Imagination. Love and Beauty even in Romances are
Delightful: the very Dreams and Ideas of the Perfections of Bliss, have a
Pleasure as well as their Reallity. The Desires of it are something more Rich
and Sacred then the fancy or Imagination: but to Hope for such a Thing with a
clear and joyful expectation, is to grasp at its fruition, with a faint Kind of
Promise, that it shall at last be ours. Had our Hopes in Spiritual Things, as
much Sense as they have in Temporal, those Beams of Assurance that enlighten
our Hope and fill it with Glory, would infuse a solid Strength into our Desire
and our pleasures would be so Great that we should not exchange them for all
the Empires in the World. Especially if it ascended so high as to be founded on
infinite and Eternal Causes, and the only fears that did chequer our Hope,
sprung from Nothing but the Danger of being Wanting to our selves. For who
would think, That when our Lives and Liberties are at stake, we should be false
to our selves, that infinite Love and Power should be tendered to us, infinite
Beauty and Goodness be before us, infinite Honor and Pleasure be offered us,
Eternal Delights, inestimable Riches, Ever flourishing Joys, an infinite Empire
be without fraud attainable, and we be so Treacherous and false to our selves,
as to fleight it all! It is an Absurdity so incredible, that we should lose all
these, Enjoyments by our own Default, and bare Remissness that we shall hate
our selves Eternally if we lose so fair an Advantage. Yet this is our Case, we
daily do that which in point of Reason is impossible to be done, and for doing
which we judge our selves Guilty of Eternal Tortures. All the Misery that is
lodged in infinite Despair has comfort and refreshment answerable to it in
infinite Hope. It Is the present food and Support of our Lives, it is the Anchor
of our Souls in the midst of all the Storms and Tempests in the World,'it is the
foretaste of Bliss and Celestial Glory, a Glympse and Appearence of the
Beatifick Vision, without which to Live is to Dye, and to Dye is to perish for
evermore.

THE Great Reason for which a right Hope is accounted so Great a Virtue, is
because its Objects do really surpass all Imagination. The fullness of the
GODHEAD in the Soul of Man, the Perfection of the Divine Image, a
Transformation for Glory, to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord,
Communion with the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, infinite Love and Bounty, the
Estate of a Bride in Communion with GOD the Possession of his Throne, with
another Kind of sweetness then the Bridegroom, himself enjoys, the Resurrection
of the Body, and Life Eternal, in a Kingdom where all Occasions of Tears and
Fears shall ever be removed, Where all Regions, and Ages, and Spaces, and
Times, and Eterternities, shall be before our Eyes, and all Objects in all
Worlds at once Visible, and infinitely Rich, and Beautiful, and Ours! Our very
Appetites also being ravished with Sensible Pleasures in all our Members, not
inconsistent with, but springing from these high and Supeperior Delights, not
distracting or confounding our Spiritual Joys, but purely Superadded, and
increasing the same; while our Bodies are made like to his most Glorious Body,
by that Almighty Power whereby he is able to subdue All Things to himself, all
these infuse their Value; and the Hope that is exercised about these Things is
a Virtue so great, that all inferior Hopes, which this does Sanctify, are made
Virtues by it, but without this all other Hopes are Debasements and Abuses of
the Soul, mere Distractions and delusions, and therefore Vices.

I Know very well that Presumption and Despair are generally accounted the
Extremes of Hope, and the only vices that are Opposite thereunto. But I Know as
well, that there may be many Kinds and Degrees of Hope, of which so me may be
vicious, and some Virtuous: and that some sorts of Hope themselves are Vices.
When ever we make an inferior Desire the Sovereign Object of our Hope, our Hope
is abominable Idolatrous and Atheistical. We forget GOD, and magnify an
inferior Object above all that is Divine. To Sacrifice all our Hopes to Things
unworthy of them, or to be Remiss and sluggish in Hoping for Things of infinite
Importance, is apparently Vicious: But to be just to all our Encouragements,
and to lift up our Eyes to the Eternal GOD, with an humble Expectation; to wait
upon him, and to hope for all that from his Bounty, which his Goodness has
promised, to desire the most high and perfect Proofs of his Love, is the
Property of a most Great and Noble Soul, by which it is carried above all the
World, and fitted for the Life of the most high and perfect Virtue.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Repentance. Its Original, its Nature, it is a Purgative Virtue. Its
necessity, its Excellencies. The measure of that sorrow which is due to Sin is
intolerable to Sense, confessed by Reason, and dispensed with by mercy.

REPENTANCE is a Sour and austere Kind of Virtue, that was not created nor
intended by GOD, but introduced by Sin, made fair by Mercy, in remitting the
offense, and pardoning the Sin. It is a Strange Kind of offspring, which flows
from Parents so infinitely different, and has a mixture in its Nature,
answerable to either an Evil which it derives from Sin, and a Goodness which
flows from Mercy. Its Evil is that of Sorrow, Indignation and Shame, Its
Goodness is the usefulness, and necessity of the thing, considering the
Condition we are now in. It is highly ungrateful to Sense, but transcendently
convenient and amiable to Reason; for it is impossible for him that has once
been defiled with sin, ever to be cleansed, or to live after in a Virtuous
manner, unless he be so ingenious as to lament his Crime, as to loath,
acknowledge, and detest his Error.

THE Union of the Soul and Body is mysterious, but that Sin and Mercy should be
united, as Causes so infinitely different, for the production of a Child so
Black and so Beautiful, is the Greattest Wonder which the Soul can contemplate
on this side Heaven; and will continue to be remembered for ever, and appear
more Wonderful than before when the perfect Disparity and Opposition between
them is clearly seen, in the Light of Glory.

THE Efficient Cause of Repentance is either Remote, or Immediate: Its
immediate Efficient Cause is the Gracious Inclination, or the Will of the
Penitent, its remote Efficient is GOD, the Father of Lights from which every
Good and Perfect Gift descended. Its Material Cause is Sorrow. Its Formal
Cause, which makes it a Virtue, is the Reason and Manner of that Sorrow, the
Equity and Piety wherewith it is attended, containing many ingredients in its
Nature too long a particular to be described here. Its Final Cause is either
immediate, or ultimate, the first is Amendment, the last Salvation.

BEING thus bounded by its Causes, its Definition is Easy, Repentance is a
Grace, or Christian Virtue, wherein a man confesses, hates and forsakes his
Sin, with Grief that he has been Guilty of it, and purposes of Amendment of
Life in Order to His Peace and Reconciliation with GOD, that he may answer the
Obligations that lie upon him, discharge his Duty, lay hold on the Advantages
of GODS Mercy, escape everlasting Damnation, and be made a Partaker of Eternal
Glory.

AMONG the Virtues some are Purgative, and some are Perfective. The Purgative
Virtues are all Preparatory to Bliss, and are occasioned only by the Disorder
of the Soul: the perfective are Essential to our formal Happiness, and
Eternally necessary by the Law of Nature. Repentance is not in its own Nature,
(If Simply and absolutely considered) necessary to Bliss: But, in Relation to
Sinners, it is as necessary as Physic to the Recovery of Health, or as the
Change it self is, by which we pass from the Distemper we are Sick of, to the
right and Sound Estate which we had lost by the Disease. As the malady is
accidental, so is the Cure. For the Nature of Man may be well, and perfect,
without either this, or the other. He that is originally pure, has no need of a
Purgative Virtue; but he that is fallen defiled musts needs rise, and wash away
the filth, before he can be clean.

FOR this Cause, even among the Heathens themselves, the more Knowing and
Learned have a Conscience of Sin; their Priests and Philosophers, devised
several Rites and Manners of Purgation, which they taught, and imposed on their
Disciples with much Circumstance and Ceremony, in order to their Reception. Nor
was there any Temple, or Religion in the World, that pretended not something to
Diviner Mysteries: Which were graced and beautified with Preparatory Washings,
Humiliations, Fashions, Attirs, Watchings, Retirements, Shavings, Sprinklings,
Anoyntings, Consecrations, Sacrifices, or some other Disciplines like unto
these, to be endured and past through, before their Votaries could be admitted
to their mysteries. All which Rites as they made a great show, because they
were sensible, so were they apt to put a magnificent face on their Religion to
dispose the Persons exercised by them to a more complying Obedience, and to
beget a Reverence mixed with Awful Admiration in their ignorant Spectators. All
which nevertheless were but Emblematical Ordinances, signifying something
invisible that was necessary to be done, of which the Priests themselves knew
not the meaning. They had the name of Paenitentia in their Common Conversation,
but applied it to profane and Trivial occasions: But Repentance in Religion,
which is the Soul and substance of those mystical Observations, a broken and
Contrite Heart, an internal Sorrow for their sin, was a thing unknown; so that
all their Appearances, how magnificent soever, were but Empty shells.

REPENTANCE alone though never so simple and short in its name, being of such
value, that GOD accepts one contrite Groan above all the Ceremonies, even of
his own Law. And therefore he says, Psalm. 51. 16. 17.
Thou desire not sacrifice else would I give it; thou delightest not in Burnt
offering. The Sacrifices of GOD are a Broken Spirit: A broken and a contrite
Heart, O God, thou will not despise.

FOR tho Repentance be not in it self a desirable Virtue, nor so much as a
Virtue, till there be a sphere and Occasion for it, wherein to be exercised,
tho Repentance in it self be far worse then obedience, yet upon the Account of
our Saviors Merits, and GODS Love to Sinners, it is preferred above the
Greatest Innocence and Purity whatsoever. For there is more Joy in Heaven over
one sinner that repents, then over Ninety and nine Just persons that need no
Repentance. Luke 15.
If the Soul be of greater value than the whole World, if the loss of any Thing
we esteem, increases the sense of its excellency; if our Savior justly and
rationally compares himself to a Shepherd, that leaves Ninety and nine sheep
in the wilderness, to seek one that is gone astray; if he rejoices when he
has found it, more for that one that was lost, then for the ninety and nine
which he had in safety; if his Delight in the success of his Labors be
answerable to their Greatness; if the frustration of all his Desires, and
painful endeavors in seeking it, be infinitely Grievious; and the Virtues more
Amiable and Wonderful, which sinners exercise after their Redemption; if their
Love, and their joy, and their praise be increased, by the extremity of their
Distress and the multitude of the sins that are forgiven them; if their
Communion with GOD be more sweet, and their Happiness more exalted, and the
Kingdom of GOD it self made more sublime and Glorious thereby; Repentance has
something more in it then Perfection had before the fall, and as sinners have
made themselves more infinitely Indebted, so are they infinitely more subject to
the Arbitrary Disposal of Almighty Power, infinitely more Capable of Obligations
and Rewards, infinitely more Obliged for Pardon and deliverance, as well as
infinitely more Obnoxious to Divine Justice, their Fear and Danger is infinitely
Greater, they stand in need of infinite Grace, and Mercy, which when they
receive and enjoy, their Love and Gratitude are proportionably greater, their
Delights are more quick, and vigorous, and full, and so are their praises.

BUT before a sinner can atchieve all this, or GOD enjoy the fruit of his
Salvation, he must needs repent, for Repentance is the true and substantial
Preparation of the Soul, the only Purgative Virtue, by which it is fitted for
these Divine Seize. It is, we confess in outward Appearance a slight
invisible Act, but as Great within, as Wide and Comprehensive as the Heavens.
It receives the Virtue of the Divine Essence of the whole Creation, of
infinite Mercy, of the Blood of Christ, of his Humiliation, Merit, Exaltation,
Intercession, and glory, of all the Work of Redemption into it self; and having
fed it self, digested them, it receives strength by the Influence of these to
dispense all their Virtue again, in the Production of those Fruits, for the
sake of which GOD has filled all the World with miracles, the Verdure, and
Maturity, and Perfection of which shall with their beauty and sweetness
continue in life and Flourish for ever.

IF we respect Man alone, and the things that are done in himself by
Repentance, it seems a Virtue of infinite value: It divests him of all his
Rebellion, Pride, and vain Glory, strips him of all his Lust and Impiety,
purges him of all his corruption, Anger, and Malice, pares off all his
Superfluities, and excesses, cleanses his Soul of all its filthiness and
pollution, removes all that is so infinitely Odious to GOD, and makes him
amiable and Beautiful to the holy Angels. It sits and prepares him for all the
exercises of Grace and Piety, introduces Humility and Obedience into his Soul,
makes him capable of a Divine Knowledge, and makes way for the Beauty of his
Love and Gratitude, inspires Fortitude, and Prudence, and Temperance, and
Justice into his soul; renues his Nature, and makes ^im a meek and patient
Person restores him to that Wisdom and Goodness he had lost, clothes him with
rightteousness and true Holiness, and seats him again in the Favor of GOD. By
Repentance he recovers the Divine Image, and by Consequence it extends to all
that Blessedness and Glory which is for ever to be enjoyed.

REPENTANCE is the Beginning of that Life, wherein all the sweat Labor of the
Martyrs, all the Persecutions and Endeavors of the Apostles, all the
Revelations of the Prophets, all the examples of the Patriarchs, all the
Miracles of old Time, all the Mysteries of the Law, all the Means of Grace, all
the Verities of the Gospel begin to take full force and Effect, in obtaining
that for which they were intended. Which sufficiently intimates the value of
the Grace, and how highly well pleasing it must be to GOD: It is the Conception
of Felicity, and the New Birth of the Inward Man the Dereliction of the Old,
and the Assumption of a New, and more celestial Nature. It is the Gate of the
Heavenly Kingdom which they that refuse to enter at, can never enjoy. It is
one of the Keys of Death and Hell, by which the Gate of the Prison is unlockt,
nay the very knocking off the Chains, and Manacles of Satan; the very Act
wherein we regain our Liberty, and become the Sons of GOD, and Citizens of
Heaven; It was fitly Typisied in the old Law, by the Laver that was set at the
Door of the Tabernacle for the Priests to wash in, before they entered into the
Sanctuary, to walk in the Light of the Golden Candlesticks, to offer their
Devotions at the the Incense Altar, and to partake of the show bread on the
Golden Table. In the Outward Court they enjoyed the society of the visible
Church, the sight of the Bloody Altar, (which answers out Saviors Cross erected
in the World) and the Benefit of their Outward Profession, which consisted in
their Admission to the Visible Ordinances, and exterior Rites of Religion: But
that Court was open over head, obnoxions to showers, in Token that a bare
Profession is not Enough to shelter us from the Dangers and Incommodities that
may be rained down in Judgments upon us from the wrath of GOD: whence the face
of Heaven is overcast with Clouds, and Covered with black and Heavy
Displeasure, till we wash and be clean, and enter by penitence into the
Invisible Church, of which the Second Court is a Figure, wherein we are
illuminated by the Holy Ghost, and offer up the sweet Perfumes of our
Thanksgivings and Praises; being admitted to feed upon the Heavenly Feast
represented by the Shewbread. Table; we are never received into the Society of
the Saints and Angels, bainted out in the Cheruhims and Palm Trees round about
on the inside of its Walls, nor Covered over head with a vail to protect us: A
vail of Blew to represent the inferior Heaven, wherein Cherubims were
interwoven to represent the Angels looking down upon us, a vail of Goats-hair
concealed and unseen above that of Blew, to signify the fruits of our Savior
Life, and another of Rams-skins died Red, to signify the Blood of Christ, by
which we are secured from all the Displeasure which otherwise for Sin, was due
to us. The Goats hair fitly resembles the Active Obedience, or the
Righteousness of Christ; for as much as Hair may be clipped off, and a Covering
made of it, while the Beast is alive: For so might Christ have been perfectly
Righteous, tho his Life had never been Taken away: But red is the Color of
blood, the Skin imports Death for as much as it cannot be fleyed off, without
the destruction of the Creature. These vails therefore as they were above the
other, were of higher and more mysterious importance: And spread over the
enclosed, and invisible Court, into which none but Priests and Levites entered,
that washed at the Laver, to intimate the security only of those, that are
washed in the Laver of Regeneration, and make Kings and Priests unto God, being
purged from their old sins, and sanctified and illuminated, in a secret
Spiritual manner. For as they only that tarried in their Houses, were under the
protection of the Paschal Lamb, whose Blood was sprinkled on the Lintils of
their Gates and Doors, when the destroying Angel past through the Land of Egypt
to kill the Firstborn of Man and Beast: So only they that keep within the
Pale of the Invisible Church, are under the Shadow of the Almighty, because
they only dwell in the secret place of the most High, and they alone are under
the Coverture of that Powerful Blood, which speaks better things than the
Blood of Abel, but pleads for the preservation of them only, that repent and
believe, and is therefore effectually spread over the Invisible Church alone.
Which in another Type is exhibited by the mixture of the Blood and Oil, which
was sprinkled upon the Priests and Lepers that were cleansed: Sanctification
and Justification moving always together hand in hand, the Unction of the Holy
One, or the Oil of Love and Gladness anointing all those that are washed, and
only those are washed in clean and pure water, they alone being effectually
sprinkled with the Blood of Christ who of GOD is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.

FOR if God should take Pleasure in us before we were pure, his Complacency
would be false, and his Delight unrighteous. Till we are Delightful to him we
can never be Honorable nor Glorious before him: Nor ever be pleasing to that
Goodness, which is indelible (tho latent) in our own Souls, till we feel our
selves clean and Beautiful.

IF any thing in the World can commend the value of Repentance, or discover the
infinite use and necessity of it, this will certainly be a consideration
Effectual: That tho GOD love us with an infinite and eternal Love, tho he
magnifies his Mercy infinitely over all our Deservings, tho Jesus Christ loved
us so, as to sacrifice himself in our places, tho he made infinite satisfaction
to the Justice of God for our Sins, tho the Holy Ghost came down from Heaven
for our sakes, may tho we ourselves were taken up into Heaven, all this would
he of little avail, and we should quickly be tumbled down again, if only Sin
were Delightful to us, and our Wills so obstinate, that there was no place for
Repentance in our Hearts, no sorrow, nor Contrition for the Offenses we had
committed. It is not the Love of GOD to us, so much as our love to him, that
makes Heaven. It may surprise you perhaps, but shall certainly instruct you,
for the Love of GOD may be infinite, yet if it be unseen, breed no delight in
the Soul: if it be slighted and despised, it shall increase our Cuilt, Shame,
and Deformity, and make us the more Odious, which it must needs do, when we are
impenitent. For so long, it is manifest that we are neither Sensible of his
Love, nor Just unto it. The taste of its sweetness, and the Pleasure we take in
his infinite Love, is the Life of Blessedness, and the Soul of Heaven. It is
the Concurrence of our Love and His, when they meet together, that makes
Heaven.

HERE upon Earth we ought actually to grieve, and repent for our Sins: -- But
should GOD require a measure in our Grief answerable to its Causes, our
Repentance it self would be an Hell unto us: For the Grief would be Endless and
insupportable. Right Reason requires that we should be infinitely afflicted for
the infinite folly and madness of Sin. But the Mercy of GOD dispenses with our
Grief so far, that it takes off the Pain, which its infinit^ Measure would
inflict upon our sense, and accepts of an Acknowledgement made by our Reason
that it ought to be infinite, if strict Justice were exacted at our Hands. Our
intention is (in the Course of Reason,) to be infinitely and Eternally grieved
for the Baseness of the Act, and the Vileness we have contracted, and so we
should be, d^d its Effects continue and abide forever; for then we should be
hated of GOD and become his Enemies World without End. But the Removal of that
Hatred, and the infinite Mercy whereby we are forgiven, has a kindly Operation
on the Soul of every Penitent, and the Joy it infuseth restrains and limits the
Excess of our Sorrow, it leaves the Intension of Grief, and its inclination in
the Mind, yet stops the persecution, and relieves our Reason, by diverting the
stream of its Operations and Exercises; it engages its actual Resentments upon
other Objects, which turn it all into Love and Adoration, Praise and
Thanksgiving, Joy and Complacency. For the Love of God continued after our
fall, and the Felicity to which we are called out of the Depth of our misery
all the Advantages we receive upon our Redemption, the Improvements of our
miserable Estate the Degrees and Ornaments that are added to the Beauty and
perfection of Gods Kingdom upon so sad an occasion as Sin is, all these things
take up our Thoughts in such a manner that while we are actually and fully Just
to these, and Loving GOD, for his Eternal Love, infinitely more than we Love
our selves, we live in him, and are all in raptures of Blesseduess. yet is
there a Vertual Sorrow which Reason conceives as most due to Sin, which being
expressed only in the Humility of our Souls, and seen as it were underneath the
fruition of our Joys, in the lowly Conceit we retain of our selves (in the
confession of our vileness and the deep Sense of our own unworthiness;) is far
Greater, now we are restored to the favor and Love of GOD, far sweeter to be
seen, and deeper to be understood; than the Grief for Sin would have been, had
we been not redeemed, but Damned forever.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Charity toward GOD. It Sanctifies Repentance, makes it a Virtue, and
turns it to a Part of our true Felicity. Our Love to all other Objects is to
begin and End in GOD. Our Love of GOD has an Excellency in it that makes it
worthy to be desired by his Eternal Majesty. He is the only Supreme and Perfect
friend. By Loving we enjoy him.

REPENTANCE without Love is so far from seating us in the Felicity of Heaven,
that it is one of the Ingredients of the Torments in Hell, a natural Effect of
Sin, and a great Part of the Misery of Devils. Love is a genuine Affection of
the Soul, and so powerfully Sweet, when it is Satisfied and pleased, that it
communicates the Relish of its own Delightfulness to every Thing near it, and
Transformes the most Virulent Affections into Smooth, Healing, Perfective
Pleasures. Insomuch that in Heaven our Sorrow for Sin shall perhaps be
infinite, yet the malignity of it so perfectly correctd, that tho we continue
Eternally Just, in rendering our Sins that grief which is their due, it shall
not discompose our peace, norcorrode our Delighs, but increase our Repose in
the Beauty of our souls, and make our Joys more full of Ecstasy, by those
Melting, Lively, Bleeding, Resentments, which our Love will occasion in the
very Grief; where with it perfects our Felicity. For as the falling out of
Lovers is the Renewing of Love, so is the Mercy and Kindness of the one, even
of him that was injured; and the calm and secure Indignation wherewith the
other hates himself for being guilty of so vile a miscarriage, the very Grace
and Beauty of the Reconciliation; it is a great means of their mutual
Endearment and Tenderness ever after: the Compassion of him that is Innocent,
and the humble grief of the Guilty making the Joy of their future
Correspondence more Deep and Serious, more Vigorous and Enflaming, more lasting.

LOVE is that which Sanctifies Repentance, and makes it pleasant both to him
that is Beloved, and to him that is adored; Acceptable and Delightful to him
that repents, as well as to him that had been injured. For the Sinners
Restoration makes it as Natural to grieve for his Fault as to rejoice in his
Felicity, his fad and humble Resentments are his own Satisfaction, because he
sees himself Just and Rational in them he delighs in his Sorrow, because it is
Honorable, and finds a new Kind of pleasure in his Abasement, because it is
relieved by the Wonder of his Happy condition; and what he has lost in himself
is regained in the pefection and Goodness of his Object.

THAT GOD is the sovereign Object of Love I scarcely need to mention; all I
shall observe upon this occasion, is; that we are more to Love him for his
Mercy and Compassion toward us as Sinners, then for his Goodness and Bounty
expressed at the first, as we were Innocent Creatures. The Bleeding Spectacle
of his Incarnate Deity, and the Perseverance of his Miraculous and Transcendent
Love after all our Offenses, is another Kind of Motive to heighten our Charity
of, and gives it another form, as much more Mysterious, so much more perfect
and Delightful then ever. Our Sorrow for Sin infuses a New Sense into Nature, a
New Beauty into Love, and gives as much unto it, as it receives from it. But
this being better known by Experience, then by description I shall refer you to
the Life of Heaven and Grace, for more ample satisfaction.

LOVE, as we have showed, may be extended to all Objects in Heaven and Earth;
all that is Goodly and Amiable being capable of that Affection. Hereupon the
Word Love is generally used for that Liking and Esteem we have for any thing,
whether Dead or alive. We can Love Life, and desire to see Good Days; we can
Love the Sun, and Wine, and Oil, and Gold; Love our Dogs and Horses, fine
Clothes and Jewels, Pleasures, Honors, Recreations, Houses, Riches, and as
well as Love Men and Women, Souls and Angels. And evermore our Love expresses
it self in Tenderness and Care for the Preservation of what we Love, in Esteem
of its Worth, and Delight in its Beauty, in endeavors also to promote its
Welfare as far as it is capable. But there is another sort of Love toward
Living Objects, Divine and reasonable, which we call Charity. This is that
Virtue of which the Apostle says, (after he had spoken of all the Miracles,
Helps, Governments, Prophesies, Tongues, and other Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
that were then in the Church) And Yet show I unto you a more Excellent Way. 1
Cor. 12. ult. 1 Cor. 13 1.
And in the next Chapter. Tho I speak with the Tongues of Men and of Angels,
and have not Charity, I am become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. And
tho I have the Gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all
Knowledge, and tho I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have
no Charity, I am nothing, and tho I bestow all my Goods to feed the poor, and
tho I give my Body to be burned, and have not Charity it profits me nothing.
It is that concerning which our Savior Speaks, The first of all the
commandments is, Mark. 12. 30, 31.
Hear O Israel, the Lord our GOD is one Lord, and thou shall Love the Lord thy
GOD with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind, and with
all thy Strength: This is the first Commandment: And the Second is like,
namely this, Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy self: There is none other
Commandment greater then those. Nay perhaps it is that of which he says to
his Apostles, when they had admired at his Miracles. He that believes on me,
the works that I do shall he do also, and greater Works then these shall he do,
because I go to the Father. For Faith works by Love, Love is the Life of
Faith, and without the Works of the one the other is Dead: The Works of Love
are the End of all Miracles, and more Blessed then they. Nay Love is the End of
Faith as well as it is of the Law: for the Apostle says, The End of the
Commandment it Charity, out of a pure Heart, and of a good conscience, and of
Faith unfeigned. It is the End of the very Creation of the World, of all Gods
Labors and Endeavors, of all his Ways in all Ages, all the faculties and
powers of the Soul, the very End of the Redemption of Mankind, the End of the
Jewish Economy under the Law, the End of all the Dispensations of Grace and
Mercy under the Gospel; the End of our Saviors coming down into the World, the
End of all his Miracles, Tears, and Blood, the End of the Holy Ghosts appearing
upon Earth, the End of all the Means of Grace, and in some sort the very last
End of all Rewards and Punishments whatsoever. The everlasting Continuance of
this Love is the End of Eternity it self in a manner, and if our Love be not
the End of GODS Love, his is of ours. And if the Truth be deeply inquired into,
the Intermixture is so sweet, that his is the End of ours, ours of his. For he
Loves us with the Love of Benevolence, that we may Love him; and he desires to
be beloved of us, that he may Love us, with another Kind of Love, distinct from
the former, even that of Complacency. Which Love of Complacency is the Crown of
ours, and so Delightful to us, that it is the very End of our Desire, and
begets in us a new Love of Complacency fitly answering his unto us.

NOW if Love be the End of all the laws, Works, and Ways of GOD, of all our
Saviors Labors and sufferings, of our souls and Bodies, of the whole
Creation, of all the Endeavors and Desires of the Deity, in all the
Dispensations of his Grace and Providence, there must be something in its
Nature Equivalent to all these Transcendent Undertakings, to justify the
Wisdom that selected Love for its Sovereign Object, for it is the office of
Wisdom to suit the means and their End together, so that the Excellency of the
one may be worthy of all the Cost and Difficulty of the other. For it is a
foolish thing to pursue a base and feeble End by Glorious and Wonderful
Methods, because its Vileness will Disgrace the Design, and with it their
Beauty, their very Grandeur will be absurd, where their Issue is but
contemptible. The Apostle therefore tells us that Love is the fulfilling of
the Law, and that it is the Bond of Perfectness. And pursuing its properties a
little more Ample, he says, Charity suffers long, and is kind, Charity
envyeth not, Charity Vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it
self unseemly, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, etc.
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not
in iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth, bears all Things, believes all
things, hops all things, endures all things. Charity never fails, etc.

IT is one noble Effect of Charity, that it suffers afflictions cheerfully
and patiently for the sake of its Beloved: Another is its Kindness to its
Object; its sweet and Courteous inclination to do all manner of Good: Another,
for which it is highly valuable, is, that it envieth not the Felicity or Glory
of its Beloved but takes Pleasure to see it far higher and greater then its
own: is not apt to vaunt and brag of its Perfections, but has an humble Esteem
of all its Atchievments: does not behave it self in distasteful manner, but
studies and designs the Honor Benefit and satisfaction of its Object. But
that which of all other is its greatest Perfection, is, that it seeks not its
own: it is not Mercenary or self ended, but truly Generous and Heroic in its
Performances. It Sacrifices it self, and all its interests, to the Advantage
of its Object; it prefers the person it Loves above it self, desires its
Exhaltation, and delights in its Glory more then its own, It is not easily
provoked, because it puts the best sense upon all that is done by its Object:
Thinks no evil, is not suspicious, or malevolent, or censorious, but frames
honorable and fair Ideas of all that is thought or done by its Beloved: Hates
all Impurity that may displease its Object, all black and crooked
Apprehensions, that may wrang and disguise it; bears all with Hope and
Equanimity, because it believes its Object to be Good, and Wise, till it must
of necessity change its Opinion, and entertain a Judgment tending to its
condemnation. It is no longer Charity then, but dislike and aversion, when it
cease to think well of its Object: for it is another Principle or distinct in
Nature from Love, as its Actions are from the Actions of Love; the diversity of
the Effects evidently proving a Difference in their Causes.

THE Quality, by which Charity rejoices in the Truth, is an incomparable
excellence and commendation of its Nature. Because the Truth is GODS infinite
Goodness, and Love, and Providence, which are exercised in preparing Delights
and Treasures for his Beloved. The truth is the Felicity and Glory of the Soul.
And if it be true that all Eternity is full of Joys, and all the World enriched
with Delights, that a man is infinitely beloved of GOD, and made in his Image
on purpose, that he might enjoy all the Best of all possible Treasures in his
similitude, he may well rejoice in the Truth: because no Truth can be greater
or more delightful, than that himself is exalted to the Throne of GOD, and
ordained to live in Communion with him.

BUT that Quality, by which the Soul believes, and hops all things, that
concern the Honor and Fidelity of its Beloved, is yet more acceptable and
delightful than the former. For a good opinion of the Nature and Intention of
the Person with whom we are united, is the Basis and Foundation of all our
Respect, the Cement of our Peace, and the Life and Soul of all that Honor that
is paid unto him. The very Grace and Beauty of all our Conversation depends
upon it, and if it be true, that we are more to love GOD for the intrinsic
Perfections of his Essence, then for all his Gifts, the chief Business of our
Knowledge is to Frame glorious Apprehensions of his Nature, and to Believe him
in all things so Kind and Wise, that he is True and Faithful in all his
Declarations, and most fit to be Honored in all the Dispensations of his
Providence, because he is ever mindful of his Protestations and Promises. For
then we can believe, that all things shall work together for our Good, can
safely trust our selves, and all that is ours in his hands; resign our selves
up to his Disposal with Joy, and say Thy Will be done, for it is Holy, Good,
and acceptable? Thy Will alone is of all other Wilis most Perfect and
Desirable. There are on Earth indeed more nice Emergencies, many Obscurities
and Riddles, in the midst of all which to think so well of GOD as he deserves,
is the most acceptable thing in the World; for it argues a great confidence of
his Worth, and a Love that is founded on Substantial Causes never to be
removed. It feeds the Soul with a lively hope, and fair Expectation of great
Things from him: by which alone we do right to His GODHEAD, in acknowledging
the Perfection of his Love and Goodness, and by which alone we are made able to
adore him and to live in Union and Communion with him.

THERE is great Talk of Friendship, it is accounted the only Pleasure, in the
World; Its Offices are highly magnified of all: Kindness of Behavior, a
through and clear communication of Souls, a secure Reliance upon each others
Fidelity, a perfect Discovery of all our Thoughts, Intentions, and Resentments,
an ardent willingness to impart Lives and Estate for the Benefit of our Friend,
the Reposing of all our Secrets in each others Bosoms, to do all services, and
suffer all afflictions, for each others sakes, to prefer the Concerns of our
Friend upon all Occasions above our own, these are the Magnalia Amicitiae, and
Arcana mutuae Benevolentiae, the Great and mighty Effects for which Friendship
is admired: But all these, without a good Opinion of our Friend, are nothing
worth, they are but Externals of Friendship, the greatest Secret in its Nature
is, the mutual agreement of Souls and Spirits, the Delight which either takes
in the other, the honor and esteem they give and receive, the Approbation and
Love of each others Dispositions, the Sense and Admiration of each others
Virtues, the continual Desire of being always together, peculiar Ecstasy,
which the Beauty of either occasioneth in the other, when of all other
Treasures in the World their Persons are the greatest to one another. Either is
the proper Element and Refrigerium of the others Soul. Their Bosoms are the
mutual Receptacles and Temples of each others accomplishments, whereinto they
are received in all their Desert, and have Justice done to every degree and
Perfection in their Nature; their Hearts are the Thrones where they are
exalted, and magnified, and live at Ease, are honored and worshipped,
extolled, and reign as absolute in each others Souls. There are some slight
aims and Adumbrations of this Friendship on Earth; but the best and highest
Degree of it here beneath is but a rude and imperfect shadow, only GOD is the
Sovereign friend, all Adoration paid to any one beside is mere Idolatry. Our
Hearts can be absolutely Sacrificed to none, but him; because he alone is
immutable in Goodness. We cannot infinitely honor and delight in any but Him,
it is he alone that can infinitely honor, and delight in us. All our Lives,
Estates, and Services are Due to him, his Will alone is to be wholly ours,
because no other Will is infallibly Right, Wise, Holy, but his alone.

THE Union of our Wills is a Perfection of Love: but that at which he aims by
all his Labors, and Gifts, and Benefits, is our Right and Good Opinion of his
Excellencies and Perfections. That we should see and discern his interior
Properties, admire his Graces, adore his Perfections, adore and magnify his
Beauty and Glory, this is the End for which he communicates himself in all his
Works and Ways unto us; it is the End of the Whole Creation, and of all the
Excellent Things in the universe: for by this he establishes his Empire in our
souls and makes us Pleasing to himself in all our Operations. And for this
Cause it is, that the Apostle plainly tells us that tho we give our Body to be
burned, and all our Goods to feed the poor, without Charity it profits
nothing. To render to GOD the Honor that is due to his Name, to receive and
admire all his Bounties, to rejoice in all his Operations, to adore him in all
his Ways, to take pleasure in all his Works, to fill Heaven and Earth with our
Joys and Praises, is a Work which cannot but be agreeable by its Nature, to his
Eternal Essence. And if this be the Work of Love, it is that which is most
Excellent, because he is therein both pleased and enjoyed. GOD and all his
Creatures are united together by Love alone, and in the Eternal Exercise of
pure and perfect Love all Blessedness and Glory consists.

IF you require what it is to love GOD, you will find it worthy of his Highest
desire, because thereby all our souls, nay all his Creatures, and his whole
Kingdom are perfected, for to Love GOD as we ought to do, is to Honor him as
our Father, Benefactor, Bridegroom, and King, to contemplate him as our Cause
with Complacency, and to rest in him as our End, to delight in him as our
Creator, Preserver, Lawgiver, and Redeemer, to dedicate our selves, wholly to
that Service, whatever it be, wherein he is chiefly pleased and delighted. It
is to love him in himself, in all his Works, in all his Ways, in all his Laws,
in all his Attributes, in all his Thoughts and Counsels, in all his
Perfections; It implies the Knowledge of all Objects, the Use of all Means, the
Attainment of all Ends; all Wisdom and Goodness, all Obedience and Gratitude,
all Righteousness and Holiness, all Joy and Praise, all Honor and Esteem, all
Blessedness and Glory. For it is to Love him with all our Heart, and with all
our Soul, with all our Strength, and with all our Might, with all our
Understanding, with all our Will, with all our Affection, with all the Powers
of our soul, with all our Inclinations and Faculties in all his Creatures, in
all his Appearances, in Heaven and Earth, in Angels and Men, in all Kingdoms
and Ages. It is to see and desire, to Esteem and delight in his Omnipresence
and Eternity, and in every Thing by which he manifests himself in either of
these, so that all Enlargement, and Greatness, and Light, and Perfection, and
Beauty, and Pleasure, are founded in it, and to Love him to Perfection implies
all Learning and Attainment, because we must necessarily be acquainted with all
Things in all Worlds, before we can thoroughly and completely do it. Which here
upon Earth to do by Inclination and Endeavor to the utmost of our Power, is
all that is required of us; And if we do it to our utmost, it shall be rewarded
in the Beatifick Vision, with a full and Blessed Pefection with an actual Love
exactly resembling his, and fully answerable to it in the Highest Heavens.

THERE are two common Motives of Love among Men, the one the Goodness and
Excellency of the Person, the other his particular Kindness and Love to us: And
both these are in the Highest Degree in GOD. He is of infinite Goodness and and
Excellency in himself, for there is nothing Good in the world, but what has
received all its Goodness from Him. His Goodness is the Ocean, and all the
Goodnesses of Creatures little Streams flowing from that Ocean. Now you would
think him a Madman that should say the Sea were not greater then a trifling
Brook: and certainly it no less folly to suppose that the Goodness of GOD does
not as much (nay infinitely more) exceed that of all the Creatures. The Sun is
a lively Mirror of that Eternal Act of Love which is the Glory of his Essence,
but it is infinitely less prone to communicate its Beams, and does less Good to
it self, and infinitely less to all other Creatures. It shines for their sakes
nevertheless, and clothes it self with Glory, by the splendour of its Beams and
is an Emblem of GOD, who exerteth his Power with infinite Pleasure, and by
communicating his Essence in an infinite Manner, propagates his Felicity, and
Glory, to the utmost Height and Perfection. By proceeding from himself to all
Objects throughout all Worlds, he begets, and dwells in himself, he inhabits
Eternity in a Blessed and more vigorous Manner, by establishing the Felicity of
all his Creatures, and become theirs infinite and Eternal Glory. Wherein his
particular Kindness and Love to us appears because he has fitted us with
Qualities and Powers adapted for so great an End, and as particularly
appropriated all to us, as the Sun to the Eye of every Spectator. For our
Bodies and our Souls are made to enjoy the Benefit of all, and his Desire is
that we should attain the End for which we are created. On his side all is
prepared; on ours nothing is wanting but Love to embrace and take pleasure in
his Goodness, which shines in all these Things, and created them on purpose,
that being manifested by them, we might delight in it for ever.

HE that loves not GOD with all his Heart, lives a Life most contrary to
Nature. For to Love is as natural for the Soul, as to shine for the Sun: and
the more Lovely any thing is, the more prone we are to Delight in it: if any
thing be infinitely Amiable, wear prone to Love it in an infinite measure, we
prefer the Better above the worse, and cannot rest but in the best of all,
Reason, is the Essence of the Soul, and tends always to the utmost Perfection.
The more Divine and Glorious any Thing is, the more high and Noble is the Love
that we bear it: No Beauty less then the most Perfect, no Pleasure, no Wisdom,
no Empire, no Learning, no Greatness, Wealth, or Honor, less then the most
sublime can be our full Satisfaction: no little degree of Love, nothing less
then the most Supreme and violent can content us: So that GOD being most truly
perfect in all these, is the Adequate Object of all our Desires, and the only
Person sit to be esteemed in an infinite manner. It is as natural for Man to
Love him, as to desire and delight in any being, which supplies the ordinary
and daily necessities of his Life.

TO Love him as we ought implies two things, that are agreeable to the Nature of
Love, yet very rarely to be found among the Sons of Men, a desire to please
him, and a Desire to enjoy him. The Desire of Pleasing is a constant fruit and
effect of Love. For he that Loves, is very desirous to approve himself, and to
do whatsoever he thinks will be grateful to his Beloved. According to the
Decree of Love, the desire is more or less. Where we Love Earnestly, we are
extremely Earnest and Careful to please: Where Love is remiss, there is little
need or Regard of any thing: But infinite Love! It is impossible to declare
what favor and Zeal it will produce. If we Love GOD, we shall keep his
Commandments with a Tenderness and Desire so extreme, that no Joy will be so
great as the Observation of his Laws; It will be with us, as it was with our
Lord Jesus Christ; it will be our Meat and Drink to do the Will of our Father
which is in Heaven. The measure of our Love will not infuse some slight and
faint Endeavors of Pleasing, but put us on the most painful and costly Duties,
make us willing to forsake our own Ease, Goods, Friends, yea Life it self, when
we cannot keep them without offending our Creator.

THE desire of Enjoying is constantly seen in our Love to one another. If any
man has a friend whom he entirely loves, he desires his Conversation, Wishes
to be always in his Company, and thinks the Time long till he and his friend
be together. And thus will it be in our Love to GOD, if as great and Hearty as
it ought to be. In this Life our Enjoyment of GOD is more imperfect, more
complete and perfect in the Life to come. Here upon Earth we desire to converse
with him in his Ordinances, in Prayer, Meditation, hearing his Word, in
receiving the Sacrament, which are intended all for this purpose, to bring us
into a nearer Intimacy, and familiarity with GOD by speaking so to him, and
hearing him speak, and show himself to us. If we love him indeed, we shall
highly Value these Ways of Conversing with him: it is all here upon Earth
whereby we can enjoy him. It will make us with David esteem one Day in his
Courts better than a thousand. We shall delight in all the Means of approaching
to him as often as possible, and use them diligently, to the End of uniting us
more and more unto him, who is the Object of our Desire and the Life of our
Souls. And for as much as there is another Enjoyment of GOD which is more
complete and perfect, we shall groan earnestly, desired to be dissolved and be
with Christ, where we may see no more in a Glass, but Face to Face, and Know as
we are Known. For Love is strong as Death, many Waters cannot quench Love,
neither can the floods drown it. Affliction, Persecution, Sickness, any thing
that will bring us to Heaven, will be acceptable and Delightful.

IF you would know more fully, why GOD desires to be Beloved, you may consider,
that Love is not only the Motive, and Incentive to Virtue, the Cause of
Obedience, but the form and Essence of every Grace, and the fufilling of the
Law, We shall choose him for our GOD, and have no other GODS but him, no
Delights, no Sovereign Enjoyment but him alone. We shall honor him with all
our Souls, and adore him with every Power of our Will and Understanding: We
shall not regard Images and shadows, but worship him immediately in Spirit and
in Truth. We shall not take his Name in vain, nor contentedly stand by when
others abuse it: But shall praise his Name, and desire to see it glorified
throughout the World. For Love desires the Honor, and delights in the Glory
and Advancement of its Beloved. We shall reverence his Sanctuary, and keep his
Sabbaths, desiring Rest from other Avocations, that we may contemplate his
Glory in all his Works. For his sake we shall observe the Laws of the second
Table, and Love our Neighbor as our self. For to Love him is no Impediment,
but a Strong Engagement, and incentive to the Love of all his Creatures. We
shall honor our Parents for his sake, and preserve the Life of our Neighbor:
We shall not rob him of his happiness in his Wife, nor wrong him in her
Chastity and Fidelity toward him. We shall not steal from him, nor diminish
his Possessions. We shall not defame him, nor hurt him by Lies; but vindicate
and preserve his Reputation: it will be our joy and Satisfaction to see his
honor clear and unblemished. We shall not injure him so much as in a thought,
nor covet ought that is his, either for necessity or pleasure: but study to add
to his Contentments.

WERE all the World as full of this Love as it ought to be, Paradise would
still continue, and all Mankind would be the Joy and Glory of the whole
Creation. The Love of GOD toward all would dwell and abide in every Soul, and
the Felicity of all would be the particular Joy of every person. All the Earth
would be full of Repose, and Peace, and Prosperity, nothing but Honor, and
Kindness, and Contentment would replenish the World. Which leads me now to that
other Branch of Love, which is Charity to our Neighbor.

CHAP. XIX.
Charity to our Neighbor most natural an Easy in the Estate of Innocence:
Adams Love to Eve and his children a great Examplar of our Love to all the
World. The Sweetness of Loving. The Benefits of being Beloved. To Love all the
World, and be beloved by all the World is perfect security and Felicity. Were
the Law fulfilled all the World would be turned in Heaven.

CHARITY to our Neighbor is Love expressed toward GOD in the Best of his
Creatures. We are to Love GOD in all the Works of his Hands, but in those
especially, that are most near unto him, chiefly those in which he manifests
himself most clearly, and these are they that are most like him, most exalted
by him, most loved of him, and most delightful to him.

ANGELS and Men, are so distinct from the residue of the Creation, that all the
Works of GOD, as if they were Things of another Kind, are put in Subjection
under their feet. They were made in his Image, and are often called the Sons of
GOD. They are the Sovereign Objects of his Eternal Love, every one of them,
considered a part, is so Glorious; as if he were the Sole individual friend of
GOD, and King of the Universe, so that they are to be treated in another
Manner, as High and Sacred Persons, elevated aabove the Race of ordinary
Creatures, as a Progeny of Kings that are all of them friends to the King of
Kings, Ambassadors representing his Person, in whom he is injured, or Obliged.

I confess there are many Disguises, that overcast the Face of Nature with a
vail, and cloud these Sovereign Creatures: the Excellency, the Absence, and
Distance, and unknown Nature of Angels; the Perverseness of Nature, the
Ignorance, and Unkindness, and Disorders of Men Darken, and Eclipse this
Glorious Duty, and make it uncouth and difficult to us: But all these Disorders
came in by Sin, and it is expedient to remove the Confusions that blind us, in
our miserable Estate, and to look upon this Virtue of Charity, in the Naked
Beauty which appears to us in the Light of Eden.

IN the Purity of Nature, Men are Amiable Creatures and prone to Love. To great
Advantages; of which Sin and misery has bereaved us, and to which we are
restored but in Part, even then when we are Sanctified. Where the Beauty of the
Object is entire, and perfect, and the Goodness of the Spectator clear and
undefiled, to Love is as Natural and Easy as for fire to inflame, when applied
to convenient matter. For the Beauty of the Object is Oil and Fuel to the
affection of the Spectator. It is not more Easy to delight in what is
pleasant, than it is to desire what is Good and Amiable. To be commanded to
take pleasure in it is Liberty, not Constraint. To be forbidden would be hard.
A Prohibition would be the Severest Law, and the most cruel Bondage. There was
no Possitive Law in Eden, that required a Man to Love his Neighbor, it was a
Law of Nature. The Nature of the Object required it, and our Nature prompted it
self thereunto. The Service that Law required was perfect freedom. Adam was
commanded to Love Eve, by a silent Law, Surprised by her Beauty and captivated
by the Chains of Nature. He was amazed at so fair a Creature, her Presence was
so Delightful that there was no need of a Law; an injunction had imported some
Sluggishness in the zeal of his Affection. His Appetite and Reason were united
together, and both invited him to lose himself in her Embraces: She was as
acceptable a Present of the Love of GOD, as Wisdom and Goodness could invent
for him. He was too apt to admire her, had not her Soul been as worthy; as her
Symmetry was transcendent. He admired the Bounty of the Donor in so Great a
Gift, and Great Part of his Life was to be spent in the Contemplation of his
Treasure. He had a Noble Creature made in the Image of GOD for him alone! Her
soul was far more excellent in Beauty then her Face, a Diviner and more
Glorious Object than the whole world. Her Intelligence and Vivacity, Her Lofty
and clear Apprehensions, Her Honor and Majesty, Her Freedom of Action, her
Kindness of Behavior, her Angelical Affections, Her fitness for Conversation,
Her sweet and Tender Principles, a million of Graces and Endowments conspiring
to enrich Her Person and Perfection, made all the World to serve Adam with one
Degree of Pleasure more in serving and pleasing her. The Universe seemed to be
Nothing but the Theater of their mutual Love, as if all the World were made for
nothing else, but to minister to her for his sake, and to make him happy in the
Enjoyment of Her. While the fruition was sanctified by a Just acknowledgement
and Thanksgiving to the Author.

WE produce Eve only for a President; this first sweetness is but a Pattern and
Copy of what follows, fair Prologue to a more magnificent scene, and used by us
as a mere Introduction. Adam was able to Love Millions more, and as She was
taken out of his side, so were they to spring from his Bowels: All to be as
Great, and fair, and Glorious as she, as full of Soul, and as full of Love. As
the Woman was the Glory of man, so were their Offsprings the Glory of both: I
mean they had been so, by the Law of Nature, had not the due course of it been
disturbed. Which Accident is wholly to be fathered on Adams fondness to please
his Wife, and to be mothered upon her Lightness and Credulity. But we being
here to disclose the Felicity which is hid in the fulfilling of GODS Laws and
to justify his Love in commancing this Charity to our Neighbors, must not
regard the Malevolence of Men, but look upon the pure Intention of the Law; and
the success that would have followed, had it been, as it might have been,
perfectly observed.

ALL Adams Children had been himself divided, and multiplied into millions, and
every one a Greater Treasure to him than the whole world. The Stars had not
been by a thousand Degrees so great an Ornament to the skies, as they to the
Earth, an offspring of Incarnate Angels, an assembly of corporeal Seraphims, a
Race of Celestial Kings, every one loving and Honoring Adam, as the Fountain
of their Being, and the Author of their Well being, of the one in begetting
them, of the other by standing and abiding in his Integrity. They had all been
so many Pledges of his Wives Affection; Monuments of love, New and Powerful
Endearments, Enlargements of their Parents, Being Mirrors and Memorials of both
their perfections; For all had been made for every one; and every one had been
the Joy, nay and the Beauty of all. All had been every ones Objects, and every
one the Spectator of all, every one would have delighted in the Beauty of all,
and all had conspired and strived together in the love of every one, their
concurrence infulfilling the Law would have banished all sin and Oppression,
Coffeehouse and sorrow, Wrong and Injury, Theft and Murder, and Adultery,
and Lying out of the World, there had been no noise of War or Contention, or
anger, or Envy, or Malice, or Revenge, this accursed the Black Guard had never
appeared; but all would have been Delightful to one another: Affections,
Honors, Benefits, and Services, Pleasures, Praises, and Prosperities, these
alone had filled the World, with Beauty, Security, Peace, and Glory, Wisdom,
Goodness, Love, and Felicity, Joy, and Gratitude had been, all that had been
Known, had Love been entirely and inviolably observed.

BUT where GODS Laws are broken there is confusion and every Evil Work. Which
nevertheless does more highly commend the excellency of his Nature, and reflect
a Praise upon that Authority, which must first be despised, before any Misery
can come into the World. If the Duty which the Law requires be all sweetness,
and Felicity, and Glory, Completely good, and on every side Advantageous and
Profitable; we that fail in the Discharge of our Duty may be condemned, but GOD
is to be admired, and still to be confessed most Glorious and Holy, because he
delights in the welfare of his Creatures, and makes Religion so desirable a
Mystery, and enjoynes such admirable Things, as would make all transcendently
Blessed, and Good, and Perfect were they perfectly observed. He designs that
all should be amiable, whom we are commanded to Love, and that we should be not
only prone to Love, but actually full of it, and the reason why he consistutes
Love, as the Sovereign Law; is, because, as our Savior says, There is none
other greater Commandment, none more Blessed, or Divine, or Glorious, none
more conducive to our Bliss, his pleasure, the perfection of his Kingdom.
Removing the Law of Love, it is impossible to put another Law in its Place,
which can answer the Designs of his Wisdom and Goodness, of comply with the
Exigencies of our Estate and condition. It is as easy to change the Nature of
GOD; and devise another deity as Good and convenient, as to invent a better Law
then this, which is plainly of all other the most Divine and Holy.

If we ascend up into Heaven, and take a perfect account of all the Opperations
and Effects of Love as they appear in Glory; we may first give our selves the
Liberty of Wishing, and consult, what of all Things possible is most fit to be
desired. Had we a Power to choose, what Kind of Creatures would our selves be
made? could we desire to be any thing more great and Perfect then the Image of
GOD? In the full extent and utmost height of its Nature it is the Resemblance
of all his Blessedness and Glory. To have Beings without Power, or power
without Operations, will never make us like GOD, because by an infinite and
Eternal Act of Power he is what he is. Actions are so necessary that all
Felicity and Pleasure is continually founded in some act or other, and no
Essence is of any value, but as it employs it self in a delightful manner. What
Law then would we have to regulate our actions by? Since Actions are of
different Kinds, some good, some Evil, some convenient, some Hurtful, some
Honorable and some Delightful, some Base and Odious, some are Miserable, and
some are Glorious, we would choose such a Law to guide our Actions by, as might
make them honorable and delightful, and good and Glorious. All these are with
Wisdom and Blessedness shut up in Love. And by Love it is that we make our
selves infinitely Beautiful, and Amiable, and Wise, and Blessed, while we extend
that Delightful and Blessed Affection to all objects that are Good and
Excellent, so that on this side we have all we can desire, Essences, Laws and
Actions that most tend to our full and complete perfection. If on the other
side, we look after objects for this Affection, and desire to have some
Creatures most Excellent, and fit for their Goodness to be Beloved, what
Creatures can we wish above all other, that can be made to satisfy and please
us? Can any thing be more high and perfect then the similitude of GOD? GOD is
LOVE, and his Love the Life and Perfection of Goodness. There is no Living
Goodness so sweet and amiable as that alone, none so Wise, none so Divine, none
so Blessed. What Laws can we desire those Creatures to be guided by, but the
Laws of Love? By Love they are made Amiable and delightful to us; by Love they
are made Great and Blessed in themselves. All Honor and Praise, Benevolence
and Good Will, Kindness and Bounty, Tenderness and Compassion, all Sweetness,
and Courtesy, and Care, and Affability, all Service and Complacency are shut
up in Love: It is the Fountain of all Benefits and Pleasures whatsoever. All
Admiration, Esteem and Gratitude, all Industry, Respect, and Courage are shut
up in Love, and by Love alone does any object of ours Sacrifice it self to our
Desire and Satisfaction. So that on that side our Wishes are Completed too:
while the most High, and Blessed, and Glorious Creatures love us as themselves.
For thereby they are as much our Felicity as their own, and as much take
pleasure and Delight therein. As for GOD his Way is perfect; like curious
needle work on either side, complete and exquisite.

ALL that we can fear, or except against, is his Omission, in forbearing to
compel his Creatures to love, whether they will or no. But in that Liberty
which he gave them, his Love is manifested most of all. In giving us a Liberty
it is most apparent: for without Liberty there can be no Delight, no Honor, no
Ingenuity, or Goodness at all: No action can be Delightful that is not our
Pleasure in the Doing. All Delight is free and voluntary by its Essence. Force
and Aversion are inconsistent with its nature. Willingness in its operation is
the Beauty of the Soul, and its Honor founded in the freedom of its Desire.
Whatsoever it does not desire and delight in, tho the matter of the performance
be never so excellent, the Manner is spoiled, and totally Blasted. Now can we
compel another to desire or delight in any Thing? The Soul in it self has an
Inclnation to, or an a version from every object. The Ingennity and Worth of
the Soul is expressed in the Kindness of its own Intention, in the freedom of
its Desire to do what is Excellent, in the delight it takes to love, its
Goodness is founded. Now tho GOD infinitely hated Sin, yet he gave us an
irrevocable Power to do what we pleased, and adventured the Hazard of that
which he infinitely hated, that being free to do what we would, we might be
Honorable and delightful in doing (freely, and of our own Accord) what is
Great and Excellent. For without this Liberty there can be no Love, since Love
is an active and free affection; that must spring from the Desire and pleasure
of the Soul. It is the Pleasure of a Lover to promote the Felicity of his
object. Whatsoever Services he is compelled to do, he is either merely passive
in them or Cross unto them, they are all void of the Principal Grace and Beauty
that should adorn them, and make them pleasant and satisfactory: men may be
Dead, and moved like stones; but in such causes there is no Love, neither do
they act of themselves, when they are overruled, and forced by another. For
this cause has it pleased God, in order to our Perfection, to make the most
Sublime and Sovereign Creatures all Free, wherein he has expressed the
greatest Love in the World. As we may see by all the Displeasures and Pains it
has cost him, through our Abuse of so illimited and great a perfection. But
where his Love is most Highly and Transcendently expressed, there are we most
prone to suspect it, Nature is so Cross and disorderly. There can be no Wisdom
without a voluntary Act, for in all Wisdom there is Counsel and design. Where
no consultation nor Election precedes, the best operation in all the World is
Blind and Casual. Fortune and chance must have no hand in that which wisdom
Effects: no more then Force and necessity must have in that Goodness, where
all the kindness ought to be in the Intention of the Benefactor. There is
something in it which I cannot explain. It is easily conceived, but will never
(I think) in Words, be expressed. The Will has a mighty hand in all the
Divinity of perfect Goodness. It is the Mind of the Doer that is the principal
object of all our Desire and Expectation.

HAVING for these Causes made his Creatures free, he has forfeited their
Choice, and secured their Determination, as far as was possible. He has done
all that can be devised to make them Love us, and left nothing undone but only
that which was, absolutely necessary that they might Love. They could not Love
us, if they were not left to themselves to do it freely. And their Ability
being provided for, nay an Inclination given to make them willing he has
strictly commanded and enjoined them to Love, by Nature allured them, and
ordered us so, that we might be fit to be Beloved, he has made it sweet and
rational to Love, given them his own Example, and solemnly protested that he
will accept of no Love to himself, but what is accompanied with Love to his
friends and servants, engaged them to Love, or be Eternally miserable. And if
for all this they will not Love, the fault is none of his. All that he has done
to let secure then Love to himself, he has done to secure then Love to us: and
is as much or more concerned in their Love to us, then in that which himself
requires and Expects. Nay he has made it impossible for them (truly) to
Love themselves without doing of it: And if they will neither Love GOD nor
themselves, we may well be despised for Company. He infinitely desires their
Love, and would take infinite Pleasure in the Operation. There is no Way to
make themselves Honorable and Delightful to GOD, but only by Loving us, as his
soul requires. And by all these Inducements and Causes, are we our selves
stirred up to Love, freely to exert the Power of Love to others in like manner.

THAT which yet further commends this Virtue of Love unto us, is, that it is
the only Soul of all Pleasure and Felicity in all Estates. It is like the Light
of the Sun, in all the Kingdoms, and Houses, and Eyes, and Ages, in Heaven, in
Earth, in the Sea, in Shops and Temples; in Schools and Markets, in Labors
and Recreations, in Theaters and Fable. It is the Great Demon of the World,
and the Sole Cause of all Operations. It is evidently impossible for any Fancy,
or Play, or Romance, or Fable to be composed well, and made Delightful, without
a Mixture of Love in the Composure. In all Theaters, and Feasts, and Weddings,
and Triumphs, and Coronations, Love is the Soul and Perfection of all, in all
Persons, in all Occupations, in all Diversions, in all Labors, in all Virtues,
in all Vices, in all Occasions, in all Families, in all Cities and Empires, in
all our Devotions, and Religious Actions, Love is all in all. All the Sweetness
of Society is seated in Love, the Life of Music and Dancing is Love; the
Happiness of Houses, the Enjoyment of Friends, the Amity of Relations, the
Providence of Kings, the Allegiance of Subjects, the Glory of Empires, the
Security, Peace and Welfare of the World is seated in Love. Without Love all is
Discord and Confusion. All Blessings come upon us by Love, and by Love alone
all Delights and Blessings are enjoyed. All happiness is established by Love,
and by Love alone is all Glory attained. GOD Knows that Love uniteth Souls,
makes men of one Heart in a House, filles them with Liberallity and Kindness
to each other, makes them Delightful in presence, faithful in Absence, Tender
of the Honor and Welfare of their Beloved, Apt to obey, ready to please,
Constant in Trials, Patient in sufferings, Courageous is Assaults, Prudent in
Difficulties Victorious and Triumphant. All that I shall need to observe
further, is, that it completed the Joys of Heaven. Well therefore may Wisdom
desire Love, well may the Goodness of GOD delight in Love. It is the form and
the Glory of his Eternal Kingdom. And therefore it is that the Apostle says,
Charity never fails: but whether there be Prophesies, they shall fail;
whether there be Tongues, They shall cease; whether there be Knowledge it shall
vanish away; For we know in part, and we Prophecy in part, but when that which
is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. For now we
see through a Glass, darkly, but then Face to Face; now I Know in part, but
when shall I know, as also I am Known. And now abides Faith, Hope and Charity,
these three, but the Greatest of these is Charity.

CHAP. XX.
Of Prudence. Its Foundation is Charity, its End Tranquillity and Prosperity on
Earth, its Office to reconcile Duty and Convenience, and to make Virtue
subservient to Temporal Welfare. Of Prudence in Religion, Friendship, and
Empire. The End of Prudence is perfect Charity.

CHARITY is that which enters into every Virtue, as a main Ingredient of its
Nature and Perfection. Love is the fountain and the End of all, without which
there can be no Beauty nor Goodness in any of the Virtues. Love to one self,
Love to GOD, Love to man; Love to Felicity, a clear and intelligent Love is the
Life and Soul of every Virtue, without which Humility is but Baseness,
Fortitude but Feirceness, Patience but Stupidity, Hope but Presumption, Modesty
but Simpering, Devotion but Hypocrisy, Liberality is Profuseness, Knowledge
vanity, Meekness but a sheepish Tameness, and Prudence it self but fraud and
Cunning. For as all other Virtues, so is prudence, founded on Charity. He that
is not Good can never be Prudent: for he can never benefit himself, or others.
For the Designs of Prudence are to secure one self in the Exercise of every
Virtue, and so to order the Discharge of ones Duty, as neither to hurt a man's
self in his Life, Estate, Honor, Health, or Contentment, nor yet to fail in
the Attainment of that Worth and Beauty, which will make our Lives Delightful
to others, and as Glorious to our selves, as Beneficial and Delightful.

PRUDENCE has an eye to every Circumstance, and Emergence of our Lives. Its
Design is to make a man's self as Great and glorious as is possible, and in
pleasing all the World, to order and improve all Advantages without incurring
the least inconvenience: To reconcile our Devotion, Obedience and Religion, to
our Interest and Prosperity in the World: To shun all extremes, to surmount all
Difficulties, to overrule all Disadvantages, to discern all Opportunities, and
lay hold on all Occasions of doing Good to our selves. Its Office is to
consult, and contrive, and effect our own Welfare in every Occurrence that can
besal us in the World, and so to mingle all Virtues in the Execution of our
Duties, that they may relieve, and aid, and perfect each other, in such a
manner as at once to be pleasing to GOD, profitable to his Creatures, and to
our selves. To take heed that we do nothing out of Season, nor be guilty of any
Defect, or Excess, or Miscarriage. All the Virtues are United by Prudence like
several Pieces in a Complete armor, and disposed all like Soldiers in an
Army, that have their several Posts and Charges, or like the several Orders
and Degrees in a Kingdom, where there are Variety of Trusts, and services to be
done, and every Man has his Office assigned by the King, and knows his own
work, and is fitted for the same.

FOR as no one man is sufficient for all; the same person cannot be chief
Priest in the Temple, and General in the Army, and Admiral at Sea, etc. So
neither can every Virtue serve for all purposes but there must be several
Virtues for several Ends.

AS the King orders and directs all his Officers and subjects in their
several Places; if they do their duty in their own sphere, the Great End is
attained by all, which no one of them alone, was able to Effect: so here, one
Virtues supplies the Defects of another, and tho every one of them moves in his
own Precincts, and does not at all intermeddle with another charge, yet the
Work is done as effectually as if any one Virtue did all alone.

WHILE all the Virtues conspire to supply what is wanting in each other,
Prudence is the general Overseer, and Governor of all, which, while every
single Virtue is ignorant of what the other are doing, fits and proportions the
subservient Ends, to which every one of these Directs its Care, and Labor,
and Skill, to the Great and last End of all, the entire Perfection and Glory of
the Kingdom. So that here upon Earth Prudence seems to be the King of
Virtues, because we have such a Multiplicity of Concerns and Affairs to look
after, that it is impossible for any one Virtue, but Prudence alone to attend
them all.

THIS discovers the Excellency of Virtue, is
and detected a very great Error to which we are liable, while we are prone
imprudently to expect more from any Virtue than it is able to perform. We are
apt to believe that in every Virtue there is an infinite Excellency. And this
great Expectation of ours is a good opinion of Virtue, yet turns (not
seldom) to its Disgrace and Infamy. For when we look upon any single Virtue,
and see it so Defective, that it scarce answers one of many Ends, because we
find our selves deceived in our expectation of its perfection, and the Service
of that Virtue so Curt and narrow, which we thought to be infinite; we are
distasted at its Insufficiency, and prone to slight it as a poor inconsiderable
Business, infinitely short of our Hopes and expectations. Nay and to be
discouraged from the practice of it, because we find it attended with many
Difficulties and inconveniences, which it is not able to remedy or answer. Thus
are we deterred from Liberality for fear of the Poverty to which it exposes
us; from Meekness, because it encourages all People to trample us under feet,
from Holiness, because it is scorned and hated in the World; from Fortitude and
Courage, because of the Perils and Hazzards, that attend it; from selfDenial,
because of the Displeasures we do to our selves in crossing our Appetite. Nay
sometimes men are so wicked as to hate to be obliged, for fear of the
Inconveniences of Gratitude, and are much Prejudiced against Fidelity, and
Love, and Truth, and Constancy. For all these Virtues can answer but one
exigence, for which they are prepared (especially in our Daily Conversation
with men) and a mistake in one of them does expose us to more Inconveniences,
then its Benefit is worth.

THIS is the Offense: and the Truth is no Virtue is of any Value as cut off
from the rest. We may as well expect all Beauty in a Nose divided from the
Face, or an eye plucked out of the head, all Perfection in an Ear, or a tongue
cut off, all serviceableness in a Hand, or Foot dismembered from the Body; as a
full and perfect Security from any one Virtue whatsoever. If one were
sufficient, the rest would be Superfluous. Man's Empire and Dominion would be a
very narrow Thing, (at least a very Empty and Shallow thing) if any one Virtue
were enough for his Felicity. As his Exigencies and Concerns are Innumerable,
so are his Cares and Endowments, his Honors and Pleasures, his Offices and
Employments, his Virtues and Graces. His Offices and his Virtues must be at
least so many, as will serve to regulate all his Concerns. And if any be so
comprehensive as to cure many Exigencies at the same time, his Virtues are the
Greater in force and Extent, but the fewer in Number. Their perfect sufficiency
is to be measured by the ends for which they are prepared: and their Beauty
Consists, (like that of an Army with Banners) in the Proportion and Symmetry of
the entire Body, the mutual Supplies and Succors they afford to one another,
the Unity of such a Great Variety of things in order to the Attainment of the
same great and ultimate end the full and complete Number of Offices and
inferior Ends, and the Extreme Providence wherewith they are reducible to one
supreme End, which is most High and Excellent. It is enough for the Ear if it
can hear well, tho it is no more able to See, or Taste, than a Stone. it is
enough for the eye to see well, tho it is no more sensible of Noise, then a
Rock or a Tree The Office of the Tongue is to Taste well, of the Nostril to
smell well, etc. and there is no Defect in any of these, because they are every
one sufficient for its own immediate end, and also tempered and united
together, that the rest are Supplies to make up the Defect of every single
Sense and Organ, and altogether perfectly subservient to the whole Man, for
whose sake they were prepared, that he might enjoy the benefit of them all. The
eye sees for the Ear, and the Tongue, and all the rest of the Members of the
Body: the foot supports and carries the eye, the hand defends and feeds the
Eye, the Ear instructs and Counsels the Eye, the Nostrils smell for the eye,
and the Tongue tastes and talks for the Eye, which the eye cannot do for it
self, because it was made to need the assistance of the rest, the eye directs
all these in Liew of their Services, and is of far greater Value, then if a man
had no other Member, but an eye alone. For the Eye is the Light of all the
members, and Great in its Relation to the whole man: It sees for the Ear, and
the Hand, and for all, and is to all these after some manner Beneficial, but
without these would be to no purpose. There is an infinite Excellency in every
Virtue, but it is to be sought in its Relation to all the Rest. It is Good for
nothing in its Place but for that Particular End to which it is assigned, in
attaining that end it is subservient to all other Virtues; and while it serves
all, is aided by all. The other Virtues remedy the inconveniences to which
this does expose us, and being all joined together earry us safely and securely
to our Last end: Because the Influence of every one passes through all, every
single Virtue is Pleasing to God, and a means in its place of our whole
Felicity. The Beauty of all the Virtues is to be sought in Prudence, for there
they meet in an entire Body: their Correspondence and convenience, their
Symmetry and proportion, their Unity and Variety, their full and perfect
Harmony, makes up the features of the Soul, and compleats its Graces, just as
the Diversity of Members perfects the Body. Knowledge gives Light to Love, but
Love gives Warmth and Feeling to Knowledge. Love may perhaps, like a Separate
Soul, dwell in Heaven, alone; and yet even then it must include all Knowledge,
and Righteousness, and Wisdom, and Holiness: for if Love know not how to guide
it self, it will never attain its End, nor be a perfect Virtue. But here upon
Earth it is like the Soul in the Body, it must Eat, and Drink, and see, and hear,
as a thousand Works to do, and therefore stands in need of many Virtues. Love
without Goodness is perhaps a Thing impossible, because it always designs well.
But Love without Wisdom is a Common Thing: for such is all that mistakes its
End. Love without Discretion is a mischievious Thing, Love without Prudence an
Helpless Thing, Love without Courage a feeble and Cowardly Thing; Love without
Modesty an impudent and Troublesome Thing; Love without the Fear of GOD is Lust
and Wantonness; and if the most Great and Glorious of all the Virtues stands in
need of all its Companions. The less and inferior must needs be lame and maimed
without the residue, especially without the Superior.

UPON this account it is, that so much Care and Study goes to the making up of
a Virtuous man. All kind of Virtues must concur to Complete his Perfection. The
Want of any one Denominates a Vice, and makes him Vicious. Nay the Want of any
one destroys the form and Essence of the rest. Virtue is not Virtue but in
order to felicity. If it has lost its force, it has lost its Nature. As a
little Poison turns the best Meat from Nourishment into Poison so does one
Vice cherished and allowed corrupt and viciate all the Virtues in the whole
World. Hence it is that the Philosophers say, all the Virtues are linked
together in the golden Chain of Prudence. And that a Thing is made Good by all
its Causes, Evil by the least Defect. For as one Tooth wanting in a Clock,
makes all the other wheels and Materials Useless; tho the frame be never so
Elaberate and Curious; so does the abscence of the smallest Virtue make void
and frustrate all the residue. A man of a Kind and Bountiful Disposition, that
is loose and intemperate, may ruin his Estate, and dye like a Prodigal and
vain-glorions fool. A stout Courageous person that is proud and debauched will
be little better then a Souldierly Russian, and Live if not like a Thief for
Want of Honesty, yet like a Swaggering Hector for Want of Discreetion. A Man
endued with all Kind of Learnning may be Morose and Covetous, and by one Vice
lose all the Benefit of his Education. A Religious Votary that is Splenetick
and Revengeful, brings a Disgrace upon his whole Profession. But he that is
Wise, and Learned, and Holy, and Just, and Temperate, and Courageous, and Kind,
and Liberal, and Meek, and Humble, and Affable, and Cheerful, and Prudent, and
Industrious, shall be serviceable, and Honorable, and delightful to others,
profitable to himself, and always Triumphant: Especially if he be so discreet
and Prudent, as to make all these Virtues move like the Stars in their Courses,
and knows how to apply and manage their Excellencies in their due and proper
places upon all occasions: for they are so many different in nature that some
of their Influences, will hit every business, and all of them together pass a
Grace and Luster upon each other, so Divine and Heavenly that they will make
their owner Venerable in the Eyes of the World, and correct the Malignity of the
most injurious and Censorious. Which moved our Savior to exhort us to be Wise
as Serpents, Innocent as Doves, to join many Virtues together: And occasioned
that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3. 10.
He that will love Life and see good Days, let him refrain his Tongue from
Evil, and his Lips that they speak no Guile: let him eschew Evil, and do Good,
let him seek Peace and ensue it, for the Eyes of the Lord are over the
Righteous: And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which
is Good? The only sure Way to live happily here upon Earth, is to join all kind
of Virtues together, and to let them work in season according to their several
Natures.

WHAT the efficacy of Prudence is may be seen in friendship, in the Regiment of
States and Kingdoms, in the Rule and government of Private Famelies. He that is
fitted for all these is an Excellent Person.

IT is the office of Prudence in all Estates, to find out the Temper of those
with whom we are to deal; and so to suit the Exercises of all Virtues with
their several Humors, as may make their Operation consistent with our own
Repose, and their Benefit, without infringing our Duty.

IN Friendship it often falls out by reason of the spiritual Sickness of
those to whom we relate, that we must either make shipwreck of Fidelity and a
good Conscience, or run the Hazard of losing our Friend by displeasing, that
we may be Profitable to him. There is no Duty so necessary, as that of free and
faithful Reproof: no Duty so nice as this. A Good man Knows it is incumbent
upon him, and yet is very Averse from the Discharge of it. It is as Troublesome
to himself as to the Person that needs it. It Is difficult to be done well, and
so unpleasant to both. Here Prudence comes in, and devises expedients for all
Inconveniences, and with a strange facility scatters all Doubts and Fears.
Three Things it discovers to be necessary in the foundation of the Business,
Three in the Superstructure, and Three in the Conclusion. He that reproves
well, must show a great respect and Tenderness to the Person, a necessity of
the Discharge of that Duty, his Aversness to it, and how Nothing but his
Perfect Love could make him undertake it. The foundation of the Success is laid
by these Provisions: In the Superstructure, he must consider whether it be best
to be done merrily or severely; by a Brief Hint or a strong Enlargement,
according to the Temper and Degree of the Person. He must choose out the Best
Opportunities, and consult the Honor of him he reproves. And if he be
displeased and grow angry at the Liberty, he must in the Close of all bear it
patiently, surmount it with Courtesy, and pursue him with Kindness. He that
rules his own Passion is Master of another man's: He must needs win him and Melt
him: For no man thus dealt with, is so very a Beast, as to be angry long. Or
the mischief is, when he that reproves miscarrieth in some of these Rules,
especially the last: for there are few so prudent as not to be exasperated with
the Affront that is put upon their kindness and Fidelity, when they are injured
for their Good Will: few so discreet as to consider which way their patience
and Meakness are to be made the Instruments of Amity and Happiness.

IN the Management of Empires, and Kingdoms Prudence has a vast and Mighty
Province to reign in. A Good King when he designs the extirpation of Vice, and
the Establishment of Righteousness and pure Religion, meets with many Rubs and
Obstacles in his Way, all which are sweetly and easily by Prudence removed. His
Great encouragement is the Beauty of Religion, and the Assistance of GOD. For
he Knows very well that Equity and Piety are such Glorious Things, that tho few
practice them as they ought to do, yet all admire them.

GODLINESS, and Honesty, need nothing but to be maintained and assented by the
Prince, when they are once countenanced by authority all the Enemies of
Religion are confounded, and dare not lift up their face against it. Wise an
Holy men may easily be exalted, and are more capable of Exaltation then others.
As they are more faithful when they are in power, they will be more Grateful to
the Prince, and more Obliging to the people; and in all Respects more able to
serve them both. The Good will secure the Throne and exalt the Kingdom.
Prudence in such a work Knows where to begin and where to end, by what steps
and Degrees to proceed, what Instruments to use, how to Oblige, and how to Awe;
whom to Oblige, and Awe; where to remit the Rigor of the Law and where to be
severe. The Truth is Prudence consists most in attempting the Business, for it
will go on, and is ever waited with success when undertaken. A King that is so
Wise as to design and endeavor, the Refurmation of his Nation, must needs be
Prudent. GOD has assured him, The Throne is established by Righteousness. When
it Goes well with the Righteous the City rejoices, and when the wicked perish
there is shouting. By the blessing of the upright the City is exalted, but it
is overthrown by the Mouth of the Wicked.

IN Families the force of Prudence is prodigious. Some men by the assistance of
this Virtue live more happily upon a mean state, then others upon Thousands,
they have more respect among their Servants, more honor among their Neighbors,
more plenty at home, more Authority abroad, more peace and comfort every where,
then Men forty times above themselves in State and Grandeur. Its first care is
to be Wary in the Choice of Servants: For they that are good act well by
Nature, and have little need of Force and compulsion. Its next Business is to
oblige them, which is done by a religious example which instilles a Reverence,
a strict prohibi^^tion of all Debauchery, a sweet and affable Behavior, a
plentiful Provision for their comfortable Subsistence, a prudent connivance at
smaller faults, a Distribution of Rewards as well as punishments for the
Encouragement of their Virtues, a meek and Gentle reproof of their Faults, a
kind acknowledgment of their Good deserts; which is a cheap and easy kind of
payment, yet more Obliging then any Dry gift of Gold or Silver. A prudent man
will so demean himself in his Family, as to make himself cordially beloved of
all: so ordere^ his affairs, that the Services of those about him shall be like
Preferments. By which Means it will first come to pass, that he shall have his
choice of servants, because it will be esteemed a Blessing to be with him: and
in the next place their service will be mingled with respect and Love. They
will befaithful as well for his sake, as their own. In the Midst of all this,
his Prudence will guide him to take a strict account, and to make all his
Servants see, it is impossible to cheat him. Thus in all Affairs Prudence
happily demeans it self; and of this Gift especially is that of solomon to be
understood, A gift is as a precious stone in the hand of him that has it,
whithersoever it turns, it prosporeth. Prove. 17. 8.


FOR the Foundation of all kind of Prudence you must remember, that he that
wins Souls is Wise. Men's Hearts are the stars by whose Influences the
affairs of the World are regulated: they are as our Savor calls them Good or
Evil Treasures; out of which proceeds Murders, Adulteries, Thefts, Slanders,
etc. Or Praises, Honors, Preferments, Riches, Pleasures, all kind of Gifts,
and Benefits: And the prudent man's main Business is to make himself entirely
beloved by all the World. which can never be without great Fidelity, Courage,
Goodness, Prudence and Dexterity. Flattery and Base compliances makes a man
Odious.

THE Last End of prudence is Eternal Happiness and Glory, to which it moves by
crooked Meanders and windings out as occasion requires. It is a strange
Virtue, for its Conversant amongst Terrene and inferior Objects, and yet a far
more Difficult Virtue then Wisdom it self. Wisdom is a more High and Heavenly
Virtue, but its Rules are always fixed, and its objects Stable, where as
Prudence has no set and Stated Rules, but in all occasions, is to mould and
shape it self, it knows not which way, till it comes to Action. Its Paths are
in the Deep and mighty Waters, among Storms and tempests.

CHAP. XXI.
Encouragements to Courage. Its Nature cause, and End. Its Greatness and
Renown. Its Ornaments and Companions. Its objects, Circumstances, Effects and
Disadvantages; how Difficulties increase its virtue. Its Verand Triumphs. How
subservient it is to Blessedness and Glory.

LOVE and Prudence are the parents of Courage. A Feeble Hen, a Timorous Mother,
will Sacrifice their Lives for their young ones. And he that forgets all his
own Interests, divests himself (together with them) of his Fears, and despising
Death first, easily slighteth all other Things. Even a Coward by Nature, is
made more Bold and confident by Skill at his weapon. And he that is always
assured of the Victory, can never be afraid of the Encounter, or the Enemy. He
that is Dexter^ous at the use of all Virtues, and knows how to apply them so,
as ever to come off more honorably, will laugh at the Trial of his own
Innocence and make a Game of Difficulties and Terrors.

VALOR is a right and strong Resolution of the Soul whereby it dare encounter
with any Difficulty and Trouble, for Virtues sake. It is the Armor of the Soul
against all Impressions of Fear, its Effect is an Equal and uniform stayedness
of Mind, against all Dangerous and Terrible Accidents. It contains
Magnanimity, Patience, Constancy, Invincible Resolution, Boldness and Industry
in its Nature. Its cause is the Love of Virtue, and the sense of Honor,
Indignation against any thing that is Base and vile, a High Ambition and desire
of Glory. Its End is the preservation of a Man's person and Honesty, the
Conquest of all Opposition in the Way to Bliss, the Destruction or Subjection
of Enemies, Triumph and Conquest, the Establishment of Peace, the Attainment of
Liberty and Glory. Its Attendants are Prudence, Justice and Temperance, the
principal Ornament and Grace of valor is Worth and Goodness. its Aids and
Encouragements are insinite, it grows Great and High, by making use of all
the Causes of Hope and Confidence. Conflicts and Dangers are the Element in
which it lives, It owns its whole being to them; for without Causes of Fear,
there could be no courage in all Nature. The Knowledge of GOD is the root of
Divine Valor, and Fidelity to his Laws its Commendation. The Assurance of his
Love, and all those Things that serve to beget and confirm it, are subservient
to it. It draws in strength and Encouragements form all Obligations and
Rewards, from all Great and Holy examples, from the Knowledge of its own
Sublimity, from the Greatness of Felicity, from the Omnipotence, and
Omnipresence, and Providence of the Deity, from his Truth and Goodness, and
from all those Things wherein he has manifested his Love above the Heavens.

OF all the Virtues in greatest Estimation, this is most renowned. For its
Prerogative is so great, that it is simply called VIRTUE. Virtue being the Word
to express and signify Valor among the Latins; because the Force and
Efficacy that is in it, is most visible and Apparent, and by that all other
Virtues are secured, vindicated, Exercised, and made Useful. It is styled
Manhood among the English, with a peculiar Emphasis. As is the Essence of a man
was founded in Courage, because his Vigor is emasculated, and his Dignity lost,
that is Effeminate and Timorous; for he is scarce a Man that is a Coward.

WHAT a Glorious and incomparable Virtue this is, appears from the Baseness
and Ineptitude of its Contrary. A Coward and an Honest Man can never be the
same; a Coward and a constant Lover can never be the same; a Coward and a Brave
Man can never be the same: Cowardice, and Wisdom are as incompatible forever,
as Love and Wisdom were thought to^ be of Old. A Coward is always despicable
and Wretched; because he dares not expose himself to any Hazzards, nor
adventure upon any Great Attempt for fear of some little Pain and Damage, that
is between him and an Excellent Atchievment. He is baffled from the Acquisition
of the most Great and Beautiful Things, and non plust with every Impediment. He
is conquered before he begins to fight. The very sight of Danger makes him a
Slave; He is undone, when he sees his Enemy a far off, and wounded, before the
Point of the Sword can touch his shadow. He is all ways a Terror and Burden to
himself, a Dangerous Knave, and an useless Creature.

STRANGE is the Vigor in a^ Brave Man's Soul. The Strength of his Spirit and
his irresistible Power, the Greatness of his Heart, and the Height of his
Condition, his mighty Confiedence and Contempt of Dangers, his true Security
and Repose in himself, his Liberty to dare and do what he pleases, his
Alacrity in the midst of Fears, his invincible Temper, are advantages which
make him Master of Fortune. His Courage fits him for all Attempts, renders him
serviceable to GOD and MAN, and makes him the Bulwark and Defense of his King
and Country.

LET those Debauched and unreasonable men, that deny the Existence of Virtue,
contemplate the Reality of its Excellency here, and be confounded with shame at
their Prodigious Blindness. Their Impiety designs the Abolishment of Religion,
and the utter Extirpation of all Faith and Piety, while they pretend the
Distinction between Virtue and Vice to be merely feigned, for the Awing of the
World; and that their Names have no foundation in Nature but the Craft of
Politicians and the Tradition of their Nurses. Are there no Base fellows, nor
Brave Men in the World? Is there no difference between a Lion and a Hare? a
faint hearted Coward, and a Glorious Hero! Its there Nothing Brave nor vile in
the world? What is become of these Rodomontadoes wits. Where is the boasted
Glory of their Personal Valor; if there be no Defference, but Courage and
Cowardice be the same thing!

HOW empty these Self, but shallow conceited Ranters are, is evident by their
short and narrow measures. They place all Gallantry and Worth in Valor: all
the Virtue of a man they think seated in this: They forget that Policy, and
Learning, and Prudence, and Gratitude, and Fidelity, and Temperance, and
Industry, and compassion and Bounty, and Affability, and Courtesy, and
Modesty, and Justice, and Honesty are Virtues, and that in every one of these
there is something fitting a Man for the Benefit of the World. Nay they have
lost the Notion of Virtue, and know not what it is. Those things by which a man
is made serviceable to himself and the World, they think not to be Virtues, but
imagine^ Chimeraes which they cannot see, and then deny they have any
Existence. A Man is capable of far more Glorious Qualities then one of them:
And his Courage it self may be raised to far higher Ends and purposes then
Buffoons and Thrasonical Heroes can dream of.

IT is to be noted here, that any one of those Things that are called Virtue,
being alone, is not a Virtue. It is so far from aiding and setting us forward
in the Way to Happiness, that oftentimes it proves a Great and intolerable
Mischief, and is never safe, but when it is corrected and guided by the rest of
its Companions. To stir no further then Courage alone: What is Courage in a
Thief, or a Tyrant, or a Traitor, but like Zeal and Learning in a pernicious
Heretic.

YOU may note further, that Goodness is a principal Ingredient in the
excellency of this Virtue, tho it be distinct in its Nature from the Being of
Courage. A brave man will expose his Life in an Honest cause, for the Benefit
and preservation of others, tho not for the Damage or Destruction of any. He
will slight his own safety, and despise his Repose to make himself a Savior,
and a Benefactor. A true Courage holds Virtuous Actions at such a Price, that
Death, Imprisonment, Famine, Dishonor, Poverty, Shame, Indignation, all
Allurements and Temptations are nothing, compared to the Performance of Heroic
Deeds. He exceeds all constraint, and walks in the Glorious Liberty of the
Sons of GOD.

THE last note which I shall offer to your Observation on this Occasion, is
this, (for the Illustration of the Reason and excellency, of GODS
Dispensations:) The Great End for which GOD was pleased not to seat us
immediately in the Throne, but to place us first in an estate of Trial, was the
Multiplication of our Virtues. For had we been seated in the Glory of Heaven at
the first, there had no such Virtues as Patience, and Courage, and Fidelity
been seen, no Faith, or Hope, or Meekness, no Temparance, or Prudence, or self
Denial, in the World. Which Virtues are the very clothes and Habits of the Soul
in Glory. The Graces and Beauties of the Soul are founded in the exercise of
them. Actions pass not away, but are fixed, by the permanent Continuance of all
Eternity, and tho done never so long ago, shall appear before the Eye of the
Soul for ever in their places, be the Glory of their Author, the Lineaments and
Colors of his Beauty, seen by GOD and his holy Angels, and Delightful to all
that love and delight in worthy things. Our Life upon Earth, being so
diversified like a Sphere of Beauty, so variously adorned with all sorts of
Excellent Actions, shall wholly and at once be seen as an entire Object, rarely
and curiously wrought; a Lively Mirror of the Nature of the Soul, and all the
Elements of which it is compounded, all the Parts that conspire in its Symetry,
all the Qualities, Operations, and Perfections that contribute to its Glory,
shall afford wonder and pleasure to all Spectators. While every Soul shall be
concerned more in its Actions then in its Essence; indeed its Essence, (how
ever considerable) is of little or no Value in Comparison of its Operations.
Every Virtue being the Natural Offspring and production of the Soul, in which
its Vigor principally appears, an effect discovering the Nature of the cause,
and the sole occasion of its shame or Glory. For if the Essence of the Soul be
all Power and its power exerted in its operation, the Soul must needs enter
into its Actions, and consequently be affected with all that befalls its
Operation. All Acts are Immortal in their places, being enbalmed as it were by
Eternity, till the Soul revive and be united to them. Then shall it appear in
its own Age, and in eternity too, in its last life enjoying the Benefit of its
first. And in that sense is that voice from Heaven to be understood, which
commanded the Divine to write Blessed are they that die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and
their Works do follow them. Rev. 14. 15.
For the Glory of the place is nothing to us, if we are not endued with those
Glorious Habits, which will make our Souls all Glorious within. We must be
Glorious and Illustrious our selves, and appear in Actions that will Beautify
the Throne to which we are exalted.

THAT these Actions may be Great and Amiable, manifold and Excellent, is the
desire of every soul, the natural Wish and Expectation both of Reason it self
and of self Love.

HOW Glorious the Counsel and Design of GOD is for the Archieving of this Great
End, for the making of all Virtues more complete and Excellent, and for the
Heightening of their Beauty and Perfection we will exemplify here in the
Perfection of Courage. For the Hieght, and depth, and Splendour of every Virtue
is of great Concernment to the Perfection of the Soul, since the Glory of its
Life is seated in the Accomplishment of its essence, in the Fruit it yeildeth
in its Operations. Take it in Verse made long ago upon this occasion.

For Man to Act as if his Soul did see
The very Brightness of Eternity;
For Man to Act as if his Love did burn
Above the Spheres, even while its in its Urne;
For Man to Act even in the Wilderness,
As if he did those Sovereign Joys possess,
Which do at once confirm, stir up, inflame,
And perfect Angels; having not the same!
It does increase the Value of his Deeds,
In this a Man a Seraphim exceeds:
To Act on Obligations yet unknown.
To Act upon Rewards as yet unshewn,
To keep Commands whose Beauty's yet unseen,
To cherish and retain a Zeal between
Sleeping and Waking; shows a constant care;
And that a deeper Love, a Love so Rare,
That no Eye Service may with it compare.
The Angels, who are faithful while they view
His Glory, know not what themselves would do,
Were they in our Estate! A Dimmer Light
Perhaps would make them err as well as We;
And in the Coldness of a darker Night,
Forgetful and Lukewarm Themselves might be.
Our very Rust shall cover us with Gold,
Our Dust shall sprinkle while their Eyes behold
The Glory Springing from a feeble State,
Where mere Belief does, if not conquer Fate,
Surmount, and pass what it does Antedate.
THE Beatifick Vision is so sweet and Strong a Light, that it is impossible for
any thing that Loves it self, (and sees the Face of GOD) to turn away to any
vanity from so Divine and Strong a Blessedness. To Love GOD in the clear and
perfect Light is a cheap and Easy Thing: The Love that is showed in a more
weak Estate to an absent Object, is more remiss perhaps, and Black in
appearance; but far Deeper, if in the Lovers Weakness, and its Objects absence;
it be Faithful to the Death; constantly Solicitous, and Careful to please,
Laborious and Industrious, Wakeful and Circumspect, even and immutable, and
freely springing from its own Desire, not out of bare pleasure; but humble
Obedience to the Laws of its Benefactor. All the Courage which it shows in such
Occasions is more full of Mystery and Divinity then is imaginable; far more
Moving and full of Virtue, while it struggles with Impediment, Disadvantages,
and Difficulties, then if without any such Occasion of showing its Virtue, it
did smoothly and Peaceably proceed in the Highest Rapture. Add to that the
mysteriousness of its Beauty in all the varieties of its Operation, and the
Different Sweetnesses that still appear in all its several Effects upon new
occasions. The very Representation of Love upon the stage, in its Conflicts and
Agonies, produces another kind of sense in the Spectator, then that of
Embraces. It is more Tender and endearing, touches the Soul (of its Beloved
especially) in a more Vigorous and lively manner, it makes all fruitions
(afterward) more precious; by Fidelity, Courage, and Immovable Perfection it
makes the Lover more Honorable, and Effects far more Serious. Alterations in
the Soul, solid Joys and tender Compassions, moving and Bleeding Resentments;
all which, End in satisfactions heightened with more Perfect Complacencies.

THUS you see Courage in the Root made more Glorious by a Persons Exposure and
Abasement. In the fruit and Exercise it is otherwise to be considered. Where
there is no Evil to be endured, or no Strength to be resisted, there can be no
Courage or Virtue at all. Where the conflict is more sharp the Victory is more
pleasant, and the success of the fight is far more Honorable. Where a Giant is
to fight with a Gnat, or a Dwarf, the Disproportion of his Strength takes away
the Pleasure of its Trial, and a Glory of the Combat. There is no Room, or
occasion for its Exercise. And tho it might without any Trial be known by him
that sees all things in their hidden Essences, yet without its Exercise it
remains unexcrted, is wholly vain, especially when there is no occasion for
it in Nature, The Pleasure of the Spectacle springs from its Operation.

TO see a Seraphim surmount one of our Difficulties, in the midst of all his
Strengths and Advantages, is no more then to see a Giant destroy a Gnat, or
subdue a Grass hopper. But in Man there is a certain Degree of strength, that
makes him a fit Match for the appointed Encounter. In the Estate of Innocence
indeed his Enemies and Difficulties were very few, just as many as were needful
for the trial of his Obedience, Gratitude, Fidelity. All the Hardship he was to
undergo, was to cross his Appetite in an Apple, and and tho, he did not as yet
see which way it was reserved for him, to be so Courageous as to hope well, so
Grateful to GOD, as to dare to confide in him, rather let go the Knowledge he
might gain by eating it, than break his Commandment. All other Duties were his
Pleasure and Felicity: here lay his Trial, and his Obedience should have been
crowned with infinite Reward. All which would in some Measure have risen out of
the Duty discharged by him. For by this Resignation and Self-Denial he had
manifested his Obedience, and acquitted himself, and showed his Love, and his
Prelation of his Makers Pleasure above all other Concerns, wherein he had been
approved; and Wise, and Holy, and well pleasing to GOD, he would have put the
Crown upon all Gods Works in accomplishing the End for which he was made, and
been very Delightful to all the Angels: He had been crowned with Glory and
Honor in all their Complacency. If that were too little, because he had then
no enemy but his Appetite, the Dimness of his Sight makes up the Mystery. If
his Clarity was too Great, and there was no Proportion between his Strength and
the Temptation; that proceeded of the Tenderness of GODS Love, which feared to
adventure him too far, and had rather something of Honor should be endangered,
then his Soul lost, or thrust upon the Hazard of too great a Temptation. When
the Angels fell, the Devil was let loose upon man, for the increase of his
Honor and Dominion: Yet like a Dog in his Chain so far, and no further. He had
but one Way, and that was to persuade our first Parents to do what was
forbidden: Persuade he might, and try his Skill to deceive, but could not
compel, nor otherwise afflict, or hurt him in the least. He had not Power so
much as to diminish the least Hair of his Head: yet so Gracious was Almighty
GOD, that upon this Trial of his Prudence and Courage, the Exercise of these
Virtues had been infinitely pleasing to his Eternal Love, because he infinitely
delighted in the Welfare and Preservation of what was so precious to himself,
as a Soul is, that is infinitely Beloved. In that Complacency Adam had found
little less then infinite Glory. It did not become the tenderness of GODS Love
to expose him to any Severer Trial.

For there are certain Periods and fit Bounds,
Which he that passes, all his Work confouds.
But when Adam fell, and brought more Hazzards and Difficulties on himself GOD
might justly leave him to them, for his greater Trial and more perfect Glory.
Now we are more blind and Weak by Nature, yet infinitely Beloved and more
Precious: For the price of the Blood of the Eternal Son of GOD is laid upon the
Soul as an Addition to its interior Value. We are even in our corruption to
Grapple with Sin, and Hell, and Death, and Sickness, and Poverty, and Fear, and
all the Devils, and Afflictions in the World; nay which is worse then all, with
our own Errors, Lusts and Passions, more near and Bitter Enemies: A poor Clod
of Earth is to overcome all the World, to fight (as the Apostle speaks) with
Principallities and Powers, with the Rulers of the Darkness in this World, with
spiritnal Wickednesses in high places. And to return laden with Victories and
Trophies into the Kingdom of Heaven. Nor is the Combat so unequal, but that
there is a mighty Hope and Assurance of triumphing, tho Lucifer and all his
Angels are to be trampled under fect. For under the Disguise of this apparent
Clod, there lies concealed a mighty Great and Celestial Personage, a Divine
and Glorious Creature, Miraculous and M^sterious, even the Image of the Deity,
that can derive Strengths and Succors from all eternity, and being aided by
the Conduct of so great a Captain as our Lord Jesus Christ who has taught us by
his example not to fear, because he has overcome the World, we may safely sing,
O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy Victory! And challenge all the
powers of Heaven, Earth, and Hell to the combat, Which for one single person to
do against all the Creation, is the most Glorious Spectacle which the universe
affords. Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or
Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? as it is
written, for thy sake we are Killed all the day long, we are accounted as Sheep
to the slaughter. Nay in all these things me are nore then Conquerors through
him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor Height nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us, from
the Love of GOD which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

A REMARK.
To be Courageous is the Easiest thing in the World, when we consider the
certain success, which Courage founded on Goodness must needs attain. For he
that makes his Fortitude subservient only to the excess of his Love, has all
the Powers of Heaven and earth on his side, and the Powers of Hell that are
already subdued are the only foes that are to be vanquished by him. To dare to
be Good, is the Office of true and Religious valor. And he that makes it his
Business to oblige all the world, he whose design it is to be delightful to all
mankind, has nothing to overcome, but their error and bitterness, which by
meekness, and Kindness, and Prudence, and liberality will easily be
accomplished. For they all love themselves, and cannot choose but desire those
that are kind and Serviceable to them, and must so far forth as they love
themselves, honor and delight in their Benefactors. So that Courage thus guided
by Prudence to the works of Charity and goodness must surely be safe and
prosperous on earth, its Admirableness and its Beauty being a powerful Charm,
an Invincible Armor.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Temperance in Matters of Art, as Music, Dancing, Painting, Cookery;
Physic, etc. In the works of Nature; Eating, Drinking, Sports and Recreations:
In occasions of Passion, in our Lives and Conversations. Its exercise in
Self-denial, Measure, Mixture and Proportion. Its effects and atchievments.

PRUDENCE gives Counsel what Measure and Proportion ought to be held in our
Actions, Fortitude inspires Boldness and Strength to undertake, and set upon
the Work; but it is Temperance does execute what both of them design. For
Temperance is that Virtue, whereby the actions of Prudence and Power are
moderated, when they come to be exerted.

IT is the Opinion of some, that as Patience respects Afflictions, so
Temperance is wholly taken up in moderating our Pleasures, and has no
employment but in the midst of Prosperities. But since there are certain bounds
which Fear and Sorrow ought not to exceed, Temperance has its work in the
midst of Calamities, and being needful to moderate all our Passions, has a
wider sphere to move in, than Prosperity alone; its Province is more large and
comprehensive, including all estates and conditions of Life whatsoever.

OTHERS there are that admit of its use in all Conditions, but confine it to
one particular employment, even that of enlarging or bounding the Measure of
every Operation: but in real truth it has another Office, and that more deep
perhaps, and more important than the former. For Actions are of two kinds,
either Mixed, or Simple. Where the work is single and but one, it is expressed in
nothing else but the Measure of the Action, that it be neither too short, nor
too long; too remiss, nor too violent; too slow, nor too quick; too great, nor
too little: But where many things are mixed and meet together in the Action (as
they generally do, in all the affairs of our Lives;) there its business is to
consider what, and how many things are to enter the Composition, and to make
their Proportion just and convenient. As in preparing Medicines, the skill
whereby we know what is to be put in, and what left out is of one kind, and
that of discerning how much of every Ingredient will serve the turn, of
another. The skill of Mingling is like the virtue of Prudence, but the actual
tempering of all together, exhibits the virtue of Temperance to the Life,
because it reduces the Skill to its operation. Its End is the beauty and
success of our Endeavors.

OF what use and value Temperance is in our Lives and Conversations, we may
guess by its necessity, force and efficacy on all Occasions.

THE fit mixture and proportion of the four Elements in all Bodies, is that
upon which their Nature, Form and Perfection depends. Too much of the Fire,
too much of the Water, too much of the Air, too much of the Earth, are
pernicious and destructive. There is an infinite wisdom expressed in the Mixture
and Proportion in every Creature.

BEAUTY and Health, Agility, Repose, and Strength, depend upon the due
Temperament of Humane Bodies. The four Humors of Choler, Melancholy, Phlegm, and
Blood are generally known: But there are many other Juyces talked of besides, by
the discreet and accurate mixture of which the Body of a Man, or Beast, is
perfected. Some great inconvenience always follows the excess or defect of
these. Disorder and Disproportion go hand in hand, and are attended by
Sickness, and Death it self.

IN matters of Art, the force of Temperance is undeniable. It relates not only
to our Meats and Drinks, but to all our Behaviors, Passions, and Desires.

All Music, Sawces, Feasts, Delights and Pleasures,
Games, Dancing, Arts consist in governed Measures;
Much more do Words, and Passions of the Mind
In Temperance their sacred Beauty find.
A Musician might rash his finger over all his strings in a moment, but Melody
is an effect of Judgment and Order: It springs from a variety of Notes to which
Skill gives Time and Place in their Union. A Painter may daub his Table all
over in an instant, but a Picture is made by a regulated Hand, and by variety
of Colors. A Cook may put a Tun of Sugar, or Pepper, or Salt in his Dishes:
but Delicates are made by Mixture and Proportion. There is a Temperance also in
the Gesture of the Body, the Air of the Face, the carriage of the Eye, the
Smile; the Motion of the Feet and Hands, and by the Harmony of these is the
best Beauty in the World either much commended, or disgraced. A Clown and a
Courtier are known by their Postures. A Dancer might run into Extremes, but his
Art is seen in the measure of his Paces, and adorned with a variety of sweet
and suitable Behaviors. A Physician may kill a man with the best Ingredients,
but good Medicines are those wherein every Simple has its proper Dose, and
every Composition a fit admixture of good Ingredients. A Poem, an Oration, a
Play, a Sermon, may be too tedious, or too dull, or too feeble and impertinent;
but all its faults are avoided by a fit Temperance of Words and Materials.
Temperance every where yields the Pleasure: And Excess is as destructive as
Defect, in any Accomplishment whatsoever; Virtue being seated in the Golden
Mean; It is by an Artificial limiting of Power that every Thing is made as it
ought to be, Complete and Perfect. All kind of Excellence in every sort of
Operation springs from Temperance. A curious Picture, a melodious Song, a
delicious Harmony by little invisible motions of the Pen or Pencil, or by
Ductures scarce perceivable in the throat, or fingers, finisheth the Work,
where Art is the only power of performing.

WE know that upon Men's Actions far more does depend, than upon Dancing and
Painting: their Wisdom and Virtue, their Honor, Life and Happiness. And
therefore more Care ought to be exhibited in the Actions of which their
Conversation is made up and accomplished. In their Meats and Drinks, and
Recreations, it is apparent, that without Temperance there can be no Success or
Order. The best Wine in the World makes him that is lavish in the use of it a
Sot. The most wholesome and delicious Meat upon Earth by excess in eating, may
turn to a Surfeit. If Sports and Recreations take up all a man's Time, his Life
is unprofitable: their End is lost, and their Nature changed; for instead of
recruiting, they consume ones Strength; and instead of sitting a Man for it,
devour his Calling.

AN exact hand over all our Passions, and a diligent Eye to extravagant
Actions, tend much to our Welfare, Repose, and Honor. Loose and impertinent
Laughter, excessive Cost in Apparel, a Lascivious wandering of the Eyes, an
ungoverned Boldness which turns into Impudence, an extremity of Fear which
degenerates into Baseness, a Morose and sour Disposition, Anxiety and needless
Care, immodest and violent strivings after Things we too eagerly desire,
inordinate Love, too keen and bitter Resentments, a fierce and raging Anger, a
blockish Stupidity, a predominant Humor of Melancholy, too much Sloth and too
much Activity, too much Talk, and too much Silence: all these are diligently to
be ordered and avoided: for upon the right Temperament of these we are made
Acceptable and Amiable, and being so, are full of Authority, and can do within
the compass of Virtue and Reason, all that we desire, among our Friends and
Companions, for our own good, or the benefit of others. And by this means also
we shall be admitted to the society and friendship of Great men, where a Nod or
a Word is able to prevail more, than the strength of Oxen and Horses among the
dregs of the People. But for lack of tempering these Ingredients aright, and as
we ought, we become odious and insupportable, lose all Esteem and Interest, are
rejected, and trampled under feet, as vicious and deformed.

HERE you may observe, that all the qualities and dispositions in Nature, are
ingredients and materials in our Lives and Conversations, and for the most part
it is their Excess or Defect that makes the miscarriage, when we err in the
Measure. There is a certain mixture of Gravity and Cheerfulness, Remisness and
Severity, Fear and Boldness, Anger and Complacency, Kindness and Displeasure,
Care and Carelessness, Activity and Idleness, Joy and Sorrow, Forwardness and
Reservedness; nay of Envy, Pride, and Revenge in every Man's life, as well as of
Selfishness and flowing Courtesy, Plainness and Policy; at least the grounds
of these things, which are neither Virtues nor Vices in themselves, yet make
Conversation transcendently Virtuous, when they are wisely tempered and united
together.

I do not look upon Ambition and Avarice, nay nor upon Envy and Revenge, as
things that are evil in their root and fountain. If they be, Temperance has a
strange virtue in its Nature, for as Chemists make Antidotes of Poisons, so
does this virtue turn the Matter of all these into a Quintessential perfection.
Nay Selfishness and Pride it self escape not its influence. A little touch of
something like Pride, is seated in the true sense of a man's own Greatness:
without which his Humility and Modesty would be contemptible Virtues. In all
baseness of Mind there is a kind of folly and Cowardice apparent; and more
veneration follows an humble Man that is sensible of his Excellency. An aerie
Humor without something of the Melancholy to ballast it a little, would be
light and trifling: And a melancholy Humor without something of Air and
Jovialness in it, too sour and disobliging. Anger without Softness is like
untemper'd Steel, brittle and destructive: and a plyant Humor without some
degree of stiffness, too near to Flattery and Servility. Anger is the matter
and fuel of Courage, and its appearance afar off puts a Majesty into Meekness,
that makes it redoubted. A sorrowful Humor neatly allayed with a mixture of
sweetness, begets a tenderness and compassion in the Spectator, that turns into
a deeper and more serious Love: A little Selfishness puts our Companions in
mind of our own Interest, and makes them perceive that we understand it: which
adds a luster to our Self-denial, and renders our Liberality more safe and
precious. Plainness without Policy is downright Simplicity, and Policy without
Plainness void of Honesty. The one makes us Crafty, and renders us suspected;
the other exposes us, and makes us Ridiculous; but both united are venerable
and prudent. By the appearance of Revenge in its shady Possibility, a man that
never does other than Actually forgive, does oblige for what is past, yet
threaten and discourage from the like Offenses. All these are the Subjects of
Temperance. A little spice of Jealousy and Emulation are advantageous, in the
midst of our Security and Resignation. They give a relish to our Confidence in,
and Prelation of others; and make our Security and Civility taste of our Love
to the Person we prefer, and of our Love to Virtue. There is not one Humor, nor
Inclination, nor Passion, nor Power in the Soul, that may not be admitted to
act its part, when directed by Temperance.

NOR is it unlawful to alter the Natural Complexion by Care and Study. I know
very well, that the Complexion of the Body can hardly be changed by the
strongest Physic: and that Choler, and Phlegm, and abundance of Blood, will,
where they are, have their Natural Course without any remedy. But the Humors of
the Soul are more tractable things; they are all subject to the Will in their
operations: and though they incline, yet they cannot act, but by consent and
permission. I know furthermore that Custom and Habit is a Second Nature: what
was difficult at first, becomes at last as easy in its Exercise as if it were
innate; and that the Soul of a Virtuous man does in process of time act by a
new Disposition. I know further that all virtuous Operations are free and
voluntary; and that the office of Virtue is to correct and amend an Evil
Nature. Let no man therefore be disgusted, because a Madeup man is Artificial,
and not Natural: for when the Conversation is sincerely guided to a good End,
the more free and voluntary it is, it is the more Noble: the more Industry and
Desire a man expresses in attaining all these measures and perfections, they
are the more Virtuous: and the Probity of his Will is to be the more accepted.
For Virtues are not effects of Nature, but Choice. Which how free soever it may
appear, is as stable as the Sun, when founded on Eternal principles: it secures
any Friend in the good and amiable Qualities he desires in his Beloved, as much
as Nature it self could do, though they depend upon the Will, which is capable
of changing every moment. This of Temperance in the Government of our Humors.

I shall add but one Note more, and that is, That a wise man discards the
Predominancy of all Humors, and will not yield himself up to the Empire of any:
for he is to live the life of Reason; not of Humor. Nor will he have any Humor
of his own, but what he can put off and on, as he sees occasion. He will cleave
eternally to the Rules of Virtue, but will comply in his Humor so far as to
make his conversation sweet and agreeable to every Temper. Religion and
Charity, as well as Courtesy and Civility, prompt to this; and where these
concur with his Reason, and favor his Interest, he may well do what S. Paul
taught him, become all things to all men, that he might gain some. And this
encouragement he has, A man by sacrificing his own, may comply with the
satisfaction of all the World: and find his own far more great and honorable,
and sweet and amiable in the End, far more high and blessed, in the Love and
Esteem he shall obtain thereby, than if he had gratified his first inclination
without any respect to the Prelation of others. It will bring him to the
fruition of Pleasures, far greater than those he despised.

TEMPERANGE in the full composition and use of Virtues, is far more sublime,
and more immediately approaches the end of Virtue, than any Temperance in
Meats and Drinks: It is resident nearer the Throne of Felicity, and seateth us
by her. You may see its Task as it is prescribed in Prudence. But for Example
sake we will instance it in Meekness, which of all the Virtues is the most weak
and naked. A meek Spirit receives its Temper, its encouragement, strength, and
facility, from the union and concurrence of all the Virtues. Knowledge is its
light, and Love the principle of its life and motion. Wisdom guides it to the
highest End; Righteousness is a great incentive thereunto, while it teaches us
to esteem the favor of God, and the excellency of those Souls, whose value
makes us tender of their Repose, and prone to honor them with a due esteem,
as well as to desire their peace and salvation. Holiness makes us to delight
in our Duty. Goodness inclines us to sacrifice our own, to the welfare of
others. Mercy leads us to pity their Infirmities, and more to compassionate
their Misery, than to be provoked with their Distemper. Justice makes us to pay
our Saviors Love and Merits, what we owe unto him. All these establish the
habit of Meekness in our Souls. Fortitude does several ways conspire
thereunto, for it makes us to adventure upon any Trouble that we can fall into
thereby, and puts a luster upon us in the act of Meekness. Patience habituates
the Soul to Afflictions, and makes our sense of Injuries easy. Repentance
minds us of other employments than Anger and Revenge, even a contrite Sorrow
for our own Offenses. Humility gives us a sense of our own Unworthiness; and a
willingness to be yet more low than our Enemies can make us. It inclines us
also to confess, that we have deserved far worse, and more bitter Evils; and to
despise our selves; which when we truly do, no Injuries or Wrongs can move us.
Faith carries us up to higher Enjoyments. Hope has respect to the promised
Reward. Our Love toward GOD enflames us with Desire to please him, Charity to
our Neighbor is prone to forgive him. Prudence teaches us to expect no Figs
from Thorns, nor better entertainment from Briars and Brambles: but rather to
right our selves by improving their Wrongs, and to turn their Vices into our
Virtues. Magnanimity despises the Courtship of Worms, and scorneth to place
its rest and felicity in Trifles. Liberality is industrious to find out
occasions of Obliging and Conquering: Contentment is fed by higher Delights,
and beautifies our Meekness with a cheerful Behavior. Magnificence carries us
to the most high and illustrious Deeds, and by very great and expensive Methods
to multiply favors and benefits on our Beloved: for all are our Beloved
whether Friends or Enemies. Temperance it self takes off the stupidity and
sluggishness of our Meekness; puts activity and vigor into it, that it may not
be a Sleepish, but Heroic Virtue; nay, adorns, secures, and perfects it by the
Addition and Exercise of all these; and by giving to every other Virtue its
Form and Perfection, makes them more fit and able to aid and assist us here. It
moderates our Passions, and puts a better dose of Life into our Consideration.
If there be any other Virtue, it is not so remote, but that it may lend us its
helping hand, and be subservient to the perfection of our Love and Meekness.
Which, however simple it may appear in Solitude, is very strong and
irresistible, amazing, as far from Contempt as the Sun is from Darkness, when
it is animated with Courage, and made illustrious by Love, enriched with
Liberality, and made bright by Knowledge, guided by Wisdom to the highest End,
and by Prudence to well-known and advantageous, tho inferior Purposes. When
the Soul appears neither foolish, nor Cowardly, nor base, nor soft, but High
and Magnanimous in its Operation, Meekness is redoubted.

IN the Throne of Glory all the acts of Faith, and Hope, and Repentance shall
be for ever perfected, or swallowed up in fruition. The fruit of all occasional
and transient Virtues shall remain, the Divine Virtues shall be so firmly
united, that in their Act and Exercise they shall be one for ever. By Knowledge
we shall see all that the light of Heaven and Eternity can reveal. By Love we
shall embrace all that is amiable before GOD and his holy Angels. By Wisdom we
shall use the most glorious Means for the attainment and enjoyment of the
highest End; which is GOD in all his Joys and Treasures: in the use of those
Means we must actually enjoy all Blessedness and Glory. Righteousness and
Holiness, and Goodness and Charity shall with all the rest be the Lineaments
and Colors of the Mind, the Graces and Beauties of the blessed Soul: They
shall shine upon its face, and it self shall be glorious in the perfection of
their Beauty, as GOD is. Its Goodness shall make it a fountain of Delights to
all the other Creatures. It shall be all Humility, yet all Enjoyment: Amazed at
its own Nothingness and Vileness, yet ravished with wonder and the height of
its Felicity: For the lower it is in its own Eyes, the more Great does the
Goodness of GOD appear, and the more transcendently Sweet is its Adoration and
Satisfaction. By its Gratitude it sacrifices it self Eternally to the Deity,
and takes more pleasure in his Glory than its own. It is all Godliness and
Contentment. All these Virtues are exercised together in the state of Glory,
not so much by our own Temperance, as by the Infusion of his most Heavenly
Grace, who fills us with his own Fullness and Perfection by way of Reward, and
causing us to enter into his Eternal Rest, makes us to cease from our own
Works, as he also did from his, by inspiring us with his own Wisdom, Life and
Strength, and actuating all our Powers by his own for ever: That we, by virtue
of his Grace infused, may live in the Image of his Eternal Moderation, and
attain that extremity of Bliss and Glory, which he has (exceeding his Almighty
Power) by an exquisite and mysterious Temperance in all his Operations,
Divinely attained.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Temperance in GOD. How the Moderation of Almighty Power guided in its Works
by Wisdom, perfecteth the Creation. How it has raised his own Glory and our
Felicity beyond all that Simple Power could effect by its Infiniteness.

IF Moderation has such happy effects in Men, where the Strength is small, the
Wisdom little, the Matter base, the Occasion low, as in diverse Instances it is
manifest it has: how glorious must this Virtue be, where the Power is
Almighty, the Wisdom Infinite, the SubjectMatter Perfect, the End, and the
Occasion most Divine and Glorious!

IT would seem a strange Paradox, to say, That Almighty Power could not exist
without Infinite Wisdom: but it is infinitely true: For the Wisdom and Power of
GOD are one. No Blind Power can be Almighty, because it cannot do all that is
Excellent. That Power would without Wisdom be Blind, is as evident as the Sun,
the want of that being as great an impediment to its Operations, as the lack of
Eyes is to a Man upon Earth: which so Eclipseth and darkneth his Power, that he
cannot perform those excellent Works, to which Light is necessary. There is no
Blind Power in GOD, and therefore no Power distinct from his Understanding.
Prove. 3. 19, 20.
By his Wisdom he made the Heavens, by his Understanding be established the
Earth. By his knowledge the Depths are broken up, and the Clouds drop down the
Dew. Wisdom is the Tree of Life, which bears all the fruits of Immortality
and Honor. Inartificial Violence will never carry it: There is a Mark to be
hit; and that is in every thing what is most fair and eligible. It may be
missed as much by shooting over it, as by falling short of it. Naked Power
cannot tell what to propose as its Aim and Object. Only that which is able to
contrive, is able to effect its Desire, in the Work it conceives most fit and
excellent for its Power to perform.

IT is a stranger Paradox yet, That Power limited is Greater and more
Effectual, than Power let loose; for this imports, that Power is more
infinite when bounded, than Power in its utmost liberty. But that which solveth
the Riddle, and removes the Inconvenience, is our Assurance of this, That GOD
can do nothing but what is Wise, and that his Wisdom therefore is all his
Power. And of this it follows, That nothing is possible with GOD, but what is
infinitely Excellent: for to do any thing less than the Best is unwise; and
being so, is contrary to the Nature of Wisdom which is his Power.

THE Will of GOD is his Wisdom: By the mere Motion of his Will he Created all
things, and therefore it is his Power: his Power and his Wisdom meet in his
Will and are both the same. By his Word he made the Worlds, and his Eternal
Word is his Eternal Wisdom.

ALL this I speak because it is the Office of Wisdom to propose the most
excellent End, and to pursue it by the most efficacious Means: And because the
Wisdom of GOD will be found one with his Eternal Moderation.

THE utmost End of all that is aimed at, is indeed illimited: It is the Best
and Greatest Thing that infinite and Eternal Wisdom could conceive: but being
out of all measure High and Excellent, it includes innumerable Varieties, that
are shut up in bounds for their greater Perfection. Whereupon it follows,
that GOD has attained a more excellent Effect, than if he had made any one
Thing singly infinite.

HIS Love being Infinite and Eternal, in sacrificing it self in all its Works
for its Objects welfare, became an infinite and eternal Act; Which was not
contented, unless in all its Works, it added Art unto Power, and exerted its
Wisdom in all its Productions. Had it made one Infinite, some are of Opinion,
it had exceeded it self; at least done all that was possible, both for it self,
and for its Object, and that one Infinite, being so Created, must be its only
Object. For more than Infinite what can be? We are apt to think that nothing
can be beside. But to show that GOD is infinitely more than what we conceive,
while we think him infinite; and that we infinitely wrong him, while we limit
his Essence to one single Infinity; Who is every way Infinite, in Himself, in
all his Works, in all his Ways, in all his Counsels, in every one of his
Perfections; He has made every thing either Infinite, or better than so. For
by variety of Effects he has attained an End in the Beauty and Correspondence
of all his Productions, far more Amiable and Divine than any one Effect is
capable of being. All Things by a kind of Temperance are made and ordered in
Number, Weight and Measure, so that they give and receive a Beauty and
Perfection every thing to, and from all the residue, of inestimable value, in
relation to the Goodness and Love of their Creator.

I doubt not but GOD (would his Wisdom have permitted such a thing) could have
made an infinite Object. For wherever GOD is, he is able to Act; and his
Omnipresence is infinite Wisdom and Power; which filling Infinity is able to
exert it self beyond all the bounds of Space in an infinite Manner all at once.
If it so do, it cannot rest in a less Attainment, than one that answers the
measure of its Operation: if it did, that Attainment would be infinitely
defective: For infinite Wisdom could certainly conceive one infinitely Better.
But this I will aver, that GOD has wrought abundantly more, than if he had
made any one single Effect of his Power infinite. He has wrought a Work that
pleases him infinitely Better, and so will it please us, when we are Wise as
he is.

HAD he made any one single Infinite, it must be either Corporeal, or
Spiritual: Be it either, there is room enough in his Understanding and
Omnipresence to receive it. Empty Space is an infinite Object in his
understanding. But for the Glory of his Moderation, it is evident that he has
attained a far greater and more perfect End.

HAD he made an Infinite Object of a Spiritual Nature, it must be a Spirit
endued with illimited Power, to see his Omnipresence and Eternity. And had he
made no more but only this, it is to be feared that the Spectator would be
displeased for want of Objects, in preparing which the Love of GOD should have
glorified his Wisdom and Goodness for its fruition.

IF you say, the Omnipresence and Eternity of GOD had been filled with that
Creature, it is evident that Spirits fill no Room, though they see all things:
and that it had been much better if Objects had been prepared for its Enjoyment.

HAD he prepared any one Corporeal Object for the fruition of that Creature;
any Corporeal Object if infinite in Dimensions, would be wholly useless: nay
pernicious and destructive: for it would exclude all other Beings to which it
might be serviceable, out of place, and have nothing whereto to be beneficial.

IF you say it would be Beneficial to GOD, or to that Spectator, or that
Intelligible Power, that Spirit for whom it was made: It is apparent that no
Corporeal Being can be serviceable to a Spirit, but only by the Beauty of those
Services it performs to other Corporeals, that are capable of receiving them:
and that therefore all Corporeals must be limited and bounded for each others
sake. And for this Cause it is, that a Philosophical Poet said;

As in a Clock, it is hinder'd-Force does bring
The Wheels to ordered Motion, by a spring;
Which ordered Motion guides a steady Hand
In useful sort at Figures just to stand;
Which, were it not by Counter-ballance staid,
The Fabric quickly would aside be laid
As wholly useless: So a Might too Great,
But well proportioned, makes the World complete.
Power well-bounded is more Great in Might,
Than if let loose 'twere wholly Infinite.
He could have made an endless Sea by this,
But then it had not been a Sea of Bliss;
A Sea that is bounded in a finite shore,
Is better far because it is no more.
Should Waters endlesly exceed the skies,
They Would drown the World, and all whatever we prize.
Had the bright Sun been Infinite, its Flame
Had burnt the World, and quite consumed the same,
That Flame would yield no splendour to the Sight,
'Twould be but Darkness though 'twere Infinite.
One Star made Infinite would all exclude,
An Farth made Infinite could never be viewed.
But all being bounded for each others sake,
He bounding all did all most useful make.
And which is best, in Profit and Delight,
Though not in Bulk, he made all Infinite.
He in his Wisdom did their use extend,
By all, to all the World from End to End.
In all Things, all Things service do to all:
And thus a Sand is Endless, though most small.
And every Thing is truly Infinite,
In its Relation deep and exquisite.
THIS is the best way of accommodating things to the Service of each other, for
the fruition of all Spectators.

MODERATION is not so called from Limiting and Restraining, but from Moderating
and Ruling. If Reason require that a Thing should be Great, it is the part of
Temperance to make it so. Where Reason requires it is a point of Moderation to
enlarge and extend Power: Nay to stretch it out to the utmost of its Capacity
if Wisdom order it, is but equal. To moderate Almighty Power is to limit or
extend it, as Reason requires. Reason requires that it should be so limited and
extended, as most tends to the perfection of the Universe.

IF it be more Wise, and more tends to the perfection of the Universe, that
Millions of intelligible Spirits should be Created, and every one of them be
made in finite in Understanding, it shall be done: If not, Temperance forbears.
If Sands and Atoms tend more to the perfection of the World than Angels; there
where they do so, Sands and Atoms shall be made, and Angels there where they
tend more to the perfection of the World. So that every thing is best in its
proper place. Were there no Sands or Atoms there would be no Universe: For the
Earth, the Sea, the Sky, the Air, all Bodies consist of these, either united
or divided. If they had been lest unmade, and Angels had been created in their
Places, there had been no visible World at all.

TO make Visible Objects useful it was necessary to enshrine some Spirits in
Corporeal Bodies, and therefore to make such Creatures as Men, that might see,
and feel, and smell, and taste, and hear, and eat and drink by their Bodies,
and enjoy all the Pleasures of the World by their Souls: And by their Souls
moreover know the Original and End of all, understand the design of all, and be
able to celebrate the Praises of the Creator. For by this means pure Essences
abstracted from all Corporeity might enjoy the World, while they delight in the
glory of its Uses, and especially in those complete and amiable Creatures, for
whom it was prepared.

IT was expedient also to make their Bodies finite, that they might converse
together: but their inward Intelligences of endless reach, that they might see
the holy Angels, delight in them, and by their Love be delightful to them: that
they might also be able to search into the depth of all Things, and enjoy
Eternity; Nay, that they might be fit Recipients for the infinite Bounty and
Goodness of GOD, which is infinite in its Communications.

THAT they should be subject to his Laws, and depend upon him, was necessary in
like manner. For by that distinction an infinite difference was between him and
them: that disparity being laid in the foundation, though the benefits they
receive are altogether infinite, the distance is still the more infinite
between them: for the greater the Bounty is, the deeper is the Obligation. The
Love and Service they owe is infinite, and so is the Gratitude.

TO see all his Glory is to be able to admire it, and to adore it with infinite
amazement and joy, which is to be completely just unto it, and perfectly
blessed.

There is but one thing more, wherein Almighty Power was by Wisdom infinite to
restrain it self for the perfection of his Kingdom: And that is to create them
free, that were made to enjoy it. Not to determine their Wills by a fatal
Necessity, but to make their esteem and fruition of GOD and his Works their
duty, and to leave them to themselves for the more free and voluntary discharge
of their duty. For by that means, it would make them capable of Rewards and
Punishments, in the Righteous distribution of which the nature and the glory of
a Righteous Kingdom consists.

THUS did GOD by infinite Moderation, and by a sublime and transcendent
Temperance prepare his Kingdom, and make every Thing exquisite in his whole
Dominion, to the praise of his Glory, and the satisfaction of his infinite and
Eternal Reason. The similitude of which Reason being the Essence of the Soul,
all these things fall out for our glory and satisfaction also.

NOW if GOD himself acquired all his Joys by Temperance: and the glory of his
Kingdom is wholly founded in his Moderation: We may hope that our Moderation
and Temperance in its place, may accomplish Wonders, and lead us to the
fruition of his, by certain steps and degrees, like those that are observed in
the Womb toward Manhood, and in the School of our Childhood toward perfect
Learning.

TOO much Rain, or too much Drought will produce a Famine: the Earth is made
fertile by a seasonable mixture of Heat and Moisture. Excess of Power may
overwhelm, but moderation is that which perfecteth and blesses the Creation.

ALMIGHTY Power is carried far beyond it self, or really is made Almighty, by
virtue of that Temperance, wherein Eternal Wisdom is eternally Glorified.

IF any thing be wanting to the full demonstration of the perfection of GODS
Kingdom, it is the consideration of his Delay: for we are apt to think, he
might have made it Eternally before he did. But to this no other Answer is
necessary (though many might be made) then that all Things were from all
Eternity before his Eyes, and he saw the fittest Moments wherein to produce
them: and judged it fit in his Wisdom first to fill Eternity with his
deliberations and Counsels, and then to beautify Time with the execution of
his Decrees. For were there no more to be said but this, his Empire is eternal,
because all Possibilities, nay and all Impossibilities are subject to his Will.
But if it be confessed that Eternity is an everlasting Moment, infinite in
duration, but permanent in all its parts, all Things past, present, and to
come, are at once before him, and eternally together. Which is the true Reason,
why Eternity is a standing Object before the Eye of the Soul, and all its
parts, being full of Beauty and Perfection, for ever to be enjoyed.

IF any man be disposed to cavil further, and to urge, that GOD might at the
very first have placed Angels and Men in the state of Glory, the Reply is at
hand: that GOD very well understands the beauty of Proportion, that Harmony
and Symmetry springs from a variety of excellent Things in several places,
fitly answering to, and perfecting each other: that the state of Trial, and the
state of Glory are so mysterious in their Relation, that neither without the
other could be absolutely perfect: Innumerable Beauties would be lost, and many
transcendent Virtues and Perfections be abolished, with the estate of Trial, if
that had been laid aside, the continual appearance and effect of which is to
enrich and beautify the Kingdom of GOD everlastingly: That GOD loves Man far
more than if he had placed him in the Throne at first, and designeth more Glory
and Perfection for him, than in that dispensation he could have been capable
of: all which springs from the Restraint of his Power in some occasions, that
it might more fully be exerted in the perfection of the whole, and of all
things that were possible to be made, might end in the Supreme, and most
absolutely Blessed.

Therefore upon the whole Matter, we may conclude with solomon, Happy is the
man that finds Wisdom, and the man that gets Understanding. For the
Merchandise of it is better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the Gain
thereof than of fine Gold. She is more precious than Rubies, and all the things
thou can desire are not to be compared with her. Length of Days is in her
right hand, and in her left hand Riches and Honor. Her Ways are ways of
Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. She is a Tree of Life to them that
lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that retains her. The LORD by
Wisdom has founded the Earth, by Understanding has he established the
Heavens. My Son, let not them depart from thine Eyes: Keep sound Wisdom and
Discretion. Wisdom is the principal Thing: therefore get Wisdom, and with all
thy Getting get Understanding. For the same Wisdom which created the World, is
the only Light wherein it is enjoyed.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Patience. Its Original. How GOD was the first Patient Person in the World.
The Nature, and the Glory, and the blessed Effects of his Eternal Patience. The
Reason and Design of all Calamities. Of Patience in Martyrdom. The
extraordinary Reward of ordinary Patience in its meanest obscurity.

PATIENCE is a Virtue of the Third estate; it belongs not to the estate of
Innocence, because in it there was no Affliction; nor to the estate of Misery,
because in it there is no Virtue: but to the estate of Grace it appertains,
because it is an estate of Reconciliation, and an estate of Trial: wherein
Affliction and Virtue meet together. In the estate of Glory there is no
Patience.

THIS is one of those distastful Virtues, which GOD never intended. It received
its bitterness from Sin, its life and beauty from GOD's Mercy. If we dislike
this Virtue we may thank our selves, for we made GOD first to endure it. And if
all things are rightly weighed, no Creature is equal to GOD in Sufferings. We
made it necessary for the Eternal GODHEAD to be Incarnate, and to suffer all
the Incommodities of Life, and the bitter Torments of a bloody Death, that he
might bear the Penance of our Sins, and deliver us from eternal Perdition.

THE Corporeal Sufferings of our Savior are not comparable to the Afflictions
of his Spirit. Nor are there any Sufferings or Losses so great as those we cast
upon the GODHEAD. He infinitely hates Sin, more than Death: and had rather be
Crucified a thousand times over, than that one Transgression should be brought
into the World. Nothing is so quick and tender as Love, nothing so lively and
sensible in resenting. No loss is comparable to that of Souls, nor any one so
deeply concerned in the loss, as GOD Almighty: No Calamity more peircing, than
to see the Glory of his Works made Vain, to be bereaved of his Desire, and
frustrated of his End in the whole Creation. He had rather we should give him
the Blood of Dragons, or the cruel Venom of Asps, to drink, than that we should
pollute our selves, or his Kingdom with a Sin. Nay it were better (if without a
Sin it could be done) that the whole World should be annihilated, than a Sin
committed. For the World might be Created again with ease, and all that is in
it be repaired with a word: but a Sin once committed, can never be undone; it
will appear in its place throughout all Eternity: Yet is so odious, and so
infinitely opposite to the Holiness of GOD, that no Gall or Wormwood is
comparable thereunto. To see his Beloved blasted, his Love despised, and his
Son rebellious; to see the most amiable Law in the World broken, his Kingdom
laid waste, and his Image defaced; to see all his Labor marred and spoiled,
his Benefits slighted; and his infinite Goodness abused and undervalued; all
Obligations imposed, and all Rewards prepared, in vain: is worse than to see
ones Palace on fire as soon as it is builded, or ones Wife smitten with
Leprosy, and ones only beloved Son run mad. For a Child to trample on his
Fathers Bowels is nothing in Comparison! He therefore that feels what he made
GOD to endure, what Grapes of Sodom, and Clusters of Gomorrah he offered to his
Teeth, how evil a thing and bitter it is, to forsake GOD, how the Scripture
says, He was grieved at the Heart, when he saw the Corruption and Impiety of
the Earth; and how the Sorrow inflicted was so sore, as to make him repent that
he had made Man in the World: he surely will be more concerned at the Evil he
has done, than at any Evil he can otherwise suffer: and his Godly Sorrow (as
Moses's Rod did eat up all the Rods of the Egyptians) will devour all other
Sorrows whatsoever.

TO consider that GOD was the first Patient Person in the World, must needs
sweeten the Bitterness of Patience, and make it acceptable unto us: to consider
that we alone brought it upon our selves, and may thank our selves for the
folly of its Introduction, must make us out of very Indignation against our
selves contented to suffer, and in pure Justice, quietly to digest it: but to
consider yet further, that GOD, by bearing our Offenses with Patience, took off
the trouble of them from us, and by refusing to ease himself of the greatness
of his displeasure, in pouring it back again on our own heads, digested it so,
as to turn our eternal Torments into transitory Woes, nay into his own Agonies
and Pains on the Cross: this will help our Reason to rejoice at our light
Afflictions which are but for a moment; especially since they work out for us a
far more exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory.

The first Impression of that abominable Mischief, which occasioned Patience in
GOD, made it a Calamity, but not a Virtue. Detestation and Grief in themselves
are but Sufferings, and mere Sufferings have no Virtue, nor so much almost as
Action in them. If his detestation and grief had broken out in Impatience, we
had all been destroyed: Anger and Fury had been poured down upon us. That which
made it a Virtue was the great and mighty Continence, whereby it was kept in,
and governed for all our Benefit. For it was full of Goodness, and Compassion,
and Mercy, and Love; and that was indeed the virtue of Patience, in which so
much Magnanimity and Government did appear, so much Wisdom, and Stedfastness,
and Immutability; and upon this virtue of that Act whereby he retained his
displeasure, the whole Kingdom of Grace, and the glory of his Mercy and Love,
and the blessedness and exaltation of his Church is founded, it depended upon
it, and from his Patience it proceeded.

PATIENCE then is that Virtue by which we behave our selves constantly and
prudently in the midst of Misfortunes and Troubles: That Virtue whereby we do
not only forbear to break out in Murmurings and Repinings, or support our
selves from sinking under Afflictions, or suppress our Discontentments, and
refrain from Anger and Disquiet; but whereby we retain our Wisdom, and the
goodness of our Mind, notwithstanding all the Confusions and Disorders that
would disturb us, and demean our selves in a serene and honorable manner,
surmounting the Pains and Calamities that trouble us, and that would otherwise
overwhelm us. While we move in a quick and vigorous manner under our Burden;
and by a true Courage improve our Afflictions, and turn them into the Spoils of
Invincible Reason.

IT is an easy Observation, that Troublous Times are the Seasons of Honor,
and that a Warlike-Field is the SeedPlot of great and Heroical Actions. Men
that live in quiet and peaceful Ages, pass through the World as insensibly as
if they had all their days been asleep. Hazards, and Calamities, and Battles,
and Victories fill the Annals with Wonder, and raise Great Men to an eminent
degree of Fame and Glory. It is Saint Chrysostoms opinion, That a Man shows far
greater Bravery, that grapples with a Disease, or surmounts his evil Fortune,
or behaves himself with Courage in distress, bears the burning of his House, or
the loss of his Goods, or the death of his Children with an equal Spirit, in
the midst of all Calamities retains his Integrity with Humility and Patience,
and Blesses GOD, cheerfully submitting with Resignation to his Will, and shows
himself Constant in all Estates: then he that in the midst of a prosperous
Condition, builds Hospitals and Temples, shines in the exercise of Bounty
and Magnificence, and obliges all the World without any other Expense than
that of his Moneys. A Pelican that feeds her young ones with her Blood, is a
more Noble Bird than an Eagle, that fills her Nest with Ravine, though taken
from the Altar: For though that of a Sacrifice be the more Sacred food, that of
ones own Blood is more near and costly.

TIMES of Affliction are Seed-times for a future Harvest. We are made perfect
through Sufferings: though the Way be mysterious, and the Manner almost
incomprehensible, whereby the Sufferings we endure conduce to our Perfection.
Consider the Patience of Job, how great a spectacle his Sufferings made him to
GOD, Angels, and Men, and how glorious he became by his Patience to all
Generations.

THIS Virtue has an Appearance, by reason of its Objects and Materials, so
cross to its disposition, that if any thing be difficult in all Nature to be
understood, Patience is one, it being a thing of the most deep and obscure
value. Its Nature and Effect seem contrary to each other. It raises a Man by
depressing him, it elevates by overwhelming, it honors by debafing, it saves
by killing him. By making a Man little and nothing, it magnifies and exalts
him. No Act of Love is attended with such bleeding Circumstances as that of
Cruel Resolution, in exposing our selves to all Calamities that can befall our
Souls, for our Beloved's sake. It is the glory of the good Shepherd that He
lays down his life for the Sheep. And for this very Cause is our Savior
honored by GOD and Men, because being in the form of GOD he made himself of no
Reputation, but took on himself the form of a Servant, and died the most cursed
Death of the Cross, for the sake of the World: Wherefore, says the Text (that
is, For which very Cause) GOD also has highly exalted him, and given him a
Name which is above every Name, that at the Name of JESUS every Knee should
bow, of things in the Heaven, things in the Earth, and things under the Earth.
Nor is this Gift of GOD so purely Arbitrary, but that it has a foundation in
Nature. Angels and Men do not bow their Knees only because they are commanded;
but because they see Reason to incline them to bow their Knees. There is
something in our Saviors Nature, Action, and Merit, that deserves it at their
Hands. The wonderful Love wherewith he loved us is the Root, the Soul, and
Glory of his Passion. It is wonderful as it made him willing to become Death,
and Sin, and a Curse for us. But the height of our Ecstasy is in the Reality of
his Passion, and in the full accomplishment of all its Purposes.

IT is the Virtue of Love which is infused into Patience, and the chief Elixir
of its Nature is founded in the Excellency of a Spirit, that Suffers for
another sake. This therefore we ought ever to remember, That Patience when it
is a Virtue springs from Love; and that this Love is chiefly toward GOD, and
next that to our Neighbor. When we suffer any thing for GOD's sake, or for our
Neighbors good, we suffer in a Wise and Virtuous manner. And the Honor which
follows such a Suffering is the Crown of Glory which it shall for eyer wear. It
is a vain and insipid thing to Suffer without loving GOD or Man. Love is a
transcendent Excellence in every Duty, and must of necessity enter into the
Nature of every Grace and Virtue. That which makes the solid Benefit of
Patience unknown, its Taste so bitter and comfortless to Men, is its Death in
the separation and absence of its Soul. We Suffer, but Love not. Otherwise Love
to the Person for whose sake we Suffer, is its own support and comfort; It
makes the Action to be valuable; and insuses a sweetness into all the
Affliction it can make us endure: A Sweetness answerable to the Welfare and
Pleasure, which is either caused or secured, to our Object thereby. Our own
growth in the approbation and esteem of the Person we love, is the desirable
Greatness which we covet to attain, which can no way be confirmed, and
increased so perfectly, as by Suffering for him. For our Fidelity, Sincerity,
Reality, Vigor, Life and Industry, can never be made so fair and apparent, as
when we pursue our love, and are carried by it to the utmost extremities of
Death and Misery, and labor through all disasters, Persecutions, and
Calamities, to obey, and honor, and please, and glorify the Object which in
times of quiet we pretend to love. In an easy and prosperous Estate there is
little difference between Friendship and Flattery: but he that sticks firm in
Calamity is a Friend indeed. The Trial of Love consists in the difficulties it
endures for its Beloved.

AND for this Cause it is, that GOD will expose us to so severe a Trial:
himself ordaining some Trials in the beginning; but permitting more, when we
brought them upon our selves: Many also he suffers to come, which we daily
bring upon our own heads by our own folly. Some he inflicteth perhaps himself,
for the Chastisement of our Sins, or the Medicine of our Souls, to abate our
Confidence, and to excite our Care; to awaken us out of our Lethargy, and to
quicken our sense both of our Miserable Condition, and our need of his Favor:
to humble our Rebellion, to heal and purge our Corruptions, to moderate our
Passions, to heighten our Penitence, to abate our Pride, to increase our Ardour
in Devotion and Prayer; to make our subjection to, and dependence on him Clear;
to stir us up to a more strict Examination of our selves in our Thoughts,
Words, and Deeds, least some Jonas or other should lie in the Ship, that
continues the Tempest upon us; to enkindle our Compassion toward our afflicted
Brethren, and to inflame us with more perfect Zeal, and Love toward GOD; It is
like Wormwood that imbitters the Nipple, to wean us from the World, and augment
our desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ; to make us groan after our
Eternal Rest, and long for the glorious Liberty of the Sons of GOD. Sometimes
he suffers Tribulations and Trials to come upon us, by the Perverseness of
Men, who being left at Liberty in their dominion over the World, are the
principal Authors of all the Troubles and disorders in it. To know the several
springs and sources of Affliction is very expedient; for our Patience and
Contentment much depends upon it. A confused Apprehension makes us blind, but
a clear Sight distinguishes between the Will of GOD, and the Corruption of
Nature; which in our selves and others is the principal Cause of all our
disturbances.

BE it by which of all these Occasions it will, or for which of all these Ends
it can befall us, it is evermore to increase our Conquest, and to make us like
the King of Sufferings pure and perfect. And the Consideration of Gods
overruling Power and Providence therein, which makes all these Things work to
together for our good, begets a grateful Admiration in us as well as a sense
of our dependence on his Goodness, which increases the Fear of GOD in our
Souls, and animates us with great Wonder, that he should put his hand to touch
the vile and evil Offspring of our Sin, and turn all into Good, and make it to
rest in our Exaltation and Glory by his Wisdom and Mercy.

Concerning GOD's End in bringing, and permitting all these Evils, the
Scripture is very frequent: It was one of Job's Job. 7. 17, 18.
Contemplations, What is Man that thou should magnify him, and that thou
should set thine Heart upon him; and that thou should visit him every
Morning, and try him every Moment? Man is magnified by his Trials. It was
David's Observation, The LORD is in his holy Temple, the Lords Throne is in
Heaven: his Eyes behold, his Eyelids try the Children of Men. Psalm. 11. 4, 5.
The Lord tries the Righteous; but the Wicked and him that loves Violence his
Soul hates. It was Daniel's Prophecy, Dan. 11. 35.
And some of them of Understanding shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and
to make them White, even to the time of the End. GOD himself expresses his own
Resolution, I will bring part of them through the fire, and will refine them as
Silver is refined, and try them as Gold is tried: They shall call on my Name
and I will hear them; I will say, It is my People, and they shall say, The LORD
is my GOD. Zech. 13. 9.


THE meaning of all which places is, not as if GOD did stand in need of all
these Trials to know what is in us: for he knows what is in Man from all
Eternity: before these Trials come he searches the Heart, and tries the
Reins, and discerns the thoughts, and purposes of the Soul: He sees every
Inclination in the seed, every Grace in the secret habit of the Mind, and every
Virtue in the Root. They lie in the Seed, but yet he sees a mighty difference
between quiet Habits, and effectual Operations: for they differ as much as the
Root and the Blossom, or the Blossom and the Fruit. For Virtues to lie asleep
in the Soul, and for Virtues to be actually and fully perfected, is as great a
difference, as for a Vine to be of a generous kind, and prone to bear, but to
remain without Fruit; or for a Vine to bring forth, and to be really laden with
all the bunches of Grapes that beautify it. The Excellency of its Nature is
vain, if its Fruit be never brought to perfection. There is a Glory in the Work
which the silent Habit is incapable of. It is the Life and Vigor of the
Exercise in which all the brightness consists. Even Diamonds in the Quarry
are dull and dim, they receive not their full luster and Price till they are
cut and polished. GOD has placed our Trial in sharp and bitter Atchievments,
because the Love that is expressed in Agonies and Conflicts, acquires other kind
of Beauties, that produce more violent and strong Effects in the Mind of the
Spectator, and touch the Soul of the Beloved with more quick and feeling
Compassions, than any Love expressed in Ease and Pleasure can pretend to. And
since all our Felicity consists in the violence of Gods Love, his great and
perfect Sense of our Beauty and Honor, his full and complete delight and
Complacency, all that which affects his Soul with more feeling and tender
Resentment, must be (...) and precious to us, because (...) us more dear and
precious to him. We live in him more effectually, and feel our selves rooted in
his Love, and crowned with his Com^lacency more abundantly, by how much the
more his Affection bleedeth, and his Pity (which enbalms Love) is stirred up to
receive us. And therefore it is that St. Peter says, We are in Heaviness for a
season through manifold Temptations, that the Trial of our Faith being much
more precious than of Gold that perishes, though it be tried with Fire, might
be found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory at the Appearing of Jesus Christ. 1
Pet. 1. 6, 7.
For as we have before observed, Love is more effeminate in a condition of
Repose, where all is sweet and easy to our selves: there can be no Fidelity,
no Patience, no Fortitude, no actual Sacrificing of all our Contentments and
Joys to our Beloved; no Victory over Death, and Hell, and the Grave; no Self
denial, no Endearments springing from the same, no Prelation of our Object
above our selves; no loss of Honors, Riches, Liberties, and Lives for our
Objects sake; and the more of this is Actually done, the more of Necessity must
be the following Joy of Glory. And for this Cause does St. Peter further exhort
us, Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery Trial which is to try
you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: But rejoice, in as much as
ye are Partakers of Christ's Sufferings: that when his Glory is revealed, you
may be glad also with exceeding Joy. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ
happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you: on their
part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorisied. 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13,
14.


THIS he speaks I confess of the Persecutions, Imprisonments, and Flames of
the Martyrs, that were Gods Friends, and the Champions of his Truth in the
World, that in vindication of his Glory endured the Brunt, and received all the
Arrows of his Enemies in their Bosom: but no Man has cause to be discouraged.
For where the greatness of the Cause is wanting, and the apparent glory of the
Consequence unseen, as for the most part it is in all our common and ordinary
Afflictions; there to submit to the Will of GOD, where there is so much
Baseness as in Poverty: in Sickness where there is so much Unprofitableness, in
private Losses and Calamities where there is so much Obscurity; merely because
it is GODS pleasure, and because in other things he has infinitely obliged us,
and prepared infinite and eternal Joys: this has a peculiar Grace in its
nature, that in ordinary occurrences makes our Patience more rare and
extraordinary.

THERE are a thousand things that may be said on this Theme, which for brevity
I must pass: All I shall observe further is this, that as the Scriptures open
the design of Patience, and unvail the face of its mysterious Nature, so does
Reason show its invincible height and magnanimity. Patience is a Virtue whose
element is in Miseries: it owes its being to Pains and Calamities: were there
no Miseries there could be no Patience. Evils are its Play-sellows, it feeds
upon Sorrows, thrives by Disadvantages, grows rich by Poverties, it must needs
surmount all Opposition, for the more it endures the greater it is. It is
impossible for Calamity to hurt Patience: it is made perfect by Sufferings. The
more Patient a man is, his Patience is the greater: and the greater his
Patience is, the more strong and mighty his Soul is. Nothing can quell him, or
discourage, or overcome him, that is complete in Patience.

He dares all things, because he can endure them. All his Martial and Heroical
Virtues are knit together in Patience. Fortitude it self cannot win the field
without it. The most valiant Soldier is but useless if he cannot endure Hunger
and Cold, and Heat and Rain, the Incommodities of a March, and lying on the
Ground. While he that endures all things marches on, and gets into the Field
where Fidelity, Love, and Loyalty are tried, and cannot be hindered from the
full and perfect exercise of all these, because he can bear any thing that is
Evil, he can do any thing that is Good: He will fight the good fight with
alacrity, and at last most certainly attain the Crown of Righteousness, and the
Kings favor.

CHAP. XXV.
The Cause of Meekness is Love. It respects the future beauty and perfection of
its object. It is the most supernatural of all the Virtues. The Reasons and
Grounds of this Virtue in the estate of Grace and Misery. Its manifold Effects
and Excellencies. Of the Meekness of Moses and Joseph.

MEEKNESS is a Virtue of the Third estate, as well as Patience. Patience
regards Calamities, Meekness Wrongs. The Injuries that we receive from others
are its proper Objects. It springs from Love, and tends to its Continuance and
Preservation. It has something peculiar in its nature, because it gives
Immutability to Goodness, and makes our VVorth not to depend on other Men's
Deservings, but our own Resolutions. It is fed by Charity, and like a grateful
Off spring of a Parent so amiable, helps in its greatest extremity to preserve
it from its extinction. For all Love by Nature dies into Distaste, when its
Object has offended: because Approbation which is the first step to Esteem,
and Esteem it self which is a degree to Love, have no other Object but
something that is Amiable and sit to be beloved. And again every thing that is
divested of all its excellence, is common, if not odious; and lost to our
Affection, till Meekness comes in to rescue and save both our Love and it from
its dismal Period. Its End is the Recovery of what has offended, Hope and
Possibility are the foundation of its exercise, Prudence is the Guide by which
it is conducted to the satisfaction of our desire in the restitution of Amity
between us and our Adversary.

WHERE there is no hope that the Beauty of what we love may be regained,
Meekness has lost its Virtue, and with that its Existence. For if it be
impossible that an evil Person should ever be reclaimed, it is to no purpose to
be Meek. He that can never be delightful more, is utterly useless: Meekness
therefore which derives its solidity and Power from its End, is in such cases
utterly abolished. For this cause it is that we are to esteem our Saviors
Blood the ground on which it stands: since all Nature without his Incarnation,
Death, and Passion, could never restore a Sinner to the possibility of becoming
Just and Amiable. This Virtue of Meekness respects the future beauty and
perfection of an Object that is now deformed; It must needs be of transcendent
excellency, since the practice of Meekness is acquired by the price of our
Saviors Blood, and the first step to its exercise did cost the death of the
Eternal GOD.

IT is a transcendent Virtue, because the Means of introducing it are wholly
Supernatural. It carries us above all the Rules of Nature, above all the
Principles of Reason, and in that is Supernatural. For by Nature we are to be
Just and Good toward all that are Innocent, and kind to all those to whom
Kindness is due: but it is not by Nature either just or rational that we should
love any Creature that is Evil: and how GOD came to do it first is an infinite
VVonder. Though now since he has first loved us who are so vile, nothing is
more natural than that we should do as we are done unto, imitate him, and love
those whom our Creator loves: With Pity and Benevolence at first, that we may
hereafter do it, with full Complacency.

That Humane Nature is infinitely exalted by the Incarnation of the Son of GOD
is confessed by all those, that believe the Article of our Saviors
Incarnation: that the Earth how base soever it seem is the Bride of Heaven, its
own quiet, and the embraces of the Skies, that make it the Center of all their
Revolutions, sufficiently demonstrate; though few have observed that the Sun,
and Moon, and Stars dance attendance to it, and cherish it with their
Influences, while the Earthly Globe is crowned with the fruits of all their
secret Endeavors: That the Angels desire to look down into those things which
are done upon Earth, the very Scriptures witness; and yet for all this, it
would seem a New Doctrine, to affirm, that there are Works done here upon
Earth, that are by Nature above the Heavens. Yet all the Operations of the Holy
Ghost, and all the Good Works of Holy Men, especially the Meekness and Patience
of the Saints, which are founded on the greatest Miracle in all Eternity, the
Love of GOD to Sinners, and his stupendous Humiliation and Passion for them,
are set upon a higher Basis than all Nature, except that of the Deity, can
afford unto us. Which Note I make for our greater encouragement to the works of
Meekness. They are all in Nature like the effects of our Saviors Love to the
greatest Offenders. Reason it self is now exalted above all its former heights,
and there is reason since our Saviors Death for the doing of that which no
reason, before he designed to forgive, and Die for us, could lead us to do.

THAT GOD through the greatness of his Love may condescend to such Indignities
as are infinitely unworthy of him, we see by the Examples of Kings and Queens,
and other high and delicate Personages, that suffer their Children to play with
their Beards, and the Tresses of their Hair; which other Persons dare not so
much as approach, for the Reverence of their Majesty. I have oftentimes admired
at the mean Offices to which Parents stoop, and the familiar boldness they
permit to their little ones, to play with their Scepters, and Crowns, and Eyes,
and Lips, with their Breasts and Jewels, and sometimes to pinch and hurt, nay
and to defile them too, being unmindful of their State, and far from all Anger
and Indignation. But the free Pardon, and desire of the Return of vicious and
debauched Children, is a nearer instance and resemblance of GOD, in his
gracious Dispensations, who suffers all Nature still to attend us, though we
continually profane his Name, and injure his eternal Goodness by our manifold
Transgressions.

THIS Example of GOD, who died for Sinners, in the Person of his Son, and
prayed for his Tormentors, in the very Act of their Cruelty and Rage against
him, should prevail with us to esteem all those whom he owneth for his
Children, as our own Bowels, and to be as Meek and Condescending to all
Mankind, as Parents are to their Children. The Reasons of which Duty are thus
variously offered to our Consideration.

TO labor after those Principles only that establish our repose in the estate
of Bliss and Innocence, is utterly impertinent to our present Condition. --

Were all the World a Paradise of Ease
'Twere easy then to live in Peace.
Were all men Wise, Divine, and Innocent,
Just, Holy, Peaceful, and Content,
Kind, Loving, True, and always Good,
As in the Golden-Age they stood;
'Twere easy then to live
In all Delight and Glory, full of Love,
Blessed as the Angels are above.
But we such Principles must now attain,
(If we true Blessedness would gain)
As those are, which will help to make us reign
Over Disorders, Injuries,
Ingratitudes, Calamities,
Affronts, Oppressions, Slanders, Wrongs,
Lies, Angers, bitter Tongues,
The reach of Malice must surmount, and quell
The very Rage, and Power of Hell.
NO Man but he that came down from Heaven, and gave his Apostles power to
handle Vipers, and drink any deadly thing without harm, was able to reveal the
way of Peace and Felicity to Sinners. He, and only he that made them able to
trample Satan under feet, and taught them how to vanquish all the Powers of
Darkness, was worthy to make known this glorious mystery of Patience and
Meekness, by which in despite of all the Corruptions and Violences in the
World, the holy Soul of a quiet Man is armed and prepared for all Assaults, and
so environed with its own repose, that in the midst of Provocations it is
undisturbed, and dwells as it were in a Sanctuary of Peace within it self, in a
Paradise of Bliss, while it is surrounded with the howlings of a terrible
Wilderness. Nothing else can make us live happily in this World, for among so
many Causes of Anger and Distaste, no man can live well, but he that carries
about him perpetual Antidotes and Victories.

THERE are two things absolutely necessary to Felicity, outward Security, and
inward Contentment. Meekness is as it were the Bulwark of Security, which
though it be as soft as Wool, is able with more success to repel the violence
of a Cannon-Bullet, than the rough temper of a Stone-Wall. Contentment springs
from the satisfaction of Desire in the sight and fruition of all Treasures and
Glories: And as the Sun is surrounded with its own Light, the felicity of the
Enjoyment becomes its own fortress and security. For he that is thoroughly
Happy, has so much work to do in Contemplation and Thanksgiving, that he cannot
have while to be concerned with other men's disorders, he loves his Employment
too well to be disturbed, and will not allow himself the thoughts of Revenge or
Anger.

IN two things Meekness is greatly profitable to a Man's self, Possession and
Triumph. He that permits the Tumult of the World to enter into his Soul, and
suffers the Temple of the Holy Ghost to be defiled with Rage and Anger, makes
it an unfit habitation for the Blessed Spirit. Doves will not dwell in
PigeonHouses disturbed, or haunted with Vermin: nor can Felicity be enjoyed but
by serene and quiet Thoughts that are full of tranquillity. For where Envying
and Strife is, there is Confusion and every evil Work. But the Wisdom that is
from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated,
full of Mercy and good Fruits. And the fruit of Righteousness is sown in Peace
of them that make Peace. Which must of necessity precede fruition, as Triumph
follows.

WERE I for my life to interpret that Text of our Savior, The Meek shall
inherit the Earth, I should in the first place say, that every Knowing man may
enjoy the beauty and glory of the whole World, and by sweet Contemplations
delight in all the abundance of Treasures and pleasant Varieties that are here
upon Earth, especially since by the Ordinance of Nature all men are to be his
peculiar Treasures. This he might do, I say, did all men love him, and fill the
World with Glory and Virtue. But since all is confounded by their perverseness
and disorder, his Fruition is utterly lost, unless he will forgive all
Injuries, and by the virtue of Meekness maintain the quiet of his own Soul in
the midst of their distempers. The Meek man is not fretted nor disturbed, but
may enjoy all Still: and the unspeakable Joy which all the Glories of Gods
Kingdom do afford him, shall make him more meek, and able also to pacify, and
rule, and heal the minds of his Enemies, and even by the love of Sinners to
recover his Right, and ancient Fruitions.

TO be able to live at quiet, and enjoy the felicity of Heaven and Earth,
notwithstanding all the attempts of our Enemies, makes them mad when they see
they cannot fret us, and so by Consequence a greater Revenge is seated in
Meekness than in Revenge it self. For our Repose is their punishment and
torment that hate us. Their vexation falls on their own head, when they see
they miss of their aim, and cannot molest us: but it is a joy to see our selves
seated in a throne of Repose, clean out of their reach; it breeds a kind of
triumph and ovation in the Soul. The secret Conscience of its own Power is a
glory and satisfaction unimaginable.

HE that masters his own Passion is master of another man's, and seldom falls
into those Broils and Inconveniences that are the destruction of ungoverned
and hasty Spirits. Which made Solomon to say, He that is slow to Anger is
better than the Mighty, and he that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a
City.

HE that troubles his own house shall inherit the Wind; he that is nice and
exquisite in exacting all Faults shall never be beloved. They are disobliging,
angry, testy men that are hated; and the Revengful that do frequently fall into
mischief. But to be kind to the Unthankful and the Evil, and to deal with all
men better than they deserve, is the way to be beloved by the worst of men, and
admired by the best.

MEEKNESS is the retreat of Goodness, and the only force in the rear of
Liberality. He that does one Injury after forty Kindnesses, blots out the
memory of all his Courtesies; and he that revenges an Injury seems to do one.
For he that did the Wrong, seems innocent to himself, because he felt it not;
and seeming innocent takes the Revenge as an undeserved Injury, and is lost for
ever. Now some Injuries we must expect from our best Friends, which are always
lost for want of Meekness. So are all the Benefits we do, unless we will
forgive as well as give. But an Injury forgiven is forgotten by him that did
it, and the Friendship continues at the expense, and to the honor and comfort
of the Pardoner, as if no Offense had ever been committed: Nay if afterward he
comes to see the Candor of his abused Friend, he that did the Injury loves him
better than before, because he pardoned the Wrong.

MEEKNESS as it preserves Friendship between two, makes Goodness invincible and
unalterable in one. He shall not be good long whose Goodness depends on
others Merits. He is a miserable weak man, that is of an Exceptious humor; he
is a trouble to his own flesh, and subject to the power of every Wasp, whether
he shall be good or no. He is quickly stopped in his Careir of Virtue, and easily
turned out of the way, that is apt to be infected with another Malice. He
carries no Antidotes about him, and for want of a Preservative, is in danger of
the Contagion. Meekness is a means of the health of the Soul: a Passionate man
being all over sore, is covered with hot and angry Boils, which cannot be
touched.

IT preventeth much mischief in Families. An occasion of Anger is like a spark
of Fire, it is of great Consequence where it falls. If it falls into barrels
of Gunpowder, it blows up the World; if into green Wood or watery places, it
does no harm. Penitent Tears, and the verdure of Humility prevent such flames,
and extinguish the quarrel. If Wildfire be thrown, I will put it out with my
foot, and not by throwing it back, give my Enemy the advantage of retorting it
upon me. A soft Answer pacifieth much Wrath, but virulent Speeches are a
fireball tossed to and fro, of them that love Death.

BY Revenge a man at best can but preserve himself, by killing his Enemy: but
Meekness well managed, destroys the Enmity, preserves the Person, and turns the
Enemy into an excellent Friend.

MEEKNESS is not the way to Peace, and Repose, and Victory only, but to Honor
and Glory. As it is the strength, it is the Glory of a man to pass over a
Transgression: He that is lightly angered is quickly lost, and a fickle Friend
is not worth a farthing. A straw and a feather shall forfeit all the
Obligations in the World, in some Tempers. Nay he that is Revengful, is a
dangerous Person: and with an Angry man thou shall not go: He has the Plague
upon him and is prohibited Company. All this is dishonorable. But a man that
is a resolved and stable Friend, that cannot be altered, that will not change,
though he be wronged, but forgive, and pity, and continue to serve and love his
Friend, though he shows him some dirty Tricks; he that will surmount all by
invincible Kindness, he is a solid and weighty Friend, a rare Treasure, and
exceeding precious. Neither my Errors nor Misfortunes are able to change him
that loves me purely because he will love me. When his Excellency be found
out, he will more highly be esteemed, not only by his Friend, but by all that
see him, and note his Fidelity.

INJURIES well forgiven are the highest Obligations in the World: especially if
a man has been injured after many Benefits. A Friend that will so oblige, is
more to be preferred than the Gold of Ophir

MEEKNESS brings a man into respect with his Servants, and into power with his
Neighbors. Anger rests in the bosom of Fools, but Meekness has always this
advantage, it is attended with Wisdom, and other Virtues, as Goodness and
Courage. A man that is prudent in Affairs, and zealous of Good Works, faithful
in retaining Secrets, and so full of Love, that he is prone to do all manner of
Good with industry, and is courageous to expose himself to any Hazard, for the
benefit of his Neighbors, shall keep his Servants in awe, and yet be beloved
of them: He shall be able to do among his Neighbors what he pleases: He shall
when known well, become the Father of all their Families, they will entrust
their Wives and Children in his hands, as I have often experienced; their Gold,
their Bonds, their Souls, their Affairs, their Lives, their Secrets, Houses,
Liberties, and Lands; and be glad of such a Friend in whom to be safe, and by
whom to be assisted. But though you have all the Virtues in the World, the way
to the use of them is blockt up without Meekness: for your Neighbors are few
of them Wise, or Good; and if you will be provoked by Injuries, you will upon
forty occasions so distaste them, that they will never trust you. You will look
as like a Trifle, a Knave, or a Fool, as one of them; and be as very a Mad man.
He that will not do good but to deserving Persons, shall find very few to do
good to. For he shall not be acquainted with Good men, and from doing good to
others he excludes himself. But if all his other Virtues are beautified by
Meekness, such a man will be like an Angel, and live above all his Neighbors,
as if he were in Heaven. So that Meekness is his real exaltation. And this made
our Savior to cull out that Blessing for the Meek, The Meek shall inherit the
Earth. Even here upon Earth the Meek are they that are most blessed.

TO do good to an innocent Person is Humane, but to be kind and bountiful to a
man, after he has been Injurious, is Divine. Philanthus gave Laws and Countries
to the Parthenians, and was disgraced and banished: But he did them good after
the Injury, and was made their God, as Justine records.

THE very nature of the Work encourages us to its exercise, because it is
GOD-like, and truly Blessed. But there are many other Considerations moving us
unto it.

Mankind is sick, the World distempered lies,
Oppressed with Sins and Miseries.
Their Sins are Woes; a long corrupted Train
Of Poison, drawn from Adam's vein,
Stains all his Seod, and all his Kin
Are one Disease of Life within.
They all torment themselves!
The World's one Bedlam, or a greater Cave
Of Madmen, that do always rave.
The Wise and Good like kind Physicians are,
That strive to heal them by their Care.
They physic and their Learning calmly use,
Although the Patient them abuse.
For since the Sickness is (they find)
A sad Distemper of the Mind;
All railings they impute,
All Injuries, unto the sore Disease,
They are expressly come to ease!
If we would to the Worlds distempered Mind
Impute the Rage which there we find,
We might, even in the midst of all our Foes,
Enjoy and feel a sweet Repose.
Might pity all the Griefs we see,
Anointing every Malady
With precious Oil and Balm;
And while our selves are Calm, our Art improve
To rescue them, and show our Love.
But let us not fondly our own selves beguile;
If we Revile' cause they Revile,
Our selves infected with their sore Disease,
Need others Helps to give us ease.
For we more Mad then they remain,
Need to be cut, and need a Chain
Far more than they. Our Brain
Is crazed; and if we put our Wit to theirs,
We may be justly made their Heirs.
But while with open eyes we clearly see
The brightness of his Majesty;
While all the World, by Sin to Satan sold,
In daily Wickedness grows old,
Men in Chains of Darkness lie,
In Bondage and Iniquity,
And pierce and grieve themselves!
The dismal Woes wherein they crawl, enhance
The Peace of our Inheritance.
We wonder to behold our selves so nigh
To so much Sin and Misery,
And yet to see our selves so safe from harm!
What Amulet, what hidden Charm
Could fortify and raise the Soul
So far above them; and control
Such fierce Malignity!
The brightness and the glory which we see
Is made a greater Mystery.
And while we feel how much our GOD does love
The Peace of Sinners, how much move,
And sue, and thirst, entreat, lament and grieve,
For all the Crimes in which they live,
And seek and wait, and call again,
And long to save them from the pain
Of Sin, from all their Woe!
With greater thirst, as well as grief we try,
How to relieve their Misery.
The life and splendor of Felicity,
Whose floods so over flowing be,
The streams of Joy which round about his Throne,
Enrich and fill each Holy One,
Are so abundant, that we can
Spare all, even all to any Man!
And have it all our selves!
Nay have the more! We long to make them see
The sweetness of Felicity.
While we contemplate their Distresses, how,
Blind Wretches, they in bondage bow,
And tear and wound themselves, and vex and groan,
And chase and fret so near his Throne,
And know not what they ail, but lie
Tormented in their Misery
(Like Madmen that are blind)
In works of darkness nigh such full Delight:
That they might find and see the sight,
What would we give! that they might likewise see
The Glory of his Majesty!
The joy and fullness of that high delight,
Whole Blessedness is infinite!
We would even cease to live, to gain
Them from their misery and pain,
And make them with us reign.
For they themselves would be our greatest Treasures
When saved, our own most Heavenly Pleasures.
O holy JESUS who did for us die,
And on the Altar bleeding lie,
Bearing all Torment, pain, reproach and shame,
That we by virtue of the same,
Though enemies to GOD, might be
Redeemed, and set at liberty.
As thou did us forgive,
So meekly let us Love to others show,
And live in Heaven on Earth below!
Let Us prize their Souls, and let them be our Gems,
Our Temples and our Diadems,
Our Brides, our Friends, our Fellow Members, Eyes
Hands, Hearts and Souls, our Victories,
And Spoils and Trophies, our own Joys!
Compared to Souls all else are Toys!
O JESUS let them be
Such unto us as they are unto thee
Vessels of Glory and Felicity!
How will they love us, when they find our Care
Brought them all thither where they are!
When they conceive, what terror it is to dwell
In all the punishments of Hell:
And in a lively manner see,
O Christ, eternal Joys in thee!
How will they all delight
In praising thee for us, with all their might,
How sweet a Grace, how infinite!
WHEN we understand the perfection of the Love of GOD, the excellency of
immortal Souls, the price and value of our Saviors Blood, the misery of Sin,
and the malady of distempered Nature, the danger of Hell, and the Joys of
which our sorest Enemies are capable, the Obligations that lie on our selves,
and the peace and blessedness of so sweet a Duty. Compassion it self will melt
us into Meekness, and the wisdom of knowing these great things will make it as
natural to us as Enjoyment it self, as sweet and easy, as it is to live and
breath. It will seem the harshest and most unnatural thing in the World to
sorbear so fair, so just, so reasonable, so divine a Duty.

NOR is it a small comfort, that the more vile our Enemies are, the more price
and luster is set upon our Actions. Our Goodness is made by their Evil, the
more eminent and conspicuous: we improve their Injuries and turn them into
Benefits, we make a Virtue of Necessity, and turn their Vices into Graces, make
them appear more abominable and vile if they continue obstinate; and the
greater their Perverseness is, the more great and honorable is our Virtue. It
was the praise of Moses, that the Man Moses was the Meekest man upon all the
Earth, yet one passionate expression lost him so much in the esteem of GOD,
that it hindered his entrance into the Land of Canaan. How great an Instrument
he was nevertheless in the Conduct and Felicity of the Jews, and how much he
profited the whole Nation by his Meekness Sacred story does record. How Joseph
also dealt with his Brethren, how he saved all the Family of Israel in the Root
by his Meekness, and by Meekness purchased an everlasting Name of Glory and
Renown, all Christian Ages and Nations understand, where his Praises are
celebrated to this day: And the benefit thereof is spread abroad, and
propagated throughout all Generations for evermore.

CHAP. XXVI.
Humility is the basis of all Virtue and Felicity, in all Estates, and for ever
to be exercised. As Pride does alienate the Soul from GOD, Humility unites it
to him in Adoration and Amity. It makes infinite Blessedness infinitely
greater, is agreeable to the Truth of our Condition, and leads us through a
dark and mysterious way to Glory.

MEEKNESS respects others faults; Humility and Penitence our own. But
Humility is more large than Penitence, and is a distinct Affection of another
nature. Penitence is an exercise of the Affection of Sorrow, and that only for
Sin. Humility is an acknowledgment of all our Vileness; it respects our
Original out of nothing as well as our Guilt, our Weakness and Unworthiness,
our dependence upon another Will, our Debt and Obligation, the duty of
Obedience and Allegiance which we owe, and all the naked Truth of our
Condition. It confesses our homage, and is sensible of our Smallness and
Subjection. All that a man has received it distinguishes from what he is of
himself: And its Fruits or Effects are suitable to its Nature. It is the Virtue
by which we think basely of our selves, and behave our selves in a lowly and
submissive manner. It makes us soft and pliant as Wax, susceptible of any form
that shall be imposed on us by our Benefactour, and prone to Gratitude. It is
accompanied with a high and mighty sense of Benefits received, and made Noble
by the honor which it inclines us to return to GOD and Man for all the
goodness which they show unto us. It is of incomparable use in our Felicity,
because it magnifies our esteem of all our happiness and glory.

IT is not through Ignorance, or want of good Will, that we speak nothing of
Vices, the woeful deformity of which being exposed to view, near the excellence
of Virtue, would put a greater luster on all their brightness: but the
abundance of matter which Virtue it self does afford, forbids us to waste our
Time and Paper in the description of their Contraries. The glory of their
nature being so full and perfect in it self, that it needs not the aid of
those additional Arts, which labor to set off the dignity of imperfect things
by borrowed Commendations. And besides this, the mischief and inconveniency of
every Vice is so great and manifold, that it would require a distinct and
entire Volume to unfold the deformity of their destructive nature, so fully as
their baseness and demerit requires. It is sufficient therefore here to
observe, that Pride is of all other things most odious to GOD; because it
puffs up the Soul with Self-conceit, is forgetful of its Original, void of
all Gratitude, and prone to Rebellion. Is it not an odious and abominable
thing, for a Creature that is nothing in himself to fly in his Creators face,
and to usurp a dominion over it self to the apparent wrong of its Sovereign
Lord, to rob its Benefactor of all the glory of his Bounty, to renounce and
deny all dependence on him, and to forswear its homage and allegiance, to
ascribe all its Glories to it self, and abhor all sense of honor and
gratitude, to look upon it self as the sole original and author of all its
Greatness, and to be dazzled so with the brightness of its condition, as to
forget the true fountain of it, the goodness and the love of him that first
raised him to all that Treasure and Dominion: to dote on its own Perfections
without any reflection on the Bounty of him that gave them! All this is to act a
Lie, and to be guilty of apparent Falsehood: It is as full of Fraud and
Injustice as is possible: and as full of Folly as it is of Impiety. For Pride
aims at the utmost height of Esteem and Honor; and is fed by its own beauty
and glory: yet foolishly undermineth and blasteth the Person it would advance
with the greatest baseness and shame imaginable, it devours the Beauty which
ought to seed it, and destroies the Glory in which it delights. The higher,
the greater, the more perfectly glorious and blessed the Person is that is
exalted, his Ingratitude (which is the dregs of Baseness) is the more black and
horrid, and provokes the greater detestation. It forfeits and renounces all the
Delight which the goodness of its Lord and Benefactor affords, it cuts off
the Soul like a branch from the root that gave it life and verdure, it tends
all to division, alienation and enmity, it turns that Complacency, which is its
only bliss, into wrath and indignation: And whereas it delights in nothing more
than appearing highly amiable in the eyes of all Spectators, it falls into
contempt and extreme disgrace before all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth,
that look upon it, and behold its Unworthiness. No Toad has so much deformity,
or poison, or malignity as Pride, in its nature. It is the ruin of all that is
great, and turns the brightest of the Seraphims into the most abominable of
Devils.

NOW if Pride be so pernicious, and be by nature (though a mere Fantasy) so
destructive: what shall Humility be which is full of truth and reality! How
forcible, how divine, how amiable, how full of truth, how bright and glorious,
how solid and real, how agreeable to all Objects, how void of error and
disparity, how just and reasonable, how wise and holy, how deep, how righteous,
how good and profitable, how mightily prone to exalt us in the esteem of GOD
and Man! How agreeable to all its Causes and Ends, how fit and suitable to all
the circumstances of Man's Condition! I need not say more: It bears its own
evidence, and carries Causes in it that will justify our Saviors words, He
that humbles himself shall be exalted. He that is puffed up has but a
counterfeit glory, but Humility is full of solid glory. Its beauty is so
amiable that there is no end of counting its proportions and excellencies. The
Wise man that saw into the nature of all things very clearly, said long before
our Savior was born, Pride goes before a fall, but before Honor is Humility.
He that exalts himself must needs be humbled, because the Colors are
envenomed wherewith he painteth his face, which in a little time is discerned,
and at the very first instant the Painting begins to turn into a Canker.

THE Amiableness of Humility appears by its Excellency; on these two the
greatness of its beauty and success is founded. It is so agreeable to all the
principles of Nature, and Grace, and Glory, to all the desires of Angels and
Men, to all the designs of GOD himself, and to all the interests and concerns
of the Soul, that it cannot but be the most advantageous Virtue in the whole
World. It is strange that a man should look with the same Eye upon two Objects
so infinitely distant and different from each other. But at the same time he
sees GOD and Nothing, Heaven and Earth, eternal Love and Dust to be his
Original. Self-love and Justice, Wisdom and Goodness, Joy and Gratitude have
the same Objects, but look upon them in a several manner: and are very
differently affected with them. Humility regards all Objects high and low, Good
and Evil: but with a peculiar remark and notice of its own. It takes them in in
another light, and discerns them all with another kind of sense. It is in some
manner the taste of the Soul. Their Truth appears to the eye of Knowledge,
their Goodness is apprehended by the ^^fe of Love, the perfection of their
serviceableness to the most perfect End is discerned by Wisdom, the benefit
which all Spectators receive is the delight of Goodness, the incomprehensible
depth and mysterious intricacy of their frame and nature is the peculiar Object
of our Wonder and Curiosity: they help our Faith as they show a Deity, and the
truth of all Religion and Blessedness. As they are the gifts of GOD they are
the provocations of Gratitude, and as they are aggravations of Sin they are
respected by Repentance. As they are the means of our Glory, and our proper
Treasures, they are the Objects of Contentment; but Humility looks upon them in
relation to its Unworthiness, compares them with it self and its own deserts,
and admires the disproportion that is between them. It uses them all as
grounds of a deeper and profounder Lowness in the esteem which it ought to have
of it self, and as the incentives to Love and Gratitude; which it paies in the
depth of a more profound Acknowledgment and Adoration.

THIS habit or affection of the Soul is not inconsistent with its Joy and Glory
(as by some foolish people, that are by Ignorance and Errors far from GOD, is
generally supposed) but highly conducive and subservient to its perfection. It
gives us the tenderest and greatest sense; it passes through all things,
embraces the Poles, and touches all Extremes together. The Center it self is
but the middle of its profundity: it has a Nadir beneath it, a lower point in
another Heaven, on the other side opposite to its Zenith. In its own depth it
contains all the height of Felicity and Glory, and doubles all by a mystery
in Nature. It is like a Mirror lying on the ground with its face upwards: All
the height above increases the depth of its Beauty within, nay turns into a
new depth, an inferior Heaven is in the glass it self; at the bottom of which
we see the Sky, though it be not transplanted, removed thither. Humility is
the fittest Glass of the Divine Greatness, and the fittest Womb for the
conception of all Felicity; for it has a double Heaven. It is the way to full
and perfect Sublimity. A man would little think, that by sinking into the Earth
he should come to Heaven. He does not, but is buried, that fixes and abides
there. But if he pierces through all the Rocks and Minerals of the inferior
World, and passes on to the end of his Journey in a strait line downward, in
the middle of his way he will find the Center of Nature, and by going downward
still begin to ascend, when he is past the Center; through many Obstacles full
of gross and subterraneous Darkness, which seem to affright and stifle the
Soul, he will arrive at last to a new Light and Glory, room and liberty,
breathing-place and freshair among the Antipodes, and by passing on still
through those inferior Regions that are under his feet, but over the head of
those that are beneath him, finally come to another Sky, penetrate that, and
leaving it behind him sink down into the depth of all Immensity. This he cannot
do in his Body, because it is gross and dull, and heavy and confined: but by a
Thought in his Soul he may, because it is subtle, quick, aerie, free, and
infinite; Nothing can stop or exclude it, oppress or stifle it. This local
descent through all the inferior Space and Immensity, though it brings us to
GOD, and his Throne, and another Heaven full of Joys and Angels, on the other
side the World; yet is it but a real Emblem of the more spiritual and
mysterious flight of Humility in the mind. We all know that the way to Heaven
is through Death and the Grave, beyond which we come to another Life, in
Eternity: but how to accommodate this to the business of Humility, few
understand. By this Virtue we are inclined to despise our selves, and to leave
all the garish Ornaments of Earthly bliss, to divest our selves of the
splendors of Temporal prosperity, and to submit to all Afflictions, Contempts
and Miseries, that a good Cause can bring upon us. In the eyes of other men we
are beneath their feet, and so we are in our own, till we are gone a little
further: but on the other side of all this Baseness, we find a better Life in
Communion with the Deity. For as much then, says St. Peter, as Christ has
suffered for us in the flesh, 1 Pet. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4.
arm your selves likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in the
flesh has ceased from sin: That he no longer should live the rest of his time
in the flesh, to the lusts of Men, but to the will of GOD. For the time past of
our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we
walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquettings, and
abominable Idolatries; wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them
to the same excess of Riot. There is a motion from Vice to Virtue, and from one
degree of Grace to another: by which we leave the fantastic World, with all
its Shows and Gauderies; and through many Afflictions and Persecutions, come to
the real and solid World of Bliss and Glory.

WHAT hand Humility has in leading us through all Afflictions, and in
facilitating the way of Pressure and Calamity, I need not observe; I shall note
the Error which men incur, by their Weariness and Haste; who because they do
not immediately see the Bliss of Humility and Patience, if they do not curse,
yet they boggle at all Calamity. These men ought to be informed, that the
middle of the Way is not the place of Rest and Perfection. They must pass
through all these things to the further Regions of Clarity and Glory. Men are
not to stick in Calamities themselves: but if Humility lead them to suffer all
Indignities with Patience, it must lead them further to the bottom of their
estate and condition; to the true light, and to the clear and perfect sight of
their own Vileness: In which they shall see their Original, their Misery, their
Sin, their Glory; their GOD and themselves, their Bliss and their Forfeiture,
their Recovery and their Savior, their Hope and Despair, their Obligations in
the height of eternal Love and Bounty, and their shame and confusion in the
depth of their Apostasy and Ingratitude; their infinite demerit, and GODS
infinite Mercy; the riches of free Grace, and their own Unworthiness: And in
all these, the length, and breadth, and depth, and height of the Love of GOD
which passes Knowledge, that they might be filled with all the Fullness of GOD.

HUMILITY makes men capable of all Felicity. All deep Apprehensions and great
Resentments, all extents and distances of things, all degrees of Grace and
Virtue, all Circumstances that increase the guilt of Sin, all Adorations,
Prostrations, Admirations, Debasements, Thanksgivings, Praises, Exaltations,
are founded in Humility. All the Fullness of all Estates, all Honor and
Obedience, all Devotion and Worship, all the beauty of Innocence, all the
deformity of Sin, all the danger of Hell, all the cost of our Redemption, all
the hatred of our Stupidity and Perverseness, all the hope of Heaven, all our
Penitence and Grief, all our Fear and Expectation, all our Love and all our Joy
are contained in Humility: there they are expressed, there they are exercised:
There they are enlarged, and beautified in like manner: There they grow deep,
and serious, and infinite: there they become vigorous and strong; there they
are made substantial and eternal. All the Powers of the Soul are employed,
extended and made perfect in this depth of Abysses. It is the basis and
foundation of all Virtue and Gratitude whatsoever. It is in some sort the very
fountain of Life and Felicity it self. For as nothing is great but in
comparison of somewhat less; so nothing is sweet but what is New and Eternal.
All Life consists in Motion and Change. The pleasure of Acquiring is oftentimes
as great, and perhaps always greater than that of Enjoying. The long
possession of that which we have always had, takes away the sense, and makes
us dull: Old and Common things are less esteemed, unless we rub up our Memories
with some helps, to renew them and our senses together. Gifts are always
sweeter in the coming, than in the abiding with us. And if what I observe in
the course of nature be of any force, there is no possibility of enjoyment, at
least no perfection in fruition, without some relation to the first
Acquisition. Old things are apt to grow stale, and their value to be neglected,
by their continuance with us. I have noted it often in the joy that young Heirs
have, when they first come to their Estates, and the great felicity which
Lovers promise to themselves, and taste also when they meet together in the
Marriage Bed. The pleasures of all which pass off by degrees, not solely by
reason of our dullness and stupidity, but far more from a secret in the nature
of things. For all Delight springs from the satisfaction of violent Desire:
when the desire is forgotten, the delight is abated. All Pleasure consists in
Activity and Motion: While the Object stands still, it seems dead and idle.
The sense of our want must be quick upon us to make the sense of our enjoyment
perfect. The rapture proceeds from the convenience between us, the mavelous
fitness that is in such Objects to satisfy our Capacities and Inclinations.
The misery and vacuity must needs be remembered to make that Convenience live,
and to inspire a sense of it perpetually into us. The coming of a Crown, and
the joy of a Kingdom is far more quick and powerful in the surprise and novelty
of the Glory, than in the length of its Continuance. We perceive it by the
delight which Lovers taste in recounting their Adventures. The Nature of the
thing makes the memory of their first Amors more pleasant, than the possession
of the last. There is an instinct that carries us to the beginning of our
Lives. How do Old men even dote into lavish discourses of the beginning of
their lives? The delight in telling their old Stories is as great to themselves
as wearisom to others. Even Kings themselves, would they give themselves the
liberty of looking back, might enjoy their Dominions with double luster, and
see and feel their former Resentments, and enrich their present Security with
them. All a man's Life put together contributes a perfection to every part of
it, and the Memory of things past is the most advantageous light of our present
Condition. Now all these sparkles of Joy, these accidental hints of Nature, and
little rays of Wisdom, meet together in Humility. For an Humble man
condescendeth to look into his Wants, to reflect upon all his Vices, and all
his Beginnings, with far deeper designs than is ordinarily done.

WE recount these ordinary discoveries of the inclination of Nature, because
Humility is (if I may so speak) the Rendezvous of their perfection. All the
stirrings of Grace and Nature, all the acts of GOD and the Soul, all his
Condescensions, and beginnings to advance us, all his Gifts at their first
coming, all the depths and changes of our Condition, all our Desires, all our
primitive and virgin Joys, the whole story of our Creation, and Life, and
Fall, and Redemption, in all the newness of its first appearance, all our Wants
and Dangers, Exigencies and Extremities, all our Satisfactions and Delights are
present together in our Humility; and are so infinitely near and present
thereunto, so sweet and vigorous in their mixture, so strangely powerful in
their influence, that they inspire our Hearts, enter our Thoughts, and
incorporate with our Souls, and are as near and sweet, as our present
condition, be it never so blessed: All put together is far more sweet than our
present Condition, a great part of our felicity and glory is in it, while we
take it in by our Conceptions here, and apply it to our Souls, in an humble
manner; but it will be much more our felicity in Heaven. It is of so much
concernment, that a Great Divine in our English Zion said, Dr. Hammond.
The greater part of our eternal happiness will consist in a grateful
Recognition (not of our Joys to come, but) of Benefits already received.

NOW look into the office and work of Humility. I will not tell you how here
upon Earth it shunneth all strife and contention about Places; and all the
Mischiefs consequent thereto; nor of the Unity, and Peace, and Honor it
produces. These are all but Temporal Benefits. It has ten thousand other Walks
and Circuits, and periods of Revolution. I will tell you how it behaves it self
in Paradise and in Heaven.

HUMILITY by leading us to the bottom of our Condition, sets our Original
before our eyes, considers that eternal abyss of Idleness and Vacuity out of
which we were taken, that miracle by which we were made of Nothing.

How destitute we should have been in our selves had not GOD created the World,
had he not been pleased to communicate himself and his Glory to us. How weak
and unable we were to devise or desire any Felicity, yet how infinitely
necessary the preparation of it after we were created. How great our desires
and expectations were, how sore and urgent our wants and necessities: how much
we needed infinite Wisdom, and almighty Power to fill Immensity with the
omnipresence of their Glory, and to fill their omnipresence with Effects and
Treasures: How gracious and good GOD was to do all this for us, without our
asking: and how justly David's rapture may be taken up by the Soul, Psalm. 21.
The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy Salvation how greatly
shall he rejoice! Thou preventest him with the blessings of Goodness, thou
set a Crown of pure Gold on his head! His glory is great in thy Salvation,
Honor and Majesty have thou laid upon him. For thou have made him most Blessed
for ever; thou have made him exceeding glad with thy Countenance! We might have
been made, and put, in the condition of Toads; who are now created in the Image
of GOD, have dominion over all his Works, and are made capable of all Eternity.
The infinite condescension of GOD is the amazement of the Soul: The depth of
its low estate increases the height of its exaltation. All that it wanted in
it self it finds in the goodness of its Benefactour, and the joy of being so
Beloved, is greater than that of having all these things of our selves for
ever. For the Love of GOD alone, and his goodness in Giving, is our last, and
best, and proper Felicity. Hereupon follows the extinction of all Envy, Regret,
and Coffeehouse; the sacrificing of our selves, the annihilating of our
selves, the lowliness of our selves; And the Exaltation of GOD, and the
Adoration of GOD, and the Joy of adoring the Greatest of all other; The Amity
and Friendship between GOD and his Creature, the Unity of both, and their
happiness for ever. Without this Humility of looking into the bottom of our
first Condition, all this is impossible: And for this cause is Humility an
eternal Virtue, in all estates for ever to be enjoyed; (I might have said)
exercised.

THUS in the estate of Sin and Misery, all the odiousness of our Guilt, all our
despair and deformity, all our shame and misery, all the necessity of Hating
GOD and being hated of him, comes before the eyes of an humble Soul, with all
the mercies and condescentions of eternal Love in the work of Redemption.

AND in the state of Glory it self all the particular Sins, Neglects,
Rebellions, Apostasies, and Villainies we committed against GOD after all his
mercy and goodness in the Death of his Son; how infinitely base we were in
despising all his Bounties and Glories; how infinitely those Offenses made us
unworthy of Heaven, and the eternal Glory we now enjoy; how mavelous and
incomparable his Love was, in pursuing us with so much Long-suffering and
Patience; how amiable he is, and how vile and unworthy we are in all this, it
is the office of Humility to feel and ponder. Thus you see its work, and you
may easily conjecture at its eternal Reward. All things are in it, in the
utmost height and depth of Resignation and Contentment, enjoyed.

I need not observe that sweetness of Conversation, that Civility, and
Courtesy, that springs from Humility. The Meek and Lowly are the same men: the
Kind, and Charitable, and the Affable and the good are all of them Humble, and
so are all they that prefer others above themselves, and render themselves
amiable by honoring their Inferiors, and giving place to their Equals. At
least they imitate Humility as Complemental Courtiers do, for their advantage.
And it is no small token of its excellency, that the greatest enemies of
Humility and Virtue, are forced sometimes to fly to it for succor; as those
that well know they can never thrive, nor prosper in the World without Esteem,
nor gain Esteem without covering their Vices under the mask of Virtue. All the
advantages and effects of this will be enjoyed eternally.

CHAP. XXVII.
That Contentment is a Virtue. Its Causes and its Endi: Its Impediments,
Effects, and Advantages. The way to attain and secure Contentment.

THOUGH we have not named it, in our first distribution of Virtue into its
several kinds, yet the commendation which Contentment has in Scripture,
imports it to be a Virtue: so does the difficulty of attaining it, and the
great and mighty force it is of in our Lives and Conversations. Having Food and
Raiment, says the Apostle, let us therewith be content: For Godliness with
Contentment is great Gain. Where he fitly notes, that Godliness is the
original of true Contentment, and that the Gain of so great a Virtue is
inestimable. The truth is, it is impossible to be happy, or grateful without
it. A discontented Mind is exceeding prone to be peevish and fretful, and
throws a man into all the indecencies of Avarice, Ambition, Envy, Treason,
Murder, Contention, Turbulency, Murmuring, Repining, Melancholy and Sowrness,
Anger, Baseness and Folly, into all the Malevolence and Misery which can
disorder the Soul, or disturb the World. Suspicion, Unbelief, Enmity against
GOD, Fear and Cowardice, Barrenness in good and praiseworthy Employments,
Weariness and Complaint, hatred of Retirement, Spiritual Idleness and Ignorance
are its Companions, followed by Debaucheries, and all the sorts of vile and
wicked Diversions. For Man is an unwelcome Creature to himself till he can
delight in his Condition, and while he hates to be alone, exposes himself to
all kind of Mischiefs and Temptations, because he is an active Creature, and
must be doing something, either Good, or Evil.

TRUE Contentment is the full satisfaction of a Knowing Mind. It is not a vain
and empty Contentment, which is falsely so called, springing from some one
particular little satisfaction, that however Momentany it be, does for the
present delight our Humor: but a long habit of solid Repose, after much study
and serious Consideration. It is not the slavish and forced Contentment, which
the Philosophers among the Heathen did force upon themselves; but a free and
easy Mind attended with pleasure, and naturally rising from ones present
Condition. It is not a morose and sullen Contempt of all that is Good. That
Negative Contentment, which past of Old for so great a Virtue, is not at all
conducive to Felicity, but is a real Vice: for to be Content without cause, is
to sit down in our Imperfection: and to seek all ones Blis in ones self alone,
is to scorn all other Objects, even GOD himself and all the Creation. It is a
high piece of Pride and stiffness in a man, that renders him good for nothing,
but makes him Arrogant and Presumptuous in the midst of his blindness, his own
slave and his own Idol, a Tyrant over himself, and yet his only Deity. It makes
a man to live without GOD in the World, and cuts him off from the Universe. It
makes him incapable either of Obligation or Gratitude, his own Prison and his
own Torm^ntour. It shuts up the Soul in a Grave, and makes it to lead a living
Death, and robs it of all its Objects. It mingles Nature and Vice in a
confusion, and makes a man fight against Appetite and Reason. Certainly that
Philosopher has a hard task, that must fight against Reason, and trample under
foot the essence of his Soul, to establish his Felicity!

Contentment is a sleepy thing!
If it in Death alone must die;
A quiet Mind is worse than Poverty!
Unless it from Enjoyment spring!
That Is Blessedness alone that makes a King!
Wherein the Joys and Treasures are so great,
They all the powers of the Soul employ,
And fill it with a Work complete,
While it does all enjoy.
True Joys alone Contentment do inspire,
Enrich Content, and make our Courage higher.
Content alone's a dead and silent Stone:
The real life of Bliss
Is Glory reigning in a Throne,
Where all Enjoyment is
The Soul of Man is so inclined to see,
Without his Treasures no man's Soul can be,
Nor rest content Uncrown'd!
Desire and Love
Must in the height of all their Rapture move,
Where there is true Felicity.
Employment is the very life and ground
Of Life it self: whose pleasant Motion is
The form of Bliss:
All Blessedness a life with Glory Crowned.
Life! Life is all: in its most full extent
Stretched out to all things, and with all Content!
The only reason why a Wise and Holy man is satisfied with Food and Raiment, is
because he sees himself made possessour of all Felicity, the image of the
Deity, the great Object of his eternal Love, and in another way far more Divine
and perfect, the Heir of the World, and of all Eternity. He knows very well,
that if his honor be so great, as to live in Communion with GOD in the
fruition of all his Joys, he may very well spare the foul and feeble Delights
of men: And though the Law be not so severe, as to command him to be Content
without Food and Raiment: yet if for GOD's sake he should by the wickedness of
Men be bereaved of both, he may well be Patient, nay and die with glory. And
this indeed is that which makes Contentment so great a Virtue. It has a
powerful influence upon us in all Estates; to take off our Perplexity,
Solicitude and Care, and to adorn our lives with Liberty and Cheerfulness, by
which we become acceptable and admirable to the Sons of Men. It makes us prone
to be Kind and Liberal, whereby we become Obliging and full of good Works. For
it delivers us from all servile Fear, and gives us Courage and Confidence in
GOD. For well may we dare to trust him in such little Matters, who has
manifested his Friendship and Bounty in such infinite good things, and made it
impossible for us to be Miserable, if we are pleasing to him. An intelligent
and full Contentment elevates the Soul above all the World, and makes it
Angelical: it instills a Divine and Heavenly Nature, enflames the Soul with the
love of GOD, and moves it to delight in Devotion and Prayer. The sweetness of
his Thoughts, and the beauty of his Object draws a Lover often into Solitudes.
And a Royal Man in a strange Country (especially when he has heard tidings of
his Fathers Death, and the devolving of his Crown and Throne on himself)
desires to be alone, that he may digest these Affairs in his Thoughts a little:
He delights in being retired, because he can find nothing worthy of himself in
Company. Magnanimous Souls are above Garlands and Shepherds: And there is no
greatness of Soul like that which perfect Contentment inspires.

BUT that which above all other things makes me to note the Virtue of
Contentment, is its great influence, efficacy, and power in confirming our
Faith. For when I see the Beauty of Religion I know it to be true. For such is
its excellency, that if you remove it out of the World, all the things in
Heaven and Earth will be to no purpose. The business of Religion is the Love of
GOD, the Love of Angels and Men, and the due esteem we owe to inferior
Creatures. Remove this Love, this Charity, this Due Esteem, this delight that
we should take in all amiable Objects; Life and Pleasure are extinguished. I
see Nature it self teaching me Religion: And by the admirable Contexture of the
Powers of my Soul, and their fitness for all Objects and Ends, by the
incomparable Excellency of the Laws prescribed, and the worthiness and Beauty
of all the Objects for which my power are prepared, see plainly, that I am
infinitely Beloved: and that all the cross and disorderly things, that are now
upon Earth, are mere Corruptions and depravations of Nature, which free Agents
have let in upon themselves. All which since they are reducible to the
Government of Reason, and may be Wisdom be improved to my higher happiness, I
am sure I am redeemed, and that there is some eternal Power that governs the
World with so much Goodness for my felicity, since I my self was not able to do
it. That all Ages are beautified by his Wisdom for my enjoyment I hope in like
manner: nay I see it plainly. And of all these Joys the Cross of Christ is the
Root and Center.

I confess it is difficult to gain this high and divine Contentment, because
its measure and value is infinite: Nay there are other causes both Temporal and
Eternal that may seem to be impediments. One was a business which David did
experience, The prosperity of the Wicked. They live in so much Splendor, Pomp,
and Grandeur, have so much Respect and Reverence paid unto them, and reign as
it were in the high Esteem of all that are round about them in such a manner,
that a Poor good man is hardly looked upon among them. His condition seems
Servile, and he is little regarded. David carried the Temptation far higher,
yet triumphed over it, Psalm. 73. 1, etc. Truly GOD is good to Israel, even to
such as are of a clean heart. But as for me my feet were almost gone, my steps
had well nigh slipped. For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the
prosperity of the Wicked. For all the day long have I been plagued, and
chastened every morning. Whether it be through Nature, or its Corruption, I
cannot tell (at least I will not stand to dispute it) but it is somewhat
grievous, to see men of the same mould with our selves so highly magnified, and
our selves slighted, and unable to appear with Equality among them: because the
true Greatness of our Souls is hidden, oppressed, and buried as it were in the
Meanness of our Condition. But yet we have excellent Company, David and the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and all the Martyrs, that are now so
glorious. And if you please you may consider, what these Great men do when the
show is over: We when we come abroad are weak and despised, and they when they
are alone. A Virtuous man is Great within, and glorious in his Retirements, is
honored also among men in Truth and Reality; the rest make an outward show,
and are honored in Ceremony. We are accepted in the eyes of GOD and his holy
Angels, and they are condemned: Their Life is a Dream, and ours is Eternal: We
expatiate over all the World with infinite Joy and Pleasure in our Solitudes,
and they are nothing when they return to themselves. That wherein the greatest
difficulty of all does consist, is the boundless desire and ambition of the
Soul, whereby we are tempted to envy any thing that is above us, and for ever
to be displeased unless our glory and blessedness be Eternal; I do not mean
Immortal only, but of everlasting Extent, and infinite Beauty. We soar to the
Best and highest of all that is possible: And unless in all Ages and Kingdoms
our Satisfaction be complete, and our Pleasure exquisite; we are prone to be
tormented with the perfection of our Desires. But GOD having given himself, and
all his Kingdom and Glory to us, there is no room for Complaint. All his Power
being glorified by his Wisdom and Goodness for our advancement, we need nothing
but a clear sight of the face of Truth, and a lively sense of our Condition, to
ravish and transport us into Ecstasies, and Praises.

THE happiness of a Contented Spirit consists not alone in the fruitions of its
Bliss, but in the fruits and effects it produces in our Lives. It gives us
many advantages over Sin, Temptation, Fear, Affliction, Poverty, Sickness,
Death, and all other Casualties to which we are obnoxious, by reason of our
frail and fickle condition. But all these I shall pass over, and only mention
two, which are worth our care and desire; Security and Power.

AS there is a vain and empty Contentment, so there is a rash and foolish
Security. For a man to wink at all Hazards to which he is exposed, and without
any consideration of what may befall him, to give himself up to his ease and
pleasure, is as great a madness, as it is for a General environed with Enemies
to sleep without his Guards, or be totally negligent of his Camp, and his Army.
But when he has Conquered all his Enemies, then to be filled with Melancholy
fears, and Pannick terrors, is as great a weakness, as a man of Worth can be
capable of. Even in the midst of them, when he has surveyed all their
strengths, and made full provision for their incursions; he may take his rest
with liberty: provided he be moderate and wary in his proceedings. This last is
our Condition. We must not live as if there were no Sickness and Death in the
World. We must remember there are Calamities of every kind, and fortify our
selves with Principles and Resolutions against them all, put on the whole
Armor of GOD, which is called sometimes the Armor of Light, and stand
prepared for all Assaults whatsoever. When we have so done, as it is a terrible
thing to be surprised, so it is a glorious thing with open eyes to see and know
all the Evil that is in Death, Imprisonment, Persecution, Shame and Poverty,
Famine, Banishment, Pain and Torment; and yet to be secure in the midst of our
fruitions. There is a worthless, and there is a divine Security: It is a poor
business for a man to be secure, that has nothing to lose. A Beggar sings upon
the Road without any fear of Thieves. But to be full of Gold and Jewels, yet
safe from danger; to be secure in a Palace of Delights; in the midst of a
Kingdom, and in the possession of all its glory to rest with safety, this is a
valuable and sweet Security, a safety enriched with solid Enjoyments, much more
is it here upon Earth to have the bliss and security of Angels. Among Wolves,
and Tigers, and Bears and Dragons; among Thieves and Murderers, Bloody Men and
Devils; among Dead-mens Bones, and Graves and Sepulchers, when showers of
Arrows fall round about us, and Hell is beneath us; this is something more than
to be secure where no danger is near, no Calamity possible. It is a kind of
triumph in Security, and has a peculiar glory in it which the very security of
Heaven is incapable of. And yet poor frail Man obnoxious and liable to all
these destructions is safe among them all, when he is once gotten into the
heart of GOD's Kingdom, and surrounded with Felicity. Its very Beauties are its
Strengths. He knows himself beloved of the eternal GOD, and that the King of
Terrors is but a disguised Bugbear, a dark and doleful passage to the
Ignorant, but to him a bright and transparent way to the King of Glory. This
Blessedness is of stable, incorruptible nature, which nothing can destroy. It
digesteth all kind of Evils, and turns them into nourishment. There is a
Wisdom above us, and a Wisdom within us, that makes all things work together
for good to them that love GOD, and nothing is able to hurt us but our selves.

Now for Power which Felicity gives: There is an intrinsic power in the
enjoyment it self, for which Felicity is to be admired: in comparison of which
all other Powers are but poor and feeble. To speak with the tongue of Men and
Angels, to move Mountains, or turn them into Gold, to raise the Dead, to
command the Sun, are common things: The power of creating Worlds is but vain,
without the power of enjoying them. All Honor, Pleasure and Glory are shut up
in Felicity. Had we a power of Creating and enjoying all Worlds, it were
infinitely short of the power of enjoying GOD, because he is infinitely greater
and higher than all. the Creating Power is superfluous to us, because all is
most exquisite and perfect already. The fools Wishing Cap, and the Philosophers
Stone are but trifles: All things (that are not gold) are better than gold.
Felicity gives us the power of enjoying all, even GOD himself, all Angels and
Men, and all Worlds, nay all their Riches, Splendors and Pomps in their places,
which is the most amiable and desirable, the most sweet and profitable Power of
all other.

BUT when we are Contented, there is another Power worth the having, which
Felicity gives us. It enables us to despise the Menaces and Angers of Men, it
sets us above their reach, and inspires us with a comely boldness to dare to
do any thing that is good, as well as with ability to dare to suffer any thing
that is evil. He that is secure, and he that has enough, is independent, and
bold as a Lion: And besides all this he has a certain luster in his Actions,
that gives him authority and power over others, to intercede and prevail in his
requests, to live in honor and good esteem, and to make many subservient to
his best occasions. He is great in Heaven, and whatever he asks of his eternal
Father in his Sons Name, with Wisdom and Piety, shall not be denied him. He can
touch the hearts of millions by his Fathers Mediation: For the hearts of Kings
are in the hands of the Lord, to turn them as the Rivers of water. He made his
people to be pitied of all them that carried them away Captive, and gave them
favor in the sight of the Egyptians. And this secret alone is of more value
then we can well describe.

To receive power from Heaven to be Virtuous, to delight in Virtue, to be
irresistible and invincible in the practice of it, is a very divine and
glorious Privilege. Felicity it self is the fountain of this Power, and the
knowledge of its greatness that which enflames us with the love of it. Felicity
is excellent not only as it is the end of Virtue, but the encouragement of it.
He that is Content has a great advantage above all other men, because he moves
with greater ease, and passes through all difficulties with greater pleasure.
A general of an Army, that works with the Common Soldiers in the Trenches,
does the same work, but with more honor and less labor. He is not servile in
it as the rest are, but his pleasure is to do it for all their encouragement.
He does it in the quality of a Prince, and with less molestation; he has higher
Incentives, and more sublime Rewards. Yet he does it too with greater merit and
acceptance. A man that sees and knows the glory of his high and heavenly
Estate, does all things triumphantly. The sweetness of his Bliss alters the
very nature of his Fights and Battles. He does all things in the light, without
groaning and reluctance: He marches on with dancing and melody, and cheerful
looks, and smiles, and thanksgivings: whereas they that know not the glory of
Felicity groap in the dark; they that are discontented move heavily, and are in
all their proceedings lame and maimed.

THE way to attain the felicity of Contentment, is to attain Felicity that we
may be contented. True Felicity is the source of Contentment, and of all
Virtue. It is never to be gotten but by digging after Knowledge as for hidden
Treasures. Praying for it is a good way, but Prayers without Industry is a mere
mockery. Industry on the other side without Prayer is loose Presumption. For a
man to pray to GOD to make his Field fruitful without ploughing and sowing is
madness, and to expect all from his own labor, without GOD's Blessing,
impiety. But GOD never yet said to any of the seed of Jacob, Seek ye my face in
vain.

WHEN Contentment is gotten, it must be secured by the same means by which it
was obtained. Care in fencing is as necessary as Care in ploughing, and there
is Labor too but sweet and delightful even in reaping in the Harvest. But all
the work is reduced into narrow room: Thou have no charge over any other than
thine own Vineyard. When thou have gotten the knowledge of Felicity and thy
self, the grand means of Contentment is continually to enjoy it. With all thy
getting get Wisdom, and with all thy keeping keep thy Heart; For out of it are
the Issues of Life and Death. Nothing can waste thy Conscience but Sin, and
nothing trouble thy Repose, but what disturbs thy Conscience. Let Virtue and
Felicity be thy only good, and believe firmly that nothing can hurt thee but
SIN alone.

One evil action done by thy self, is more mischievous to thee, then all the
Calamities and Sufferings in the World.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Magnanimity, or Greatness of Soul. Its Nature. Its Foundation in the vast
Capacity of the Understanding. Its Desire. Its Objects are infinite and
eternal. Its Enquiries are most profound and earnest. It disdaineth all feeble
Honors, Pleasures and Treasures. A Magnanimous Man is the only Great and
undaunted Creature.

MAGNANIMITY and Contentment are very near allied, like Brothers and Sisters
they spring from the same Parents, but are of several Features. Fortitude and
Patience are Kindred too to this incomparable Virtue. Moralists distinguish
Magnanimity and Modesty, by making the one the desire of greater, the other of
less and inferior Honors. But in my apprehension there is more in
Magnanimity. It includes all that belongs to a Great Soul: A high and mighty
Courage, an invincible Patience, an immovable Grandeur which is above the
reach of Injuries, a contempt of all little and feeble Enjoyments, and a
certain kind of Majesty that is conversant only with Great things; a high and
lofty frame of Spirit, allayed with the sweetness of Courtesy and Respect; a
deep and stable Resolution founded on Humility without any baseness; an
infinite Hope; and a vast Desire; a Divine, profound, uncontrolable sense of
ones own Capacity, a generous Confidence, and a great inclination to Heroical
deeds; all these conspire to complete it, with a severe and mighty expectation
of Bliss incomprehensible. It soars up to Heaven, and looks down upon all the
dominion of Fortune with pity and disdain. Its aims and designs are
transcendent to all the Concerns of this little World. Its Objects and its Ends
are worthy of a Soul that is like GOD in Nature; and nothing less than the
Kingdom of GOD, his Life and Image; nothing beneath the Friendship and
Communion with him, can be its satisfaction. The Terrors, Allurements and
Censures of men are the dust of its feet: their Avarice and Ambition are but
feebleness before it. Their Riches and Contentions, and Interests and Honors,
but insignificant and empty trifles. All the World is but a little Bubble,
Infinity and Eternity the only great and sovereign things wherewith it
converseth. A Magnanimous Soul is always awake. The whole globe of the Earth
is but a Nutshell in comparison of its enjoyments. The Sun is its Lamp, the Sea
its Fishpond, the Stars its Jewels, Men, Angels its Attendance, and GOD alone
its sovereign Delight and supreme Complacency. The Earth is its Garden, all
Palaces its Summer houses, Cities are its Cottages, Empires its more spacious
Conrts, all Ages and Kingdoms its Demeans, Monarchs its Ministers and public
Agents, the whole Catholic Church its Family, the eternal Son of GOD its
Pattern and Example. Nothing is great if compared to a Magnanimous Soul, but
the Sovereign Lord of all Worlds.

Mistake not these things for arbitrary flourishes of Luxuriant fancy: I speak
as I am inspired by Felicity. GOD is the Cause, but the knowledge of a Man's
self the Foundation of Magnanimity. Trismegistus counts thus, First GOD,
secondly the World, thirdly Man: the World for Man, and Man for GOD. Of the
Soul that which is sensible is Mortal, but that which is reasonable Immortal.
The Father of all things being full of Light and Life, brought forth Man like
unto himself, whom he loved as his proper Offspring: for he was all Beauteous
having the Image of his Father. This in his Poemander. Again he says, Man is a
divine and living thing, not to be compared to any Beast that lives upon the
Earth, but to them that are above (in the highest Heavens) that are called
Gods. Nay rather if we shall be bold to speak the truth, he that is a MAN
INDEED is above them! He is infinitely greater than the gods of the Heathen:
And a God like unto himself (as the Wise Man observes) he cannot make. At
least, says Trismegistus, they are equal in Power: For none of the things in
Heaven will come down upon Earth, and leave the limits of Heaven: bur a Man
ascends up into Heaven, and measures it. He knows what things are on high,
and what below. And that which is the greatest of all, he leaves not the
Earth, and yet is above: so mighty and vast is the greatness of his Nature!
Wherefore we must be bold to say, that an Earthly Man is a Mortal God, and the
Heavenly GOD is an Immortal MAN.

THIS is the Philosophy of the ancient Heathen: wherein though there be some
Errors, yet was he guided to it by a mighty sense of the interior Excellency
of the Soul of Man, and the boldness he assumes is not so profane, but that it
is countenanced here and there in the Holy Scripture. GOD himself said unto
Moses, Lo, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh. Again he tells him concerning
Aaron, He shall be to thee instead of a Mouth, and thou shall be to him instead
of God. And again concerning all the Great men of the World in general, I have
said ye are Gods, but ye shall die like Men. But let us see the Reason of the
Heathen a little, on which he foundeth his great Opinions. In one place he
makes his Son Tatius to say, I conceive and understand, not by the sight of
mine Eyes, but by the intellectual Operation, etc. I am in Heaven, in the
Earth, in the Water, in the Air: I am in the living Creatures, in Plants, in
the Womb: every where. Whereupon he asks him, Do thou not know (O my Son)
that thou art born a God, and the Son of The One as I am? And the ground of
this Question he unfoldeth in another place thus; Consider him that contains
all things, and understand, that nothing is more Capacious than that which is
Incorporeal, nothing more swift, nothing more powerful: but (of all other
things) it is most Capacious, most swift, and most strong. And judge of this by
thy self. Command thy Soul to go into India, and sooner than thou can bid it,
it will be there. Bid it pass over the Ocean, and suddenly it will be there:
not as passing from place to place, but suddenly it will be there. Command it
to fly into Heaven, and it will need no wings, neither shall any thing hinder
it; not the fire of the Sun, nor the Ether, nor the turning of the Spears,
nor the bodies of any of the Stars, but cutting through all it will fly up to
the last and furthest Body. And if thou will even break through the Whole, and
see those things that are without the World (if there be any thing without)
i.e. if the World be confined,] thou may. Behold how great Power, how great
swiftness thou have! Can thou do all these things, and cannot GOD? After this
manner therefore contemplate GOD to have all the whole World in himself, as it
were all Thoughts or Intellections. If therefore thou will not equal thy self
to GOD, thou can not understand GOD. For the like is intelligible by the
like. Increase thy self to an immeasurable Greatness, leaping beyond every
Body, and transcending all Time, become ETERNITY; And thou shall understand
GOD. If thou belive in thy self that nothing is impossible, but accountest thy
self Immortal, and that thou can understand all things, every Art, every
Science, and the manner and custom of every living thing, become higher than
all Height, and lower than all Depth, comprehend in thy self the qualities of
all the Creatures, of the Fire, the Water, the Dry and the Moist, and conceive
likewise that thou can at once be every where, in the sea, in the Earth; at
once understand thy self not yet begotten, in the Womb, Young, Old, Dead, the
things after Death, and all these together; as also all Times, Places, Deeds,
Qualities, Quantities, thou may, or else thou can not yet understand GOD.
But if thou shut up thy Soul in thy Body, and abuse it; and say, I understand
nothing, I am afraid of the Sea, I cannot climb up into Heaven, I know not who
I am, I cannot what I shall be; what have thou to do with GOD? For thou can
understand none of those fair and good things, but must be a lover of the Body
and Evil. For it is the greatest evil not to know GOD. But to be able to Know,
and to Will, and to Hope, is the strait Way, and the divine Way proper to the
Good. It will every where meet thee, and every where be seen of thee plain and
easy, when thou do expect, or look for it. It will meet thee Waking,
Sleeping, Sailing, Traveling, by Night, by Day, when thou speak, and when
thou keep silence. For it is nothing, which is not the Image of GOD. His
Close is most divine; And yet thou say, GOD is Invisible; but be advised:
for who is more manifest than he? For therefore he made all things, that thou
by all things might see him. This is the Good of GOD, his Virtue is this, to
appear, and be seen in all Things. This is the bottom of all other Greatnesses
whatsoever: GOD is infinitely communicative, infinitely prone to reveal
himself, infinitely Wise, and able to do it. He has made the Soul on purpose
that it might see him: And if the Eye that was made for the World, being so
little a ball of Earth and Water, can take in all, and see all that is visible,
if the sight of the Eye be present with all it beholds; much more is the Soul
both able to see, and to be present with all, that is Divine and Eternal.

I know very well that a Man divided from GOD is a weak inconsiderable
Creature, as the Eye is, if divided from the Body, and without the Soul: but
united to GOD a Man is a transcendent and Celestial thing. GOD is his Life, his
Greatness, his Power, his Blessedness and Perfection. And as the Apostle says,
He that is joined to the Lord is one SPIRIT. His Omnipresence and Eternity fill
the Soul, and make it able to contain all Heights and Depths, and Lengths and
Breadths whatsoever. And it is the desire of the Soul to be filled with all the
fullness of GOD.

Magnanimous desires are the natural results of a Magnanimous Capacity. The
desire of being like Gods, knowing Good and Evil, was the destruction of the
World. Not as if it were unlawful to desire to be Like GOD: but to aspire to
the Perfection in a forbidden way, was unlawful. By Disobedience, and by
following our own Inventions, by seeking to the Creature, to the stock of a
Tree, to make us Like GOD; that is erroneous, and poor, and despicable: but to
know our selves, and in the strait and divine Way to come immediately to GOD,
to contemplate him in his Eternity and Glory, is a right and safe Way: for the
Soul will by that means be the Sphere of is Omnipresence, and the Temple of the
Godhead: It will become ETERNITY, as Trismegistus speaks, or ONE SPIRIT with
God, as the Apostle. And then it must needs be present with all things in
Heaven, and in the Earth, and in the Sea, as GOD is: for all things will be in
it, as it were by Thoughts and Intellections.

A Magnanimous Soul then, if we respect its Capacity, is an immovable sphere of
Power and Knowledge, far greater than all Worlds, by its Virtue and Power
passing through all things, through the Center of the Earth, and through all
Existencies. And shall such a Creature as this be contented with Vanities and
Trlfles, Straws and Feathers, painted Butterflies, Hobby-horses and Rattles.
These are the Treasures of little Children! but you will say a Man delights
in Purses of Gold, and Cabinets of Jewels, in Houses and Palaces, in Crowns and
Scepters. Add Kingly Delights, and say he delights in Armies and Victories,
and Triumphs and Coronations. These are great in respect of Play-things. But
all these are feeble and pusillanimous to a great Soul. Tully in Somn. Scipion.
As Scipio was going up to Heaven, the Earth it self seemed but a Nutshel, and
he was ashamed of all his Victories and Triumhs, amazed at his madness in
Quarrelling, and fighting about Territories and Kingdoms contracted to a Star,
and lost into nothing. the whole Earth is but one invisible Point, when a man
foareth to the height of Immensity, and beholds and compasses its
everlasting Circumference, which is infinite every way beyond the Heavens. It
is the true and proper Immensity of the Soul: Which can no more be contented
with the narrow confinement of this World, no more rest in the Childishness of
all the noise of the Interests of Men, be no more satisfied with its Earthly
Glories, than the SUN can be shut up in a Dark-Lanthorn. It is true indeed it
would desire to see, as the Angels do, the least and lowest of all the
Creatures full of the Glory and Blessedness of GOD, all Wisdom and Goodness in
every thing, and is apt to complain for want of some eternal and Celestial
Light wherein to behold them: but if all the expansions of Time and Eternity
should be void, and all the extents and outgoings of Infinity empty round
about them; though things upon Earth, nay and things in the Heavens, should be
never so Rich, and divine, and beautiful, yet such is the Magnanimity of a
Great Soul, that it would hugely be displeased: its loss and its distaste would
be alike Infinite. Infinite Honors, infinite Treasures, infinite Enjoyments,
things endless in number, value, and excellency are the Objects of its Care and
Desire; the greatness of its Spirit leads it to consider and enquire, whether
all the spaces above the Heavens, and all the parts of GOD's everlasting
Kingdom be full of Joys, whether there be any end or bound of his Kingdom;
whether there there be any defect or miscarriage, any blemish or disorder in it,
any vile and common thing, any remissness or neglect, any cause of complaint or
deformity? As also whether all the Ages of the World are Divine and Sacred;
whether after they are gone, they abide in their places; whether there be
anything in them to entertain the Powers of the Soul with delight, and feed
them with satisfaction? What end, what use, what excellency there is in Men?
Whether all the ways of GOD are full of beauty and perfection; all Wisdom,
Justice, Holiness, Goodness, Love and Power? What Regions eternal Blessedness
is seated in? What Glory, what Reason, what Agreeableness and Harmony is in all
his Counsels? Whether those durations of Eternity before the World is made, are
full or empty, full of bright and amiable Objects, or dark and obscure? Whether
the government of the World be perfect; whether the Soul be Divine in it self;
whether it be conducive to its own felicity, or to the happiness of all those
in whom it is concerned? Whether the World shall end? If it shall, after what
manner; whether by Design or Accident? Whether All Ages and Nations shall rise
from the Dead? Whether there shall be a general Doom, or a day of Judgment?
Whether I am concerned in all the transactions and passages at that day?
Whether all Mankind shall be united into one, to make up one complete and
perfect Body, whereof they all are the Fellow Members? What shall be after the
End of the World? Whether we shall live for ever? Whether we shall see GOD,
and know one another? Whether we shall reign in eternal Glory? Whether in the
Confusions of Hell there be any Beauty, and whether in the Torments of the
damned we shall find any joy or satisfaction? Whether all the Riches, Customs
and Pleasures of this World shall be seen? Whether in the World to come any
fruit shall appear and arise from them, for which they shall be esteemed to
have been not in vain, but profitable in relation to all Eternity? What kind of
Life we shall lead, and what kind of Communion and fellowship Angels and Men
shall have with each other? Whether the Works of GOD were unworthy of his
Choice, or the best of all that were possible? What his Laws are as to their
nature and excellency? Whether his Love be really sincere and infinite? Whether
there be any such thing as infinite Wisdom, Goodness and Bounty, Blessedness
and Glory? Such things as these are the Concerns and Inquiries of a Magnanimous
Soul. And if its expectations and desires are absolutely satisfied, it will
easily appear, and break forth upon all Occasions, into the most high and
Magnanimous Actions.

Trismegistus (or whoever else was the Author of that Book) saw the deep
Capacity of his own Soul, but if a Conjecture may be made by the residue of the
discourse, did not understand the end (at least not clearly) for which it was
implanted. Some knowledge he had, that all the things in Eternity were the
Objects of that Power, by reason of which he calls them Fair and Good: but that
they were to be the Treasures and Enjoyments of the Soul I do not find him
affirming. He that knows this must needs be of our Saviors mind, who when all
the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them were showed him by Satan in a
moment of time, despised them all. For the divine and Celestial Kingdom is
infinitely greater, and in a far more perfect manner to be enjoyed.

HE that knows the Honor which comes from above, will despise the Honor
which men can pay, and in comparison of that Honor which comes from GOD only,
esteem all the Honor of this World but false and feeble. Not as if Men were in
the truth of Nature vile and despicable Creatures; a Magnanimous man knows all
others to be by Nature like himself, and is apt to reverence all of his kind as
sublime and Celestial Creatures. But he is a Man of a clear and discerning
Spirit, and the Corruption of Nature makes him to slight all that is defiled.
He sees that Men are generally Evil, deformed and blind, erroneous, perverse
and foolish, poor and miserable: And that all the Honor which they generally
give is irrational and feigned. A little color in the face, a gay Coat, a fine
Horse, a Palace and a Coach, an Exchequer full of Gold, or some such light and
superficial Causes, are all the grounds of the respect that they pay us.

And if the Glory and Esteem I have,
Be nothing else than what my Silver gave;
If for no other ground
I am with Love or Praises crowned,
It Is such a shame, such vile, such base Repute,
It Is is better starve, than eat such empty Fruit.
IF a King be dejected from his Throne, it is but a poor comfort that he is
admired by Persons condemned to die, and praised by Beggars. The dignity and
power of the Persons that admire us, is of great consideration, in the love and
delight which they take in us. They all must vanish and perish as a Dream: no
Honor is truly great, but that which is continual and endless too. A great and
mighty Soul can care for no Honor but that which comes from wise and amiable
Persons, that are themselves great and honorable, most rich and powerful,
holy, just, blessed and glorious. Honor from GOD and his holy Angels, from the
eternal Son of GOD and all his Saints, is mavelous and substantial. That
Honor which is paid upon great and solid causes; because a Man is
well-pleasing to GOD, and exalted to his Throne; because he is the very true
Image of GOD, and has dominion over all the Creatures; because he is infinitely
beloved of GOD, and all Angels and Men are commanded to love him; because he is
redeemed by the Blood of Christ, and made a Temple of the Holy Ghost; because
he is a Priest and King to his eternal Creator, because he is full of Goodness
and Wisdom, adorned with all kind of Virtue, and made an Heir of eternal Glory;
because he is Faithful and True, and Just and Holy; because he has conquered
Death, and Hell, and Sin, and the Grave, and triumphs over them, this is
being paid by such Persons, Honor indeed: and to desire this Honor is the
Property and the Virtue of a Magnanimous Soul.

An Eagle cannot stoop at Flies. An Alexander, or a Caesar cannot debase or
confine their Souls to the pleasures of a Cottage in a Wilderness. Infinite
Hopes and infinite Desires, infinite Fears, and Despairs, and Sorrows, infinite
Joys, and Delights, and Glories, infinite Adorations, Praises and
Thanksgivings, infinite and eternal Objects are the only fit and proper
Concerns for the Affections of a Great and Magnanimous Soul. The very
signification of the word is Greatness of Soul, or if you please, of Mind: For
a distinction may be made between the Soul, and Mind. The Soul of Man is the
immutable essence, or form of his Nature, unimployed. His power of Reasoning is
alive, even then when it is quiet and unactive; and this is his Soul. It is one
and the same in all men, and of it self equally inclined to all great and
transcendent things: but in the most it is misguided, baffled and suppressed,
and though it be never so great it is to no purpose. This greatness implanted
by Nature is not Magnanimity: It is a Natural disposition, not an acquired
habit, as all Virtue is. A Man is then said to be of such a Mind, when he
determines, or thinks in such a manner. His mind is Good that intends well,
his mind is Evil that designeth mischief. So that the Mind is the Soul exerting
its power in such an act: and the greatest Soul in all the World is but
Pusillanimous that minds little things. A great Soul is Magnanimous in
Effect, a Mind applied to mighty Objects. Some men have a Magnanimity infused
by the power of Education, and are led by Custom to Great things, and in a
manner by Necessity, for such is their Place and Calling, that they are
frequently led to greater Objects than other men. Of this sort are the most
eminent rank of Grandees, and Princes: Kingdoms, and Thrones, and Privy
Councils, and Queens, and Armies are their natural Dialect. This is no Virtue,
for though it be not innate by Nature, yet they are born to it, and it is given
by Fortune. Others consider what they have to do, and make an election, and
though they are born in a poor and despicable estate, are not Magnanimous by
Nature, or Fortune, but by Choice and voluntary Election. Not to satisfy the
humor of a high Blood, choler and fire, nor to answer the necessities of a
higher Calling; but to discharge the office of Virtue and Wisdom. And this is
the Offspring of the Will, the true and genuine Virtue. Which as it is far more
worthy than any of the rest, is guided to far better and more glorious Objects,
and more diffusively given by the Bounty of GOD to all kind of Men in all
Conditions. In the Poor it is more mavelous than in the Great and Rich: It
has such an undaunted property in its Nature, that though the disproportion
between them and their Assurance, or Hope, or Desire seem infinite, and the end
which they aim at by their Magnanimity is judged impossible: though their
attempt appear a ridiculous madness to them to whom the Verities of Religion
appear incredible, yet they are no whit discouraged or disheartened at the
matter, but stoutly march on, being animated by the alarm of such a Trumpet,
such a Drum as Magnanimity is. His Faith is more Divine by conquering the
discouragements of the World, than if he met with no censure or opposition.

IF you would have the Character of a Magnanimous Soul, he is the Son of
eternal Power, and the Friend of infinite Goodness, a Temple of divine and
heavenly Wisdom, that is not imposed upon by the foul and ragged disguises of
Nature, but acquainted with her great Capacities and Principles, more than
commonly sensible of her interests, and depths, and desires. He is one that has
gone in unto Felicity, and enjoyed her beauties, and comes out again her
perfect Lover and Champion: a Man whose inward stature is miraculous; and his
Complexion so divine, that he is King of as many Kingdoms as he will look on:
One that scorns the smutty way of enjoying things like a Slave, because he
delights in the Celestial way, and the Image of GOD. He knows that all the
World lies in Wickedness; and admires not at all, that things palpable and
near, and natural, are unseen, though most powerful and glorious; because men
are blind and stupid. He pities poor vicious Kings that are oppressed with
heavy Crowns of Vanity and Gold, and admires how they can content themselves
with such narrow Territories: yet delights in their Regiment of the World, and
paies them the Honor that is due unto them. The glorious Exaltation of good
Kings he more abundantly extols, because so many thousand Magnanimous Creatures
are committed to their Trust, and they that govern them understand their Value.
But he sees well enough that the Kings glory and true repose consists in the
Catholic and eternal Kingdom. As for himself he is come unto Mount Sion, and
to the City of the living GOD, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
Company of Angels, to the General Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which
are written in Heaven, and to GOD the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of Just
men made perfect, and to JESUS the Mediator of the New Covenant: And therefore
receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, he desires to serve GOD acceptably
with reverence and godly fear: And the truth is he can fear nothing else, for
GOD alone is a consuming fire. He very well understands what the Apostle says,
and dares believe him: I cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of
you in my Prayers, that the GOD of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory,
may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of him,
the eyes of your Understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is the
HOPE of his Calling, and what the RICHES of the GLORY of his INHERITANCE in the
Saints. And what is the EXCEEDING GREATNESS of his POWER to usward who
believe, according to the WORKING of his Mighty Power: which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own RIGHT HAND in
the HEAVENLY places: far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and
Dominion, and every Name that is named, not only in this WORLD, but in that
also which is to come: And has put ALL THINGS under his feet, and he gave him
to be HEAD over all Things to the CHURCH which is his BODY, THE FULLNESS OF HIM
THAT FILLS ALL IN ALL. Now to him that is able to do exceeding abundantly
above all that we ask or think, according to the Power that WORKS in us, Unto
him be Glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all AGES, World without
end. Amen.

A great and a clear Soul knows that all these intimations must needs be
true, for it is an amazing Miracle that they should be otherwise. Infinite Love
and Eternal Blessedness are near allied; and that these should cease, is
contrary to all Nature, in GOD, in the Soul of Man, in Heaven, in Earth, in the
order of the Universe, and contrary to all that VISIBLE GLORY which in the
World appears.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Modesty. Its Nature. Its Original. Its Effects and Consequences.

MODESTY is a comely Grace in the Behavior of a Man, by which he piously
dissembleth his own Perfections, and blusheth at his Praises. It springs from
a certain fear and sense of his Imperfection. It Is the shadow of Guilt, and a
beautiful cover of Original Corruption. It is sometimes Natural, and, which is
contrary to all other Virtues, more truly virtuous for being so. For then it is
Simple, Genuine, and Real; but studied Modesty is affected and artificial: yet
where Nature has not been so obliging as to give the endowment, it is not
altogether to be condemned, since it is agreeable to the best of our conditions
in this World, and supplies a defect in his Nature, that is born without it.

IT is akin to Shame, yet increases the honor of him that wears it; it is the
shade of Virtue, yet makes it brighter: It is a tincture of Humility, visible
in a vermilion and deeper die; and the more natural and easy, the more sweet
and delightful.

IT charms the Envy of those that admire us, and by seeming to extinguish our
worth gives it a double beauty. It reconciles a man to the Enemies of his Grace
and Virtue, and by a softness irresistible wins a Compassion in all Spectators.
It is a Virtue which by refusing the honor that is due unto it, acquireth
more; a real Counterfeit, and the only honest and true dissimulation. It is an
effeminate, yet a laudable quality; a spice of Cowardice, more prevalent than
Courage; a Virtue by which we despise all meaner Honors, while we are
ambitiously carried to the highest Glory. It seems inconsistent with
Magnanimity, yet is her youngest Sister.

IT has not many Objects, nor are its Aims apparent, nor its Ends conspicuous.
It is the Mother of fine and delicate Resentments; its strength consists in
tenderness and fear. He that is Magnanimous in one respect, may be modest in
another. Praises and Commendations are the fuel of its Nature, it feeds upon
them, while it grows by rejecting them. It delights in what it fears; and is
full of discords, but more full of harmonies. It is pleased in its displeasure,
and always fights with its own Repugnancies. It is a Virtue mixed of Sense
and Reason; its region is in the Body more than in the Soul, and in all its
Spiritual motions it is attended with Corporeal impressions. The Blood and
Spirits dance in the Veins, as if Nature were delighted with its own
Confusions. By captivating the favor of Men upon Earth, it affects the very
Angels in Heaven, with much of pleasure. It puts us in mind of Guilt and
Innocence at the same time, and by confession of the one adds luster to the
other. By making way for the acceptance of a man's Person, it gives more
esteem, success, and efficacy to his other Virtues. And by this means it has
much of excellency in a little.

HE that has it not, must needs acquire something like it; and if he be
elaborate in expressing it, must hide his Art under the vail of Nature. Though
it be remote from the highest End, it may be guided to it, and when so
directed, is always innocent. It is very just, for while other Virtues make it
a Virtue, it is a Grace unto them all. You may look upon it as a tangible flame
and see it in others, but must feel it in your self before you can understand
it. It is old in Children, young in middle Aged men, at last an Infant. It is
greatest in the beginning of our life, it decays in Youth, in Old Age it
vanishes; at least changes its dwelling, for it cease to be in the Body of
an Aged man, and turns into Courtesy or Civility, in the Conversation. When
it dies, it is buried in Humility, and lives in its Tomb, being empaled in as
it were with Meekness, and waiting daily for its Resurrection. Much cannot be
said of it precisely: but it is best commended, when left to your Practice. It
is the only tender Infant of all the Virtues: like Cupid among the gods: it
appears frequently, and is much exercised, in the School of Venus: but is
capable of more high and more noble uses.

MODESTY in Apparel is commended in the Scriptures. It implies Moderation and
Chastity together. It is sometimes opposed to Lasciviousness, sometimes to
Excess, sometimes to Impudence: And is a great Virtue, if for nothing else, but
the exclusion of these abominable Vices.

THE other Virtues seem to be the Members, and substantial parts of the Body of
worth: Modesty like the Air, and Mien of them all. It is the guard of the Soul
against Looseness and Pride, a Virtue repressing the sumes of selfconceit, and a
kind of silent restraint of all that Arrogance, that delights in pomps and
superfluities.

THOUGH it be a little Virtue, its Reality is apparent: for unless it be made
up with some other supplies, the want of Modesty is pernicious and destructive.

IT is exercised in small things, but is of long extent in the virtue of its
influence; and because of the multiplicity of its uses and occasions, amounts
to a considerable degree of Goodness. It has something like Love in its
nature, for it prefers another above it self, and in that its magnetical and
obliging quality much consists. In honor preferring one another. It fulfils
that Law, wherein our most near and tender Interest is concerned. In preferring
one another there is a lovely (...), more sweet and happy than the best
Agreement. It is of all other the most (...) strife, and (...) Cont^^^^^^.

CHAP. XXX.
The excellent Nature of Liberality. Rules to be observed in the practice of
it. Regard to our Servants, Relations, friends and Neighbors must be had in
our Liberality, as well as to the Poor and Needy. How our external acts of
Charity ought to be improved for the benefit of men's Souls. Liberality makes
Religion real and substantial.

LIBERALITY, in the common use and acceptance of the Word, differs from
Magnificence, as Modesty from Magnanimity. There is much of liberty and freedom
in its Nature. For Avarice is a strict and sour Vice, and they that are guilty
of it are called Misers; but a Bountiful man has a good eye, and is as free
from Anxiety, as he is free in disbursing. His Communicative humor is much his
enlargement: he knows little of Confinement, Care or Bondage.

THERE are two Virtues that endanger a Man's welfare in this World; and they
have all the Temporal Promises. Meekness seems to encourage our Enemies to
trample us under feet, because it promises Impunity: And it is directly said
The Meek shall inherit the Earth: may he so far from having Enemies, that the
Meek shall inherit the abundance of Peace. And concerning Liberality which
makes a man a Beggar, at least threatens to make him so, by wasting his Estate,
the Scripture says, The Liberal Soul shall be made fat. The Liberal Heart
devises liberal things, and by liberal things shall be stand.

MEN are almost in all things contrary in GOD. For since they tumbled out of
Eden, they have lost their wits, and their heads are downwards: They think it
wisdom to keep their Money against a rainy day: and to lay it up for fear of
Poverty. But Solomon advises them to the direct contrary, and makes it an
Argument why they should be Liberal, Because they know not what evil may come
upon the Earth. We cannot put our Treasures into safer hands, than into GOD
Almighty's: Nor can we make any use of Gold and Silver, comparable to that of
Charitable uses. By this it is that we lay up a good foundation against the
time to come; and oblige others to receive us into Mansions here, into
everlasting habitations hereafter.

MY Lord Bridgeman, late Lord Keeper, confessed himself in his Will to be but a
Steward of his Estate, and prayed GOD to forgive him all his offenses, in
Getting, Mispending, or not Spending it as he ought to do: And that after many
Charitable and Pious works, perhaps surmounting his Estate, though concealed
from the notice and knowledge of the World.

I have heard of a smart obliging Calumny fastened on a Great Man of France, by
one that had largely tasted of his Bounty: for having been in his House
honorably entertained for some space of time, and observing how much the
Palace was frequented by all kind of Learned Men: and how Liberal the Master of
it was, especially to men of Worth and Virtue; he charges the Man with the
greatest Covetousnes in the World: because he turned all his Riches into
Obligations: As if he had put all his Estate and Moneys to Use: But to covet
affections, and be rich in hearts is no deformity.

THE truth is, when the ways whereby Love is begotten in the Soul are well
examined, and the happiness of being truly beloved, and delighted in, is known;
no man is so wise as the Liberal man. He is his own end, while he thinks not of
it. For nothing is more conducive to his (...) and (...), than the bounty of
Munificence which enriches his Soul. There are three things which beget Love,
Beauty, Benefits and Praises: They are all three shut up in Goodness, which is
the fountain of Liberality. The beauty of the face is a silent Oratory, a high
style of Commendation without an Epistle: yet by doing Benefits it prevails
more, than by any of its Charms; and makes it self great by enriching others.
Love inspires it with an amiable Soul; and if others are delighted with their
own Praises, he that is liberal in the acknowledgment of m^ns Virtues, and
gives Honor to the Worthy, is full of music in his words, of a sweet and
pleasing behavior, agreeable in his deeds, and fraught with the Honor which
he imparteth so freely. A Liberal man is clothed like the Sun with the Rays
of his own glory, and establishes himself in the hearts of his Neighbors, and
reigns like a King by the sole interest of Virtue and Goodness. Every man is a
Friend to him that gives many Gifts. He may be as holy, and as temperate, and
as wise as an Angel, no man will be offended at him, because he beautifies his
Religion with so much goodness. He enjoys himself, and his Riches, and his
Friends, and may do what he will (with perfect liberty) because he delights in
the felicity of all that accost him. He puts embroideries on Religion by the
cheerfulness of his Spirit, and carries a light wherever he goes, that makes
men to reverence his Person, and esteem his Censures. He moves in a sphere of
Wonders, his life is a continual stream of Miracles, because he is always
sacrificing himself and his Possessions, to the benefit of the World, and the
comfort of others. Benefits and Blessings are his Lifeguard, like his guardian
Angels always attendant on him. His House is the habitation of joy and
felicity, and yields a spectacle of Contentment to every beholder. His
Neighbors are his Security, not his Suspicion; and other men's Houses the forts
and ramparts about his own. No man will hurt him, because they extinguish their
own contentment and benefit in him. Theytender him as the apple of their eye,
because he is a greater comfort and advantage than that unto them. The ancient
custom of Paradise, so long since lost and forgotten in the World revives in
its Family, where all men are entertained as Brothers and Sisters, at the
expenses of GOD and Nature. He takes care, because Thrift is the suel of
Liberality; and is Frugal, that he may be Bountiful. All his aim and labor is
that he may maintain Good Works; and make his light so shine before men, that
they seeing his good works may glorify his Father which is in Heaven. There is
a generous Confidence discovered in all his Actions, and a little glimpse of
Heaven in his Behavior; for he lives as if he were among a company of Angels.
All men's Estates are his, and his is theirs: If he had them all he would impart
them, and restore them to supply their Wants; perhaps not with so much wisdom
as GOD has done, but with as much pleasure and contentment, as his goodness
can inspire, in the exercise of power so kindly and well employed. But because
the designs of GOD are infinitely deeper than he can well apprehend, and laid
all in eternal Wisdom, he is pleased and delighted, that his Care is prevented;
and that GOD has done that for other men, to which his own inclination would
readily prompt him were it left undone. If it were permitted him to wish
whatsoever he listed, of all other things he would chiefly desire to be a
Blessing to the whole World; and that he is not so, is his only coffeehouse.
But for that too there are remedies in Felicity: when he knows all, his desire
is granted. For a Life beautified with all Virtue is the greatest gift that can
be presented to GOD, Angels and Men. And when all Secrets shall be revealed,
all hidden things brought to light, his life shall be seen in all its
perfection, and his Desires themselves be the enjoyments and pleasures of all
the Creatures. There is a certain kind of sympathy that runs through the
Universe, by virtue of which all men are fed in the feeding of one: even the
Angels are clothed in the Poor and Needy. All are touched and concerned in
every one. Like the Brazen Pillars in the Temple of Minerva, if one be smitten
all resound the blow throughout the Temple: or like the strings of several
Lutes skrewed up to Unisones, the one is made to quaver by the others motions.
If Christ himself be fed in the Poor, much more may Angels and Men. At the last
day we find no other scrutiny about Religion, but what we have done or
neglected in Liberality. Come ye blessed of my ^ather, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundations of the World, for I was hungry and ye
gave me meat, thirsty and ye gave me drink, naked and ye clothed me, a
Stranger and ye took me in; I was sick and ye visited me, I was in Prison and
ye came unto me. Inas much as ye have done it to the least of these my
Brethren, ye have done it unto me. LOVE it seems will sit in Judgment on the
World: and the Rule of Trial shall be the fulfilling of its Laws. Love shall be
the glory too of all the Ass^ssors. And every act of Cruelty and Oppression
infinitely odious in all their eyes.

THERE was a certain King which would take account of his Servants: and when he
had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, that ought him 10000 Talents.
But for as much as he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and all
that he had, and payment to be made. The Servant therefore fell down and
worshipped him, saying, Lord have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
Then the Lord of that Servant was moved with Compassion, and loosed him, and
forgave him the Debt. But the same Servant went out, and found one of his
Fellow Servants which ought him 100 pence, and he laid hold on him and took him
by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owe. And his Fellow Servants fell down
at his feet and besought him, Have patience with me and I will pay thee all.
And he would not, but went and cast him into Prison till he should pay the
Debt. So when his Fellow Servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and
came and told to their Lord all that was done. Every neglect and contempt of
our fellow Brethren is injurious and grievous to GOD, Angels and Men: for there
is one common Principle in all Nature, to hate evil Deeds, and especially those
of Rigor and Severity, when we our selves stand in need of Mercy, and have
received Favor. This common principle of Sympathy and Compassion intitles us
to all the good, that is done to any Man in the World. The love of Equity and
Reason, and the natural inclination that carries us to delight in excellent
Deeds, gives us an interest in all that are performed. The beauty of the one is
as sweet and blessed as the deformity of the other is odious and distastful.
And if we our selves are infinitely obliged, and live by the bounty and
goodness of another, after we have forfeited the Kings favor, have received it
again with pardon and forgiveness, nay and with more and greater benefits; if
we shall not be liberal to one another, it is a strange inequality. But the
discharge of our duty will make us amiable and delightful.

That the King of Glory is so concerned in the welfare of his Subjects, were
there nothing else in the Duty but that consideration, is an infinite
encouragement. He that receives you, receives me, is such an obligation, that
as it is all Goodness in it self, so is it all Motive unto us. Eternity will
scarce be sufficient to fathom its depth. Do we feed GOD himself in feeding the
Poor, and his eternal Son Jesus Christ? Are these Needy persons the
Representatives of the GODHEAD, in whom we are to show all our affection, love
and gratitude to the fountain of all Life and Happiness? How infinite ought our
Liberality to be, when we consider the excellency of our Bliss and Benefactour?
Are they beloved, are they all his Sons, the very express image of himself; all
disguised and concealed Kings; all Temples of eternal Glory? What measure can
confine or shut up our bowels? Are the Spectators so innumerable, so divine, so
blessed, so nearly allied to our selves, so rich, and great, and beautiful, are
they so deeply concerned in the welfare of others, and does every act of
Charity extend to all; shall we appear in the very act it self eternally before
them? What a vast ambition of pleasing all these glorious Persons, should be
expressed in every operation of the Soul? As every Thought is seen throughout all
eternity, and every Word that is spoken here on Earth) heard in the utmost
extents of immensity; so is there a kind of Omnipresent greatness in the
smallest action, for it is vertually extended through all the omnipresence of
Almighty GOD: even as every Center, wherein it can be done is eternally near,
nay and within him in the remotest part of his omnipresence. It Is dilated in a
moment, and fills the immensity of GOD with its nature. According to its kind
it affects all his Essence in all spaces whatsoever.

YET is there a Rule for the bounding of all external acts of Charity, and
another for improving it. Intelligence is the light wherein Alms-deeds ought to
shine, and attain their glory: Love is the soul of Compassion, and Zeal the
fervor of Perfection: without which though a man bestow all his Goods to feed
the Poor, and give his Body to be burned, it profits nothing. Where this
great abyss of goodness is, Prudence may dispense it, as it sees occasion. All
other Virtues attending upon it, it is impossible to destroy it self here on
earth, unless the case be so urgent, that it is better die, than to live in the
World. For a good man shows favor and lends; but it is added, He will
guide his affairs with discretion.

The first Rule is, to secure the life and growth of the tree, by causing it so
to bear one year, that it may bring forth fruit another. It is no good
husbandry to cut it down: nor any charity to make it wither and expire. And on
this very account a Charitable man must preserve himself, that he may do more
good, by continuing longer able to do it.

HE that will examine the proportions and measures of his Liberality may take
this Rule for the second: Let thy Superfluities give place to other men's
Conveniences, thy Conveniences to their Necessities, thy Necessities to their
Extremities.

A third Rule is this; Our Riches must be expended according to the several
Circumstances and occasions of our lives. A Liberal man will not pinch and
starve his Servants. For it is contrary to the nature of Bounty to oppress any,
to hurt any, to trample upon any. He will be good to all, and to those most,
that are near unto him. GOD hates robbery for burnt Offering, or that
Strangers should eat the Childrens meat, or that Beggars or Riotous persons
should devour the right of a man's Servants. He that does brave acts abroad, but
is a Niggard within doors, has a glorious train spread abroad like a Peacock,
but stands upon black feet; and may bear that unlucky bird for his Crest, which
is the emblem of Pride and Vainglory. So is it with young Prodigals that
oppress poor Tradesmen, by defrauding them of their Debts, yet are lavish
enough to the Poor and Needy. This is a defect with which Goodness is
inconsistent, and it blasteth their Charity. It is better take off 100 pound a
year from ones benevolence to the poor, than wrong a Servant or Creditour of a
shilling. The Rule therefore is this, First secure the works of Necessity; have
food and raiment for thy self: keep out of debt. Next render to every man his
due in point of Justice, and employ no man thou can not pay; rather perish
thy self than oppress another. If thou art able, and have any thing to spare,
then let the miseries of the Needy be supplied in the works of Compassion and
Charity: but let not all be swallowed up here, thy Neighbors, and
Acquaintance, and Friends, and Kindred claim a share; and thou must secure
something for the works of Courtesy and Hospitality. So order all both in thy
Estate and Life, that the kindness of GOD may shine in all. So doing thy
Stewardship shall be acceptable to the whole World, and thy Memory blessed
among men and Angels.

Our Savior when he wrought his Miracles, as he opened the eyes of the blind,
healed the sick, cast out Devils, raised the dead, gave food to the hungry,
tongues to the dumb, ears to the deaf, and legs to the lame: so did he give
advice to the ignorant, and interpret all his design, by those Parables and
Sermons which attended his Cures. Good Counsel is oftentimes a greater gift
than a Trunk of Money. While the Iron is hot it is time to strike. Good Counsel
is like a bitter Pill, that must be gilded with Liberality. If the Word of GOD
be like good seed, the heart in which it is sown is softened by Sorrow, and
ploughed up by affliction, and prepared to receive it by the husbandry of
Providence. And the properest Season that can be chosen for Instruction is the
time of Obliging. He that intends the welfare of the Soul by all the good
works he does to the Body, is deep and perfect in Charity. A wise man will
improve his advantages, and enrich his Gifts with pious discourses. A
Benefactour has authority to talk what he lists, and bribes his Auditor to
patience by his Bounty. Since He that wins Souls is wise, a profound
Liberality will not let slip a golden Opportunity, nor suffer his Gift to be
dark and insignificant. He will make mention of the glory of GOD, and the Love
of Christ, the guilt of Sin, the danger of Hell, and the hope of Heaven, and
always endeavor to make his Love apparent to that GOD, for whose sake he
pities the Poor, and is kind toward all. For as much as man has two parts,
and his Body is without the Soul but a putrid Carcass; he will put life into
his Money, and inspire his Munificence with all his Reasons, that his Bounty may
consist of two parts in like manner, and have a Soul for its Interpreter.
Liberality to the Soul is the Soul of Liberality. Paradise and Heaven are
better to be given than Gold and Silver. And every Good man will imitate the
Apostle, who was ready not to impart the Gospel of GOD only, but his own Soul
to the benefit of those for whom Christ died.

THIS one thing further I desire you to note, He that sows sparingly shall
reap sparingly, but he which sows bountifully shall reap also bountifully. 2
Cor. 9. 6
In the Kingdom of Heaven every man receives his Penny: because all their
Joys are common and equal. Their Treasures shall be the same, but they will
differ in Glory. The same GOD, the same Angels, the same Men, all the same
Objects shall be round about every man. Every man shall see and enjoy all the
Glory of his eternal Kingdom, because every ones life and felicity shall be
perfect. But yet their works follow them; and every man shall be clothed in
the beauty of his own actions, Virtues and Graces. There may be twenty Children
in the same family, yet all of several Features. There may be a thousand Trees
in the same Orchard, yet all of different kinds. The same brightness and glory
may be round about them, the same sky cover them, the same Earth support them,
the same Stars serve them, the same Sun shine upon them, the same Sea, the same
Dew, the same Air and Nourishment feed them, and yet the one be more fair, and
honorable, and excellent than the other. All the World does know that a Tree
laden with Fruits and Blossoms is far more beautiful than a Tree that is barren
and unfruitful. And the degrees of Beauty are according as the Fruits are, more
or less. And as the Fruits they bring forth adorn them, so do their own works
praise them in the Gates. Heaven as it is a Kingdom of Light and Knowledge, is
a Kingdom of Perfection; Righteousness and Justice flourish there in their
fullness: and every several degree of excellence is entertained with an
answerable degree of esteem: according to the number and greatness of their
Virtues every one is honored by Saints and Angels.

NOW least these Fruits should receive any impediment by the Vices and
Corruptions of men, order is taken, that we should love our Enemies, bless them
that curse us, do good to them that hate us, pray for them that despightfully
use, and persecute us. By which means it is that a Liberal man surmounts all
obstacles whatsoever, lives among Dragons as if he were surrounded with Doves,
and though he be environed with Devils, is as if he were conversant with
Angels: Because he takes no notice of any Vice in any man, to stop him, but is
as Liberal as if all were full of worth and virtue. Nay he is more good and
more miraculous. Their Vices, their Provocations, their Disorders cannot stain
or imbitter his Nature: but he will be always cheerful, and bright, and fair,
and free and perfect. To love the amiable, and be kind to the beautiful is
natural and easy. It is not given to the Angels but to visit the Faithful and
the Penitent. But to love the Evil, to be kind, and good and serviceable to the
Deformed and the Odious, to the Injurious and Ungrateful, is somewhat more than
Angelical. We learn it not of them but of GOD, and of his eternal Son: who has
commanded us to be the Children of our Father which is in Heaven; for he makes
his Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and sends rain on the Just and
on the Unjust. Even Publicans and Sinners do in some manner as much as Angels,
love them that love them. In Heaven they have no malignity, or malice, or wrong
to overcome, all that they love is Beauty and Goodness: unless they learn of
Jesus Christ, and imitate him here on Earth toward us Sinners. But our duty is
far greater, and our opposition more. Which is intimated also in our Saviors
words: For if ye love them which love you, what reward have you? Do not even
the Publicans the same? And if ye salute your Brethren only, what do ye more
than others? Do not even the Publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect even as your
Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

In the Close of all, I beseech you to consider this one most cogent and
weighty expostulation. It is the beloved Disciples, If a man say, 1 John 4. 20.
I love GOD, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar: for he that loves not his
Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? Our
Neighbors are not only the representatives of GOD, but they are here upon
Earth, are visible, are present with us, are Corporeal as we are, and always
near us, our actions among them are palpable, and our Conversation with them
real. GOD is invisible, and absent from us, he is afar off in the highest
Heavens, Incorporeal, and Incomprehensible: If we are remiss and careless in
our duty toward our Neighbor, all our devotion toward GOD will be but
imaginary, our Religion will degenerate into an idle and vain Chimera, become a
weak and feeble shadow, be seated in the fancy, and dwindle away into an aerie
Speculation. The reality of Religion consists in the solid practice of it among
the Sons of men that are daily with us. The difficult and serious actions of
our Lives abroad, feed our Meditation in all our retirements, and infuse a
reality and strength into our Devotions, which make them solid and substantial.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Magnificence in GOD. Its resemblance in Man. The chief Magnificence of the
Soul is Spiritual. It is perfectly expressed in the outward Life, when the
whole is made perfect, and presented to GOD. GOD gives all his Life to us: and
we should give ours all to him. How fair and glorious it may be.

GOD being proposed as the Pattern of our Liberality and Kindness by our
Savior, the nature of his Bounty is sit to be considered for our Information:
which is great, and public, and advantageous to many. In some of his private
dispensations it walks under the notion and form of Liberality, as it gives
food and Raiment, Gold and Silver, Houses and Lands to particular persons: But
in other effects of his eternal love, which are great and public, its nature
is changed into the highest Magnificence.

MAGNIFICENCE is a Virtue scarcely to be found, but in Kings and Emperors. It
is busied in erecting Temples and Triumphal arches Magnificent Theaters,
Colleges and Universities, Aquaeducts and Palaces, Royal Momuments and
Pyramids, Marts, Havens, Exchanges, and all those other great and mighty things
wherein the glory of Imperial Power is made conspicuous, and whereby whole
Nations are benefited, and Kingdoms adorned.

GREAT Power, Riches, Wisdom and Goodness must concur in the effect which is
truly Magnificent. It must be of great luster and glory, as well as of public
use and benefit; and as it is wrought with great labor and expense, be
imparted by a great Soul, and freely given to the good of the People. For
Magnificence implies Greatness and Bounty united.

THE Creation of the Universe was a great and Magnificent work, because the
luster and beauty of the WORLD is a sublime and wonderful Gift imparted to
millions. The bounty of GOD in adorning all ages with Cities and Empires, for
the benefit and enjoyment of all the World is another piece of his Royal
Magnificence. The infusion of a Soul so divine and everlasting into the Body of
a Man is an act of love transcendently greater than all the Aquaeducts and
Trophies in the World. For such a Celestial presence, such a sublime and
illimited power, such a vast and noble Workmanship, as that is, which can see
and comprehend all Eternity and Time together, extend to all Objects in all
Worlds, and fill Immensity with life and joy, and love and knowledge, with
light, and beauty, and glory, with adorations and praises; though its essence
be invisible, and all its splendor within, is next under GOD the highest
Object of all the admiration of Men and Angels: It is a being as public as the
Sun, the great occasion of all the ecstasies of the Seraphims, the wonder and
the rapture of all the Cherubims, the glory of GOD communicated to the World in
so divine a Creature; a miraculous effect of his eternal Power, and the
resemblance of his Godhead among all the Creatures.

THE Incarnation of his Eternal Son, and the giving of the Holy Ghost was
another Magnificent effect of his almighty Power: so was the preparation of his
Word, with the Gifts he gave unto Men in the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles,
adorned with all the varieties of their Labors and Virtues, Wisdom, Courage
and Patience, Lives and Examples, Deaths and Sufferings, Oppositions and
Successes, Miracles and Revelations. The Jewish Nation alone is a Magnificent
gift to the whole World. The Apostle phraseth the Regiment of it as a matter of
Bounty: Romans 11. 12.
Now if the Fall of them be the Riches of the World, and the diminishing of
them the Riches of the Gentiles, how much more their Fullness! And again, When
he ascended up on high, and led Captivity captive, he gave Gifts unto Men, some
Apostles, and some Prophets, etc. When he presented all Nations and Kingdoms as
a token of his love to the Angels; when he gave all those glorious Hosts in the
Heavens to the vision, service and pleasure of Men; much more when he gave all
these in their mavelous order and amity united, to every Soul: When he filled
the Heaven of Heavens with Joys; and gave all the glory of his Kingdom to one
(and that one to every one) he manifested the glory of his Magnificent power,
in that of his great and transcendent goodness. And in relation to this we may
cry out with the Apostle (more than for the mysterious Regiment of a little
Nation, as he does upon the account of GODS dealing with the Jews) O the depth
of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD! Ro^^^^^
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! For all
things are yours, 1 C
Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life or Death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are CHRIST'S, and CHRIST is
GODS. Wherefore he says, Isai. 55.
My Thoughts are not your Thoughts, nor your Ways my Ways. For as the Heavens
are higher than the Earth, so are my Ways higher than your Ways, and my
Thoughts than your Thoughts. You give triflles, and give them but to one, I
give Worlds and give them to every one. You divide and disperse your Gifts, and
lessen by dispersing them, I communicate and unite my Gifts, and augment by
giving them: You think it impossible for one man to enjoy all things, I think
it possible for innumerable Millions. You think your interest is abated, and
your fruition endangered by the communication of your Treasures to many, I know
they are increased and multiplied by the number of the Enjoyers. You think Gold
and Silver to be the greatest Gifts, and that nothing is yours but what is shut
up within such Shores, and Walls, and Hedges, I know that Men are the greatest
Treasures, and that your interest is extended through all Worlds, and your
Possessions illimited. For according to the tenor of these words, and a little
before he says, Thou shall break forth on the right hand and on the left,
Isai. 54. 3, 4, 5.
and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate Cities to be
inhabited. Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded,
for thou shall not be put to shame: for thou shall forget the shame of thy
Youth, and shall not remember the reproach of thy Widowhood any more. For thy
Maker is thy husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, etc. Isai. 62. 3. 4, 5.
And a little after he says, Thou shall also be a Crown of Glory in the hand
of the Lord, and a royal DIADEM in the hand of thy GOD. Thou shall no more be
termed Forsaken, neither shall thy land any more termed Desolate, but thou
shall be called Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah: for the Lord deligheth in thee,
and thy Land shall be married. For as a young Man marries a Virgin, so shall
thy Sons marry thee: and as the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall
thy GOD rejoice over thee. For a Son to marry with his Mother is Incest: it is
Confusion also for a Child to go in unto his Fathers Wife: And yet the Church
of GOD shall be the lawful Bride of every one of all her Sons. Here is
Magnificence! GOD gives himself, and his eternal Son, and his Holy Spirit, and
his Bride, and his Apostles and Prophets, and all the Universe to every Soul!
Which justifies that saying of St. Chrysostom, GOD loves every one with all
the Love wherewith he loves the whole World. His Magnificence exceeds all
Limits, Laws, Imaginations, Wishes, Possibilities, and he makes every one Romans
4. 13.
Heir of the World, To. 8. 17.
Coheir with Christ, Rev. 21. 7.
to inherit all things; every one more than the sole end of all his Kingdom.
For all the Ornaments and Riches of a Bride are given with her Person: her
Palace and Attendants are her Lovers upon the Marriage, as well as she: and all
things that magnify, or make her amiable, are subservient to his enjoyment,
and really his that is her Husband. So that GOD giving us his Church to be our
Mother and our Bride, has intended us in all the things whereby he benefited
her in all kingdoms and ages: and has loved us in all the Love which he has
exercised toward her: and all the fruit of all his Love to the whole World
rests in our Exaltation. This is the Magnificence of Almighty GOD to every
Soul in his Kingdom. And for this it is that the Church is called, The Assembly
of the Firstborn, because all her Children are the perfect Heirs, and Kings,
and Bridegrooms, every one completely, and more to his satisfaction, than if he
were so alone. For as GOD is wholly every where, and the more here for being in
other places; and infinitely here because he is Omnipresent: So does he wholly
see and intend every one, as if him alone; and love him far the more, by loving
every one; for his Love being infinite, it is expressed toward him in all the
parts of his Kingdom: and the more rich and glorious he makes all things, the
more great and happy he makes Him, according to the immeasurable
All Sufficiency of his infinite Wisdom.

THERE is in the Goodness of GOD an infinite Greatness that makes it
Magnificent: for he gives Himself. When a Queen gives her self, whether it be
to a Beggar, or to one of her Courtiers, or to another King, if it proceed from
an ardent Love the Gift is full of sweetness within; but it is always attended
with great Magnificence without: together with her self she gives him her
Palace, her Exchequer, Gardens of Pleasure, her Crown and Throne, her
Sovereignty, her Nobles, Attendants, and all her Kingdom. GOD does infinitely
more. He gives himself by Loving, and with himself gives us all his Wisdom,
Goodness and Power, by making them full objects of Complacency: by doing with
them for us, all that we could devise, or desire, or effect with them, had they
been our own and seated in our selves. His bounty in giving himself is attended
with infinite advantages, innumerable wonders of love and goodness; a care to
make himself (as a Bridegroom does) exceeding amiable and glorious, a care to
purify and fit his Queen for himself with all kind of greatness and beauty: a
care to adorn his Palace with all kind of delectable things, Riches, Pleasures,
magnificent Furnitures, Perfumes, Musicians, Pictures, Jewels, Dainties,
Feasts, Attendants, Nobles, etc. In all which he infinitely exceeds all the
Monarchs of the World. His Kingdom is celebrated by David with great
Exultation, Psalm. 145.

NOW if we would be Magnificent as GOD is, we must have a love within our
Souls, that is willing to impart all these incomprehensible Treasures and
Glories to every Soul, and to all his Hosts; and if it be possible, to outdo
all this, to give all these Worlds, nay GOD himself, and every Soul to all with
greater ardour, and joy and gratitude: Angels and Men, our selves to all, and
all to every one. For that Love which is the fountain of all is greater than
all, a greater Gift, and a greater Treasure. And that love which imitates the
first is in its place the only desirable and excellent thing that is possible.
GODS love in its place is infinitely better then all. Removing it you shake and
abolish all. But in such a Creature he desires to be beloved. He made him free,
that he might be capable of Loving, for it is impossible to love by constraint
or necessity: and having made him free and left him to himself, infinitely
desires to be beloved of him. All his own love unto him, and all the glories of
Heaven and Earth which are prepared for him, are means for the obtaining of
that end, Obligations, Motives, Allurements, Incentives of that Love which GOD
desires. If he will not return Love, all are imbittered and made distastful.
Infinite Love infinitely desires to be beloved, and is infinitely displeased if
it be neglected. GOD desires to take Complacency in all, to see the beauty of
his Bride, and the accomplishment of his design, in the Love of his Beloved.
And nothing in all Worlds but the love of that Person can be his satisfaction.
For nothing can supply the absence or denial of that Love which is his end. For
in its place it is the only needful and proper thing, far more desired than all
that went before: All that went before was but the Means, this is the thing
designed and endeavored by them. For upon this Return all the sweetness of the
rest depends. All is made sweet and complete, and delightful, if this Soul
does love GOD in all these things; if not, they are all made vain, and his love
is turned into sour displeasure. All the other things are so far from
alleviating that they increase his displeasure; the glory and abundance of them
is so far from making him to despise this Love, that in respect of these things
he the more desires it; because he would not have his labor vain; and his own
infinite Love makes him more to esteem the love of this Creature, which is (in
its place) his Sovereign object; and for that very cause so beloved and admired
by all Angels and Men. Is not then the Love which a man returns a Magnificent
thing! Certainly if it answers all these preparations and obligations as their
end, and be looked upon as that without which all the Creation is vain and
frustrate, it is the most great and mavelous thing in all the World, and is
in its own place of all other things most highly desired by all Angels and Men;
and is the greatest Gift which (in, and by that Soul) can possibly be given. It
is esteem of, honor paid to, and delight in, all these great and most glorious
things. It contains in it self a desire to see GOD pleased with more than the
fruition of all Worlds, and of becoming it self the greatest Treasure to his
eternal essence of all that is possible. And if this desire be not satisfied,
all the grandeurs of his eternal Kingdom are to no purpose. But the desire
satisfied is a Tree of Life. What the Sun is to the Eye, that is Love to the
Desire. GODS infinite desire of our Love makes it infinitely delightful to him.
David's purpose to build the Temple was more accepted than Solomon's performance.
And if one Contrite groan be better than all Sacrifices, to love GOD with all
the Soul and Understanding is better than to give him all Worlds. We sacrifice
all by Loving him as we ought. We see the Beauty and Glory of all, and offer it
all up to him, with infinite Desire, our selves also with infinite Gratitude.
Could we make millions of Worlds, infinitely greater and more perfect than
this, they should all be his. No delight, no joy, no pleasure can be greater to
us, than to see him reigning. He gives all to us, that we might give it all to
him: In our Affection and with our Love it is most delightful. Our Affections
are the flames and perfumes that enrich the Sacrifice. He is a Spirit to be
served in a Spiritual manner: all that we would do, we do. Infinite desires and
intentions of Pleasing him are real objects to his Eye. The Goodness of the
Soul, and the Greatness of his Goodness consists in them. A Will enlarged
with an infinite Fancy is a prodigious depth of goodness when it is all Love.
It would do millions of things for its Object! But GOD is incapable of more
Worlds: and all that are possible he can make himself: our Magnificence must be
shown in something he cannot do, unless he were in our Circumstance, and which
of all things in the World he knows most fit to be done, were he in our places.
He cannot be the Soul of any of his Creatures: but would be the Soul of that
Soul: the joy and delight of that Soul; the life and glory of that Soul: and
that he cannot be, unless that Soul will delight in him, and love and honor
him. It is not he must honor himself: but that Soul: His desire is, that that
Soul would freely turn, and delight in him freely, of its own accord, would
incline it self to consider his Excellencies, and dedicate it self to love and
honor him. This is one way for the Soul to be Magnificent toward Men too: who
by Nature delight to see GOD beloved, and satisfied in a point of such infinite
importance.

IT is true indeed, that GOD can be full of Indignation and punish: but for
love to turn into anger is no compensation for the pleasure it lost by our
miscarriage: and to punish is a strange and troublesome work, in which Love is
extinguished, or else afflicted. Infinite Love puts an infinite value on the
Gift. And I think it is Magnificence to give a Gift of infinite value.

OUR Magnificence toward Men must be laid on a deep and eternal foundation. We
must be willing to give our selves to their comfort and satisfaction. And that
we cannot do, but by imitating GOD in all his Goodness, studying their
felicity, and desiring their love with the same earnestness to the utmost of
our power: doing in all places, in all things, in all Worlds, the things they
desire: supposing them to be what they ought to be, like Gods themselves.

THE best Principle whereby a man can stear his course in this World, is that
which being well prosecuted will make his Life at once honorable and happy:
Which is to love every man in the whole World as GOD does. For this will make a
man the Image of GOD, and fill him with the mind and spirit of Christ, it will
make every man that is, the Representative of GOD and of all the World unto
him. It will make a man to reverence GOD in all Mankind, and lift him up above
all Temptations, Discouragements and Fears. It will make him to meet the love
of GOD, Angels, and Men, in every Person. It will make a man truly glorious, by
making him pleasing to GOD, and universally good to every one; diffusive like
the Sun, to give himself to all, and wise to enjoy their complete Felicity. If
there were but one, the Case is evident: supposing more than one, his duty is
to love every one the more for all their sakes. For since he must love all, and
they are all to love one, and every one, he must please them all by gratifying
their love to one, and by doing so to every one, they are all concerned in the
welfare of one, and pleased in the love that is born to every one. This in the
state of Glory will be clear, where every one like the Sun shall be clearly
seen extending his love to all; though here upon Earth, where our estate is
imperfect, by reason of the imperfection of our Knowledge it does not appear.
Our actions are limited: for being finite in our outward demeanor, they must
needs be regulated by Justice and Wisdom. But two things come in here to the
assistance of Magnificence, whereof the first is the inferior perfection of
our Love to all, the second is the universal Satisfaction which the beauty of
our outward life will afford at last. Concerning the last, two things are fit
to be considered. First, that as GOD has communicated the Sun, by making it
visible, to all; and there is not a Star but is seen by all Nations and
Kingdoms: so has he communicated the Soul, by making it visible, to all; and
there is not a Thought that shall remain uncovered; nor an action, but it shall
be seen by all for ever. Secondly, that as GOD himself is admired for his
Inward Love, so is he for the operations of his Outward Life, I mean for his
Works and Judgments. When they saw his Works finished, The Morning Stars sang
together, and all the Sons of GOD shouted for joy. Job.
The Elders are represented before his Throne, casting down their Crowns, and
saying, Thou art worthy, Rev. 4. 11.
O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for thou have created all
these things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created. Where the
perfection of GODS Pleasure in the GLORY of the Creation is evidently
discovered, to be one of the Joys of Heaven; a great matter of their
Contemplation, an eternal cause of their Praises. His infinite and eternal Love
is that by which he is All Glorious within: all the sweetness of his Essence,
and all the perfection of the Soul is there: but yet his Saints in the Church
Triumphant, sing the Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb, Rev. 15. 3, 4, 5.
saying, Great and Mavelous are thy WORKS, Lord GOD Almighty, Just and True
are thy WAYS thou King of Saints! His Works are the substantial Creatures in
Heaven and in Earth: his Ways are his proceedings and dispensations among them
in all ages. For all shall appear together for ever, the one being Great and
Mavelous, the other beautified with Truth and Justice. So that neither of
these does swallow up the other, but both are distinct and perfect. Our Love
may be infinite on the Inside, and yet our Life be diversified with many
limited and particular actions. Now if our Life be like GODS, eternally to be
seen; and our Actions in passing pass not away, but in the sphere of our life
abide for ever, our Life all at once is a mysterious Object, interwoven with
many Thoughts, Occurrences, and Transactions; and if it be to be presented to
GOD like a Ring, or a Garland, we had need to be very choice in the mixture of
our Flowers, and very curious in the Enammel of so rare a Token. Perhaps it is
his Crown, nay our own; His and our Royal Diadem. It shall shine like a glory
about our Souls for ever. That there should be any dirt or blemish in it, is
inconsistent with our Felicity: but it is a Magnificent Present if it be
enchased with Jewels, well chosen and curiously set, I mean with the most pure
and fit elections, the most Wise, and Just, and excellent Actions, the most
bright and clear Apprehensions, the most divine and ardent Affections. The last
are like Gold, the ground work of the Crown: but the work it self is a mixture
of elaborate Distinctions that sparkle in their luster like Gems of several
cuts and colors. An imperial Crown is a Magnificent Present from a King to a
King: But a Life like GODS in a sphere, for which Time was lent that it might
be well wrought, and presented before him when made perfect, as far surpasses
the most glorious Crown that did ever sit upon Monarchs brows, as that can be
supposed to excel a dull Clod of Earth, or a piece of Rusty Iron. There all
Obligations, and Laws, and Duties, and Occasions are interwoven, all our
Virtues, and Graces, and Vices, all our Tears, and Devotions, and Prayers, our
Servants, the Poor, the Rich, our Relations, Parents, Friends, Magistrates and
Ministers are set, and exhibited in their proper places; they appear to the
life with all our Behaviors toward them: and though we did deny a Poor man's
Request for the sake of another, and this and that, and the other particular
action did not at present extend to all: but the Soul was feign to use much
wisdom in contracting its operation for the greater advantage, in finding out
its Duty, in moderating its Behavior, in ballancing its occasions and
accounts; yet in the result of all, it will be found full of Bounty and
Goodness to all, by taking care to be just and pleasing to all in the beauty of
its Conversation. When two things it desires to do, are incompatible to each
other; it studies which of the two was more just, and fit, and necessary; which
tends most to the full and final perfection of its Life; the interest of a
Child sometimes carries it from another man, a debt of Necessity is paid with
that we would give, for a work of Charity: yet when all is Obedience, Duty, and
Love, that life is a most Magnificent Gift. A Wife, a Sister must be respected
in her place, a Son, a Servant, a Friend, before a Stranger; if the case be
such that one of them only can be relieved. All in the Family, being made in
the Image of GOD, as well as the Beggars without doors, are Objects of our
Charity. But so much Goodness being in the bottom of the design, and so much
Prudence and Justice in the denial: Where his Gold and Silver fails, his
affection may be infinite, and the restraints he sets upon his Actions, be the
several cuts and distinctions in the Work, the very true Engravings that make
the Jewel, or the Crown Glorious. Its Matter is Life it self, yet the
Workmanship far excess the Matter, when it is as Accurate and Divine as it
ought to be. This great and deep Thought makes every little act of Life
magnificent and glorious, a better Gift to GOD in its place, than the Creation
of all Worlds before him. While a man's Love is really infinite toward all, and
he is ready to sacrifice himself with Moses, and St. Paul, for the good of the
World: but is fain to set a restraint upon himself for the sake of others. The
very grief which true Goodness conceives at the deficiency of its power, and
the force that lies upon it in so ungrateful a Necessity, where it must be an
Umpire and a Judge between its Bowels and its Children, is a molestation which
he endures in the midst of his duty, filling all Spectators with as much
pleasure as him with pain. All shall be remembered, and all these things which
are now so grievous, shall themselves become a part of our future Glory.

REMEMBER always thou art about a Magnificent work: and as long as thou
dwell here upon Earth lay every action right in its place. Let not Patience
only, but every Virtue have her perfect work. Let Wisdom shine in its proper
sphere: let Love within be infinite and eternal, in the light of true Knowledge
it is impossible to exceed: be right in all thy Conceptions, and wise in all
thine Elections, and righteous in all thy Affections, and just in all thy
Actions; let the habits of Compassion and Mercy appear and break out fitly upon
all occasions: and the severity of Justice too for the preservation of the
World! Let all be underlaid with solid Goodness, and guided with Prudence, and
governed with Temperance, ordered with Care, and carried on with Courage: lay
hold on thy Incentives by a lively Faith, and on all the strengths of Eternity
by a glorious Hope, let all be sweetened with a gracious Charity, fortified and
secured with invincible Meekness, and profitably concealed, and veiled over
with Humility; let thy Contentment put a luster and grace upon all: let
Magnanimity and Modesty appear in thy actions, Magnificence and Liberality act
their part; let Resignation to the Divine Will, and Gratitude, come in to
complete all these, and thy Life be beautified with the sweet intermixture of
Obedience and Devotion: Thy GODLINESS will be so divine, that all Angels and
Men will be perfectly pleased, especially when thou have wiped out the
Miscarriages by the blood of the Lamb, which in a little crystal Vial pure and
clear thou ought always to carry about with thee, when thou have washed
away the defilements contracted in the work, with the Tears of Repentance:
Those Tears too he puts in his Bottles, and they will turn into Jewels.
There is not one drop so small, but it shall turn into a Precious Stone, and
continue for ever as it were frozen into a Gem. Psalm. 40. 5.
Many, O Lord my GOD, are thy wonderful Works which thou have done, and thy
Thoughts which are to us ward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee:
If I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can he numbered: how
precious also are thy Thoughts O GOD, how great is the sum of them! if I should
count them they are more in number than the Sand! Psalm. 183. 17, 18.
When I awake I am still with thee! And with whom else can I be! for thou only
art infinite in Beauty and Perfection: O my GOD, I give my self for ever unto
thee!

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Gratitude. It feeds upon Benefits, and is in height and fervor answerable
to their Greatness. The Question stated, Whether we are able to love GOD more
than our selves. It is impossible to be grateful to GOD without it. A hint of
the glorious Consequences of so doing.

WHAT GOD has made us able to do by way of Gratitude, you must see in the
Chapter of Magnificence. The Love wherewith all these things ought to be done,
shall be so great in the estate of Perfection, our Charity and Wisdom so
directly intend all Angels and Men, and especially GOD above all blessed for
ever, our Gratitude and Goodness make us so zealous for their satisfaction,
that no pleasure in the whole World shall be comparable to that of being
Delightful to them. To receive all is sweet, but to communicate all (adorned
thus within the sphere of our own lives) is infinitely beyond all that can be
sweet in the reception, both for our glory and satisfaction. There is ever upon
us some pressing want in this World, and will be till we are infinitely
satisfied with varieties and degrees of Glory. Of that which we feel at present
we are sensible: when that want is satisfied and removed, another appears, of
which before we were not aware. Till we are satisfied we are so clamorous and
greedy, as if there were no pleasure but in receiving all: When we have it we
are so full, that we know not what to do with it, we are in danger of bursting,
till we can communicate all to some fit and amiable Recipient, and more delight
in the Communication than we did in the Reception. This is the foundation of
real Gratitude, and the bottom of all that Goodness which is seated in the bent
and inclination of Nature. It is a Principle so strong, that Fire does not burn
with more certain violence, than Nature study to use all, when it has gotten
it, and to improve its Treasures to the acquisition of its Glory.

THE Holiness of all the work consists in the Fervor wherewith it is done, and
if our Love shall in Heaven answer all its Causes, it will be equal to all its
Obligations and Rewards, and as infinite in a manner as the excellencies of its
objects, the very love of GOD toward all things will be in it, our Love shall
be in all his, and his in ours. And if we love GOD, Angels and Men, all Virtue,
Grace and Felicity as they deserve; we shall so delight in excellent actions,
and in appearing amiable and glorious before them, that we would not for all
Worlds miscarry in a tittle: And therefore every defect (even after pardon)
will be an infinite disaster as well as blemish. This is one effect of
Gratitude in Nature. And if it were not for the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ,
and the efficacy of Faith and Repentance in his Blood, the least Sinner in all
Nature would be eternally miserable, notwithstanding the advantages of Christ's
blood. It is the desire of the Soul to be spotless in it self. And if it be so
profane as to build upon these advantages, without taking care to be as
excellent as it is able, it is the most ungrateful Creature in the World, and
is too base and dirty, to appear in Glory.

TO talk of overflowing in the disbursments and effusions of Love and Goodness,
till our emptiness and capacity be full within, is as impertinent and
unseasonable, as to advise a Beggar to give away a Kingdom, or a dead man to
breath, or one that is starving to give Wine and Banquets to the Poor and
Needy. But when a man is full of blessedness and glory, nothing is so easy as
to overflow unto others: to forbid, or hinder him, is to stifle and destroy
him. Breath with the same necessity must be let out, as it is taken in. A man
dies as certainly by the confinement, as the want of it. To shut it up and deny
it are in effect the same. When a man has the glory of all Worlds, he is
willing to impart the delights wherewith he is surrounded, to give away himself
to some amiable Object, to beautify his Life, and dedicate it to the use and
enjoyment of Spectators, and to put life into all his Treasures by their
Communication. To love, and admire, and adore, and praise, in such a case are
not only pleasant, but natural, and free, and inevitable operations. It is then
his supreme and only joy to be amiable and delightful. For the actions of Love
and Honor belong in a peculiar manner to a plentiful estate: Wants and
Necessities when they pinch, and grind us in a low condition, disturb all those
easy and delicate Resentments, which find their element in the midst of
Pleasures and Superfluities. Hence it is, that highborn Souls in Courts and
Palaces are addicted more to sweet and honorable excesses, than Clowns and
Peasants. The one spend their life in Toil and Labor, the other in Caresses
and soft Embraces. Amities and Bounties, Obligations and Respects, Complements
and Visits are the life of Nobles: Industry and Care is that of the meaner
People. Honors and Adorations are fit for the Temple not for the Market. Soft
and tender Affections are more in the Court, than in the Shop or Barn. There is
some difference in this respect even between the City and Country. But Heaven
is the Metropolis of all Perfection. GOD is a mighty King, and all his Subjects
are his Peers and Nobles. Their life is more sublime, and pleasant, and free,
because more blessed and glorious. Their very Palaces and Treasures are
infinite Incentives to the works of honor and delight, and they cannot rest
either day or night, but continually cry, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord GOD of Hosts,
Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory. Their Beauties and
Perfections inflame one another. Their very Joys inspire them with eternal
Love: and as all Care and Labor are removed, so are all delights and ecstasies
established. Ravishments and Caresses, Adorations and Complacencies, all the
force and violence of Love, Charms, Allurements, high Satisfactions, all the
delicacies and riches of sweet Affection, Honors and Beauties are their
Conversation. Toward GOD, toward themselves, toward each other, they are all
Harmony, and Joy, and Peace, and Love: they fly upon Angels wings, and trample
upon Spices. Aromatic Odeurs and Flowers are under feet; the very ground upon
which they stand is beset with Jewels. Such you know were the foundations of
the Walls of the New Jerusalem, and the pavement of the Street was beaten Gold.
GOD and the Lamb were the Light, and the Temple of it.

THAT we are to Enjoy all Angels and Men by communicating our selves unto them,
is a little mysterious: but may more easily be understood, than a thing so
obscure as The Enjoyment of GOD by way of Gratitude. That we are to love GOD
more than our selves is apparently sure, at least we ought to do it, but
whether it be possible, is a question of importance. That we gain infinitely by
his Love, is certain; but that we gain more by our own, is prodigiousl^ It is
our duty to love him more than our selves, but whether it be our Nature, or no,
is doubtful. It is impossible to ascend at the first step to the top of the
Ladder. Even Jacobs Ladder will not bring us to Heaven, unless we begin at the
bottom. Self-love is the first round, and they that remove it, had as good take
away all: For he that has no love for himself can never be obliged. He that
cannot be obliged cannot delight in GOD: He that cannot delight in him cannot
enjoy him: He that cannot enjoy him, cannot love him: He that cannot love him
cannot take pleasure in him, nor be Grateful to him. Self-love is so far from
being the impediment, that it is the cause of our Gratitude, and the only
principle that gives us power to do what we ought. For the more we love our
selves, the more we love those that are our Benefactors. It is a great mistake
in that arrogant Leviathan, so far to imprison our love to our selves, as to
make it inconsistent with Charity toward others. It is easy to manifest, that
it is impossible to love our selves, without loving other things: Nature is
crippled (or if it has her feet, has her head cut off) if Self-preservation be
made her only concern: We desire to live that we may do something else; without
doing which life would be a burden. There are other principles of Ambition,
Appetite, and Avarice in the Soul: And there are Honors, and Pleasures, and
Riches in the World. These are the end of Self-preservation. And it is
impossible for us to love our selves without loving these. Without loving these
we cannot desire them, without desiring cannot enjoy them. We are carried to
them with greater ardour and desire by the love of our selves. Preservation is
the first, but the weakest and the low'st principle in nature. We feel it
first, and must preserve our selves, that we may continue to enjoy other
things: but at the bottom it is the love of other things that is the ground of
this principle of Self-preservation. And if you divide the last from the first,
it is the poorest Principle in the World.

TO love another more than ones self is absurd and impossible. In Nature it is
so, till we are obliged; or perhaps till we see it our interest, and find it
our pleasure: It is a surprise to an Atheistical fool; That it should be ones
interest to love another better than ones self: yet Bears, Dogs, Hens, Bees,
Lions, Ants do it: they die for their young-ones. Nurses, Fathers, Mothers do
it. Brides and Bridegrooms frequently do it; and so do Friends. All valiant
Hero's love their Country better than themselves: Moses would have his Name
blotted out of the Book of Life rather than the Israelites destroyed. St. Paul
could wish himself accursed from Christ for his Brethren the Jews: and they
both learnt it of their Master, who made himself a Curse, and even Sin for us.
And it was his interest to do it! If we are immortal, and cannot but be
blessed, it must needs be our interest to love him that is more blessed than
we, better than our selves; because by that love we enjoy his blessedness,
which is more than our own, and by that Love it is made ours and more than
ours. Is not all our Glory, and Virtue, and Goodness seated in the excess of
this perfect love! Do not all brave and heroical deeds depend upon it? and does
not the man deserve to be burnt as an enemy to all the World, that would turn
all men into Knaves and Cowards, and destroy that only principle which delivers
them from being Mercenary Slaves and Villains; which is the Love of others!
That alone which renders a man useful to the World is the Love of others. He
that destroys this would pluck up all Gratitude by the roots: all Worth,
Goodness, and Honor! No wonder therefore he should be an Atheist, since Nature
is so base and abominable before him. But its Principles are oftentimes so
generous, in Truth, that they are too great for themselves. Nothing is so
ordinary in the false way, as that of loving others better than our selves.
Even Dogs have starved themselves to death upon the absence of their Masters.
How many Fathers have gone down with sorrow to their Graves, and lost all the
comfort of their lives in the death of their Sons! How many Mothers have broken
their hearts for the death of their Children! How many Widows have buried
themselves alive for the loss of their Husbands; I mean, by sequestring
themselves from all the delights and pleasures of the World! How many Lovers
dote, and wax pale, and forget their Meat, Sleep, and Employment, and run mad
for their Mistresses! Are there no such Examples; or is there no strength in
such Examples as these? But to love GOD better than ones self seems more
unnatural. Ah vile! the more base, and more wicked we! How we should love GOD
better than our selves is easy to unfold by the principles of Self love, and
Self exaltation. Take it in the manner following: (and when you have seen its
possibility, consider the glory of doing it, the benefit, and felicity, and
honor that is in it. For it is all worth and pleasure, goodness and beauty,
Gratitude and Virtue, wisdom and security, perfection and excellency. We love
our selves more in doing it, than it is possible to do without it.)

IT is natural to all them that love themselves, to love their Benefactors, and
all those things that are conducive to their welfare, pleasure, satisfaction:
And the more they love themselves, the more apprehensive they are of the
benefit they receive, and the more prone to love that which occasions it. The
more goodness we find in any thing, the more we are prone to love it; and the
more we love it, the more to take pleasure in it. And if we find it highly
convenient, and extremely delightful, we had (not seldom) rather die than part
with it: we love our selves only that we might live to enjoy that glory, or
delight, or beauty, or convenience that we find so agreeable. It often falls
out, for want of acquaintance with delightful things, that we think nothing so
powerfully sweet, as to engage our Soul, beyond the possibility of retrieving
it self: and that nothing can cleave so strangely to our minds, as to be nearer
and dearer than Life it self. Yet oftentimes we find men of this opinion
changing their minds, when they have chanced to taste some sweetness in Nature,
they were not aware of, and then to become such miraculous Converts, that they
love not themselves but for the sake of that delight which they have found in
the World. I make it a great Question, would men sink into the depth of the
business, Whether all Self-love be not founded on the love of other things? And
whether it be not utterly impossible without it? Only the love of those things
is so near and close to the love of our selves, that we cannot distinguish
them, but mistake them for one and the same. If the Sun were extinguished, and
all the World turned into a Chaos; I suppose there are few that love themselves
so, but they would die, which plainly shows that the love of the World is
inseparably annexed with the love of our selves, and if the one were gone, the
other would be extinguished: especially if the sweetness of the Air, and its
freedom and ease, were changed into fire and torment. For then we would surely
desire to die, rather than endure it: which shows that the love of ease and
repose is greater than the love of our very Beings, though not so perceivable,
till we have examined the business. But if there be any pleasure, or goodness,
or beauty truly infinite, we are apt to cleave unto it with adhaesion so firm,
that we forget our selves, and are taken up only with the sense and
contemplation, of it. The ravishment is so great, that we are turned all into
ecstasy, transportation and desire, and live entirely to the object of our
fruition. The power of infinite delight and sweetness is as irresistible, as it
is ineffable. And if GOD be all beauty and delight, all amiable and lovely,
truly infinite in goodness and bounty, when we see him, and taste the grace of
his excellency, the blessedness and glory wherewith we are amazed, possesses
us entirely and becomes our sole and adaequate concern. After that sight it is
better perish and be annihilated, than live and be bereaved of it. The fall
from so great a height would fill the Soul with a cruel remembrance, and the
want of its former glory and bliss be an infinite torment. Now if it loved
nothing but it self, it could endure all this; rather than forsake it self, or
lose, or be bereaved of its essence, it would endure any misery whatsoever. Or
to speak more correct and accurate sense, it would be incapable of any Passion,
Patience or Misery, but only that which flowed from its abolition. Nothing
could prejudice it but the change of its Being.

THAT is not likely to love it self after the way which some conceive proper to
Self-love, which is willing to forsake it self upon any Misery, and apt to
forget it self upon any great felicity. It loves it self that it might enjoy
such a pleasure, but loves that pleasure so much beyond it self that it is
ready to go out of it self, and is almost beside it self for the fruition of
it. Loving it self only for that end, and that chiefly and for its own sake, it
loves that far more than it loves it self. And there is no limit nor bound,
when it once begins to love any thing more than it self, it may proceed
eternally: and provided its Object be infinitely more excellent, it will easily
and greedily love it infinitely more than it can it self, and value the
continuance of its own life only for the sake of that which it so infinitely
esteems and delights in. It is true indeed it presupposes its Capacity: but
what would that capacity be worth, were it not for Objects.

WERE there no SUN it were impossible for so fair an Idea to be conceived in a
Mirror, as is sometimes in a Glass, when it is exposed to the sky. The Mirror
is in it self a dark piece of Glass; and how so much fire, and flame, and
splendour should come from it while it is a cold Flint or piece of Steel, how it
should be advanced by any Art whatsoever to so much beauty and glory, as to
have a Sun within it self, and to dart out such bright and celestial beams no
man could devise. Yet now there is a Sun, the Matter is easy, it is but to
apply it to the face of the Sun, and the Glass is transformed. And if GOD
dwells in the Soul as the Sun in a Mirror, while it looks upon him, the
love of GOD must needs issue from that Soul, for GOD is love, and his love is
in it. The impression of all his Beauty swallows up the Being of the Soul, and
changes it wholly into another nature. The Eye is far more sensible of the Day,
and of the beauty of the Universe, than it is of it self, and is more affected
with that light it beholds, than with its own essence. Even so the Soul when it
sees GOD is sensible only of the glory of that eternal Object: All it sees is
GOD, it is unmindful of it self. It infinitely feels him, but forgets it self
in the Rapture of its Pleasure.

BUT we leave Illustrations, and come to the reason of the thing in particular.
The Soul loving it self is naturally concerned in its own happiness, and
readily confesses it owes as much love to any Benefactour, as its bounty
deserves. And if the value of the Benefit be the true reason of the esteem,
and Reason it self the ground of the return, A little Kindness deserves a
little love, and much deserves more. Reason it self is adapted to the measure
of the good it receives, and for a shilling-worth of Service, a shillingworth
of Gratitude is naturally paid. For a Crown or a Kingdom the Soul is enflamed
with a degree of affection that is not usual. Now GOD created and gave me my
self; for my Soul and my Body therefore I owe him as much as my Soul and Body
are worth: and at the first dash am to love him as much as my self. Heaven and
Earth being the gifts of his Love superadded to the former, I am to Love him
upon that account as much more as the World is worth; and so much more than I
love my self. If he has given all Angels and Men to my fruition, every one of
these is as great as my self, and for every one of those I am to love him as
much as that Angel or Man is worth. But he has given me his Eternity, his
Almighty Power, his Omnipresence, his Wisdom, his Goodness, his Blessedness,
his Glory. Where am I? Am I not lost and swallowed up as a Center in all these
Abysses? While I love him as much as all these are worth, to which my Reason,
which is the essence of my Soul, does naturally carry me, I love him infinitely
more than my self; unless perhaps the possibility of enjoying all these things
makes me more to esteem my self, and increases my Self-love for their sake more
than for my own. Thus when I see my self infinitely beloved, I conceive a
Gratitude as infinite in me, as all its Causes. Self-preservation is made so
natural and close a Principle, by all the hopes and possibilities to which I am
created. Those Hopes and Possibilities are my tender concern: and I live for
the sake of my infinite Blessedness. Now that is GOD: And for his sake it is
that I love my self, and for the glory and joy of delighting in him, I desire
my continuance; and the more I delight in him, my Continuance is so much the
more dear and precious to my self. Thus is GOD infinitely preferred by Nature
above my self, and my Love to my self, being thoroughly satisfied, turns into
the Love of GOD, and dies like a grain of Corn in the Earth to spring up in a
new and better form, more glorious and honorable, more great and verdant, more
fair and delightful: more free, and generous, and noble; more grateful and
perfect. The Love of GOD is the sole and immediate Principle upon which I am to
act in all my Operations.

NOW if you enquire what Advantages accrue by this Love, to the Soul of the
Lover, we are lost again in Oceans of infinite Abundance. The strength, and
brightness, and glory of the Soul, all its Wisdom, Goodness and Pleasure are
acquired by it, founded in it, derived and spring from it: as we have before
declared upon the Nature of Love. The solution of that one Question will open
the mystery, Whether we gain more by his Love, or our own? All that we gain by
his Love amounts to the Power of Loving, the Act of Loving we gain by our own,
and all that depends upon it.

BY his Love he existeth eternally for our Enjoyment, as the Father of GLORY
which is begotten by it self: but we do not gain all this by his Love; but by
our own. Some man would say, We gain our Souls and Bodies by the Love of GOD,
all Ages and Kingdoms, Heaven and Earth. Angels and Men, infinite and eternal
Joys, because all these were without our care or power prepared by him, and
his love alone. They were prepared indeed by his Love, but are not acquired, or
enjoyed by it. He so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, and
with him all the Laws and Beauties of his Kingdom: but unless we love him,
unless we are sensible of his Love in all these, and esteem it, we do not enjoy
our Souls or Bodies, Angels or Men, Heaven or Earth, Jesus Christ or his
Kingdom: Rather we trample upon all, and despise all, and make our selves
deformed. All these do but serve to increase our Damnation, and aggravate our
Guilt, unless we love and delight in their Author, and his Love it self will
eternally confound us. So that we gain and enjoy the Love of GOD by ours. Now
Love returned for Love is the Soul of Gratitude. In that act, and by it alone,
we gain all that is excellent: And beside all these become illustrious
Creatures. It is more to our avail to be Divine and Beautiful, than to see all
the World full of Delights and Treasures. They would all be nothing to us,
without our Love. Nothing does so much alienate and estrange the Soul from any
Object, as want of Affection. All the Kingdom of Heaven is appropriated and
made ours by Love alone. The inferior perfections of our own Essence are
gained by Love, and by it we accomplish the end of our Creation. We receive and
enjoy all the benevolence of GODS former Love by ours; are made excellent in
our selves, and delightful to GOD, which can never be brought to pass any other
way, but by our Love alone. By Loving him as we ought to do, we enable him to
take pleasure in us! And this is of all other the greatest benefit. We cloth
our selves with the similitude of all his Attributes, and shine in his Image by
Love alone. Our Love, as it acquires, crowns our Perfections with his infinite
Complacency. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, is a voice that
can be directed to none, but him only that loves GOD with an eternal Love. He
cannot rest satisfied in any that hate, or despise him. The eternal complacency
and delight of GOD, whereby we are crowned with eternal Glory is acquired, and
receives its Being in a manner by Love alone.

NOW to love GOD is to desire Him and his Glory, to esteem him and his Essence,
to long for him and his Appearance, to be pleased with him in all his Qualities
and Dispositions, or (more properly) in all his Attributes and Perfections, to
delight in all his Thoughts and Ways. It is to love him in all his
Excellencies. And he that is not resolved to love every Excellency in him, as
much as it deserves, does not love GOD at all: for he has no design to please
him. But he that purposes to do it, must of necessity love GOD more than
himself, because he finds more Objects for his Love in GOD, than in himself;
GOD being infinitely more excellent than he. But if this seem a grievous task,
it is not a matter of Severity, but Kindness. We mistake its nature, the Duty
does not spring from any disorder in GOD, not from any unreasonable or arrogant
Selfishness, as base and foolish men are apt to imagine, but from his
Excellency: it naturally springs from the greatness of his Worth: And it is
our freedom, when we see his infinite Beauty, to love it as it deserves. When
we so do, we shall infinitely love it more than our selves: because it is
infinitely better: And indeed, shall find it so conveniently seated in the
Deity for us, that could it be transposed or removed, it would no where else be
fit for our fruition. It is that eternal act of Love and Goodness that made all
the Kingdom of Glory for us: that Care and Providence that governs all Worlds
for our Perfection, that infinite and eternal Act that gave us our Being. That
Beauty is it self the Deity, and wherever it appears there GOD is, The GOD
HEAD is the Beauty in which we are all made perfect. And because we were
nothing, we must be infinitely pleased that he is Eternal; because it is his
eternal Act that gives us a Being: and the Act, Oh how Divine! It is his Beauty
and Glory. Can we choose but love that Act, which is all Goodness and Bounty!
Which prepares for, and gives to, us, infinite felicity! If we love our selves
we must needs love it, for we cannot forbear to love the fountain of all our
delights, and the more we love it, the more ardently we delight in it, the
sweeter and more transporting will all our Raptures be, the more feeling and
lively, the more divine and perfect will our Souls and our Joys be: When we
know GOD, we cannot but love him more than our selves: and when we do so, his
Blessedness and Glory will be more than ours; we shall be more than Deified,
because in him we shall find all our Perfection, and be eternally Crowned. We
must of necessity sit in his Throne, when we see him enjoying all his Glory,
because his Glory is his Goodness to us, and his Blessedness our Felicity:
Because in the acts of our Understanding we shall eternally be with him, and
infinitely be satisfied in all his Fruitions. That Excellency which obliges us,
will enable us to love him more than our selves: and while we delight in him
for our own sakes, we shall steal insensibly into a more divine and deeper
Delight, we shall love him for his. And even in point of Gratitude adore his
Glory.

To Adore and Malign are opposite things: to Envy and Adore are inconsistent.
Self-love is apt to leap at all advantages, and the more we love our selves,
the more prone we are to covet and wish whatsoever we see Great and Excellent
in another. But he has conquered our Envy by his infinite Bounty: and made us
able to adore him by the Perfection of his Essence. To cover the Perfections of
him we adore, is impossible. It is impossible to adore him whom we would spoil,
and rob of his Perfections. For Adoration is a joyful acknowledgment of the
infinite Perfections of an Adorable Object, resting sweetly in them with
acquiescence and rejoicing. It is prone to add and to offer more. An adoring
Soul is in the act of sacrificing it self to the Deity, and with infinite
Complacency admiring and adoring all his Glories.

HIS Glories will be inspired into the Soul it self, for the healing of that
Envy to which it is otherwise addicted. And instead of Robbery, and
Coffeehouse, and Blasphemy, and Covetousness, the Soul shall be full of
Honor and Gratitude, and Complacency: and be glad to see its GOD the full and
eternal act of Perfection and Beauty. It was from all eternity impossible there
should be any other but he; and he from all eternity has so infinitely obliged
us, that were it possible for any other to have been, it would not be
desirable. He has obliged us, and we love him better than any other. Should we
fancy or conceive another, a Power from all Eternity acting, should we suppose
it possible that a Power besides him might have bin; it must be just such a
Power as this is, and act just in such a manner as this has done: or it would
be displeasing. This has done all that we can desire, all that all Powers
infinite and eternal can do well: and therefore all possible Powers are
conceived in him. He is the full and adaequate object of all Desire; because
the Fountain of all the most Glorious things, and the sole perfect cause of all
Enjoyment whatsoever.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The Beauty of Gratitude. Its principal Canses. Amity and Communion are the
great effect of its Nature. The true Character of a Grateful Person. GOD'S
Incommunicable Attributes enjoyed by Gratitude. All Angels and Men are a
Grateful Person's Treasures, as they assist him in Praises. He sacrifices all
Worlds to the Deity, and supreamly delights to see him sitting in the Throne
of Glory.

GOD having prepared the way to Gratitude by infusing generous and noble
Principles into the Soul, beautified the Exercise of it by diverse other
provisions, that conspire to make it amiable and delightful. By the one he made
it Possible, by the other desirable.

ONE of the greatest ornaments of this Virtue, is the Grateful Sense of
Benefits received: For in it the Felicity of the Receiver consists; on it his
Grateful behavior depends; by it he is made Grateful, or Acceptable; and it
is one of the great Ends intended in the Gift bestowed by the Donor, whose
Satisfaction ought to be regarded highly by every honest and worthy Receiver.
That Grateful Sense is the crown of the Gift, the Light wherein its Beauty
appears, the Temple of its Honor as it were, the Womb wherein it is conceived,
and finds its life and value perfected.

SHOULD we stand upon the Explication of these, we should have little room for
the Fruits and Effects of Gratitude, which are the principal things intended in
this Chapter. But in short you may take this account. The greatest Benefits we
can receive, are but Abortive, or rather turned into Curses, without a Grateful
acknowledgment of them: All Gifts are but Carcasses devoid of Life, unless
inspired with that Sense, which makes them Delightful. For as Causes without
Effects are not Causes; of Blessings, if they Bless not, are falsely reputed
Blessings. No Benefits can be Blessings, unless they are crowned with our
Complacency. They must be conceived in the Mind before they can be transformed
into Joy, and be transformed into Joys before they can produce those Praises
which are the music of the Benefactors Soul, as well as of the Receivers. They
are not conceived, unless they are quickened with the Life of the Receiver, nor
are they reputed Blessings, till they are had in Reputation. An interior Sense
is the Life and Soul of every Blessing: without which a whole World of Delights
would be but a Chaos, the very Kingdom of Heaven but a Confusion to him for
whom it is prepared, and a Soul among the Angels but a Fool in Paradise. An
Ungrateful Person bereaves himself of the Pleasure, that should spring from his
Enjoyment, for the stifles the enjoyment of the Gift he receives. He Eclipses
and extinguishes his own blessedness by the dullness of his Soul, and the
perverseness of his Behavior. He may be surrounded with Causes of Delight, but
is not blessed, that is not full of the Joys wherewith he is surrounded. When
he is full of Joys he must needs overflow with Complacencies; which are the
very element of Thanksgiving, the matter and fuel, as well as the Soul of
Praises. Were there nothing in a Grateful Sense but this, Gratitude were an
incomparable Virtue, because all the effects of infinite and eternal Bounty are
by virtue of that Grace applied to the Soul, and enjoyed thereby, but are lost
without it. That certainly must be a great Virtue, by force of which we inherit
all things.

AS for the Beauty of the Receiver, it is evident that a dull and heavy
Complexion is the disgrace of his Nature. His Stupidity makes him a worthless
piece of Clay, that cannot be improved to any advantage. A carelessness and
contempt of Benefits springs from his Sottishness, which makes him
Ungrateful, that is, Odious: because he cannot be won by Kindness, nor wrought
upon by Gifts. But he is more deformed, because he acts in a brutish manner,
against Reason; while he fails to do what is fit and proper on such
occasions. It is a base and dirty Temper that cannot be enflamed with the Love
of a Benefactor. It is incapable of high and generous Sentiments; is dull and
dry, insipid and untractable, as dead as a Log of Wood, a crabbed and knotty
piece of matter, that cannot be wrought, and only fit for the fire! But a quick
and lively Perceiver, a tender Sense, and sprightly Intelligence, is all honor
and delight upon the Reception, all activity, life, and vigor, Angelical in
his nature, sweet and heavenly; apt to come up to the Benefactor, and answer
his desires: He is rich and abundant in amiable Resentments, and prone to make
Returns suitable to the Kindness wherewith he is affected. He has a strange
kind of Beauty lodged in his Soul; there is a sweet Correspondence, and a
delicate Convenience between his Nature and his Benefactors. All his
Inclinations are Purity and Praise, he is a great encouragement to the Love of
his Benefactor, an ornament to his Person, an admirer of his Worth, an appendix
of his Honor, and a pleasure to his Disposition; all Life and Goodness. He is
capable of Amity in the heights of its exercise.

A wise and worthy Benefactor designs the felicity and contentment of the
Person, to whom he imparteth his Bounties: and if he were able, would do that
for him, which above all other things is most to be desired; not compel him to
be Grateful, whether he would or no; for that would but spoil the beauty of his
Return, but make him capable of the best and highest Resentments; that he might
have the Joy of seeing his Benefits work kindly. All which are lost and thrown
away upon an ungrateful Person. This GOD has done. He has put brave Principles
and Inclinations into the Soul of Man, and left him freely to exert them, with
infinite desire to see him act freely, but generously and nobly. For by this
means only, is he made capable of Honor, and the essence of Gratitude consists
in the freedom of its operation. Having so made him, and desiring nothing more
than a lovely Behavior, his Joy is as great as his Goodness can inspire, when
he sees that sweetness which attends the Operation and the work of Reason, in a
Grateful Person; and the Joy which he occasions is his own Joy, in the Soul of
his Creature. Of which to rob GOD is a kind of Spiritual Sacrilege, and a
cruel Murder committed on our selves. For we have an inclination to delight in
the Joys, of which we are the Authors, and by a kind of Echo, or reflection,
find the Pleasure doubled which we take, and which is taken in the
communication of our Bounties. And in this there is founded a certain sympathy
of Delight, which carries us to feel and be affected with another Joy, and
makes it an Object, and a Caufe of ours, nay almost the very Form and Essence
of ours, when we are the Authors of it. A Grateful Soul holds Intelligence with
GOD; as it receives his Bounties, it delights in his Complacencies.

THE great effect of Obligation and Gratitude, is Amity and Communion. A
Grateful Soul is deeply concerned in the Honor of his Benefactor; in his
Benefactors Pleasure, Life, and Safety, in all his Successes, Prosperities,
Advancements; in all his Felicity and Glory! He is afflicted in all his
Afflictions, he is delighted in all his Enjoyments, he is crowned in all his
Promotions, he is wronged and injured in all his Affronts, he is touched with
the least Displeasure that can befall him: Nay he is more tender of his
Benefactors Repose than his own: The apple of his Eye is the tenderest part in
himself, yet he had rather have it touched, than the Person of his Benefactor.
No wounds can wound him more than those which his Benefactor receives, and he
in him. His own wounds may kill his Body, but these destroy his Contentment. A
thousand Injuries and Calumnics against himself he can forgive, and is never
provoked but when his Friend is offended. He slights himself, and prefers his
Benefactor: He would make his Face a Stepping stone to his Benefactors Glory.
He exposes his body to Swords, and Spears, and Arrows, for his Benefactors
safety: He would rather be torn to pieces, and suffer a thousand Deaths, than
permit his Benefactor to be slain or dishonored. Now all this in time of Trial
and distress, would seem disadvantagious. But besides the Obligation there is
Sense of Honor that comp^^^ a man thereunto, and a certain beauty in the act
of Gratitude, distinct from the goodness of the Benefit, that is so naturally
sweet to the goodness of the Soul, that it is better to die than renounce it.
And a certain Baseness on the other side, an odiousoess in Ingratitude (in the
very act) so abominable, that it blasts any Safety and Repose that can be
gotten by it.

WHERE the Benefits are small, the Virtue of Gratitude is less powerful and
perfect: for its strength depends upon its food and nourishment. A thin and
spare diet is not very healthful for it. Though all the benefits that are done
upon the Earth by Men to Men are infinitely mean, if compared to those which
the Godhead does to the least of his Creatures; yet the World is full of the
praise of this Virtue, and an Ungrateful man is the most hateful Object living.
Former Ages afford us many rare and glorious Examples of the power of
Gratitude, and its sacred Zeal for, and tenderness of its Object. The union
between the Body and the Soul is nothing comparable to the union of Love and
its Beloved, though the Causes are but slight upon which it is founded. The
Soul will often forsake its mansion to dwell with its beloved. It esteems all
its beauties and Members only for its Beloloveds sake. Yet Colors and
Features, a little red and white, a sparkling Eye, a brisk Conversation, and a
delectable Humor, are all that breed it, all that produce this mighty effect,
this prodigy of Nature. There is something more, where the Life and Honor of a
man has been saved, by the kindness of a Benefactor: especially if he be rich
and amiable that has delivered us. If he be great and honorable that was the
Author of the benefit, the obligation is the greater. For the Worth of the
Person enters into the nature of the act, and enhances its value. Yet all this
put together is exceeded by the Gratitude of a worthy Soul, because his own
Worth inclines him to be more Generous than the Cause requires, and to magnify
the benefit, by the mighty addition of his own goodness. It is the natural
property of Goodness to communicate it self, any occasion of doing it, is
instead of a Cause. But when there is a Cause, it is like a spark to Powder, it
enkindles a flame in his Inclination. All acts of Gratitude have a great deal
of sweetness in their own nature, and for the sake of that beauty which is
seated in themselves will not be rigorous and exact in their proportions, since
it is a beautiful thing to exceed in Goodness. Its own disposition prompts it
to do more than is deserved by the Kindness it receives, and if not to conceive
it self more obliged than it is, yet to be more honorable in its Returns, than
the mere goodness of its Benefactor can exact; because it conceives it self by
its own Virtue obliged to be Noble and Munificent, in all its acknowledgments.

BUT however slow Gratitude may be in the Returns which it makes for smaller
benefits, it is infinitely prone to exceed all measure, when it is infinitely
obliged. Praises are not fed by mean Contentments, but by sublime ones. The
acknowledgment is cool, where the benefits are small; and the Contentments
imperfect, where they are limited and restrained: Full Satisfaction has
another kind of influence on the Soul of Man, than single Kindnesses, or some
few particular Supplies. An infinite Bliss produces more vigorous and joyful
efforts, than bare Acknowledgments. Here upon Earth there are disquiets, and
destres, and expectations, and Complaints, and defects, and imperfections,
fears and interests to be still secured, that lame and darken our Contentment
and Gratitude. But in Heaven all these admixtures of alloy are removed. The
glory of the light in which our Gratitude appears, adds luster and beauty to
the increase of its Perfection. In the utmost height of our Satisfaction there
is such an infinite and eternal force, that our Gratitude breaks out in
exulting and triumphing Effusions; all our Capacities, Inclinations, and
Desires being fully satisfied, we have nothing else to do, but to Love and be
Grateful. An infinite and eternal Kingdom given to him that was taken out of
Nothing, by a King that is infinite in greatness and beauty; all his Joys, and
all his Treasures! it makes the Soul a fountain of Delights, whole nature is to
receive no more, but overflow for ever. When the Soul comes once to love GOD
so infinitely above it self, as the cause requires, its only delight is to
magnify him and to see him blessed. The beauty and sweetness of its own
Gratitude is as rich and divine as all his Gifts. It is tempted here infinitely
more to exceed its Causes than ever before. Amazements, Admirations,
Affections, Praises, Hallelujahs, Raptures, Ecstasies, and Blessings are all its
delights: The pleasure of Loving is its only business; it is turned all into
flame, and brightness, and transportation, and excess. It infinitely passes
Light and Fire in quickness and motion: all Impediments are devoured, and GOD
alone is its Life and Glory. The more Great, the more high, the more excellent
he is; the more blessed is it self, the more joyful, and the more contented.
Its Nature is to shine, and burn, and admire; to offer, and to sacrifice up it
self to its Joys: And GOD is its sovereign Joy, its perfect happiness. To
suspend its beams were to act against Nature. All overtures of Pleasure,
Beauty, Glory, Power, Exaltation and Honor it would have added to its
happiness. The more Great, the more Good, the Wiser GOD is, the greater is its
Happiness. The more he is admired and praised, the greater is its Happiness.
The more he is magnified and pleased, the greater is its Happiness. All the
Excellencies and Perfections in its Objective bliss, though they are not
locally removed, are removed into the Soul of him that enjoyes it; and there
express themselves far more powerfully and effectually, than if they were there
alone. No joy can be like that of seeing its Creator adored, no Service like
that of magnifying its Beloved, no pleasure like that of delighting its
Beloved, no melody like that of praising its Benefactor, no honor like that of
obeying its Preserver. All Worlds are its Treasures, because they manifest his
Power and Glory; all Angels and Men its Delights, because they see and
acknowledge the beauty of its Sovereign, and eternal Perfection; all Creatures
the Instruments of its Joy, that celebrate his Praises! In him it enjoyes the
glory of all Eternity, the infinite beauty of all Immensity, the innumerable
riches of all Worlds, the pleasures and adorations of all the Angels, the state
and magnificence of all Empires, the splendor and perfection of all Ages; all
which it has in it self, by his infinite Bounty, as its own immediate and
proper Possessions; but far more divinely and sweetly enjoyes them, by virtue
of its Gratitude and Love, to him, whose they originally are, and from whom
they proceeded. For the very true reason why it enjoyes it self, and all its
own Treasures, is because it loves it self: And the more it loves him, the more
it will be delighted with his fruitions. It is more concerned, it feels more,
it sees more, it tastes more, it possesses more, it rejoices more in its Object
than it self. The imagination and fancy that is in Love frames all the thoughts
of its Beloved, in it self; it has an exquisite and tender sense of every
change and motion in the mind of its Beloved. Stir not up, nor awake my Love,
till he please, is the song of a feeling and affectionate Soul. Every prick
with a Needles point in its Object, is a stab with a Dagger to it self. Its
heart bleeds in every drop of its Objects finger. It loves his Beloved ten
thousand times more than it self: and is infinitely more pleased with its
exaltation, than its own. The happiness of its Object is most its own. True
Gratitude is crowned in its Benefactor, enthroned in its benefactor, admired in
its benefactor, adored in its benefactor. Nothing in all the World is so easily
ravished as Love, nothing is so lively as Love, nothing so lovely! Nothing so
violent in its grief or joy, nothing so capable of pain or pleasure: All the
Victories and Triumphs of its Savior are its own. My Joy, my Life, my Crown,
my Glory; my exceeding great Reward, my Love, my Soul, my Idol, nay the GOD of
my Soul! my All in all! This is the language of Love in its Rapture. Seraphick
Love! It is Altar, Heart and Sacrifice, Angelical Love! It is Priest and
Temple: All Service, Freedom, Duty, Reward, Desire, Enjoyment, Honor, Praise,
Adoration, Thanksgiving, Ecstasy, Pleasure, Bliss and Happiness. It is all
Goodness and Beauty, Paradise, Heaven; the life and Soul of Heaven! All that is
incommunicable in GOD, Eternity, almighty Power, supreme Dominion, independent
Majesty, infinite Immensity, with all the adorations and praises of all the
Creatures, are by such a Love and Gratitude enjoyed. Loving GOD more than it
self, it is more happy in GOD, than if it were a GOD. Could Is Deity be taken
away, and seated in it self, the Soul of a Grateful Creature would be grieved
at the exchange. Even GOD in his place is perfectly enjoyed. All Envy is by
perfect Gratitude removed: All Coffeehouse at any thing in its Object,
especially at its Objects Blessedness is abolished. It is carried above all
Thrones, Dominions and Powers, and still ascends eternally higher, the higher
its Object is exalted. Could it be miserable in it self, it would be happy in
its Object: but the higher it is exalted, the more is its Creator delighted.
If the resentment be wholly Spiritual, the Soul perhaps may be transformed to
Gratitude, as Gratitude is to Contentment, and Praise, and Thanksgiving. But it
will have no Body, no frail and corruptible Flesh, no bones or members to look
after. All its operations are of one kind, all its works and concernments are
the same. It has no Fear, or Care to divert it; no impediment, or danger, or
distraction. Pure Gratitude is so divine a thing, that the Soul may safely wish
to be turned all into Gratitude. Its Employment and Nature are all one,
acknowledgment and benevolence united together. It sacrifices all Worlds to the
Deity, and with infinite delight desires to offer all Honor and Glory to him.
It is very sensible, that it can never pay so much Honor to GOD as is his due,
unless it be assisted with all the Tongues of Men and Angels. It goes along
with their Joys, and consents to their Praises. In them it adores, and by them
it admires, with them it conspires, and takes in all their powers and divine
affections. It fees with all their Eyes, hears with all their Ears, speaks with
all their Mouths, and uses all their Hearts in loving and adoring. All the
tendencies and operations of Universal Nature are subservient to its desires.
It surmounts the Songs of David, and yet we know how earnestly he exhorted all
Creatures to praise him. Praise ye the Lord: Praise him in the Sanctuary;
Praise him in the Firmament of his Power; Praise him in his mighty Acts; Praise
him according to his excellent Greatness. Praise him in the Heights; Praise him
all ye Angels; Praise him all his Hosts: Praise him Sun and Moon, Praise him
all ye Stars of light. Praise him ye Heaven of Heavens! And when all is done,
it still confesses, that his Name is exalted far above all Blessing and Praise.

HE that praises GOD only for his Health, and Food, and Raiment, and for his
blessing on his Calling (as too many only do) either is very ignorant, or upon
a strict scrutiny, will be detected for upbraiding GOD, for the meanest of his
bounty. For his Love must infinitely be defective, that is able to bestow Gifts
infinitely more, yet gives us none but these. He that sees not more Causes of
Joy than these, is blind and cannot see afar off: The very truth or Religion is
obscure to him, and the cause of Adoration unknown. He wants ten thousand
demonstrations of the Love of GOD, and as many Incentives to coflame his Soul
in the Return of Love, that is unacquainted with these high and mighty
bounties. No man can return more Blessings than he receives: nor can his
Praises exceed the number (and greatness) of his Joys. A House is too little,
a Kingdom is too narrow for a Soul to move in. The World is a confinement to
the power, that is able to see Eternity, and conceive the Immensity of Almighty
GOD! He that can look into infinite Spaces, must see them all full of delights,
or be infinitely displeased. How like an Angel does he soar aloft, how divine
is his life, how glorious and heavenly; that does converse with infinite and
eternal Wisdom, intermeddle with all the delights of GOD, assume the similitude
of his knowledge and goodness, make all his Works his Riches, his Laws his
Delights, his Counsels his Contemplations, his Ways his Joys, and his
Attributes his Perfections! He that appropriates all the World, and makes it
his own peculiar is like unto GOD, meet to be his Son, and fit to live in
Communion with him. The Kingdom of GOD is made visible to him to whom all
Kingdoms are so many Mansions of Joy, and all Ages but the streets of his own
City. The man that sees all Angels and Men his Fellowmembers, and the whole
Family of GOD in Heaven and Earth, his own Domestics, is fit for Heaven. As he
has more encouragements to believe in GOD, and to delight in him, so has he
more concerns to engage his fear, more allurements to provoke his desire, more
incentives to inflame his love, and more obligations to compel his obedience:
More arguments to strengthen his Hope, more materials to feed his Praises, more
Causes to make him Humble, more fuel for Charity to others, more grounds of
Contentment in himself, more helps to inspire him with Fortitude, more rewards
to quicken his Industry, more engagements to Circumspection and Prudence, more
ballast to make him Stable, more lights to assist his Knowledge, more sails to
forward his Motion, more employments in which to spend his Time, more
attractives to Meditation, and more entertainments to enrich his Solitude. He
has more aids to confirm his Patience, more avocations from Injuries to
Meekness, more wings to carry him above the World, and more Gates to let him
into Heaven. He has more Withholders to keep him from Sin, more aggravations
to increase his Guilt, more odious deformities in every Vice, more waters to
augment his Tears, more motives to Repentance, and more Consolations upon his
Reconciliation: More hopes to relieve his Prayer, more bounds to secure his
Prosperity, more comforts in Adversity, and more Hallelujah's in all Estates:
More delights to entertain his Friends, more sweetness in his Conversation,
more arts to conquer his Enemies, more Feasts in abstemious Fasts, more and
better sauce than other at his Feasts, innumerable Companions night and day, in
Health, in Sickness, in Death, in Prison; at his Table, in his Bed, in his
Grove, in his Garden, in the City, in the Field, in his Journey, in his Walk, at
all times, and in all places. He has more antidotes against Temptation, more
weapons in his Spiritual Warfare, more balsom for his Wounds, and more
preservatives against the contagion of Worldly Customs. From this Spring of
Universal Fruition all the streams of Living Waters flow that refresh the Soul.
Upon this Hing all a man's Interests turn, and in this Center all his Spiritual
Occasions meet. It is the great Mystery of Blessedness and Glory, the Sphere of
all Wisdom, Holiness and Piety, the great and ineffable Circumstance of all
Grace and Virtue, the Magazine and Storehouse of all Perfection.

An APPENDIX.
Of Enmity and Triumph: Of Schism and Heresy, Fidelity, Devotion, Godliness.
Wherein is declared, how Gratitude and Felicity inspire and perfect all the
Virtues.

I Should here have ended all my discourse on Virtue, had it not been necessary
to speak something of our Enemies. Since there was never any man so Wise but he
had some, it is not to be expected that the most Virtuous Man living should be
altogether without them. Moses, and David, and Elijah, and Daniel had Enemies,
so had our Lord Jesus Christ himself: Joseph had some in his younger days, and
Solomon some in his Old age: Of all the Prophets I find Samuel the most clear
and exempted from them. But this I observe, that Men of great and transcendent
Principles, of staid and well-governed Passions, of meek and condescending
Behaviors, highly kind and serviceable in their Age, free from the spots and
blemishes of the World, have frequently arrived to an universal Applause and
Honor, and moved in a sphere so high above the Nation in which they lived,
that as if they had been Creatures of another World, they have enjoyed a
Veneration above their Degree, and been surrounded with a repose, that makes
them look like Angels in a kind of Heaven; that that Heaven which they enjoyed
upon Earth, was the Work, and the Reward, and the Crown of Virtue. Thus Moses
after his long Meekness, and invincible Fidelity to the Jewish Nation, was in
the close of his life most exceedingly honored by all the People, and lamented
after his death by a million of Persons, that felt the disastre of so great a
loss. Joseph suffered much by the Envy of his Brethren in the beginning, and
the Lust and Slander of his Mistress. But after he had once been the Savior of
the Land of Egypt, and of his Fathers Family, his Virtue being known, he
enjoyed a long life of Glory and Honor, and of the abundance of his own peace
and tranquillity, communicated a repose and prosperity to his Nation. Joshua did
run the hazard of being stoned for crossing the perverse humor of the Jews,
when he returned from searching the Land of Canaan: but from Moses's death,
throughout all his life afterward was an absolute Prince among his own People,
and a glorious Victor over all their Enemies. Samuel was from his Infancy
chosen of GOD, and from Dan even to Beersheba they knew he was established to
be a Prophet of the Lord. The honor of his Communion with Heaven joined with
his great Integrity and Gravity on Earth, gave him a Reputation that made him
Greater than all the Elders in the Land. And it is very apparent, that the
eminent Holiness, and Goodness, and great Wisdom of these Men made them to
prevail, with GODS blessing on their Virtues, and to reign like Benefactors,
and magnificent Patriots of their Country. Solomon was by his Wisdom exceeding
glorious, till he revolted from GOD: and those Mischiefs which befell David
after he came to the Throne did spring from his Fall in the matter of Urias.
These things I note to encourage Men to Virtue. For though our Lord Jesus
Christ, and his Apostles, were persecuted to the Death, yet two things are very
considerable: First, that their Glory surmounted the Rage of all their Enemies,
and continues immortally shining throughout all Kingdoms and Ages: Next, That
they were born to troublesome Times, and were to break the Ice for all their
Followers. For their business was extraordinary, to change the state and
condition of Kingdoms, to alter the public Rites of Religion both among Jews
and Gentiles, and therein to shake and dissetile the Secular Interests of
Millions, as well as to touch and offend the Conscience, in defaming that for
which so many Ages had so great a Veneration. This created all the difficulty
in their Lives. But where the public Rites of Religion are approved, and a Man
is born in peaceable and quiet Times, I do not see but the most Virtuous Men
inherit all the Honor and Esteem of the People, and whatever estate and degree
they are of, reign in the fullest and freest Prosperity. Nor has the Death of
Christ of little prevailed upon Earth, but that all the World does now take
notice of the Glory of his Doctrine, and far better understand the excellency
of Virtue than they did before: They feel and admire its influences. Insomuch
that as foam Virtuous Men grow contemptible by their Vices; so do the most
debanched and vicious Men, find a Necessity of appearing Virtuous, if they mean
to be Honorable; for as all Errors receive their strengths from some Truths
professed by Heretics, so do all Vices and vicious Persons owe their supports
to the powerful strengths of those Virtues on which they lean, and which they
use (though in a wicked manner) for their own security. For they cannot rise
and thrive in the World without some Virtue, or show of Virtue at least, to
cover and help out their Vices. Three things I desire you to note seriously,
when you have first observed, that it is a very hard matter to hate an
Excellent Man, or contemn him, when he is known. The one is, that Enmities and
Disgraces are like the pangs and throws of the New Birth, they fall like Storms
and Showers upon budding Virtues in their spring and greeness: When a Man first
begins to be Virtuous he is despised, suspected, unknown; it may be censured
and hated: But when he has made himself eminent and conspicuous, is a man of
tried and approved Virtue, well known for a Person of Honor and Worth; the
first Envies and Censures abate; and if he constantly exercise all Honesty and
Goodness with great activity, courage, and prudence, he shall conquer all his
Enemies, and inherit the benefit of his own Virtues in the peace and
tranquillity of his happy Condition. Note also, that it is not so much the
Malignity of the World, as some Vice of the Proficient, or some occasion that
Religious men give the World to blaspheme Religion by some Infirmity or other,
that makes them to be hated. And this I note, because I would have you not cry
out of other Men's Corruptions, so much as of your own. There is a little Pride,
or Covetousness, or Laziness, or Scorn, or Anger, or Revenge, some one
Deformity or other, that gives Men advantage against us, when they deride at
our Profession: but under the Name and Notion of Virtue no Man was ever yet
upbraided. As a Fool perhaps, and a Coward (but not as a Wise and gallant Man)
he may be scorned. Thirdly, Some Secular Interest may put People together by
the Ears, but no Man is hated for being perfectly Virtuous. Misapprehensions,
Slanders, Injuries, Quarrels about Estates and Possessessions may arise; but
where the Land is at peace, and the True Religion established, no Man is hated
for being Wise, and Good, and Holy, and Chaste, and Just, and Liberal, and
Honest, and Merciful, and Meek, and Courageous, but the more admired for being
Holy and Blessed, when he joins all GODS Virtues together. A man may be
perverse and turbulent, a Schismatic and a Heretic, Of Heretics and
Schismatics.
and by a rash and erroneous Zeal bring many Enemies and Penalties on himself,
while he rails against the Magistrates, and reviles the Bishops and Pastors of
the Church, breaks the Laws, and disturbs the Kingdom, prophanes and blasphemes
GODS public Worship, and endeavors to overthrow the established Religion and
Discipline among us. But all the Troubles which a man brings on himself by any
such means as these, are not to be fathered on Virtue, but rightly to be
ascribed to their proper Causes Had he that suffered them been more Virtuous,
he had been less miserable. And truly this I may say for the glory of
Christianity, Where it is freely and purely Professed in any Nation or Kingdom
(as at present in Ours) a Man may be as divine and heavenly as an Angel. And if
he be Liberal, and Kind, and Humble, and Cheerful, especially if withal he be
Undaunted and Courageous, most exceedingly Honest and Faithful in his dealings;
the more Holy and Divine he is, the more he is commended and valued in the
Land: but if he have any flaw the greater stir he makes in Religion the more he
is hated. He loses his Credit, and undergoes the Censure of a supercilious
Hypocrite.

AS for all the Enemies which Strife and Contention about Worldly Goods
occasion to a Virtuous Man, he is no more liable to them than other persons:
And yet when he meets them, he has far more advantages over his Enemies than
other Men. For being full of Courage, he dares do any thing that is fit against
them, and that sparkle of the Lion makes them to dread him: whereas a Coward is
baffled and run over in a moment. Being full of Temper and Humility, he is not
apt to exasperate them, and make them mad, as hot and angry Spirits are apt to
do. By Kindness he obliges, and wins, and softens them: By Prudence he knows
how to manage them, and all his other Virtues come in as so many strengths
against them. Being Just he never quarrels but in a Good Cause; being Good and
Merciful, he is not apt to make an Enemy: Being Wise and Holy his Soul is in
another World, and it is no trivial Injury that can make him contend: Being
Liberal and Magnanimous he is prone to do Heroical things, and to make himself
Venerable to his very Adversary: And above all to tender and to love his Soul,
and to steer all the Contention to both their benefit. We rail on the World
when the fault is in our selves. The most of Men professing Virtue are but
Children in Worth; very weak, and very defective: And too timorous too, GOD
knows. They neither trust GOD enough, nor carry Virtue to the height. Virtue is
base and not Virtue, while it is remiss: It never shines gloriously and
irresistibly, till it be acted almost in a desperate manner. He only is the
Great Man, that contemns Danger, Life, and Death, and all the World, that he
may be supreamly and completely Virtuous.

ENEMIES may sometimes spring from Envy. And indeed there alone lies the Core
of the Matter: when some Men imperfectly Virtuous, abhor others for being more
Excellent than themselves; at least for being more Honored, and more
Prosperous. Here again Temporal Interest is the ground of the Enmity. For thus
our Savior was hated by the Scribes and Pharisees. Pilate knew that they
delivered him for Envy. But the main pretext and Cause of his Condemnation, was
the Testimony of those that heard him say, He would destroy the Temple: Without
which, and his imputed Blasphemy they could hardly have killed him. But he came
to die, and was the less solicitous. Where these public Cases are away: They
that envy Virtuous Men are generally Men of equal rank and degree with
themselves; but a Man truly Virtuous will outstrip them, as far as a Swallow
will a Snail, all his Inferiors, and all his Superiors that understand him,
and the most also of his Equals, and all they too, if he invents ways and
methods to oblige them, will at last be won to confess and acknowledge him. But
in the mean time he grows, and thrives, and enjoyes their very Enmity. He never
speaks ill of them behind their backs. He is not a jot discouraged, nor
exasperated, he pities their Weakness, and is humble under the sense perhaps of
his own: He is careful to give them no advantage against him: He confides in
GOD, and strengthens himself in hope of Divine assistance: He rejoices
exceedingly that he has the opportunity of Forgiving, and considers how many
Virtues he has to exercise upon that Occasion. It makes him to exult, when he
considers that these Enemies are the Instruments and Materials of his greater
Glory. He foresees the Victory, and delights in the Triumph. And besides all
this, He is obliged by Jesus Christ to forgive greater Wrongs than these, and
gladly yields some Trials of his Obedience: He has an infinite felicity in
daily View, and remembers he is a Pilgrim in a strange Country. He is dead to
the World, and alive unto GOD. The Moon is beneath his feet, and so are all
fickle and transitory things. He is clothed with the Sun, and walks in the
Light, environed with the beams of his own Enjoyments. If his Enemy be able to
do him a Mischief; (which to a man perfectly Virtuous seldom happens) he turns
it into Good, which a Foolish and a Vicious Man cannot do: He sinks not under
it, but plunges out again, and furmounts it altogether: immediately forgives
it, and can after cheerfully serve his Enemy. For his part he will be an Enemy
to no man in the World. He knows his Duty and his Master: the value of Souls,
and the excellency of Virtue: His very Gratitude to GOD and Jesus Christ is
enough to make him go through a thousand greater and more terrible brunts than
these.

I would not have Men ungrateful to Jesus Christ; not blind to themselves. I
know very well that the Age is full of Faults, and lament it: but withal I
know, it is full of Advantages. As Sin abounds, so does Grace also superabound.
Never so much clear Knowledge in any Age: Learned Ministers, multitudes of
Sermons, excellent Books, translated Bibles, studious Gentlemen, multitudes of
Scholars, public Liberty, Peace and Safety: all great and eminent Blessings.
There were many disorders in the Church of Corinth, and yet the Apostle tells
them of their Reigning, and wishes, Would to GOD he did reign with them! after
their City had a little flourished in peace, and received Religion: and makes
his Comparison between them and himself after such a manner, that when it is
considered, it would make one apt to think the Reigning of the Saints, which is
spoken of in the Book of the Revelations, were either now present or already
past. Now ye are full (says he) now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings
without us, and I would to GOD ye did reign, 1 Cor 4.^
that we also might reign with you. For I think GOD has set forth us the
Apostles last, as it were appointed to Death: for we are made a spectacle to
the World, and to Angels, and to Men: We are sools for Christ's sake, but ye are
wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong: Ye are honorable, but we are
despised. Even to this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked,
and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place. A small matter will make
a Saint to Reign, by reason of the greatness of his interior Bliss. If he be
not buffetted and cast out of doors; having Food and Raiment, with his
Godliness it is Great Gain. Especially when Kings and Princes yield a professed
subjection to the Gospel of Christ. For then all the Kingdoms of the World
become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ: When the Cross is exalted
above the Crown, and the Kings Palaces surmounted by the magnificence of our
Saviors Temple, and there is no Idolatry nor Poison in the Church, but a pure
public worship, when the very Laws and Magistrates countenance Religion, and
those Apostles that were once persecuted and cast out as Vile, are now
glorified and admired for their Sanctity. Men may be Christians publicly and
in the face of the Sun, it is horrible ingratitude to be unsensible of the
advantage, to calumniate, and reproach, and disturb the Church, as if it were a
sink of Paganism. Rather we should admire and adore GOD Almighty, that other
men labored, and we are entered upon their Labors. We inherit the blood, and
toil, and sweat of the Martyrs, they bore the burden and heat of the day, and
we enjoy the victory and the peace they acquired. This is one, but not one of
the least of GODS Mercies for which we should be Grateful.

THAT all the business of Religion on GODS part is Bounty, Gratitude on ours,
and that this Gratitude is the sphere of all Virtue and Felicity, easily is
discerned after the first intimation. Gratitude is all that is to be expressed
here upon Earth, and above in Heaven. All our Complacencies in his infinite
Highness, all our Delights in his eternal Praises, all our Adorations,
Ecstasies, and Offerings, all our Joys and Thanksgivings, are but the Feathers
and the Wings of that Seraphim in Glory. All the Acknowledgment, and Faith, and
Hope, and Repentance, all the Obedience and Resignation of a Sinner upon Earth,
all his Care and fear to offend, all his Desire and Endeavor to please, all
his Worship and Charity, all his Courage, and Perseverance, and Patience, all
his Fidelity, Devotion, and Godliness, are but Gratitude in several dresses, as
Time, Place, and Occasion require. Sermons are to inform and assist our
Gratitude, Sacraments to revive and exercise its virtue. Virtues themselves are
our Aids to bring us thereunto.

Upon Sabbaths it enjoyes a Rest, that has something in it of Heaven; and it
is a hard matter to be wicked in the Sanctuary. But in ordinary Conversation,
in Shops and Taverns, in the Camp, in the Navy, at a Feast, or in a Journey, to
retain the Sense of all Mercies, and to carry all these Virtues and Graces
about a Man, is not ordinary for a Common Christian. But that which does
realize our Gratitude, and make it perfect, is a true Fidelity to GOD and our
selves, which is an acquired habit, or a Grace infused, by virtue of which we
keep all those Promises which we made to GOD in our holy Meditations, and all
those holy Resolves which in our best Retirements we put upon our selves to do
his Will, even in the midst of all Assaults and Temptations. It is a Virtue by
which we remain Constant in all Persecutions and Allurements; not warping, or
moving aside on any Consideration; neither melting with Pleasures, nor
flinching at Distresses; but continuing faithful to the death, that we may
obtain the Crown of Life. He certainly that sees himself a King of all Worlds,
and Brother to our Lord JESUS CHRIST (who has said, He that does the will of
my Father, is my Mother, Sister, and Brother:) will not be wrought on to
forsake or hazard so great a Bliss. His knowledge of its Perfection will
animate his Soul with all Fidelity.

IT will draw him from the World too, and make him desire to be much alone,
that he may be much with GOD. A Covetous man will be telling his Moneys, an
Ambitious man aspires to be always near the Kings Person, an Epicure is for
his Wine, or Women, or Feasts continually. A Virtuous man is more Covetous,
more Ambitious, more prone to Celestial Epicurisme, if I may so speak, than all
the World besides: And so art thou, if thou art really engaged in the study of
Felicity. A Pious man has greater Treasures, higher Honors, more pure
Pleasures, sincerer and truer Delights, a more glorious Friend than all the
Earth beside. Why should we not enjoy him, why should we not retire to adore
him, why not delight in Devotion and Communion with him? There a Man is to feed
by sweet Contemplation on all his Felicities: He is there to pray for open
Eyes, and a pure Heart, that he may see GOD. There thou art to exercise thy
strengths, and acquaint thy self with him, to look into all Ages and Kingdoms,
to consider and know thy self, to exp^ciate in the Eternity and Immensity of
GOD, and to gain that GODLINESS, which with real Contentment is Great Gain.
There thou art to stir up thy self, by way of pure Remembrance, to recollect
thy scattered and broken Thoughts, and to cloth thy self with all thy
necessary Perfections.

FOR Godliness is a kind of GOD-LIKENESS, a divine habit, or frame of Soul,
that may fitly be accounted The fullness of the stature of the Inward Man. In
its least degree, it is an Inclination to he Like GOD, to Please him, and to
Enjoy him. He is GOD-LIKE that is high and serious in all his Thoughts, humble
and condescending in all his Actions, full of love and good will to all the
Creatures, and bright in the knowledge of all their Natures. He delights in all
the Works of GOD, and walks in all the Ways of GOD, and meditates on all the
Commandments of GOD and covets all the Treasures of GOD, and breaths after all
his Joys! He that hates all that GOD hates, and desires all that GOD desires,
and loves all that GOD loves, and delights in all his delights, is GODLY: He
that aspires to the same End, by the same Means, and forms himself willingly to
the same Nature. Every Like in Nature draws to its Like, the Beautiful, and
the Wise, and the Good, and the Aged; but especially the GOD-Like. There is
more reason why they should delight in each other. They have more Attractives
and Incentives. GODLINESS, or GOD-LIKENESS is the cement of Amity between GOD
and MAN. Eternity and Immensity are the sphere of his Activity, and are often
frequented, and filled with his Thoughts. Nothing less than the Wisdom of GOD
will please the GOD-LIKE Man: Nothing less content him, than the Blessedness
and Glory of his Great Creator. He must enjoy GOD, or he cannot enjoy himself.
That is, he must rest satisfied in him, as the Creator, the Lawgiver, the Lord
and Governor of the World; and for that end must be completely satisfied with
the Glory and Perfection of all his Works, and Laws, and Ways. He must delight
in all his Counsels, that he may enjoy him as the Great Counselor of all
Nature; and see the Beauty of his Mind, that he may take pleasure in him as the
Blessedness of the Angels, the Redeemer of Men, the Sanctifier of his Elect
People, and the Sovereign End of all things. He must enjoy him as his own
supreme and eternal Object, his King, his Father, Bridegroom, Friend,
Benefactour, All in all. Which he can never do, till he sees GOD to be the best
Father, the best King, the best Benefactour, Bridegroom and Friend in all the
World: Nor that, till he sees the Beauty of the whole Creation, the great and
wonderful things of his Law, the mavelous glory of his All-wise
dispensations, the Sacred perfection of his Decrees, and the nature of his
Essence: And all these must be as sweet and satisfactory to himself, as they
are to the Deity. To be GOD-Like is a very sublime and most glorious
Perfection: which no man can attain, that is not either curiously satisfied in
all these things, or humbly confident of their Beauty and Perfection. And for
Cause have we thus written upon all the Virtues, that all that need it, and
read the Book may be elevated a little higher than the ordinary Rate, have
something more erect and Angelical in their Souls, be brought to the Gates (at
least) of GODS Kingdom, and be endued with GODLINESS a little more completely
by their Care, than hitherto they have been; because they know, both that GOD
is, and is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

FINIS.

