THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF TWO Popish Priests, ANDREW BROMMICH and WILLIAM
ATKYNS, for High Treason at Stafford Assizes, August 16, 1679.

WITH An Account of the Notable Equivocation of some Witnesses of the Romish
Church there produced.

AND The Reason thereof from their own Authors.

Mr. Stephen Dugdale, one of the Grand Evidences of the POPISH PLOT being there
present.

LONDON, Printed for John Amery at the Peacock in Fleet Street. 1679.

THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF TWO Popish Priests, etc.
WEre there no other Evidence of a Popish Plot lately, I wish I could not say
still carried on, for subverting the Established Government and Religion of
these Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland, (the only remaining Bulwark of the
Protestant Interest throughout the World;) The unusual Resort and numerous
Swarms of Jesuits, Priests, and other Romish Locusts from their Outlandish
Seminaries of Rome, Valladolid, Saint Omers, Doway and Rhemes (those constant
Nurseries, and for about one hundred years continued Rendezvous of Rebellion
and Treason, ever since Allen, afterward a Cardinal, laid the first Platform
at Doway in the year 1568) that have of late come into England; might be a
sufficient proof that they had some more than ordinary design in hand. For
though by the Statute of the twenty seventh of Elizabeth, on most just and
necessary reasons, viz. Their disowning her Majesty's Right to the Crown, and
justifying her Deposal by the Pope, and that all (...) Subjects were discharged
from their Allegiance, and all obedience to her, etc. It was made Capital for
any of those Seminarists to come into these Kingdoms; so that their first
setting a step on English Ground was by Law High Treason, yet such is their
confidence, that well knowing the premises, they daily came over in great
numbers, and as if they had a public indulgence, did not stick continually to
pervert and seduce his Majesty's Subjects to the Idolatries and Superstitions
of the Romish Church. Yet had this been all, and managed with any modest
colorable pretense of Conscience, it might possibly have been born with by our
most Gracious Sovereign, the best and most merciful of Princes, without
exacting the severity of those Laws^ but when th^se very men so obnoxious
before to just punishment, have so far abused his Majesty's Lenity, and
compassionate good nature, as to contrive, and vigorously promote horrid
Designs against his Sacred Life, and what is yet more dear to him, the true
Protestant Religion, as it is most appa^e^t they lately have done, it cannot
but be thought high time to re^train their insolence, by putting in execution
those wholesome Laws, which their continual Treasonable Pra^ti^^^ (...) not
only justified, but rendered absolutely n^cess^ry for the preservation of his
Life and Crown.

In pursuance hereof, in such a juncture of Affairs, the Honorable Judges of
Assize had particular order to give in charge the strict prosecution of all
Jesuits and Popish Priests that might be discovered in their respective
Circuits; and it is wonderful, considering the subtle Disguises and Caution of
that sort of Men, and the secrecy of their seduced Followers, who as strictly
conceal their Priests, as those do their Confessions, that so many should be
discovered.

At the Assizes of Stafford there were no fewer than nine persons charged as
Popish Priests, whereof two, viz. George Hopson and Robert Peter's, as being
it is said obnoxi^us to an Indictment of another nature, are to be removed to
London, the Writs for that purpose being now in the Sheriff's hands: five
others suspected o^ violent pres^mptions to be Jesuits, are ordered to remain
in custody till the next Assizes; the evidence against them that ^^pears for
the present, not being full enough, according to the mercifulness of our
English Laws, to proceed against them to a Legal Conviction: though it is
credibly reported, and reasonably believed there will, before that time, come
in sufficient and demonstrable proof.

The other two, viz. Andrew Brommich, late of Perry-^a^, and William Atkyns of
Wolver-hamp^on in this County of S^afford (for the multitude of Papists
roosting there^ commonly called Little Rome) did now come to their Trials. The
first was a young lusty brisk Fellow, lately come from beyond the Seas, and as
he pretended (according to the usual Arts of that Tribe who are never to seek
for an excuse) a Merchant heretofore in France and Portugal: which may pass
well enough under the favor of a Catholic Figure. For no doubt he had good
store of Roman Commodities ^o vend amongst his silly Popish Chapmen, as
consecrated B^ads, Crucifixes, Agnus Dei's, Pardons, Indulgences, and such like
Trumpery, with not a little Sedition, Rebellion and Treason in to the Bargain.
The first and most material Witness to prove him a Priest, was one Anne
Robinson, who about a year ago was a Papist, and then seduced to that Religion
by a wheadling Priest, who is since fled; but upon consideration of the horrid
Plot carried on by those of that Religion, and the charitable pains of some
Protestant Divines, she has been reduced again to the Church of England. The
Evidence she gave against him, was to this effect.

That about Christmas last he said Mass, and she received the Eucharist, or
Sacrament from him in a Wafer, (...) a private Popish Conventicle, six or seven
being then in company^ and before that time twice at one Mr. Purcel's, and
twice at one Mr. Birch's.

But most observable it was, that there being two o^he^s, known Papists,
summoned in for Evidence, and whom she swore positively to have received the
Sacrament^ and heard him say Mass the same times with her; they
notwithstanding, according to the common Principles and Practices of their
fraudulent Religion, which teaches them ^o dispense with truth, or the most
^acred Oath, to save a Priest from danger, did foully equivocate in their
Evi^^nce, and denied that they knew him; but the contrary was proved upon them
and thereupon, and other concurrent Evidence, and irrefragable Circumstances,
the Ju^y was (...), and brought him in Guiltsy.

But lest any affron^ed Papi^^ should say, or weak P^o^^stant think, that I
wrong the Popish Church, in asserting, that they teach, a person may lawfully
deny the truth, or affirm a lie, though upon Oath, to secure one of their
Priests, I shall here make it good from their own approved Authors, and then
leave the indifferent Reader to judge what account is to be made of these men's
perjury, or the late impudent Lies of the Novices from S. Omers against Doctor
Oates's Testimony. Our first proof shall be taken from no less than a whole
Popish College, viz. that of Rhemes, who in their Annotations on their English
Translation of the New Testament, upon Acts 23. verse 12. lay down this
Doctrine in these express words, -- If thou be put to an Oath to accuse
Catholics for serving God, as they ought to do, or to utter any innocent man
to God's Enemies, and his, thou ought first to refuse, such unlawful (...)
but if thou have not constancy and courage so to do yet know thou, that such
Oaths bind not at all in Conscience and Law of God, but may, and must be broken
under pain of damnation.

Secondly, to show you how you shall shift and deny the Truth in such Cases, I
shall cite another Document of theirs, in a Book Inti^uled, -- A Treatise,
tending to Pacification, Printed Permissu Superiorum, in the year 1607; and
said to be written by their famous Jesuit, Parsons. Page 426. he thus instructs
his Catholics, -- Our Doctors say, and maintn, that when the Judge is not
lawful [so with them is every Protestant Judge, especially when he meddles with
their Priests] or that ^e (...) of secrets which appertain not to his
jurisdiction, then any Witness may refuse to answer, yea, though he has first
(...) to answer directly, may use a Refuge, that is to say, (...) may deny all
in ^or^, (...) use doubtful, or Equivocal words, and (...) manner of ordinary
Evasions, which if they prevail not then he may deny, and s^y, Nihil scio,
nihil vidi, nihil audivi^ I know nothing of the matter^ ^ have seen nothing, I
have heard nothing, reserving [Pray, observe the horrid Chea^, how to baulk an
Oath^ and stifle Conscience in Roman Catholic Way] in his (...) (of the
intended equivocating Sentence) that (...) seen nothing, nor heard nothing
within (...)

The ^ame (...) assertin^ and justifying the use of Equivocation, recites with
approbation this Case, put by one Sotus^ one of (...) Doctors: -- If, says he,
I ^a^ing seen Peter (...) John, (...) being afterward examined upon the same
injustly, (and we guess how far that will extend in a Catholic Sense) whether
I may say I know nothing thereof? To which he gives this Answer; --
Respondetur quod jure possum respondere, Nescio; quia jure intelligitur,
nescio, ut dicam; aut nescio eo modo quo jure debeam dicere: I affirm, that I
may rightly answer, that I know nothing thereof, that is, I know it not to
declare it; or I know it not in such a manner, as by Law I ought to utter the
same.

An hundred such Instances might be given from their own approved Pens; and who
can think but the private Instructions of their little Father-Confessors are
agreeable to these Rules of their great Doctors; and therefore it is no wonder
if these two well disciplined Papists denied upon their Oaths, that they knew
this their Ghostly Father Mr. Brommich, that is, they did not know him in their
sense to be guilty of Treason, or to have taken Orders at Jerusalem, or any
thing else that they should please to have reserved in their fallacious minds.
As for the other person indicted, Mr. Atkyns, the Evidence was very full and
home, that they heard him say Mass and Prayers in an unknown Tongue, that they
saw him administer the Sacrament in a Wafer, after the manner of the Church of
Rome; and one of the Witnesses swore directly, that he himself had been at
Confession with him, and received absolution from him; so that he was likewise
brought in guilty: and the Court proceeded to pronounce Sentence of death
against them, according to Law. But by order, their Execution is respited, till
his Majesty be further informed, and shall declare his Gracious Pleasure
therein.

There were likewise these Assizes, Tried one Mr. Keme, a Seminary Priest at
Hereford, and one William Jones of the same Quality at Monmouth. But against
each of these there being but one positive Witness, as to saying Mass in their
Vestments, administering the Sacrament, etc. and the rest of ^he Evidence only
Circumstantial, neither of them were brought in Guilty.

And hereby the whole world may take notice of, and and admire the clemency of
his Majesty, the tenderness of his Laws, and the moderation of his Protestant
Subjects; and how little reason Papists at home, or their Brethr^n abroad, have
to complain of any hardship used toward them in England, when after such
obstinacy in repeated Treasons, and Contempt of his Majesty's Proclamations,
commanding them away, and the unparallelled provocation of their Conspiracy,
yet still they are proceeded against with all kind of equity, and allowed the
utmost privileges of Law; and even those that happen to be Convicted, ofttimes
after Condemnation enjoy their Lives, by the mercy of that Prince whom their
merciless Faction would of late so impiously and ungratefully have murdered.

What rigors and severities would other Nations, and the Roman Catholics
beyond the Seas, have exercised upon such an occasion? Had the poor French
Hugonots, after all the Infringements of their Liberties, and daily
Oppressions, happened thus to have violated their Loyalty, they must not have
expected the Formalities of Law to convict them; nor the patience of Authority
to hear them, nor the Indulgence of Majesty to reprieve them. A general
Massacre, promiscuous Destruction, and exquisite Tortures had been the least
they could have hoped for from the incensed Rabble, and their Barbarous
Tyrannick Hands, who have formerly, in a base perfidious manner, slaughtered so
many thousands of them, without the least pretense either of Justice, or
Provocation.

FINIS.

