THE TRIAL OF Nathanael Thompson, John Farewell, William Pain, Before the Right
Honorable Sir Fran. Pemberton Knight. Lord Chief Justice of England, by Nisi
Prius. AT Guild Hall, London, the Twentieth of June, 1682. For Writing, and
Publishing, Scandalous Letters to Mr. Miles Prance, in Relation to the Death of
Sir EDMUND-BURY GODFREY.

LONDON, Printed for William Mason, 1682.

THE TRIAL OF Nathanael Thompson, John Farewell, William Pain.
MR. Farewell only appeared Personally, being a Prisoner in the Kings Bench,
and brought thence: But Thompson and Pain, though called, appeared not, but
only by Council.

The Jury being Impannel'd, Were as Follows: Mr. Peter Hubland Forem. Mr.
Ellis. Mr. Barry. Mr. Brooks. Mr. Bifield. Mr. Lee. Mr. Whitwood. Mr. Sambrook.
Mr. Jacob. Mr. Denew. Mr. Bailey. Mr. Howard.
Who being Sworn, the Information was Read, The Substance of which, Was this:

Mid. ss.

THe Informations sets forth, That on Tuesday next, after the Purification of
the Virgin Mary in Hillary Term, in the thirtieth and thirty one Year of this
King; Robert Green, (...) Gerrald, Henry Berry, Lawrence Hill, Dominick Kelly,
and Philbert Vernatt were Indicted, for that they Feloniously and out of Malice
forethought did make an Assault upon Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, and with a Linen
Handkerchief did Strangle the said Sir Edmund-bury, And afterward on Wednesday
next after the Purification of the Virgin Mary in Hillary Term, in the
thirtieth and thirty one Year of this King, the aforesaid Robert Green, Henry
Berry, and Lawrence Hill, by Writ of Habeas Corpus, were brought to the Kings
Bench Bar to plead to the said Indictment, and thereupon they said they were
not Guilty, and put themselves upon their Country, and thereupon Issue was
Joined, and were found Guilty by a Jury of the Felony and Murder aforesaid, and
thereupon were Executed. And that one Miles Prance being Produced as a Witness
for the King, then gave Evidence against the said Green and others, to Prove
them Guilty of the Felony and Murder aforesaid. And likewise William Bedlow,
John Brown, Elizabeth Curtis, and others, were Produced as Evidence for the
King, against the said Hill and others. And that one Nathaniel Thompson,
William Pain, and John Farewell being Devilishly affected to Scandalize the
said Prance, Bedlow, Brown and others in their said Evidence, and abscond and
detect Machinations of the Papists against the King, etc. And endeavoring to
persuade all Persons that the said Hill and others were Executed unjustly, and
that the said Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey Murdered himself, And the said Thomson,
Pain, and Farewell, to fulfill their wicked Intentions falsely and Devilishly
made a Scandalous Book Entitled a Letter to Mr. Miles Prance in Relation to
the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey which follows in these Words, (Thomsons
Intelligence recited Verbatim,) And the said Thompson, Pain, and Farewell
knowing the said Libel to be Wicked, Scandalous, and False, unlawfully and
Devilishly did utter and Publish in the great Contempt of Public Justice, in
the evil Example of all others in the same Case Offending, against the Peace,
etc.

To this they Pleaded not Guilty.

Crier. O Yes! O Yes! O Yes! If any man can Inform my Lord the Kings Justice,
the Kings Attorney, before this Inquest be taken, against any the persons
Informed against; let them come forth and they shall be heard.


C. Thompson. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, This is an Information
against Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain and John Farewell, for Printing and
Publishing several Scandalous Libels about the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey;
whereas we are satisfied that Green, Berry and Hill were Indicted, Tried and
found Guilty, and Executed for the Murder of the same person, upon the Trial of
the same matter, several Witnesses were Examined, viz. Mr. Bedlow, Mr. Prance
and others; and by the Inquisition of the Coroners it appears that the said Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was killed by persons unknown, though after this it has
sufficiently appeared who were the Murderers, and some of them have received
their due Reward for that so horrid a Crime, by the public Justice of the
Nation. Yet these Persons have Maliciously Printed and exposed several
Scandalous Letters to Mr. Miles Prance, reflecting on Sir Edmundbury Godfrey,
as if he had Murdered himself, and likewise on all the Witnesses as if they had
Contradicted themselves in the Trial of Green, Berry and Hill: Now if we can
prove them Guilty of these Scandalous Libels remitted, we doubt not but you
will find them Guilty of the matter of the Information.


Clark. Read the the Indictment of Green, Bury, Hill and Kelly, the 12th. of
October, the 30th of the King; which being Read, it plainly appeared, that they
were Indicted and found Guilty of the Murder of Sir E. B. Godfrey.


C. Thomp. Mr. Saunders [being of Council with one of the Defendant,] will you
put us upon proof that they were Executed for the same?


Mr. Saunders. Yes.


Crier. Captain Richardson come into Court.


C. Thomp. Captain Richardson, were Green, Berry and Hill Executed for this
Crime?


Capt. Rich. Yes Sir, they were Executed for the Murder of Sir E. B. Godfrey
and I saw them Executed.


Council. Mr. Prance, did you give Evidence against Green, Berry and Hill, for
the Murder of Sir E. B. Godfrey?


Prance. Yes Sir, I did.


Council. Was Brown a Witness too?


Prance. Yes.


Coun. Was Elizabeth Curtis?


Prance. I Don't know, but I think she was.


Coun. Eliz. Curtis, were you a Witness for the Murder of Sir E. B. Godfrey.


E. Curtis. Yes if it please your Honor, my Lord.


Crier. Sir John Nicholas, Sir Philip Floyd, W^lliam Bridgeman Esquire; make
room there Officers, go out, make room there for the Witnesses to come in.
These three Gentlemen were sworn.


L. C. J. Sir Philip Floyd, were these Papers owned by Thompson, Farwell, and
Pain, look on them.


Sir Ph. F. My Lord, these are the two Papers I indorst with my own hand, and
they owned them to be their Writing, Farewell writ one of them, and Pain the
other, and they acknowledged that Thompson Printed them, and Thompson likewise
consest the same before the Council. Sir John Nicholas, and Esquire Bridgman
spoke to the same effect.


Sir Fra. Withins. My. Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, you see that
Farewell and Pain owned the Writing of them and Thompson the Printing of them.


Mr. Saunders. Which was it that Farewell did own.


Sir J. Nicholas. Farewell did own the first read in Council, and the other the
second, but I cannot certainly say which, but I marked them.


L. C. J. Do you believe those Notes and Minutes to be true?


Sir John. Yes I took the Notes my Lord.


Council. Sir Philip, did Thompson own the things produced the 29th of March as
Printed by him?


Sir Phil. Yes.


L. J. C. Read the Letters.

Both the Letters being Read, and Nath. Thomsons Intelligences, Numb. 125. and
127. Read likewise.


Serj. Maynard Spoke here very Learnedly, and descanting on these Letters, and
Pamphlets, but with so low a voice that was not Intelligible to the Writer.


Mr. Sanders. My Lord, Of all this Charged there is nothing against Pain but
the second Letter. My Lord, he owns it as a very rash and unadvised Act, but no
malicious Act. Pain nor none of his Family (My Lord) have been Enemies to the
Government, or charged with malicious designs against it, but this Act its
Foolish and Inconsiderate, and we cannot Justify it, we submit our selves to
your Lordship.


L. C. J. You have promised to prove it, and I will hear whatsoever you can
prove, I will hear any kind of proof you can make for it. It is a business of
mighty concern, and therefore not slightly to be past over.


Council, We are sorry at what we have done, and we have offered to give the
Brothers any Satisfaction they desire, or we are Capable of.


L. C. J. Do not say so, for they told me themselves that they would make out
what they had said by five hundred Witnesses.


Council. Farewell and Pain are not Papists as they are reputed to be, but are
Protestants, for they have received the Sacrament.


L. C. J. Pray call your Witnesses, and make the best on it you can.


Crier, -- Boales, -- Scot, Mr. Pains Witnesses.


L. C. J. You shall be admitted to prove any thing you can, because they did
say, that they would prove it by five hundred Witnesses, and make it as plain
as the day.


C. Thomp. Since their hearing before the Council they Vaunted in Thompsons
Intelligence, that they were ready with threescore Witnesses to prove all they
had said.


Council, Call Thomsons Witnesses.


Crier, William Ward, Fra. Hacker, Tho. Scot.


One of them present, said I Will go call the rest.

Crier, And will you come again?


Council, I am Council here for Mr. Thompson, who by the Direction of Mr. Pain,
and Farewell, Printed these Papers upon their promise to make them good, and
they have both confessed that they were Written by them, and Printed by him,
although now they design to cast the burden upon his Shoulders; My Lord, as its
a great mercy (the Murder being Committed) that Persons concerned therein, have
been Detected and Punished, so it is a great mercy that the Authors of these
Letters are Discovered, and so also of the two Intelligences, they were as much
the Authors of the one as the other; My Lord, Thompsons Intelligence is well
known to be open to all that will come and put any thing into it, and he is
paid for his pains.


L. C. J. He will be paid for his pains too, I hope.


Crier, Edward Fisher, John Hazard, Mr. Culling, John Rawson and his Wife,
Witnesses for Farewell.


L. C. J. Hazard, begin, what say you Sir?


John Hazard, My Lord, It was early in the Morning about six a Clock, and
happened the same day after Sir E. B. G. was found, Mr. Pain desired me to walk
with him, and coming toward the White House we understood Sir E. B. G. was
found, I had known him full twenty Years before, and therefore knew him at
first sight, his Shoes were clean Bottom and Top, with Seeds sticking to them,
as if he had been in a Hay-mow.


L. C. J. Where was he?


Hazard, Upon a Table when I saw him, Then Mr. Pain desired me to go to the
place where he had lain in the Ditch, and Mr. Pain conducted me to the place,
where I saw several Gobbits of Blood by the Ditch side.


Crier, William Batson, -- Sworn.


William Batson, Mr. Farewell and I walked into the Fields in the Morning.


Williams, Did you invite Mr. Farewell to go thither?


Batson, No* he desired to walk.


Williams, Did he carry you to the White-House before he went to the place
where his Body lay?


Batson, No.


W^lliams, Did Farewell bring you to the place where the Body lay, when it was
carried to the White-House?


Batson, Yes Sir, Farewell showed me the place, and then conducted me to the
House.


Council, How came you to go to this place?


Batson, The News was brought by a Fellow who was not believed, and by consent
a Porter was sent out to inquire the Truth, when the Porter returned, he said
the Body of Sir E. B. G. was found, and carried to the White-House, we ran
thither and were there quickly, and there was not above six there beside our
selves.


Council, Did Farewell when he carried you to the Ditch, say that was the place?


Batson, Yes.


Council, Did any Body show you the place beside Farewell.


Batson, I had no acquaintance with any but him.


Council, Did any show you the place, but Farewell, I say?


Batson, No Sir.


Council, Did he go directly?


Batson, We went directly, we went the straitest way to the place, and past
over some Ditches.


Council, Was any there beside Mr. Farewell and you, at the time you went over
Ditches, Did any direct you?


Batson, No.


Another Witness -- called and Sworn.

Witness, My Lord, That Morning the Murder was discovered I went with two or
three of my Neighbors to see as others did, and when we came to the
White-House I saw Sir E. B. G. lie on the Table, his face looked swarthy, and
he seemed as though he had been Strangled, thence I walked to the Ditch, where
they said his Body had lain, they showed me Blood there, but whether his or no,
I cannot Swear.


L. C. J. Was it a Frost then?


Answer, I do not know whether it was a Frost or no, it is so long since, it to
me looked like Blood that was laid there, rather then any thing else.


Another Witness, My Lord, I was Carpenter to my Lord -- and I was sent for to
the White-House, and as I went to take Orders, I heard the Report that Sir
Edmond was found, I went on to my designed place, and when I came there, I saw
Sir Edmond lie dead on the Table, I turned his Coat up, I saw two wounds within
an Inch and half of one another, the one went no further then the bone, and the
other through his back, and they brought to me the Sword which they said, they
had pulled out of his Body. There was an Order to get him stripped, I pulled off
his Shoes, his Shoes were clean, I pulled off three pair of Stockings, and a
pair of Socks, I pulled off his black Breeches and Drawers, We set him on his
breech upon the Table, with his Legs hanging down, unbuttoned his Coat and
Wastcoat pulled them off, but we could not bend his Arms when we came to his
Shirt, so we tore it open. Upon his Back, there was some Blood, but upon his
Flannel there was none. I have one thing more to say, There was a place Black
round about his Throat, which looked as if he had been Strangled, and his Neck
was weak and loose, and had no strength at all in it, by which its Evident he
was Murdered.


Farewell, The Blood is one of the Arguments which induced me to do what I have
done: For as to the Circle about the Throat it is no more then sometimes attend
Persons in an Ordinary way, I was not present in the Court at the Trial of the
supposed Murderers, when it was strongly pretended there was no Blood there,
whereas I Will Swear there was near a handful of Blood (My Lord) and I will tell
you who laid it there.

Call Rawson and his Wife.


Crier, Rawson and his Wife -- Sworn.


Farewell, This man was the man that helped the Body out of the Ditch, and
carried it to the House, let him speak to it.


Rawson, I was the Person who upon the first Discovery of the Body, pulled him
out of the Ditch, when I had so done, pulled the Sword out, which was run
through him, and then removed him to the House, There was Blood, or like Blood
and Water came from him, and carrying him into the House, while going in at the
door his Back did swing against the side of the door, and there was some Blood
and Water left there, and likewise upon the Table where he was laid, and the
Floor, and some in the Cellar.


L. C. J. Did the Blood run from the Body on the Table, from thence to the
Floor, and then into the Cellar.


Rawson, There was Blood in all these places, but I cannot say how it came
there, unless it came from the Body.


L. C. J. Upon your Oath do you know that was Blood?


Rawson, I will not Swear whether it was clear Blood or no.


(At which was a great noise in the Court.)

Crier, Silence.


Farewell. My Lord, I desire the same Question may be asked Rawson's Wife;
Whether the Blood did not run from the Body on the Table on the Floor, and down
into the Cellar.


Raws. Wife, As Sir E. B. Godfrey's Body laid along on the Table, the Blood and
Water ran from the Table on the Floor.


L. C. J. And did it run into the Cellar too?


Raws. Wise, I am sure the Bottles were wet with Blood there.


Farewell, My Lord, now to the next Point, it is the difference between Mr.
Bedlow's and Mr. Prance's Evidence, I have the Journal of the House of Lords,
and I will undertake to prove it. Call John Stanly.


Crier, John Stanly, Come into the Court.


L. C. J. What is it you would have of him?


Farewell, I would have him prove the Copy of the Journal of the House of Lords.


L. C. J. What use do you then make of it?


Farewell, I say there is a great difference between the Evidence of Bedlow and
him, and I will produce the Journal to prove that whereas Prance said he was
strangled with a Handkerchief, Bedlow in his Depositions before the House of
Lords asserted he was stifled with a Pillow.


L. C. J. Can you prove that Bedlow gave that Evidence?


Farewell, Yes my Lord, by Mr. Whinyard, Walker, and others. Call them.


Crier, Mr. Whinyard, Mr. Walker, Mr. Hobbs, Mr. John Chase, Mr. James Chase,
-- sworn.


Farewell, I ask Mr. James Chase but this Question, who it was unbuttoned his
Collar?


James Chase, That day, after the Body was found, I went in company to the
Field, and then to the place where they said the said Body had been; I looked
into the Ditch, and could see no sign of Blood there; but on the side of the
Ditch, four or five yards distant, was some, as appeared to me; which they said
had followed the Sword when it was pulled out of the Body. Then I went where
the Body lay, and viewed it. I saw two wounds under the left Pap, his Throat
was black and blew upon opening the Collar near the breadth of an Hand, and his
Face was very much swelled: I believe he was strangled by others, for I cannot
believe all those Injuries could otherwise attend him after he was dead.


Crier, Mr. Hobbs -- sworn.


Farewell, I desire that Mr. Hobbs may be asked, If he did not propose to Mr.
Michael Godfrey that his Brothers Body might be opened, whereby he might
certainly know whether he was murdered or no.


Mr. Hobbs, My Lord, I did believe he was strangled.


L. C. J. Mr. Hobbs, Did you desire his Body might be opened? And did you say,
It might be very well, if Mr. Michael Godfrey would send for a Doctor and
Surgeon from the Court, to have him opened, that all might be fully satisfied
that he was murdered?


Mr. Hobbs, My Lord, I was satisfied in my self that he was strangled and had
those wounds from others; I did not advise it for my particular Information,
but that of others.


L. C. J. Pray what color was his Face?


Mr. Hobbs, He was black and swarthy, and the white of his Eyes and the Blood
Vessels were as full as those that are troubled with Sore Eyes.


Farewell, I desire to know whether he had Fly-blows in his Eyes?


L. C. J. Had he Fly-blows in his Eyes?


Mr. Hobbs, No my Lord.


Mr. John Chase, I walked to see this Body which I heard was found, I found a
great Contusion upon the left Muscle. I troubled my self no more at that time.
I was desired after this by Doctor Lloyd to go with him, and coming there to
review the Body, I observed a Swelling under the left Ear, together with
several other Contusions, which were very surprising, for (my Lord) I never
found any so contused in all my life. My Lord, When we had heard the Matter of
Evidence and the Persons charged with the Crime, Mr. Farewell one day called me
aside, and told me what proof he could make in this Business against the
Evidence. Then said I, Mr. Farewell you are my Friend, I would advise you for
your good; I believe nothing can be made appear against it. I saw not Mr.
Farewell for a considerable time after: Afterward on the Eve of Easter Day I
met Mr. Farewell, and it was thus; I had been drinking a Glass of Wine with
some Friends, Mr. Farewell came in and asked for one; so they knowing him,
called for another Bottle* Said I, Because Mr. Farewell is come, I will drink
another Glass with him, although I was taking my leave. We fell into some
Discourse, and talking of this Subject, he told me, That Six Months before I
had given him good Counsel, if he could have taken it.


Crier, Mr. Smith the Cook, Mr. Tho. Smith, Mr. Brown, -- sworn.


L. C. J. Mr. Farewell, What would you have from these Witnesses?


Farewell, My Lord, I would have you to ask, Whether Sir E. B. Godfrey's Eyes
were not Fly-blown?


L. C. J. Mr. Brown, It Is proposed to you by Mr. Farewell, Whether the Eyes of
Sir E. B. Godfrey were Fly-blown?


Mr. Brown, No my Lord, not that I saw.


L. C. J. Was there any specks that were like Fly-blows?


Farewell, My Lord, I Will call two Witnesses more, and will prove it.


Mr. Brown, No my Lord, I saw no specks like Fly-blows. Mr. Farewell was with
me, and told me his Eyes were Fly-blown, and would fain have me said such
things, if I would have said them.


[ A great Notse about the Court.]

Crier, My Lord the Kings Justice commands all Persons to keep silence upon
pain of Imprisonment.


Mr. Brown, He came another time, and told me, that I was wrong in my
Affidavit, as though he knew it better than my self.


L. C. J. Where was this?


Mr. Brown, He was at my House.


L. C. J. Was Mr. Pain with him?


Mr. Brown, My Lord, I did not know Mr. Pain, and therefore cannot say whether
he was there or no.


Council, Do you know Mr. Thompson, was he with him?


Mr. Brown, I know not Thompson, therefore cannot say that he was.


Crier, Mr. Nath. Thompson and Mr. Pain, being called, did not appear.


L. C. J. What do you ask Mr. Smith?


Farewell, The same Question about the Blood, and whether he did not carry some
of it away in his Handkerchief?


L. C. J. Pray tell Mr. Farewell Whether you took up any of Sir E. B. Godfrey's
Blood, and carried it home in your Handkerchief?


Mr. Smith, My Lord, When I went that way Sir E. B. Godfrey's Body was removed,
before I got thither; I viewed the place where they said he laid: and indeed I
was asked, Whether I saw any Blood there?


L. C. J. Did you not take any of Sir E. B. Godfrey's Blood in your
Handkerchief?


Smith, No not I, my Lord.


Farewell, Call Rawson and his Wife. My Lord, I will prove by these Witnesses
that his Eyes were Fly-blown.


L. C. J. Rawson, Mr. Farewell enquires of you, If you saw any thing like
Fly-blows in Sir E. B. Godfrey's Eyes?


Rawson, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Did you observe the Flies busy at that time of the year?


[ A great Laughter in the Court, the time being in the midst of October. and
Snowy Weather.

Rawson, I did see something like Fly-blows.


Farewell, Call Rawson's Wife.


Crier, Rawsons Wife, come into the Court.


Rawson. I must fetch her then.


Crier, Make Room there for Rawson and his Wife.


People, They will not come.


Crier, Make Room for them if they will come. Rawson's Wife, Rawson's Wife,
come into the Court.


Answ. Here.


Crier, Make room there, stand clear there, make room.


L. C. J. Woman, Mr. Farewell desires to know if there were Fly-blows in the
Eyes of Sir E. B. Godfrey.


R. Wife, My Lord, people said they were Fly-bows.


L. C. J. He asks too what you say to the Corners of his Mouth and Nostrils.


R. Wife, I did not take much notice of them; but they did say they were
Fly-blown.


Farewell, I have seen many a one who have dyed a natural death, in whom I have
seen as much alteration as in him, and my Lord, I can prove, that the
Discoloring of the Face, and the Circle about the Neck, might have another
cause then they make the World believe. Crier, Call -- the Kings Surgeon. --
Sworn.


L. C. J. Farewell says, That many persons dying a Natural Death may look as he
did.


Surg. My Lord he was certainly strangled, and sometimes persons may be
strangled and yet look pale: If that which strangled him had been taken away
while his Body was warm, the Vessels would have been less, and his Face would
have been very Pale: Therefore it is evident that that which strangled him, was
not removed till his Body was cold, which was the occasion of that blackness;
for the Knot remaining, the Blood could not run away: He had as high a Color
as if in a Scarlet Feavor; and the Blood that was seen by me four yards from
the Ditch, I put my finger into it, and it smelt like Blood a fortnight or
three Weeks from any Body. My Lord, I presume it was Blood came off the Womb,
etc. His Neck was very much swelled and black, on one side of his Mouth he was
discolored; wherever any Man is bruised while he has life, or while warm,
the parts so bruised when dead will soonest corrupt; as is a common thing. Mr.
Chess the Apothecary unbuttening his Collar found two great Creases about his
Neck, and desired me to come and see it; and the mark was like that of a strait
Ring upon a Finger, and while we withdrew to drink two or three Glasses of
Beer, there remained only this Crease above.


Sir F. Winington, Do you believe he killed himself now Mr. Farewell?


L. C. J. Were his Eyes Fly-blown and Shut?


Surgeon, There was something in the Corners of his Eyes that looked like
matter; but I cannot say it was Fly-blown. His Eyes were open and Blood-shotten,
like a Man that has had an extraordinary violence used toward that part; or
like a Man that has had an extraordinary Cold.


Farewell, Were not his Eye-lashes closed?


L. C. J. Were his Eye-lashes closed?


Surgeon, No my Lord, his Eyes were open.


Farewell, When I saw him his Eyes were shut I am sure.


Surgeon, I am sonsible, my Lord, that a great Storm of Hail and Rain had fallen
the Night before, and that his Cloths were as dry as mine, and as whole as mine*


Farewell, I will tell your Lordship the reason of that, he was removed by the
Constable at Seven a Clock the Night before, and they made a great Fire, and so
dried his Clothes.


[ A Laughter in the Court.]

L. C. J. Mr. Farewell, Will you call any more Witnesses?


Farewell, I will call no more, my Lord, I am looked upon with an evil eye;
they will censure me as a Papist, etc.


Council, You are Guilty of a worse Crime, Sir*


Farewell, I submit my self to the Law.


L. C. J. It matters not what Religion you are of, since ye are guilty of such
Crimes.


Serj. Maynard, Here is a high Offense against the Government and Justice of
the Nation, against the Reputation of a Person of Worth and Integrity, after
they had murdered his Person, to endeavor the murdering of his Good Name. These
persons have undertaken to manage it; all the Witnesses Mr. Farewell has
brought, have contradicted him in all he have said. No Blood, no Fly-blows, but
Stranglings, Stabs, and Bruises; and for a Man that should stab himself, how
could he bruise himself too in that manner? Yet they have asserted they would
prove it by 500 Witnesses, but could he produce but one substantial one, it
were well for him. But what have he or they to do with a matter of this nature?
The Justice of the Kingdom has past upon Green, Berry, and Hill for the said
Murder upon Clear Evidence* but suppose something might have been said, it
became them not to arraign the Government and the Justice of the Kingdom in its
Administrations. Sir E. B. Godfrey was certainly murdered, and we know by whom.
I Will produce two or three Witnesses that shall produce more than ever yet; and
if there were no more, there would be Evidence enough. My Lord, I desire that
Mr. Prance may tell us the manner of his Murder and the Circumstances.


Sol. General, Mr. Farewell has told us many Lies, and he leaves the World to
make Inferences from them, and has brought Witnesses to prove some pretended
Contradictions* and therefore Sir E. B. Godfrey murdered himself; this Fellow
is guilty of the highest malice in the World, he has told you all these things
which appear false, and from those falsities they would have inferred another,
that he murdered himself.


L. C. J. Brother Maynard, I have given him leave to bring what Evidence he
would, not that I think it material; and if he could have proved never so much,
his malice had been never the less; but we see that his own Evidence runs
counter to him. What had he to do in that Case? to what purpose should he write
Books about the Government, to traduce the Justice of it? This ought not to be
done under whatsoever pretenses. It has been sufficiently proved that Sir E. B.
Godfrey was murdered, but there are other Witnesses yet can speak to it. --
Call them.


Crier, John Okely, Mary James.


People, Make room for the Witnesses there.


Crier, Mary James.


Sol. General, Gentlemen, It Is beyond contradiction that Sir E. B. Godfrey was
murdered, and therefore shall not need further Witness to prove it; we shall
leave it to you, and shall not trouble our selves or you any further about it.


L. C. J. They did design, and would, no doubt of it, have been very much
satisfied, if they could have made some probable proof that he killed himself:
But I was desirous to hear what they could say for themselves. All the Evidence
they call, go as much against them as can be; the Evidence is as plain as the
day that the Man was killed, and killed by Strangers. Besides, Sirs, a private
person must not undertake to control the Justice of the Nation: To say he was
a just person that suffered, and I will justify it; this is not to be endured:
but I was willing to hear all that could be said, and whether a doubt could be
made; and you see his very Evidence conclude him killed, and killed by
Strangers. They are all Three in this Mischief, there is a Combination of them
to affront the Public Justice of the Nation, but the end of this Design is to
make you believe here was no Popish Plot; the Snake lies under the Bush, if
they could have vomited it, and made a tolerable Proof, That Sir E. B. Godfrey
had not been killed. But it is very plain if that could have been brought to be
a Doubt, then presently you would have had a full Cry, Oh this is a Sham, a
Sham, a thing raised against the Papists; and then the Plot and all such things
had been nothing. I leave it to you, Whether upon this Evidence you do not
believe them all Guilty of Traducing the Government and the Justice of the
Nation.


[ Then was a great Hum.]

After which, the Jury having a while consulted together, gave in their Verdict
without going from the Bar,

That the said Nathaniel Thompson, Mr. Farewell, and Mr. Pain, were all Guilty
of the Matter contained in the Information.

[ Upon which the People gave a great Shout.]

And Mr. Farewell was carried back to the King's Bench, but Thompson and Pain
not appearing, the Judgment of the Court is daily expected against them all
Three.

FINIS.

