THE TRIAL and CONDEMNATION OF Several Notorious Malefactors, at a Sessions of
OYER and TERMINER holden for the City of LONDON, County of Middlesex, and Goal
Delivery of Newgate: Beginning July 6. 1681. Ending the 9 of the same Month. AT
THE Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY.
Together with an Account of the proceedings against the Right Honorable the
Earl of Shaftsbury, and the Lord Howard Baron of Escreek. And also of a Bill of
High Treason, presented to the Grand Jury of London, against Stephen College,
of St. Ann Blackfriars.
ONE Samuel Rumny was Indicted for having two Wives, both being alive at one
and the same time, he Marrying the first in England, and Lived with her for the
space of three or four years, went beyond Sea: where at Boston in New England,
he personating a Knight of that Country, and taking his Name upon him, Married
another, to his Indictment, he Pleaded Guilty, saying, That his last Wife, who
prosecuted, was the occasion of his Committing that Felony, for she contrary
to his Inclination, Tempted him to Marry her, and that she had been a continual
Torment to him ever since.

William Richardson, and two more, being brought to the Bar, and their
Indictments read (which were, that they stood Indicted for Robing on the
Highway) to their Indictents, they all Pleaded Guilty.

William Buckly, a Youth, was Tried for the Murdering of one William
Clenchard, on the 23 of June last, near St. James's Market, after this manner,
the party Killed being a Baliffs Follower, he and 3 more, attending a Marshals
Court-Officer, to Arrest Richard Boil Esquire having some notice, that he intended
to go into the Country, they Watched for his coming out, a good part of the
day, when at last he came in his Coach, drawn by 4 Horses, and the Prisoner
riding upon a single Horse, with a Case of Pistols before him; some of the
Baliffs planting themselves on each side the Coach, to make the Arrest, whilst
the Deceased stopped the Horses, which the now Prisoner observing (and that his
Master was scufling with the rest of them) let fly a Pistol which only Grazed
upon the ground, but seeing his Master taken out of the Coach, he fired
another, laden with two Bullets, which enterd six Inches into the Belly of the
Deceased, whereupon he fell, and after having Cried out, O I am Shot, I am
Killed, he dyed upon the place, notwithstanding the Baliffs carried off their
Prisoner, against whom they had two Writs, amounting to 112 l. the Youth
alleged, what he did was in his own Defense, and that holding the Pistol up to
save him from a Blow, it unhappily went off, but it being proved, that he fired
before, and gave several Threatening Words (the Deceased being upon Executing
the Kings Writ, etc.) the Prisoner was found Guilty of Murder, for which Cases
the Law cannot allow it Manslaughter.

Elisabeth Maidstone, alias Moor, was Tried for stealing 2 Handcarcheifs, a
pair of Sleeves, Ruffles, Coifs, and other Linen, to the value of ten
shillings, from Elisabeth Manly in Cornhill, the things were proved to be
taken upon her, and after a short denial, she Confessed the Robery, and was
brought in Guilty.

Thomas Gibson and Robert Hawkson, were Tried for setting upon, and Robing
Edward Bets, Servant to Richard Cradock Esquire near Newington, taking from him, 2
Gowns, 2 pieces of Silk, Money and other things to the value of 20 l. and after
having beat and bound him, they made for London, where one of them being
Apprehended, confestd the other, who upon his Trial did acknowledge he was
there, when the Robery was done, but that he came Accidentally, and did not
meddle in taking any thing from the Prosecutor, there being three Fellows upon
him, who had him down, etc. of which the said Hawkson was one; but this Sham
would not take, for upon the Evidences Swearing point blank, that he was one
concerned, they were both found Guilty.

Ann Smith, Mary Roly, and Elisabeth Wolf, three notorious Shop-lifts, were
Tried for stealing a piece of Flowered-silk, to the worth of five pounds, out
of the Shop of Mr. Tryerwood, in Cornhill, after this manner, two of them
coming in, to cheapen Silk, whilst the other stood without, but instead of
buying, whilst the Servants were busy, they conveyed away the aforesaid piece,
which they had Cheapned and delivered it to their Confederate, but being
observed by an Opposite Neighbor, notice was given, they persued, and
Apprehended all three, she in whose Custody it was taken, Pleaded they gave it
her to carry for them, and that she never saw them before, but that was
Contradicted by some, who saw them Discoursing together, before the Felony was
Committed, the Jury believing them to be all of a Gang, brought them in Guilty.

The Petitions of the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury; William Lord
Howard, Baron of Eschreek, Stephen College, John Rouse, Prisoners in the Tower
of London, and William Hetherington, Prisoner in the County Goal of Newgate,
presented their Petitions to the Right Honorable Sir Patince Ward, Lord Mayor,
and the Judges, and Justices of the Peace, sitting on Commission of Oyer and
Terminer for London and Middlesex; In which were contained their several
Prayers, That seeing they had been Committed for High Treason, and other
Crimes, but no prosecution being made against them, they requested they might
be either speedily proceeded against, or Bailed, according to the Act made in
the thirteenth year of his now Majesty, for the securing the Liberty of the
Subject, which Petitions were read by the Clerk of the Crown, and upon Motion
of Council; Ordered to be taken into Consideration.

Mr. Attorney General objected against the Pettyt Jury for London, alleging,
They were not Churchmen, or persons fitly qualified to serve their King and
Country.

To which Mr. Sheriffs Answered, That they had returned them according to Law,
and they knew nothing to the contrary, but they were men of candid Reputations,
but in fine, they were dismissed for that time, and ordered to attend the Court
on Friday morning next, till which time the Sessions was Adjourned.

The Grand Jury according to Order, attending the Court, Mr: Attorney General
made his Exceptions against two or three of them, as not being observers of the
Kings Laws, and that the Jury were returned at the Nomination of others, which
by the Statute of Tertio Henry 8. ought not to be, but after some debate, a
Bill of High Treason was delivered to them, against Stephen College of St. Ann
Blackfriars. Wherein was specified, That he had Traitorously Conspired against
the Life of his Majesty, he intending to depose and Murder him, in Order to
which, He had provided Armor, and other Habillaments of War, to seize upon his
Majesty at Oxford, etc.

After the Reading the Indictment, Mr. Attorney desired the Witnesses might be
sworn to it, in Court, which was granted; whereupon Mr. Smith, Mr. Dugdale, Mr.
Haynes. the Two Macnamarra's and Sir W. ^ennings alleged several desperate
Treasons against him: as, that he told them, He was one that was to seize the
King at Oxford: and, that unlese he would comply with his Parliament, there
would be ready thousands to secure him: And, that he was prepared with Armor
for that purpose, which he showed them, etc. The Evidence was long, and full of
weight: So that the Jury received the Bill; after Dinner returned it Ignoramus.
And at the same time presented a Petition, subscribed, to the Court, That
whereas they were informed, That several Priests and Jesuits that lay under
Sentence of condemnation, did daily Plot and contrive by sundry Means to work
out their Ddliverance, and that by Commission from Rome, they sat and
consulted the Destruction of the Protestants, by forging diverse and sundry
devices against them, wherefore they prayed, That they might either be removed
far from this City, or other means taken to secure them from such like attempts
for the future, which Petition the Court received, and ordered to be Read, My
Lord Chief Justice promising to acquaint his Majesty with their Prayers.

John Plat took his Trial, for breaking open the House of James Holms, in the
Parish of Hornsey, in the Company of several others (some of which have been
already Executed) and taking thence Plate, wearing Apparel, coined Silver, and
broad pieces of Gold, to the value of 60 pounds, and Barbarously using the
people of the House, by Wounding, Beating of them; he pleaded he was not there,
but a great many Miles distant, at the time of the Robery, but not being able
to produce Testimony thereof, and on the other side the Prosecutor Swearing
positive, (...) was found Guilty of the Felony and Burglary.

Th Cook was tried for breaking ^pen the shop of one Will'. Smith* a Barber in
Broad st^eet, during his being above stairs and felloniously taking away a
Silver Tankard, 2 Coats, 1 Cloak 3 Perriwigs and 13 l. in money: one of the
Perriwigs being taken upon his head, when apprehended, he offering Composition;
but he once found mercy, was brought in guildy.

John Comp^on was tried for coming into a Shop in St Clement Danes, and in the
Absence of the People opened the Till of a C^unter, and took thence 6 l and
being askd, a hour after, about it, in Court denied it, saying he had Money
enough, and an Estate, but there were shrewd Circumstances, he was brought in
guilty of the Felony only.

Motion being made by Mr. Williams, late Speaker of the House of Commons, That
the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury might be bailed by reason there was
no Prosecution entered against him: there being several worthy Peers offered to
engage for him. My Lord Chief Justice told him, That nor only himself, but 9
more of the Judges, foreseeing they would make a Motion, had consulted the
Matter and were all of Opinion, It was not in their Power to deliver his
Lordship: The Tower not being within the Limits of that Commission they sat by:
but if it had been Term-time, he might have been removed to the Kings-bench-Bar
and there relieved. Mr. Wallop likewise moved for the Lord Howard, but was
answered as the former.

Mr. Francis Smith and Mr. Sam. Harris having no Prosecutions entered against
them, were discharged by Proclamation: And Mr. Hethrington styled the Manager
of the Irish Evidence, upon Bail was ordered to be set at large this Sessions.

There were 9 condemned, viz. Th. Gibson, To. Hawkson, W. Buckly, W.
Richardson, I. Plat, Ann Smith, Mary Roly, Eliz. Wolf.

4 Burnt in the hand, 3 for Transportation, and 4 to be whipped.

London, Printed for I. Guilford. 1681.


