September 13th. 1680.
I Do appoint Thomas Collins Stationer, to Print the Trial of Mrs. Cellier at
the Sessions, and that no other do presume to Print the same.

ROBERT CLAYTON Mayor.

THE TRIAL AND SENTENCE OF Elizabeth Cellier; FOR WRITING, PRINTING, and
PUBLISHING, A SCANDALOUS LIBEL, CALLED Malice Defeated, etc.

At the Sessions in the OLD-BAILEY, held Saturday the 11th. and Monday the
13th. of Sept. 1680.

WHEREUNTO Is Added Several DEPOSITIONS, made before the Right Honorable, the
LORD MAYOR.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Collins, at the Middle-Temple-Gate. 1680.

THE TRIAL OF Elizabeth Cellier, etc.
Cl. of Cr. MRS. Cellier, look to your Challenges; for the Jury that is to be
Sworn, is to pass upon you.


Cellier. Am I for my Life?


Cl. of Cr. No, but look to your Challenges.


Ld. Mayor. But if you Challenge, you must give a reason for it, Mrs. Cellier.


Cl. of Cr. Swear John Ainger. (Which was done.) Swear Richard Boys.


Cellier. I Challenge him.


Ld. Mayor. Mrs. Cellier, you must show a Cause for your Challenge.


Cellier. I did not know that, my Lord.


Mr. Baron Weston. You can Challenge none in this Case without a Cause.


Cellier. My Lord, I did not know that, then I agree he shall be Sworn. (Which
was done.)


Then the rest of the Jury without any more Challenges were Sworn: And they
were all as follows: JURY.
John Ainger. Richard Boys. John Stephens. Thomas Phelps. Gilbert Vrwin. Edward
Allanson. Richard Liveing. John Coggs. Henry Hodgsden. John Barnard. Edward
Low. James Southern.


Then Proclamation was made in Common Form for Information, and the Clerk
Charged the Jury thus:

Cl of Cr. You Gentlemen that are Sworn Elizabeth Cellier stands Indicted by
the Name of Elizabeth Cellier, Wife of Peter Cellier, of the Parish of St.
Clement Danes, in the County of Middlesex, Gent. For that she being of the
Popish Religion, not having the fear of God before her Eyes, but being moved
and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, falsely and maliciously
endeavoring and intending our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second that now
is, and the Government of this Kingdom of England; as also the true Protestant
Religion within this Kingdom of England by Law Established, to bring to hatred
and contempt; And also to bring Scandal and Infamy upon diverse Persons produced
as Witnesses, that gave Evidence on the part and behalf of our Sovereign Lord
the King, against her the said Elizabeth Cellier, and other Persons Indicted of
High Treason, the 1st. of September in the 32th. year of our Sovereign Lord
King CHARLES the Second that now is; at the Parish of St. Clement Danes in the
County of Middlesex aforesaid, Falsely, Maliciously and Seditiously, did Write
and Publish, and did cause to be Writ, imprinted and published, a Scandalous
Libel Entitled Malice Defeated, or a Brief Relation of the Accusation and
Deliverance of Elizabeth Cellier; wherein her proceedings both before and
during her Confinement, are particularly related, and the Mystery of the
Meal-Tubb fully discovered; together with an Abstract of her Arraignment and
Trial, written by her self for the satisfaction of all Lovers of undisguised
Truth. In which said Libel, are contained these False, Feigned, Scandalous
Words and Figures following, to wit, I hope it will not seem strange to any
honest and Loyal Person of what way or Religion soever, That I being born and
bred up under Protestant Parents should now openly profess my self of another
Church; meaning the Church of Rome;) For my Education being in those times,
when my own Parents and Relations, for their Constant and Faithful Affection to
the King, and Royal Family, were persecuted, the King himself murdered, the
Bishops and Church destroyed, the whole Loyal Party merely for being so,
oppressed and ruined; and all, as was pretended by the Authors of these
Villainies for their being Papists, and Idolaters, the constant Character given
by them to the King and his Friends to make them odious, they assuming to
themselves only the Name of Protestants, making that the Glorious Title by
which they pretended right to all things. These sort of proceedings, as I grew
in understanding, produced in me more and more horror of the Party that
committed them, and put me on inquiry into that Religion to which they
pretended the greatest Antipathy, wherein, I thank God, my innate Loyalty not
only confirmed, but encouraged me. And let Calumny say what it will, I never
heard from any Papists, as they call them, Priest, nor Layman, but that they
and I, and all true Catholics owe our Lives to the Defense of our Lawful King,
which our present Sovereign CHARLES the Second is, whom God long and happily
preserve so. These sorts of Doctrines agreeing to my public Morals, and no
way, as ever I was taught, contradicting my private Ones, commending at the
same time to me Charity and Devotion, I without any Scruple have hitherto
followed, glorying to my self to be in Communion with those who were the humble
Instruments of his Majesty's happy Preservation from the fatal Battle at
Worcester; and who, the poor, no temptation could invite to betray him to those
who by a pretended Protestant Principle, sought his innocent Blood. These
Truths I hope, may satisfy any indifferent Person in my first Change; nor can
they wonder at my continuance therein, notwithstanding the horrid Crimes of
Treason and Murder laid to the Charge of some Persons considerable for their
Quality and Fortunes in that Party: for when I reflected who were the
Witnesses, and what unlikely things they deposed, and observed that many of the
chiefest Sticklers for the Plot, were those or the Sons of those, that acted
the Principal parts in the last Tragedy, which History told me too had the
Prologue of a pretended Popish Plot; I say, these things made me doubtful of
the whole, and the more I searched for truth, the more I doubted that the Old
Enemies of the Crown were again at work for its destruction. I being fully
confirmed in this, thought it my duty through all sorts of hazards, to relieve
the poor imprisoned Catholics, who in great Numbers were locked up in Goals,
starving for want of Bread: and this I did some Months before I ever saw the
Countess of Powis, or any of those honorable Persons that were accused, or
receiving of one penny of their money directly or indirectly, till about the
latter end of January (78.) And in another part of the said Libel are contained
these false feigned and Scandalous Words and Figures following; to wit, About
this time I went daily to the Prisons to perform those Offices of Charity I was
obliged to, and on Thursday January the 9th (78 I dined in Newgate in the Room
called the Castle on the Masters side Debtors, and about four in the Afternoon
I came down into the Lodge with five women, of which, three were Protestants,
and we all heard terrible Groans and Squeeks, which came out of the Dungeon
called the Condemned Hole. I asked Harris the Turn-Key what doleful Cry it
was. He said it was a Woman in Labor. I bid him put us into the Room to her,
and we would help her. But he drove us away very rudely, both out of the Lodge
and from the Door. We went behind the Gate and there listened, and soon found
that it was the voice of a Strong-man in Torture, and heard as we thought
between his Groans the winding up of some Engine. These Cries stopped the
Passengers under the Gate, and we six went to the Turners Shop without the
Gate, and stood there amazed with the horror and dread of what we heard, when
one of the Officers of the Prison came out in great haste, seeming to run from
the Noise. One of us caught hold of him saying, Oh! what are they doing in the
Prison? Officer. I dare not tell you. Mistress. It Is a man upon the Rack. I Will
lay my life on it. Officer. It is something like it. Cellier. Who is it? Prance?
Officer. Pray, Madam do not ask me, for I dare not tell you. But it is that I
am not able to hear any longer. Pray let me go. With that he ran away toward
Holborn as fast as he could. We heard these Groans perfectly to the end of the
Old Bayley. They continued till near seven of the Clock, and then a person in
the Habit of a Minister, of Middle Stature, Grey-haired, accompanied with two
other men, went into the Lodge. The Prisoners were locked up, and the outward
door of the Lodge also, at which I set a person to stand, and observe what she
could, and a Prisoner loaded with Irons was brought into the Lodge, and
Examined a long time. And the Prisoners, that came down as low as they could,
heard the Person, examined with great Vehemence say often, I know nothing of
it, I am Innocent, he forced me to belly my self, what would you have me say?
Will you Murder me because I will not belly my self and others. Several other
such like expressions they heard spoken as by one in great Agony. About four of
the Clock next morning, the Prisoners that lay in a place above the Hole heard
the same Cry again two hours, and on Saturday morning again, and about eight a
Clock that morning a Person I employed to spy out the truth of that Affair,
did see the Turn-Keys carrying a Bed into the Hole. She asked who it was for:
they told her it was for Prance who was gone mad, and had tore his Bed in
pieces. That night the Examiners came again, and after an hours Conference
Prance was led away to the Press-Yard. This and many things of the like Nature,
made me very inquisitive to know what past in the Prison. Soon after this
Francis Corral a Coachman that had been put into Newgate upon suspicion of
carrying away Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey's Body, and lay there thirteen Weeks and
three days in great misery, got out. I went to see him, and found him a sad
Spectacle, having the flesh worn away, and great holes in both his Legs by the
weight of his Irons, and having been Chained so long double, that he could not
stand upright, he told me much of his hard and cruel usage, as that he had been
Squeezed and hasped into a thing like a Trough, in a Dungeon under ground;
which put him to inexpressible torment, insomuch that he soonded, and that a
Person in the habit of a Minister stood by all the while. That a Duke beat him,
pulled him by the Hair, and set his drawn Sword to his breast three times, and
swore he would run him through; and another great Lord laid down a heap of
Gold, and told him it was five hundred Pounds, and that he should have it all,
and be taken into the aforesaid Dukes house, if he would confess what they
would have him; and one F. a Vintner, that lives at the sign of the Half Moon
in Ch-si, by whose contrivance he was accused, took him aside, and bid him name
some person, and say, they employed him to take up the dead body in
Somerset-yard, and gave him money for so doing; that if he would do this, both
F. and he, should have money enough. He also told me, that he was kept from
Thursday till Sunday without victuals or drink, having his hands every Night
Chained behind him, and being all this time locked to a Staple which was driven
into the Floor, with a Chain not above a yard long: that in this great
extremity, he was forced to drink his own water; and that the Jailer beat his
Wife, because she brought victuals, and prayed that he might have it, and threw
Milk on the ground, and bid he be gone, and not look at him. And in another
part of the said Libel is contained (amongst other things) these false, fained,
and Scandalous words and Figures following, to wit, My Arraignment (which in
Confidence of my own Innocence I continually pressed for) not but that I knew
the danger, as to this life, of Encountering the Devil in the worst of his
Instruments, which are Perjurors encouraged to that degree as that profligated
Wretch (meaning Thomas Dangerfield produced as a Witness against her for
High Treason) was, and has been since his being Exposed to the World in his
true Colors, both at mine, and another Trial. And in another part of the said
Libel are contained these false feigned and Scandalous words and Figures
following. Nor have I since received any thing toward my Losses, or the least
Civility from any of them, whilst Dangerfield (meaning the said Thomas
Dangerfield) when made a Prisoner for apparent Recorded Rogueries was visited
by, and from Persons of considerable Quality, with great Sums of Gold and
Silver, to encourage him in the new Villainies he had undertaken, not against me
alone, but Persons in whose safety, all good men, as well Protestants, as
others in the three Kingdoms, are concerned. And in another part of the said
Libel called, A Postscript to the Impartial Readers, are contained these false,
feigned, and Scandalous Words following, to wit, And whenever his Majesty
pleases to make it as safe and honorable, as it is apparent it has been
gainful, and meritorious to do the contrary; there will not want Witnesses to
Testify the truth of more than I have written, and Persons that are above
being made the Hangmans Hounds for weekly Pensions, or any other Considerations
whatsoever. to the evil and dangerous Example of all others in the like Case
offending, and against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and
Dignity. Upon this Indictment she has been Arraigned, and thereunto has
Pleaded, Not Guilty, and for her Trial has put her self upon the Country,
which Country you are, so your Issue is to try, whether she be Guilty of this
Offense, in manner and form wherein she stands Indicted, or not Guilty. If you
find her Guilty, you are to say so, and if you find her Not Guilty, you are to
say so; and no more; and hear your Evidence.


Then Robert Dormer Esquire of Lincoln's Inn, opened the Indictment thus.

Mr. Dormer. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury.
Elizabeth Cellier the Gentlewoman at the Bar, the Wife of Peter Cellier of the
Parish of St. Clemens Danes in the County of Middlesex Gentleman, stands
Indicted of being the Author and Publisher of a Libel Entitled, Malice
defeated, or a brief Relation of the Accusation and Deliverance of Elizabeth
Cellier. You have heard the Indictment Read, wherein some Clauses of this Libel
are Recited in the words they were written, and in Mrs. Celliers own words, and
in other words, I will not undertake to repeat them to you.

Gentlemen, this is a Libel so Complicated and General, that within this Book
are contained as many Libels of several Natures, and against different Persons
and Orders of men as there are Paragraphs, his Majesty, and Protestant
Religion, our Laws, Government, Magistrates, Councillors of State, Courts of
Judicature, the Kings Evidence, and the Public Justice of this Kingdom are all
Aspersed and Defamed, by the virulency and Malice of this Woman's Pen.

She has Charged upon the Principles of our Religion, the Murder of his Late
Majesty, and the greatest Impieties that ever were Committed.

She accuses all that have done their Duties, or been Active in the Discovery
of the present Popish-Plot, to be Enemies of the Crown; and to be the Acting
over again the Tragedy of our Late Civil-War.

She Charge our Laws with Cruelties, as Inhumane, as they are false, in
permitting Prisoners to Starve under their Confinement, in admitting of Racks
and Tortures to be used, and that for the worst purposes, thereby to extort
Perjuries and false Evidence against the Innocent; to which she would make
Persons of the best Quality of our Nobility, Magistracy, and Clergy, Privies,
and Parties.

She Libels and King's Evidences under the Characters of the Devils
Instruments, and the Hangmans Hounds, and Defames his Majesty's Government, in
saying it is not safe to speak Truth, but Meritorious and Gainful to do the
Contrary.

She will appear to you to be so Criminal, that nothing can aggravate her
Offenses, unless the Impudence of the Delinquent, who has set her Name to
almost every Page of this Scandalous Libel; and snce the Indictment has been
depending, Owned, Published, and put a value on her self, for being the Author
of so Excellent a Book.

To the Indictment, She has pleaded Not Guilty, if the Kings Evidence prove
the Charge, you are to find her Guilty.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Gentlemen, the Charge is but this, First she is Charged with
the setting forth this Book, in the next place there are several Clauses in
that Book, which she is particularly Charged with. Now that which the Evidence
will prove must be, First, that the Book was Owned by her, and Published by
her, and then that these particulars Charged in the Indictment were in the
Book; and then you will receive the Directions of the Court, of what nature the
Proofs are. Go on to the Evidence that is your Work, fall to your Proof.


Mr. Dormer. My Lord, We will call our Witnesses.


William Downing, John Penny and Robert Stevens. (who appeared, and were Sworn.)

Mr. Dormer. Will. Downing, Do you tell my Lord, and the Jury what you know of
the Printing of this Libel: (show him the Libel,) And who brought the Sheets to
the Press.


Mr. Downing. My Lord, about the 22d or 23d of August. --


Mr. Bar. Weston. Begin with Penny first. Pray what say you to that Book?


Mr. Penny. My Lord, I was bid to buy a Book of that Gentlewoman, and I did so.
I asked for her by her Name.


Mr. Bar. Weston. By what Name?


Mr. Penny. Mrs. Cellier.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Is that the Gentlewoman?


Mr. Penny. Yes, that is the Gentlewoman. And she came out to me, and asked
what my Errand was, I told her it was to have a Book; that you may have, said
she, if you please. Madam, said I, what is the Price? Two shillings, said She.
Cannot I have them Cheaper, said I? No, said She, I sell them to Shopkeepers
for 18 s. a Dozen, and I must not sell them under here. With that She fetched
me a Book, and I gave her Two Shillings, and when She had done, She gave me
another little Paper.


Mr. Bar. Weston. That is not in Issue, nor your Question now. Did you ask her
for the Book she published and set out?


Mr. Penny. Yes, and she did acknowledge that was her Book.


Mr. Bar. Weston. What, she did own the Book she sold to you, to be hers?


Mr. Penny. This is the Book I have in my hand, and I market every Sheet of it.
And she told me there was another little Sheet to be added to it, and if any
Gentleman pleased to send it into the Country, that might be put up in a Letter
to send by the Post.


Cellier. May I ask him a Question?


Mr. Bar. Weston. Tell me your Question and I Will ask it.


Cellier. I desire to know if I said any more than you may have a Book, or
there is the Book. And who asked for a Book?


Mr. Bar. Weston. Did she say any more than you may have a Book, or this is the
Book that I have published?


Mr. Penny. When I got the Book and paid for it, I turned about again, and
asked her if it was her own. She told me it was, and more than that, if
occasion were she could have put more in it.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Why Mrs. Cellier, you did not deny this Book yesterday, for
you may remember when you did say, you wanted your Witnesses, and if you could
but have time to bring them, you would prove the Truth of it. We told you, you
had nothing to prove on this Issue of Not Guilty, but that some body else did
publish the Book, and you did not. You owned you writ it your self every word
with your own hand.


Cellier. My Lord, If I was foolish vain Woman, and did seem to speak some vain
words about my self, which I did not understand the Consequence of, I hope a
word vainly spoke by me, shall not be brought against me to convict me of a
Crime.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Mrs. Cellier, you do not seem so negligent about your self,
that we may not believe what you say of your self.


Cellier. But vain foolish words spoke in that nature, I hope, shall be no
Evidence against me.


Mr. Bar. Weston. But however it is proved against you.


Cellier. Did I say I writ it?


Mr. Penny. You told me that was your Book.


Cellier. I told you? Pray my Lord, put one Question to him upon the Oath he
has taken; did I say any more, than it was mine and I sold it, not that I writ
it, or was the Author of it.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Mrs. Cellier, This is a Book that is Entitled with your
Name, and sold by your self. Now in any ones Judgment, this is both an owning
of the Book, and publishing of the Book. When you Sold it, you gave it out as
your Book, and it has in the Title Page your Name, as the Author of it.


Cellier. My Lord, if I could have produced my Witnesses, I could have made my
defense: they have been at several places for them, they have been all about
Town, and several ways, at Sir Joseph Sheldon's, and a great many other places,
and can find none of them.


Mr. Bar. Weston. To what purpose should your Witnesses come?


Cellier. I should with them have made my Defense.


Mr. Bar. Weston. If you would have said to us yesterday, that you had
Witnesses to prove that any one else writ the Book, we would have put off the
Trial. But you said you writ it every word of it your self, and so owned the
Issue; but now you pretend you want Witnesses, to what purpose would you have
them come?


Cellier. It Is not the honor of the Bench, my Lord, to give Evidence, and I
hope you will not take that advantage of my vain words.


Mr. Bar. Weston. It Is the honor of the Bench, to repeat what you say; when
you ask time to put off your Trial, and the Court gives you direction to what
purpose Witnesses may be used, and you renounce that and take the Fact upon
your self.


Cellier. But I hope that is no Evidence.


Mr. Bar. Weston. It was spoken openly in the Court, every body heard it.


Cellier. I am surprised and have no witnesses.


Mr. Bar. Weston. It Is easy to pretend that you want Witnesses, but to what
purpose would you have them?


Cellier. My Lord, I hope you will please to remember, he Swears, I said only
it was mine, not that I was the Author.


Mr. At. Genesis If you Sold it, that is a Publishing in Law, and is within the
Indictment.


Cellier. But he did not say I writ it.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Pray Mrs. Cellier, don't trust your self upon that, for he
said after he had it, he asked you, is this your Book? You said, yes, it is my
Book, and if I had been aware, I could have put a great deal more in it than I
have done.


Cellier. But I did not say I writ it.


Mr. Penny. You said if it were to be writ again you could put more in it.


Cellier. I said it was my Book, and so it was, because it was in my
possession, but not that I writ it. This is my Fan, but it does not follow that
I made it.


Mr. Bar. Weston. But the Question was concerning the Author of the Book.


Cellier. He did ask me no such Question. Did you ask me if I was the Author?


Mr. Penny. No, I did not.


Mr. Bar. Weston. But what did you ask her?


Mr. Penny. I asked her whether it were her Book.


Mr. Bar. Weston. And did she own it?


Mr. Penny. Yes, she did.


Cellier. So it was mine, in possession.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Did you mean by your Question whether that Book was hers in
property, or she were the Author and Publisher of it?


Mr. Penny. I would know whether it was hers or no.


Mr. Bar. Weston. But what was your intention in asking, was it whether She or
any other Person made it?


Mr. Penny. I don't know who made it, She told me it was hers.


Mr. Bar. Weston. But what was your meaning in it?


Mr. Penny. My intentions was for fear she should have given me some other
Book, to know whether it was Writ by her or no.


Cellier. My Lord, I am not to be judged by his meaning, but by his Question
and my Answer.


Mr. At. Genesis Did she tell you she Sold more of them?


Mr. Penny. I turned about when I had the Book, and said I, can I have, if
occasion be, any more; she said she had but 4 or 500 left, and in a few Days
she should have more.


Mr. At. Genesis You told us, she told you what she Sold them for by the Dozen.


Mr. Penny. Yes, 18 s. the Dozen to the Shopkeepers.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Then set up Downing. (which was done,) Pray look upon that
Book and the Title of it. (which he did,) Have you Examined that Book?


Mr. Downing. Sir, I Printed part of it.


Mr. Bar. Weston. But have you Examined that very Pamphlet?


Mr. Downing. Yes, I know it very well.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Did you Print part of it?


Mr. Downing. Yes, I did.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Who brought it to you to be Printed?


Mr. Downing. Mrs. Cellier.


Mr. Bar. Weston. She her self?


Mr. Downing. My Lord, about the 22d. of August, a Messenger came to me from
Mrs. Cellier, to tell me She had something to be Printed, and She sent for me
to her House, and I went to her House in Arundel Buildings. She told me She had
a Bok to Print, and it was her own Case. I told her I was a stranger to her
Concerns, if there was nothing in it that was Offensive, I would Print it. She
told me there was nothing but the Truth and I might safely do it. She said she
had been publicly and wrongfully abused, and was resolved to publish her Case,
and would make the World sensible of the wrong She had sustained. I was apt
upon the plausibleness of her Discourse to believe her, and so I agreed with
her to have 10 s. a Ream for Printing, and I was to Print Four Ream of every
Sheet. And having Printed half the Book, the Messenger found it a Printing at
my House, and having thus found out the Press he carried it before the
Secretary, Sir Leoline Jenkins, who granted a Warrant to bring us both before
him; and having taken our Examinations, we were bound to appear before the
Privy Council as soon as Notice should be given us of it: And being discharged
by the Council we were bound to appear the First day of next Term in the
King's- Bench: Since which time She has Printed the other half of her Book at
some other place. And whereas She promised to Indemnify me from all Trouble and
Charge, when I came to pay the Clerk of the Council his Fees, She refused to
pay them for me, and told me I had betrayed her; and so notwithstanding her
promise, I was obliged to pay the Fees my self at the Council.


Mr. Dormer. Pray Sir, who was it Corrected the Sheets?


Mr. Downing. Sir, They were brought to her.


Mr. Dormer. Did she read them and Correct them?


Mr. Downing. Yes, She looked over them.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Pray tell me how far it was you Printed of the Book.


Mr. Downing. It was to Folio 22.


Mr. Bar. Weston. All the Clauses in the Indictment are contained in those
Pages.


Mr. Clare. All but the last in the Postscript.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Have you read it over since?


Mr. Downing. So far my Lord, I did Print.


Mr. Bar. Weston. You take it upon your Oath, That to the 22d. Folio of that
Book that was given in Evidence, was Printed by you by her direction.


Mr. Downing. Yes, I do.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Then set up Stevens. (which was done.)


Mr. Stevens. May it please your Lordship, I saw this Book a Printing at Mr.
Downings, and reading some Passages in it, I asked him, Mr. Downing, do you
know what you do? he said, it was a Truth; then I asked him who he did it for,
he said he did it for Mrs. Cellier; I bid him have a care that he did no more
than what he could justify. He desired me that I would not hurt him, and I was
loath to do a poor man wrong, but away I went to the Secretary, but I asked him
before, what was become of the Sheets, he said he carried them to Mrs. Cellier,
said I, did she bring you the Copy, said he, she sent it sometimes by one
Messenger, sometimes by another for she sent several, and when I came to her,
she did telll me it was her Book, and that she kept a man to write it, and she
Dictated it to another that sat by her, and she often owned it was her Book,
and she the Author of it.


Cellier. I never said so in my life.


Mr. Stevens. Mrs. Cellier, by the same Token when you sent for Bail, you had
occasion to write a Note, and I saw you write it, and said, I now find it is
none of your handwriting by the difference between the Note and the Copy. Said
she, I know that well enough, but I keep a man in the house to write it, and I
Dictated to him, and he wrote. And I have seen there one Grange and one Sing,
but Grange has come to me several times about hers and other business, and she
did tell me she did Dictate the Book to that man, and paid him for writing, it.
Says she I am up very early every morning, and preparing and Dictating things
for the Press. She has put out two sheets since, and this day at One a Clock
she has invited the Mercuries and the Hawkers to come and receive a New
Pamphlet.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Do you know her Handwriting?


Mr. Stevens. I have not that Note by me.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Did you see the Copy?


Mr. Stevens. Some part of it I did see.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Was it any part of it of her Handwriting?


Mr. Stevens. No, I believe it was none of her hand.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Was it several hands?


Mr. Stevens. I saw but one part of the Copy, and that was all of one hand, but
not hers, I believe. She said, she kept a man to write it, and she had several
other things for him to write to be Printed.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Did she before you, affirm her self to be the Author of the
Book.


Mr. Stevens. She did (if it please you) before the Secretary, and before the
Council; and said she would Answer it. And I have seen her likewise sell
several of them several days.


Mr. Dormer. Did she deliver any of these Books that you know of?


Mr. Stevens. I have seen her deliver them out, several times before me my
self, she cannot deny it.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Compare the Book with the Indictment.


Mr. Dormer. Swear Mr. Fowler. (which was done.)


Mr. Bar. Weston. What is that Fowler?


Mr. Dormer. Show him the Book if you please. (which was done) Did you Buy any
of those Books of Mrs. Cellier.


Mr. Fowler. I bought two of them. I went to her house, and told her I had a
Letter from a friend out of Oxfordshire, that desired me to buy two of her
Books.


Mr. Dormer. Is that the same in your hand?


Mr. Fowler. It Is the same as I believe. Some friends came to my house, and
told me they had seen me notoriously in Print, so I came to her, and told her I
had a Letter out of Oxfordshire for a Book or two of hers. Sir says she, I Will
fetch you one presently, she comes again with them. Madam says I, I believe you
have forgotten me.


Cellier. I know you not, I never saw you in my life before.


Mr. Fowler. No I believe not, but yet you could put me in your Book.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Why, what is your Name?


Mr. Fowler. My name is Fowler.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Where do you live?


Mr. Fowler. At the Half Moon Tavern in Ch-Si, when I am at home*


Cellier. Your name is not in the Book.


Mr. Clare. There is one F. that keeps the Half Moon Tavern in Ch-Si.


Mr. Bar. Weston. You Swear you had two Books of her?


Mr. Fowler. Yes. Madam, says I, I see you are full of business, so I paid her
4 s. for them, and away I came.


Mr. Dormer. Then you had no Discourse with her farther, who was the Author,
had you?


Mr. Fowler. No not a Syllable farther. I had only occasion to get a couple of
books; for some persons of Quality had been at my house, and told me my Name
was in it, and were pleased to Joke with me about it, as particularly, Mr.
Henry Killigrew came one day to my house, and called me into the Room, says he
you are notoriously in Print, and known to be Company for a great Duke, and
great Lords, you shall Drink a Gass of Wine now with me, and so tells me the
Story; and thereupon I went to her house to buy a couple of books.


Mr. At. Genesis You are the man meant by the (F.)


Mr. Fowler. I keep the Half Moon in Cheapside.


Mr. At. Genesis There is something supposed in this Book to be done by you, at
your going to a man in Prison, is that true?


Mr. Fowler. That I suppose is cleared by an Oath from Corral the Coachman, but
withal I gave my Oath for it before my Lord Mayor, my self.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, for the Satisfaction of People, tell us what you know of
the matter.


Mr. Fowler. The substance of my Oath before my Lord Mayor was this, That I
never was with any Great people, as they Tax me, in my life, with any great
Duke or Lord, that I never did see any of the things that they say there, that
the Duke should draw his Sword, and a Lord profler 500 l. or I Whisper to the
Coachman, that he should name some great Persons, and then he and I should have
money enough.


Mr. Bar. Weston. But I come nearer to you with a Question, Mr. Fowler.


Mr. Fowler. Yes, my Lord, if you please.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Was one Corral a Coachman apprehended for carrying away the
dead body of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, at your motion and accusation.


Mr. Fowler. As to that I will tell you the Occasion of all our Discourse, if
it may not be too tedious. Upon the Death of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, a
Coachman was one day called to carry some Gentlemen that were in my house; but
they staying a little longer than ordinary he went away, and as they say dropped
them, thereupon another Coachman was called, which was this Corral mentioned in
this Libel, and he went up to the Gentlemen into the Room; and they to engage
him to stay, secured his Whip, he comes down and begs a Pipe of Tobacco of my
Wife in the Bar, ay, said she, thou look like a good honest Fellow, and I
believe thou have no hand in the Plot, a Casual word that was passant at that
time, whereupon he begins to tell her, it was very well for him, for he had
escaped that danger: four of them meeting him against St. Clemens Church-wall,
and Swearing Dam them he should stand, and do as they would have him; and he
saw four and he saw Sir Edmond-Bury Godfreys body in a Sedan, and he shamed
upon them, that he could not carry him, for that the Axle-Tree of his Coach was
broke. I was in a Room by the Bar, and I overheard the Fellow talk after this
Rate, I came out, and asked him, said I, are you sure of this, then he tells me
the same Story over again, whereupon I began to ask him if he were a Master for
himself, or Drove for another; the Fellow being sensible he had been too lavish
in his Discourse, pretends to light his Pipe in have, and to run out to see
whether the Seats of his Coach were not stolen out, and I took a Candle with
me, and went after him to take the Number of his Coach: by that time I got to
the Door, he was driving away, though he had left his Whip with the Gentlemen,
as Security for his stay. I come in, set down the Number of his Coach in my
Book, and drew up the substance of their Discourse that happened between my Wife
and him; and I was saying to my Wife I had a mind to stop this Fellow at the
Gate, but it rained; and so I did not, only kept the Number of his Coach. The
next day Captain Richardson, and the Secondary of the Counter were Drinking a
Glass of Wine at my house, where I told them the Story, and they blamed me that
I had not stopped him. Whereupon Captain Richardson took the Number of his
Coach, and the next day sent his Janissaries abroad, and secured him, and kept
him in Custody for two or three days.


Mr. Bar. Weston. When was this?


Mr. Fowler. Two or three days after the Murder was publicly known of, I
think, it was Tuesday Night that this Fellow told me the Story, to the best of
my remembrance; and the next day I told the Captain and the Secondary.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Was that the next Tuesday after the Murder, or the Tuesday
sevennight?


Mr. Fowler. It was the Tuesday sevennight after. They blamed me very much that
I did not stop the Fellow, I told them how the thing was, and the Captain sent
his people abroad, and took the Coachman up by what marks I gave of him. The
next day I was Ordered to wait upon the Lords at Wallingford-House, where was
the Duke of Buckingham, my Lord Shaftsbury, the Marquess of Winchester, two
other Lords and Major Wildman the Secretary, where they Examined me upon this
thing, and what I have declared to your Lordships, I declared then. And they
brought the Fellow in Face to Face; and there he does Confess the whole matter,
and made a great whining and clutter, that John such an One, a Coachman, and
Mrs. such an one, a Strong-water Woman told him this, and that, and the other.
The Lords sent for two of the Persons he named, and both of them being brought
before them, the Lords were very well satisfied, in that One of them keeps a
Victualling House, and they were both of good Reputation, they were satisfied
it was only a Sham, and that he only Named them as the first Persons that came
into his mind. Getting nothing out of him, my Lord Duke of Buckingham told him,
Sirrah, if you will confess, there shall be nothing of what the King has
promised, but it shall be made good to you, you shall be sure of it, and you
shall be protected. My Lord Shaftsbury told him the same, but withal, if he
would not confess; and tell him who set him on Work, then nothing should be
severe enough for him; or words to that effect.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Upon this Accusation, was he sent to Prison?


Mr. Fowler. He was Re-ordered to Prison, and there continued several Months.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Where? To what Prison?


Mr. Fowler. To Newgate.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Were you ever in Newgate and saw him?


Mr. Fowler. Never, not I.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Did you never see him but at this Chamber with the Lords, and
at your own Tavern?


Mr. Fowler. Never.


Mr. Bar. Weston. And you never were in Newgate in your Life with him?


Mr. Fowler. No, not I.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Were you ever in Newgate with him with my Lord Duke of
Buckingham, or my Lord Shaftsbury, or any other Lord?


Mr. Fowler. No.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Or any other Duke whatsoever?


Mr. Fowler. No.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Or any Lord or Nobleman whatsoever?


Mr. Fowler. No, Except 4 Years ago with my Lord Petre.


Mr. Bar. Weston. There is no danger of him. But as to this Affair, were you
ever with any?


Mr. Fowler. No.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Did you see any Sword drawn, or money offered?


Mr. Fowler. There was never any Sword drawn, nor money offered.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you ever see 500 l. laid down upon a Table?


Mr. Fowler. There was never any Sword drawn, nor Money laid down.


Mr. Bar. Weston He answers that very fully, for he says he was never in
Newgate with any Nobleman, but once with my Lord Petre Four years ago, and if
he was with any Nobleman, he is accused to be there in the presence of a Duke,
and another great Earl; and that the Duke drew his Sword, and the other
Nobleman laid down a great deal of Gold which he said did amount to 500 l. and
told him it should be his, and that if he would accuse some other Persons, they
would maintain him, and then he did draw the Fellow aside and tell him cannot
you name some body? then you and I may have money enough. This is the
Accusation of the Book, but now it is denied that ever he was in Newgate with
any such Persons, which is consequentially a Denial of the whole Charge.


Cellier. I did not write that this was true, but I writ that the Fellow told
me so.


Mr. Bar. Weston. We will see that in the Book in the first place. We have
Examined this thing by the by, and tho it is a little out of the way, yet it may
be satisfactory, read the Book.


Cl. of Cr. Malice Defeated, etc.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Compare it with the Record, for She shall have a Fair Trial,
by the Grace of God.

Then the several Clauses recited in the Indictment were read over again by the
Clerk out of the Book, and compared by the Judge with the Record.


Mr. Bar. Weston. These are the Clauses in the Book that are proved Exactly
upon you. Now I must tell you, because this Book does cast a very great Infamy
upon our Religion and on the whole Government, it ought to be taken Notice of;
For in the first place to contrive to get a Man into Prison, and by Tortures to
compel him even to commit Perjury, then to hale another Man to Prison, and have
him thus barbarously used, as to have Nobles to come to him, one with a Sword
drawn, another with Money in his hand laying it down as a temptation, and to
force him to discover what he was not willing to confess; and then to lay
Accusation upon the King that he makes it a thing of safety to be the Hangmans
Hounds, and to be Accusers for Pensions, and shall aver that when it is as free
for her to speak truth, as it is Meritorious for them to do otherwise, she will
discover such and such things, is a slander that ought to receive a public
rebuke; and to satisfy the World of the untruth of it, I would have you prove
if Prance be here and the Coachman, what usage they received, to avert that
public Calumny that is cast upon the Nation. For let Mrs. Cellier know, She
has insinuated as tho the Murder of the late King was a sufficient Ground to
pervert her from Protestantism, which avowed such practices, when all the World
knows that at that time there were Protestants that were far better Subjects,
and more Loyal than ever any Papist was in the World; and as great sufferers
for their Opposition to that dreadful Villainy, nay far more than the Papists
can boast of for their Loyalty; whereas it is known they were Villains under
hand all the while, and those that did encourage all that Roguery and set that
Faction on Foot which brought things to that ill Period they came to. Therefore
you have set a fair Outside upon a Damnable lie. And that the Arrantest
Rebelliousest Rogues that ever lived under Heaven, are great Saints in
Comparison of Protestants, no honest Man will believe.


Cellier. I say, they called themselves Protestants. I know the Protestants
were great Sufferers for the King, and I my self felt it; our Family, which
were Protestants, were several times stripped and plundered for their Loyalty. I
grant all this.


Mr. Bar. Weston. Do you? Then you are an impudent lying Woman; or you had a
Villainous lying Priest that Instructed you to begin your Book with such a base
Insinuation against the best of Religions. But I have no more to say to that,
for that is such a visible Notorious Falsity to the knowledge of all English
Men and People of understanding, that it needs no greater Conviction than the
particular knowledge of those Men that lived in that time. Therefore for that
Lie let it go upon the Public Infamy that attends on your Party, who are
Notorious Liars, and among whom Falsehood does so much abound. Call Correl and
Prance.


Mr. At General. We will give that satisfaction to the People; but the Jury
are to know, that it does not at all concern the matter in issue. For when all
that can b^ said by them is declared, I must say in point of Law, the
Publishing of a Libel, though it be true, yet is a Crime, and deserves
Punishment.


Mr. B. Weston. I told you so: But Mr. Attorney, we are to set a Fine, and to
instruct us for the setting of the Fine, it will be a satisfaction to the
Court, to disprove the things she alleges, if you have the Witnesses ready,
but if you are not ready with your Proof, let it alone.


Mr. At. General. They are ordered to be here, I only speak that by the way,
Swear Mr. Prance.

(which was done.)


Mr. Bar. Weston. Mr. Prance, Pray were you ever tortured in prison?


Mr. Prance. No, I never saw any such thing there in my Life.


Mr. Bar. Weston. How were you used?


Mr. Prance. Very well, I had every thing that was fitting; Captain Richardson
did take great care of me.


Mr. Bar. Weston. The truth is, the very Book it self, implies, a
contradiction. It says, there was one Tortured in the Prison, and the Roarings
that they heard were like the Roarings of a strong Man in Torture; and yet,
presently after, it says, that the Prisoner comes up in Irons, and is
Examined: Now, Could any one having been so lately on the Rack be able to walk,
and come to be Examined? any Man that knows what the Nature of a Rack is, knows
also, that one that has been Tortured there, would not be able to heave the
Irons upon his Legs, nor be able to stir or walk, but that is a thing not used
amongst us: It was some Impudent lying Priest that durst venture to broach such
a Calumny.


Cellier. I don't say it was, but it was so reported.


Mr. Prance. Dr. Lloyd was with me many times for half an hour together, and if
any such thing had been, he would have seen it.


Then Francis Coral was called, but he did not appear.

Capt. Richardson. Corral they have got away, for I had him last night, and he
was Ordered to be here to day, but here is his Wife,


(Who was Sworn.)

Mr. Baron Weston. Good Woman, were you ever with your Husband in Prison?


Mrs. Corral. I was not suffered to come near him when he was of the Masters
side.


Mr. Baron Weston. But when he was out of Prison, How did he tell you he was
used? Did he tell you he was compelled to drink his own Piss?


Mrs. Corral. Sunday morning it was before I saw him, nay, I did not see him
then, but I was called to bring him Victuals, or he would have been starved;
nay, they said he would be dead before I brought him. So I carried him Bread
and things, and I did not see him then till almost a Fortnight after; And when
I saw him he had great Fetters on, and I was amazed at them. They put in some
Char-Cole there to warm him, it being very cold, and, said I, Lord, What have
you done, you have Murdered some Body sure? but they said, they put on those
things to keep his Legs warm.


Cellier. Were you ever beaten at any time for bringing your Husband Victuals?


Mrs. Corral. No indeed, I was never beaten, but they would not suffer me to
see him on the Masters side.


Lord Mayor. Her Husband has denied all upon Oath before me.


Mr. Baron Weston. Was he ever hurt with Scrues, or any such thing?


Cellier. Had he not holes in his Legs?


Mrs. Corral. Yes, he had a great many; I did see holes in his Legs.


Mr. Baron Weston. Did you?


Mrs. Corral. I did see one, and I can bring them that brought Salve to beale
it.


Captain Richardson. There is never an Iron in the House that I keep, that
Weighs 12 l.


Mr. Baron Weston. They say, you have Irons called Sheers, that weigh 40 l.


Captain Richardson. If there be one, I Will be hanged for it before I go hence.


Cellier. I hope I shall be allowed to make my defense, and call my Witnesses.


Mr. Baron Weston. Yes, to be sure.


Cellier. Did not you hear your Husband tell me, how heavily he was Fettered
and used? That he was Chained to the Floor with a Chain not above a yard long?
And was forced to drink his own water?


Mrs. Corral. Madam, he is not sensible many times what he does say.


Cellier. But, Did not you hear him tell me so?


Mrs. Corral. I cannot remember.


Cellier. Did not you tell me, That Captain Richardson drove you away, and
would not let you give Victuals to your Husband?


Mr. Baron Weston. All this is but over and above, for the great Matter that
sticks upon your part, is the Death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and you are
pinched there with Prance's Evidence, and so you would make the World believe,
that he was Tortured into his Confession, and was Mad when he did it, that you
may the better turn it off from your own Party, on some body else, on whom I
don't know.


Cellier. Pray, my Lord, hear me one word; As to your saying, I do it to defend
a Party, I profess I stand singly and alone; I have been so Barbarously used by
those you call that Party, that the Protestants have been abundantly more kind
to me then they. And I would not tell the least Lie to do them any good turn
Turn.


Mr. Baron Weston. They you are an happy Woman indeed, that are beloved by both
Parties. You have not been Serviceable alike to both I am sure, but that is no
great matter; If so be the Protestants were so kind, you have requited them ill
by such a Base LIBEL.


Cellier. I say nothing against them.


Mr. Baron Weston. Can you say any thing that you did not make this Pamphlet?


Cellier. My Lord, I bee'nt bound to accuse my self, I desire it may be proved.


Mr. Baron Weston. I think it is fully proved.


Cellier. I cannot say any thing without my Witnesses, I desire I may call them.


Mr. Baron Weston. Call whom you will.


Cellier. I desire Gregory Grange may be called.


(Who was Sworn.)

Mr. Baron Weston. What can you say for Mrs. Cellier? Tell me what Questions
you will Ask him.


Cellier. I desire to know whether I did not send him to find Witnesses? Who he
went for? What Answers they returned? And where they be?


Mr. Baron Weston. Well, What Witnesses were you sent to look for?


Grange. I went to look for one Mrs. Sheldon, that lives in Sir Joseph Sheldons
House, and they told me she was in Essex. I went to the Coach to send for her.


Mr. Baron Weston. Why Scoggin looked for his Knife on the House top.


Mr. Stevens. This Man did see her sell these Books.


Mr. Baron Weston. Who did you look for besides?


Grange. One Mr. Curtis. And his Wife said, She had not seen him since
yesterday Morning.


Mr. Baron Weston. What were they to prove?


Grange. Truly my Lord I don't know.


Mr. Dormar. By the Oath you have taken, Do you know she has sold any of these
Books?


Grange. Yes, I do know that she has Sold some of them.


Lord Mayor. There your own Witness, Mrs. Cellier, proves it against you.


Mr. Baron Weston. Who would you have else?


Cellier. I desire that Mary Smith may be called (which was done, but she
appeared not then) I desire John Clerk may be sent for from the Goal.


Capt. Richardson. He is in Execution.


Mr. Baron Weston. For what?


Capt. Richardson. For Debt.


Mr. Baron Weston. It Is not out of the Rules of Prison, you may bring him
hither, and it is no Escape.


Capt. Richardson. If your Lordship orders it so, I will bring him.


Lord Mayor. She should have brought an Habeas Corpus if she would have had him.


Mr. At. Genesis He must bring him through some part, I suppose, that is not
within the Rules, and then it will be an Escape.


Cellier. I pray an Habeas Corpus to fetch him.


Mr. Baron Weston. You might have had one before.


Cellier. This is all because I had no time to prepare for my Defense.


Mr. Baron Weston. You might have moved the Court for it; they granted you a
Copy of your Indictment.


Cellier. I had it not till nine a clock to day, and my Counsel could not
Inspect it, nor speak a word with me about it.


Lord Mayor. At what time shall we have done, if we dally after this rate?


Mr. Baron Weston. Have you any blanck Habeas Corpus?


Clerk of the Peace. It could not be Sealed, and besides, they should fetch it
out of the Crown-Office.


Cellier. I desire to have him come, in order to the Defense of something in my
Book.


Mr. Baron Weston. What would he prove?


Cellier. That I have not belyed the Government.


Mr. Baron Weston. In what?


Cellier. That he was sheer'd with long Sheers, and unreasonable Irons.


Mr. Collins. You cannot do your self greater wrong than by such talk as this.


Lord Mayor. You are not Indicted for your whole Book, but only for some part
of it.


Crier. Here is Mrs. Smith now,


(who was Sworn)

Cellier. What have you heard Corral the Coachmon say, about his usage in
Prison?


Mr. Dormar. I think that Question is not to be admitted.


Mr. Baron Weston. What is it you would have here asked?


Cellier. What she heard the Coachman say, for I only say he told me so.


Mr. Dormar. I am in your Lordships Judgment, I think it is not Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis She keeps the Coachman away, and now will tell you what he said.


Mr. Baron Weston. That is no Evidence, for the Coachman might have been here,
if you had not sent him away.


Cellier. Let his Wife speak that, because she can testify I did not send him
away.


Capt. Richardson. She gave them Money before, and told them she would maintain
them.


Cellier. You are not an Evidence against me, you are not sworn.


Capt. Richardson. But this that I say is sworn.


Mr. Baron Weston. Call her.


Mr. At. Genesis Ask her a proper Question to the Issue.


Cellier. I would know of her whether I kept her Husband away.


Mr. At. Genesis It may be you did it without her knowledge.


Cellier. Have I seen her Husband without her knowledge?


Mr. Baron Weston. Go on with your Witnesses.


Cellier. I desire Mary Johnson may be called.


Mr. Baron Weston. For what? What will she prove?


Cellier. That she was to see for Witnesses in order to my Defense.


Mr. Baron Weston. But if they are not come, what signifies that?


Cellier. I have done then my Lord; for not having time to get my Witnesses, I
cannot make my Defense so fully, as else I should have done: only I desire you
to consider I am a poor ignorant Woman, and have erred out of Ignorance: I
thought nothing, but that I might publish what others had said and told me, and
so I have offended in Ignorance, if I have offended.


Mr. Baron Weston. I do verily believe there are more Wits than yours concerned
in this Book, tho you bear the Name, yet the Book is not the Effect of your Wit
only, but you acknowledge enough. And you are to take notice, That the King
has set out a Proclamation, that no Books shall be Printed without a License.


Cellier. I never heard it. I was under close Confinement when the King set it
out.


Mr. Baron Weston. No, I deny that, for you were enlarged the first day of
Trinity Term, and the Proclamation came out toward the end.


Mr. At. Genesis She now does confess she knows of it, because she speaks of the
time, and that was before her Book was written.


Cellier. May not my Counsel speak for me, I desire you would hear him.


Mr. Collins. I have nothing to say for her.


Mr. Baron Weston. He says he has nothing to say for you.


Mr. Collins. And if you had said less for your self it had been better.


Mr. Baron Weston. The Question is but Guilty or not Guilty, Whether you
published this Libel or not; and if the Matter of the Indictment be proved,
what can Counsel say, except you can disprove the Witnesses, that you did not
the Fact?


Cellier. Well my Lord, then I beseech you consider me I am a Woman, and deal
with me in Mercy, as well as Justice.


Mr. Baron Weston. Mrs. Cellier. I have not been noted to be a Person that use
any great severity toward any body, no not toward any of your Party, but when
I see so much Malice as is comprised in your Book, and have reason to suspect,
that this is not acted only by you, tho you bear the name of it, but some of
your wicked Priests are the Authors of it, as I am sure they are, then I think
it is not severe that you, who stand at the stake for all, must bear the blame
of all. If you will tell us who it was that set you on work, and assisted you
in this wicked Business, that will be something toward the mitigation of your
Fine, but if you will take it on your self you must-suffer the Consequence.


Cellier. I beseech you my Lord have some Compassion; His Majesty acknowledged
before the Counsel, that I had suffered for him; I ventured my Life through a
Sea and an Army to serve him; I lost my Father and my Brother both in a day for
him; and if you have no Compassion for me, have some Commiseration for my Loyal
Parents that lost their Estates for him.


Mr. Baron Weston. If you have done Service for His Majesty, and thereby
deserved any thing of him, His Majesty has been so bountiful in the
dispensation of his Favor, that he would not fail to recompense you for it;
but we are to proceed according to the Rules of Law.


Cellier. But pray have some Mercy in your Justice.


Mr. Baron Weston. Gentlemen of the Jury; This Gentlewoman the Prisoner stands
Indicted --


Jury. We have not heard one word that has been said.


Mr. Baron Weston. No, That is strange, I will acquaint you with as much of the
Evidence as falls under my Information: It had been well if you had told us
this before: The business is this, She stands Indicted here for Writing and
Publishing of a very scandalous Libel. But pray did not you hear Penny prove
that she sold it?


Jury. We heard the three first Witnesses.


Mr. At. General. There was the proof of the Fact.


Mr. Baron Weston. The rest of the Evidence was but a Comparison of the Clauses
in the Book, with those in the Indictment, which you are to have Direction from
the Court in, that they do: She stands Indicted for publishing a Libel, and the
Title of the Libel is, MALICE DEFEATED; Or a brief Relation of the Accusation
and Deliverance of Elizabeth Cellier. Now this Libel branches it self out into
several Parts; the first whereof is a very fine Insinuation, as tho her leaving
the Protestant Religion, was, because those that Murdered the King, and made
that very great Subversion that was made in the Government by the late Long
Parliament, and the Army that succeeded them, were Protestants --


Cellier. Pray my Lord, I say, called Protestants.


Mr. Baron Weston. By your favor, she pretends it was by those that were
called Protestants, but if they were only those that were called Protestants,
and not Protestants, What reason had she to go off from the Protestant
Religion, to turn Papist, when there was such a Body of Loyal Protestants that
did adhere to the Loyal Party? therefore that was as villainous an Insinuation
as could be; as tho the Protestant Religion did Nourish and Teach Seditious
Principles, which in the consequence of them, tended toward the subversion of
the Government and Order, which certainly it does cherish in the highest Degree
of any Religion in the World, and has the most peaceable Principles in matters
of Duty, both in subjection to our Superiors, and of a charitable Deportment of
Men one toward another: and the practice of those Principles has been seen
amongst Protestants, especially amongst the English Protestants, as much as in
any Nation of the World; this may be said of it to this day, for the Reputation
of the English Nation, that there is more Fidelity, Honesty, and generous Trust
among them, than among all the Nations of the World besides; so that if a man
were to go out of England, to any other part of the World, he might very well
use the words of Demosthenes, upon his going out of Athens, at his banishment;
Farewell beloved City, I am going into a World, where I shall not find such
Friends as I have had Enemies here; Friends in other places, will be no better
than our Enemies here; the Carriage of Englishmen is so much beyond all
others, except the Germans, who, I must confess, are Famed for their Honesty
and Integrity one to another; but if you take the French, the Italian, the
Spaniard, or any sort of the Levantine People, they live like so many Wolves,
especially in those places where the Popish Religion is professed. Now after
this Insinuation, there is another part of the Book recited in the Indictment,
There was an horrid barbarous Murder that was committed here, and which
certainly did fix the Accusation of the Plot fuller upon them, than all the
Evidence that was given besides; the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, a
Magistrate in doing of his Duty, was most barbarously murdered, and by whom is
Evidenced by one Prance: it has been the whole labor of the Party, to cast
this Murder upon other persons, and take it off themselves; for they find if
that Accusation sticks upon them, it is a thing of so heinous a Nature, that it
will make the Popish party odious to all Mankind. And therefore this they
labor at mightily, and this Task she has taken on her self; for knowing
Prance to be a Principal Witness, she undertakes to let the World know, that
Prance was tortured in Prison, to Insinuate, that the Evidence he gave against
those Persons who were Executed for this Murder, was Extorted from him by ill
and cruel usage. But you must first know, the Laws of the Land do not admit a
Torture, and since Queen Elizabeth's time, there has been nothing of that kind,
ever done. The Truth is indeed, in the 20th year of her Reign, Campion was just
stretched upon the Rack, but yet not so, but that he could walk; but when she
was told it was against the Law of the Land, to have any of her Subjects
Racked, (tho that was in an extraordinary Case, a world of Seminaries being
sent over to contrive her death, and she lived in continual danger) yet, it was
never done after to any one, neither in her Reign, who Reigned 25 years after,
nor in King James's Reign, who Reigned 22 years after; nor in King Charles the
First Reign, who Reigned 24 years after; and God in Heaven knows, there has
been no such thing offered in this Kings Reign, for I think we may say, we have
lived under as lawful and merciful a Government as any People whatsoever, and
have had as little Blood shed, and Sanguinary Executions as in any Nation under
Heaven. Well, but (contrary to the Law in this Case) she does suppose
Extraordinary Ways were used to make Prance give this Evidence. She says, she
thought what she first heard was the noise of a Woman with Child, and that
Harris the Turnkey did tell her it was a Woman in Labor, but when she desired
to be let in to help her, he turned her away rudely; but listening she
perceived it was the Groans of a Strong Man that must be in Torture: She asked
some of the Goalers what was the Matter? They told her, They durst not tell
her, but it was something they could not endure; and they heard him Cry, What
would you have me Confess? Would you have me Belly my self? I know nothing of
it, and such words as these. Whereupon we have called Prance, and here, upon
his Oath, he tells you, there was no such matter: that he was used very kindly,
had all things fitting, and under no Compulsion, so that this is an high Libel
against the Government. She says furthermore, there was one Corral a Coachman
that was imprisoned by the means of one Fowler for the Murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, that there was a Nobleman a Duke, came to him in Prison,
and drew his Sword at him, and would have him Confess, That another Nobleman
laid down a Sum of Money, and said it was 500 l. and told him, if he would
Confess, he should have it; and that Fowler took him aside, and bid him lay it
upon some Body else, and then he and Fowler should have Money enough. Fowler
being examined, and, upon his Oath, tells you, upon what Account he did Charge
Corral; he tells you, he was never with Corral in the Goal in his Life, and
never was with him in the presence of any Duke or Nobleman, but once in a Room,
where Corral was brought to be Examined, and then there was the Duke of
Buckingham, the Marquess of Winchester (who I never heard was a Man of Cruelty,
or Harsh Nature) my Lord Shaftsbury, and Major Wildman, who was Secretary, but
there was no such cruel Usage there, and he was never in the Prison with such
Noblemen; and then the Consequence is, that the whole Story is false. Corral it
seems, my Lord Mayor says, has been Examined to this Point, and denies it all;
and is kept out of the way, that he should not give it in Evidence here: but if
we had him here it were no great matter, for if there were any thing of this
nature true, they are to proceed in a Legal way against them that make these
Transgressions of the Law, She ought to have Indicted the Persons, for they are
highly punishable for such Extravagances as these are. But there is nothing
done in that kind, but in stead of that, she has Defamed them all in a Libel,
and she is not contented to have done that neither, for she has Defamed the
King highly in His Government, and said, she could have Written more. I pass
over the Business that concerns Dangerfield, wherein she complains, that
Dangerfield had more Friends, and was visited more by Persons of Quality, when
she had none came to her; every one is Visited according to the Interest they
have in the World, and the Friends they make: I have nothing to say to that,
there is not so much in it, but come to that part wherein she Scandalizes the
King, which is this, she says, Whenever His Majesty shall please to make it as
Safe, and Honorable, to Speak the TRUTH, as it is Apparent, it has been
Gainful, and Meritorious to do the Contrary, their Villainy will not want
Witnesses to testify the truth of more then she had Written.

So that she supposes, that the King, by the Countenancing of Lies, and giving
Pensions to Liars, Chokes the Truth, and makes it Dangerous for those that know
the Truth, to divulge it to the World, which is a very Vile Scandal upon the
King and the Government. These are the Matters of the Libel, and the things in
Proof have been Sworn by Three Witnesses; one proves, That he went to her to
Buy one of her Books, and he asked her for One, and she gave him a Book which
bears that Title Page that you hear in the Indictment, Superscribed with her
Name, and she gives it as her Book. Now she would Evade it thus, That she gave
it as hers, not as though she were the Author, but as if it were hers only in
Property: But, Can any such thing be thought the Meaning of her Words? or, Can
there be any Greater Evidence that she is the Author of the Book, then her
publishing of it with her Name to it? but the Fellow goes further, and tells
you, When he had the Book he turned about, and Asked her, if it were her Book?
Yes, she said it was: and, said she, I could have Writ a great deal more, if I
would; So that her saying, She could have Writ more, Implies, that she Writ
that; and (more) is a Word of Comparison, which always supposes the Positive
Proposition. The next is the Printer, who tells you, that he Printed the first
22 Folio's, within which, the greatest part of this Charge, except only that
last about the King, is contained. He tells you, That she sent for him, and
employed him to Print it as hers; Agreed with him for Ten shillings a Ream for
the Printing, and that he did Print the first 22 Leaves at her Request, and as
Employed by her: Fowler tells you, He bought 2 of the Books of her; and these
are the Witnesses of the Publication of this Book. I must tell you this, The
Clauses in the Libel are truly set down in the Indictment, for I did Examine
them one by one. Now whether or no you can doubt she was the Author of the
Book, when in a manner she did own it at the Publication, by Selling it as
hers, I leave to you, though I must tell you plainly, I leave it as that which
is to me under the Notion of Express Evidence; but I must leave it to you as
Judges of the Fact, and expect your Verdict in the Case.


Mr. At. Genesis There are three things in the Indictment; First That she Writ
it: Secondly. That she caused it to be Printed; And Thirdly, That she caused it
to be Published. Now, if you find any one of these, she is Guilty of so much at
least, tho I think you have heard Evidence enough for all. She told him, It was
hers, and said, She could have put more in; and the Selling the Book is a
Publication. So that if you be not satisfied she was the Author, yet if you are
satisfied she caused it to be Printed* or if you are not satisfied in that, yet
if you are satisfied she caused it to be Published, you are to find her Guilty
of so much.


Cellier. The Printer does not say I Writ it.


Mr. At. Genesis But he does say you gave it him as yours, and to you the Sheets
were sent to be Corrected.


Then the Jury desired they might have the Book with them.

Mr. Clare. My Lord, the Jury wants the Book that was Sworn to.


Mr. Baron Weston. They can have no Papers, without Agreement, neither the
Book, nor any Paper else.


Mr. At. Genesis Not unless she will consent to it. Mrs. Cellier, Will you
Consent that they shall have the Book out with them?


(To which, after some Pause, she answered, No.)

Mr. Baron Weston. Then they cannot have it by Law.


Then the Jury Withdrew for a little, and Returned.

Clerk of the Crown. How say you, Is Elizabeth Cellier Guilty of the Writing,
Printing, and Publishing of the Libel for which she stands Indicted, or not
Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty. (At which there was a Great Shout.) And the Verdict was
Recorded.


Mr. Baron Weston. She must stand Committed to receive the Judgment of the
Court.


Cellier. Will you give me leave to speak a Word now?


Mr. Baron Weston. I cannot give you any Judgment, for by the Custom of the
City, that is to be done by the Recorder or his Deputy, and so, what you will
say to the Court, you must say to them, that will be on Monday when the
Sessions is done.


Cellier. What I would say is only this, That I am a Woman, and wherein I
offended, I offended out of Ignorance, and did not know it was an Offense, and
if the Offense be mine, let not others suffer for me. Have Mercy in Judgment,
and consider my Loyal Parents and Relations, and the Services they did His
Majesty; and let this Fault be wiped out by that Service and Duty I and they
paid Him; or at leastwise, let the punishment for this Offense be mitigated, in
Consideration, that all my life, ever since I had the first use of Reason, I
have been a Loyal Subject.


Mr. Baron Weston. These are things that will be considered on Monday, but we
cannot take consideration of it now.


Cellier. I will go away then, and come again on Monday.


Mr. Baron Weston. No, you are to be committed till then.


And so the Keeper carried her back to Newgate, from whence on Monday the 13th
of September, she was brought to the Bar to receive her Judgment, which Mr.
Recorder gave thus,

Mr. Record. Mrs. Cellier.

THe Court does think fit for Example sake, that a Fine of One thousand pounds
be put upon you; That you be Committed in Execution, till that thousand pounds
be paid; And because a Pecuniary Mulct is not a sufficient Recompense to
Justice, which you have offended; the Court does likewise Pronounce against
you, That you be put on the Pillory three several days, in three several
public Places; In the first place, in regard her braided Ware received its
first Impression and Vent at her own House, It is thought fit that she stand
(as near her own House as conveniently can be) between the hours of Twelve and
One, for an hours space at the May Pole in the Strand, on the most Notorious
day, I think there is a Market near that Place, let it be on that day. At
another time, That she stand in Covent-Gardeu on a Public day, the like space
of time, A Third time, that she stand at Charing Cross on the most Public day,
for the space of an hour. And in the next place, That she find Sureties for the
good Behavior during her Life; and in every place where she shall Stand on the
Pillory, some Parcels of her Books, shall, in her own view, be burnt by the
Hands of the Common Hangman, and a a Paper of the Cause, to be put upon the
Pillory.


Then the Court charged the Sheriff, That he take Care in every Place for a
sufficient Guard, that the Peace may be kept, and she was returned to the Goal.

Whereas in a Narrative, or Printed Book, or Libel called, Malice Defeated, or
a brief Relation or Accusation of the Deliverance of Elizabeth Cellier.
IT is amongst other things in Page the Third and Fourth of the said Book
written as follows (viz.) Soon after this Francis Corral a Coachman, that had
been put into Newgate upon suspicion of carrying away Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey's
Body, and lay there thirteen Weeks and three days in great Misery, got out; I
went to see him, and found him a sad Spectacle, having the flesh worn away, and
great holes in both his Legs by the weight of his Irons, and having been
Chained so long doubled, that he could not stand upright, he told me much of
his hard and cruel usage, as that he had been Squeezed and hasped in a thing
like a Trough, in a Dungeon under ground; which put him to inexpressible
torment, insomuch that he soonded, and that a Person in the habit of a Minister
stood by all the while. That a Duke beat him, pulled him by the Hair, and set
his drawn Sword to his breast three times, and swore he would run him through;
and another great Lord laid down a heap of Gold, and told him it was five
hundred Pounds, and that he shall have it all, and be taken into the aforesaid
Dukes house, if he would confess what they would have him; and one F. a
Vintner, that lives at the sign of the Half Moon in Ch-si. by whose contrivance
he was accused took him aside, and bid him name some person, and say, they
employed him to take up the dead body in Somerset-yard, and gave him money for
so doing; that if he would do this, both F. and he, should have money enough. He
also told me, that he was kept from Thursday to Sunday without victuals or
drink, having his hands every Night Chained behind him, and being all this time
locked to a Staple which was driven into the Floor, with a Chain not above a
yard long: that in this great extremity, was forced to drink his own water; and
that the Jailer beat his Wife, because she brought victuals, and prayed that he
might have it, and threw Milk on the ground, and not look at him, etc. For the
Readers farther satisfaction of his great and Cruel suffering, I refer to the
Party himself now living in Gunpowder-Alley in Shoe-Lane, and well known by his
Misfortunes.

I Francis Corral of Gunpowder-Alley in Shoe-Lane, being the Person before
named, Make Oath that Mrs. Cellier was never with me in the Prison of Newgate,
and that I never told her there, nor any where else, that ever I was Chained so
long double that I could not stand upright, nor never told her that I had any
hard or cruel Usage there, nor that I was ever Squeezed or Hasped to a thing
like a Trough in a Dungeon under ground which put me to Torment, nor that I
Swooned, nor that a Person in the Habit of a Minister stood by me at any time
whilst in the Prison, except when I went into the Chapel to Prayers; Nor that
any Duke beat me, pulled me by the Hair, or set his drawn Sword to my breast
three times, or Swore that he would run me through; Nor that any great Lord
laid down a heap of Gold, and told me it was five hundred Pounds, and that I
should have it all, and be taken into the aforesaid Dukes house if I would
Confess what they would have me; Nor that F. a Vintner that lives at the Sign
of the Half Moon in Cheapside did take me aside, and bid me name some Person,
and say they employed me to take up the Body in Somerset-yard, and gave me Money
for so doing, That if I would do this, both F. and I should have Money enough;
Nor did I ever tell her that I was kept from Thursday to Sunday without Meat
and Drink; Nor were my hands ever Chained behind me; Nor was I ever locked to a
Staple driven into a Floor with a Chain not above a yard long, but what she
has written in her said Book or Libel is notoriously false and untrue; but on
the contrary, during the time of my Imprisonment I was Civilly Treated by the
Keeper and his Servants.

Francis Corral.
Jur. 6. Sept. 1680. Coram me Robert Clayton Mayor.

I Margaret, the Wife of the said Francis Corral, make Oath, That the said
Jailer never beat me because I brought Victuals and prayed that my Husband
might have it; nor threw any Milk on the Ground; nor bad me be gone and not
look upon him. Neither do I know, or believe, that my Husband had any hard
usage from any of the Keepers during his Imprisonment; but on the contrary, was
Civilly treated by them.

This Deponent farther makes Oath, That on Thursday last She went with her
Husband to Mrs. Cellier's House; and her Husband asked her, what She meant by
putting such a Company of Lies upon him in her Book. She answered, She had a
mind to do it, and that if some of them were Lies all were not. He told her,
that she would ruin him, and bring him to a Prison as he was before. She
answered, That if he were Arrested, She would Bail him; and if he were cast
into Prison, She would maintain both him and his Family, for that She had got
Money enough, and that She would have me to a Lord or Lords that would secure
him, and bid me cheer up my Husband, for that neither I nor my Family should
want, and gave me then Five Shillings, and bid me cheer up my Husband with that.

Sig. Margaret Corral.
Jur. 6. Sep. 1680. Coram me Robert Clayton Mayor.

I Francis Corral within Named, further make Oath, That on Thursday last, I
went with my Wife to Mrs. Celliers House, and asked her what She meant by
putting such a Company of Lies upon me in her Book. She answered, that She had
a mind to do it, and that if some of them were Lies, all were not. I told her,
She would ruin me, and bring me into a Prison, as I was before. She told me,
if I were Arrested, that She would Bail me; and if were cast into Prison, She
would maintain me and my Family; For that She got Money enough, and that She
would have me to a Lord or Lords that would secure me. And She bid my Wife to
cheer me up, for that neither I, nor my Family should want, and gave my Wife
Five Shillings, and bid her cheer me up with that.

Francis Corral.
Jur. 6. die Sep. 1680. Coram me, Robert Clayton Mayor.

I Matthias Fowler, living at the Half Moon in Ch-si. Vintner, make Oath, That
I never saw any Duke or Lord with Francis Corral, in this Paper mentioned, in
Newgate; Nor did I ever see any Duke beat him, or set a Sword to his Breast;
Nor did I ever see any Lord lay down a heap of Gold, and tell the said Corral
it was five hundred pounds, and the said Corral should have it, if he would
Swear what the Duke and Lord would have him. Nor did I ever take him aside, and
bid him Name some Person, and say, they employed him the said Corral to take up
the dead Body of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey's in Summerset-Yard, and gave him
Money for so doing, and that if he would do this, both he and I should have
Money enough. But that the same is Notoriously false and untrue.

Matthias Fowler.
Jur. 8. die Sep. 1680. Coram me Robert Clayton Mayor.

FINIS.

