FREE THOUGHTS Concerning Officers in the House of Commons
To the Reader.
THE following Paper was printed in the year School. as a Preface to the History
of Standing Armies; and as it then met with a general Approbation, so, if I
mistake not, it had a favorable reception with some, whose Eyes are now
opened, and see better things: therefore in order to put them in mind of their
obsolete forgotten Notions, and to give others a Caution not to be misled by
those who hold no Principles longer than they are out of Places, I thought it
might not be unseasonable at this time to reprint it: however, if it does no
good, I am sure it can do no harm.

THERE is nothing in which the generality of Mankind are so much mistaken, as
when they discourse of Government. The different Effects of it are obvious to
every one, but few can trace its Causes. Most Men attribute all public
Miscarriages to the Corruption of Mankind. They think the whole Mass is
infected, that it is impossible to make any Reformation, and so submit patiently
to their Country's Calamities, or else share in the Spoil: whereas Complaints
of this kind are as old as the World, and every Age has thought their own the
worst. We have not only our own Experience, but the Example of all Times, to
prove that Men in the same Circumstances will do the same things, call them by
what Names of distinction you please. A Government is a mere piece of
Clockwork, and having such Springs and Wheels, must act accordingly: and
therefore the Art is to constitute it so, that it must move to the public
Advantage. It is certain that most Men will act for their own Interest; and all
wise Governments are founded upon that Principle: So that the Endeavor must be
to make the Interest of the Governors and Governed the same. In an Absolute
Monarchy, where the whole Power is in one Man, his Interest will only be
regarded: In an Aristocracy the Interest of a few; and in a free Government the
Interest of the whole. This would be the Case of England, if some Abuses that
have lately crept into our Constitution were removed. The Freedom of this
Kingdom depends upon the Peoples choosing the House of Commons, who are a part
of the Legislature, and have the sole Power of giving Money. Were this a true
Representative, and free from external Force, or private Corruption, nothing
could pass there but what they thought was for the public Advantage. For their
own Interest is so interwoven with the Peoples, that if they act for themselves
they must act for the common Interest of England. And if a few Men among them
should think it their Interest to abuse their Power, it will be the Interest of
all the rest to punish them for it: and then our Government would act
mechanically, and a Rogue will as necessarily be hanged, as a Clock strike
twelve. This is the Fountain head from whence the People expect all their
Happiness, and the redress of their Grievances: and if we can preserve them
free from Corruption, they will keep every body else so. Our Constitution seems
to have provided for it, by never suffering the King (till Charles the Second's
Reign) to have an Army to frighten them into a Compliance, nor Places or
Revenues great enough to bribe them into it. The Places in the King's Gift were
but few, and most of them Patent Places for Life, and the rest great Offices of
State enjoyed by single Persons, which seldom fell to the share of the Commons,
such as the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Privy Seal, Lord High-Admiral,
etc. And when these Offices were possessed by the Lords, the Commons were
severe Inquisitors into their Actions. Thus the Government of England continued
till the time of Charles the First, who was the first I have read of that made
an Opposition to himself in the House of Commons the Road to Preferment; of
which the Earl of Strafford and Noy were the most remarkable Instances, who
from great Patriots became the chief Asserters of Despotic Power. But this
served only to exasperate the rest; for he had not Places enough for all that
expected them, nor Money enough to bribe them. It Is true, he raised great Sums
of Money upon the People; but it being without Authority of Parliament, and
having no Army to back him, it met with such Difficulties in the raising, that
it did him little good, and ended at last in his Ruin, tho by the means of a
long and miserable War, which brought all things into the power of an Army, who
governed the Nation by a Council of War, and made all Parties join in calling
in Charles the Second: So that he came in with the general Applause of the
People, who in a kind fit gave him a vast Revenue for Life. By this he was
enabled to raise a new Army, and bribe the Parliament, which he did to the
purpose: But being a luxurious Prince, he could not part with great Sums at
once. He only fed them from hand to mouth: So that they found it as necessary
to keep him in a constant dependence upon them, as they had upon him. They knew
he would give them ready Money no longer than he had absolute necessity for
them, and he had not Places enough in his Disposal to secure a Majority in the
House: for in those early days the Art was not found out of splitting and
multiplying Places, as instead of a Lord Treasurer, to have five Lords of the
Treasury; instead of a Lord Admiral, to have seven Lords of the Admiralty; to
have seven Commissioners of the Customs; nine of the Excise; fourteen of the
Navy Office; ten of the Stamp Office; eight of the Prize Office; sixteen of the
Commissioners of Trade; two of the Post Office; four of the Transports; four
for Hackney Coaches; four for Wine-Licences; four for the Victualling Office;
and multitudes of other Offices which are endless to enumerate.

I believe the Gentlemen who have the good Fortune to be in some of these
Employments, will not pretend that they have bin better executed since they
were in so many hands, than when in fewer: and I must confess, I see no reason
why they may not be made twice as many, and so on, unless the Number be
ascertained by Parliament: and what danger this may be to our Constitution, I
think of with Horror. For if in Ages to come they should be all given to
Parliament Men, what will become of our so much boasted Liberty? What shall be
done when the Criminal becomes the Judge, and the Malefactors are left to try
themselves? We may be sure their common Danger will unite them, and they will
all stand by one another. I do not speak this by guess; for I have read of a
Country where there was a constant Series of Mismanagement for many years
together, and yet no body was punished: and even in our own Country I believe,
some Men now alive can remember the time, when if the then King had but twenty
more Places in his disposal, or disposed of those he had to the best advantage,
the Liberty of England had bin at an end. I would not be understood quite to
exclude Parliament Men from having Places; for a Man may serve his Country in
two Capacities: but I would not have it to be a Qualification for a Place;
because a poor Borough thinks a Man fit to represent them, that therefore he
must be a Statesman, a Lawyer, a Soldier, an Admiral, and what not? If this
Method should be taken in a future Reign, the People must not expect to see Men
of Ability or Integrity in Places, while they hold them by no other tenure than
the Disservice they do their Country in the House of Commons, and are sure to
be turned out by every prevalent Faction on the other side. They must then
never expect to see the House of Commons act vigorously for the Interest either
of King or People; but some will servilely comply with the Court to keep their
Places, others will oppose it as unreasonably to get them: and those Gentlemen
whose Designs are for their Country's Interest, will grow weary of the best
Form of Government in the World, thinking by mistake the Fault is in our
Constitution. I have heard of a Country, where the Disputes about Offices to
the value of Thirty Thousand Pounds per annum, have made Six Millions
ineffectual; what by some Men's prostitute compliance, and others openly
clogging the Wheels, it has caused Want and Necessity in all kinds of Men but
themselves, Bribery, Treachery, Profaneness, Atheism, Prodigality, Luxury, and
all the Vices that attend a remiss and corrupt Administration, and an universal
neglect of the Public. It is natural to run from one extreme to another; and
this Policy will at last turn upon any Court that uses it: for if they should
be resolved to give all Offices to Parliament Men, the People will think
themselves under a necessity to obtain a Law that they shall give none, which
has been more than once attempted in our own time. Indeed, tho there may be no
great Inconvenience in suffering a few Men that have Places to be in that
House, such as come into them naturally, without any indirect Means, yet it
must be fatal to us to have many: for all wise Governments endeavor, as much
as possible, to keep the Legislative and Executive Parts asunder, that the
former may be a check upon the latter. Our Government trusts the King with no
part of the Legislative but a Negative Voice, which is absolutely necessary to
preserve the Executive. One part of the Duty of the House of Commons is to
punish Offenders, and redress the Grievances occasioned by the Executive Part
of the Government; and how can that be done if they should happen to be the
same Persons?

But in my Opinion, in another thing of no less Importance, we have deviated
from our Constitution: for tho we were in a Capacity of punishing Offenders,
yet we do not know legally who they are. The Law has been always very tender of
the Person of the King, and therefore has disposed the Executive Part of the
Government in such proper Channels, that whatever Errors are committed, they
are not imputed to him, but his Ministers are accountable for them: His Great
Seal is kept by his Chancellor, his Revenue by his Treasurer, his Laws are
executed by his Judges, his Fleet is managed by his Lord High Admiral, who are
all accountable for their Misbehaviour: And formerly all Matters of State and
Discretion were debated and resolved in the Privy Council, where every Man's
Opinion might be known, and he was answerable for it. The late King Charles
broke this most excellent part of our Constitution, by settling a Cabal or
Cabinet-Council, where all Matters of Consequence were debated and resolved,
and then brought to the Privy Council to be confirmed. The first footsteps we
have of this Council in any Christian Government were in Charles the Ninth's
time of France, when resolving to massacre the Protestants, he durst not trust
his Council with it, but chose a few Men whom he called his Cabinet-Council:
and considering what a Genealogy it had, it is no wonder it has been so fatal
both to King and People. To the King: for whereas our Constitution has provided
Ministers in the several Parts of the Government to answer for Miscarriages,
and to skreen him from the Hatred of the People; this on the contrary protects
the Ministers, and exposes the King to all the Complaints of his Subjects. And
it is as dangerous to the People: for whatever Miscarriages there are, no body
can be punished for them; for they justify themselves by a private Direction
from the King: and then we have run it so far, that we cannot follow it. The
Consequence of this must be continual Heart-burnings between King and People;
and no one can see the Event.

FINIS.

