A CAP OF GRAY HAIRS, FOR A GREEN HEAD. OR, The Fathers Counsel To his SON, An
Apprentice in London.

To which is added, A Discourse on the worth OF A good NAME.

By Caleb Trenchfield.

Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked
shall rot.

London, Printed by J. C. for Henry Eversden, at the end of Duck-lane in
Smithfield. 1671.

SON,
HAving been at so much cost and care to set you fairly out, to act your part
upon the stage of this the present world; I was consulting what might be
further done, to give assistance to your fair come off. And now observing that
you were gone out from under the obumbrage of the Fathers wing, when counsel
was at hand as each occasion did present it self, and yet exposed to a standing
much more slippery, through the great store of powerful temptations; I thought
it meet to send you up a stock of such well-tried advice as might serve as a
panoply, from whence to fetch supplies, as your occasions should impose a need.

And though some Fathers, and of them some persons of great Note, have
undertook to give advice unto their Sons; whose works in that kind are yet
extant; and therefore this may seem more needless; yet there is not any (that I
know of) has stoopt so low, to give advice to an Apprentice, but did direct
their thoughts to such a pitch, as lay not in the level of the greatest part of
persons; to whom advice was not less needful. However, you will find here some
store of things not touched by their observation, and such as when
experimented, will be approved to need your wariness, and caution. But what
concerns you most, is not the Doctrine, but the Use; for it is not hard to give
good Counsel, but to take it. Green Heads are apt to think themselves the
wisest; but that were strange, when as our wisdom (for the most part) is
bought by experience, and young men are too young to make an ample purchase.
You have this advantage then, to have that stock, which has been traded for by
elder years, and those too exercised not in a few concerns: add these unto
your own, and you may be as wise, as if you had already lived some more years.

If this care for you turn not to account, I Am sure the error will be found
your own; and if that hereby you're not made the wiser, your follies will be
more without excuse. But I shall prosecute these my designs contrived for your
benefit, with my uncessant prayers, that God would ever do you good, and be
your sure and everlasting Guide. For as our Actions should be all done for his
Glory; so should our enterprises be all undertaken with the expectance and
invocation of the divine assistance. Therefore as in the disposing of our
affairs, respect should be had by us that we may be serviceable to God in our
Generations; so should our eyes be up unto him for his blessing on us in those
affairs, whose overflowing hand does blast them, or else make them flourish;
the one or other even as he pleases. And it should be our most important care,
that we so live, as that by our iniquity we give no cause that he should bring
a curse on us and our endeavors.

The first thing therefore which I have to recommend to you, is Religion
toward God; by which notion I do chiefly understand, All care to save a man's
own Soul: for it seems an apparent irrationality, there to design the provident
management of the affairs of this present life, where a man is utterly
regardless of those much more important concernments of a better. And if the
Child in the womb had but the same resentments of the life here, as we have of
that which is to come, 'twould be esteemed strange, if it should be more
thoughtful for its easy lying the nine months there, than its comfortable
living (it may be) an hundred years here. And much more gross is our vanity and
madness, in the neglect of those things which are not seen, which are eternal;
when we only care for those things which are seen, which are temporal. But it
is not my design here, to give you directions in this business, that would
swell this little Manual into too great a Bulk; and there are almost
innumerable pious labors of Learned men who have largely treated on this
subject. But there is one main thing, which is in truth much wanting every
where, which I have chiefly here to mind you of, to wit,

That you be serious in the matter of Religion: for he that is serious,
thoughtful of those affairs, according to that vast concernment that is in
them, will not be much to seek in the expedients tending thither; yet let me
set before you two or three things by way of caution.

Do not busy your self much about the Controversal part of Religion, for that
ingenders strife, rather than edifying; and makes a man rather busily
inquisitive, than usefully practical. Faith and good works they are the things
wherein a man can never unprofitably, never too abundantly be employed. And the
truth is, 'ts no hard matter for the talk of Religion, to supplant the practice
of it; nor for a man to speak handsomely of that, which he will never do; and
like Seneca, to praise poverty, whilst he heaps up millions. It Is infinitely
better to be conscientiously practicing the plain truths we know, than
curiously disputing about those things we know not; rather walking in the good
old way of manifest holiness, than in the new affected way of disputed devotion.

Do not espouse any opinion, faction, or way of men, to be led by them one step
farther, than the clear conviction of thine own judgment does conduct thee. For
how great indiscretion is it to be hurried by the whirl of others motion, into
those precipices, whirl depth and dangers thine own considerate foresight did
not first sound? And how great an injury is it to that Reason which God has
given us, to subject our Understanding to the Sense of others, and jurare in
verba Magistri, and like silly sheep to bounse into no small inordinateness,
only because we saw some great Ram leap in before us? And verily 'twould vex
one, to see those who do design to draw disciples after them, to lead a crew of
Gulls into no small puddles, by having obtained the repute of being no meanly
understanding Ganders. For how many hens do we daily see, following that Cock,
who has had the confidence to crow stoutly on his own dunghill; out of danger
of having his right disputed by the dint of Weapon?

I confess it has been no impolitick way to wealth and promotion, to be a
stout abettor of the prevailing faction, and great assertor of the opinion in
fashion.

And we need not go far for examples of those, who by this gale have
prosperously sailed to desired Dignities. But if the Apostle make it a small
matter, to give carnal things in exchange for spiritual; surely it is abominable
Traffic to give our spiritual things for carnal, and abet opinions to fill our
purses, not better our Souls.

But besides, it is seldom but God takes these wise in their own craftiness,
and brings such a turn which throws them out of Dignities shamefully, who
brought themselves in hypocritically.

Never engage so far in any opinion, or way, as to suffer for it, without the
clear conviction of thine own Conscience, that it is thy duty so to do. For
though there be a glory in suffering, overballancing to some humors the loss
and smart which accompanies it; and though there be much in a preoccupated
judgment that we do well in suffering, especially when we are clap't on the
back, and encouraged by those who abet the opnion: Though thus (I say) when in
hot blood, and in the glory of the business, it was not hard to appear gallant
in some herce incounters; yet when the wounds are stark, the spectators gone,
and thou left in thy solitudes, and become serious, believe me, thy spirit will
be intolerably dull, if it be not serened with a conscience testifying from
manifest truth, that thou have suffered according to the will of God.

But further, under this notion of Religion I have to recommend to you all acts
of Devotion and service toward God; all care to give unto him the inward
adoration of the heart, and the outward worship which is well-pleasing in his
sight. And this advice is the more necessary, because the greatest part of
persons among us, such as are not factiously devout, are irreligiously profane.
For from the one extreme, the most of men are run unto the other; contenting
themselves with the name of Christians, and nothing but the name. In which
respect (I think) they are not matched by any generation of people in the world
beside. For whereas every Nation acknowledges some God which they worship
after their manner, with a zealous devotion, even to the prodigal expending of
their very lives; how many are there among us, which have not so much as a show
of Religion, not any Duty performed to God in their Families, not any
invocation of his name, unless in cursed Blasphemy and Oaths? And that wherein
custom has so much prevailed, that it is a shame not to do it; (I mean giving
of thanks at meat) what affected brevity is designed, as if they intended
rather a scoff of the Divine Majesty, than otherwise? As for the attendance
upon the Public service, verily that is as to a Play, more than ought else,
doing merely what the Poet says Women came for to the Theaters, Spectatum
veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsae: the ends of most, at those divine
employments, being to show their own braveries, or see that of others; and the
most exact account which they there take of any thing, is the new fashion.

But do thou, in thy attendance upon Divine Worship, say, as Jacob of Bethel,
How dreadful is this place! and remember the greatness of tha^ God, who has
professed himself to be a jealous God, and therefore most observant what manner
of Addresses thou make to him; doing the duty thou art engaged in with all
thy might; as well knowing that that God who requires thou should love him
with all thy heart, expects that thou should apply thy self to his
service, with the most united intention of all thy faculties.

And though the Apostle says, that we should pray (...), without ceasing, the
heart being always in a frame of calling upon God, and in a continual desire
and expectance of supplies from him, in whom all our springs are; Yet our
solemn applications unto him, in hearing him speak to us, or our speaking to
him, should be with that fear and reverence, as suits with his infinite and
incomprehensible greatness. And as our hearing of his Word read or preached,
should be not as of the sound of words, but with observation of the importance
of the sense: So should our calling upon him, not be the inconsiderate and
formal mumbling over a parcel of prayers; but with that faith, affection, and
earnest desire, as may approve thee to be otherwise than a vain babbler.

Neither is Religion only of great use as to the advantages of the world to
come, but also to the concernments of this present life: the Grace of God which
brings Salvation, teaching us not only to live godly, but also righteously,
and soberly.

Now as I have made it my care to dispose you to such a Master, as has a good
report of all men, and I hope of the truth it self, that he is an honest good
man, and able in his way; from whom you will receive daily examples of the
exercise of virtue; and who, as he will expect the duty of a servant from you,
in your service of him; so I know he will perform the duty of a Master to you,
in your government and instruction: So it behooves you now to answer the end
that was designed in your being so disposed of, and so to take care to be a
servant now, as that you may be a Master hereafter. To which end, it is not a
little conducing, to come off the Stage with the clear applause of having acted
the part of a servant well: for he that is turnished whit that report, goes a
great way in the second part (I mean) the setting up for himself.

He that will thus come off, must be much employed in the exercise of those
virtues, which greatly tend to the obtaining a good name; and the first of
these we may say is Veracity.

For not to speak how great a sin it is by a lie to deny the God of truth, and
his omniscience who knows all things; It is not to be imagined, how great a
disrepute is thereby contracted. For we thereby not only make our selves the
scorn of those that do discover us, but deprive our selves of that belief,
which we might expect from those which do not. The liar rendering himself
perpetually suspected, and even then when speaking truth not believed.

Neither shall you find the liar any wise answered in that design of excusing
himself, which he proposes: For besides that it argues much profaneness to
back one sin with another, and make recompense for what was ill done the first
time, with doing ill the second; it seldom proves, but that the falsehood is
discovered, and what might at first be easily pardoned, upon a fair confession,
is made the subject of a severe animadversion, by a repeated guiltiness, And in
very deed, it is very seldom. but that a soft answer, and confession, obtains
the dismission of that offender, whom a lve would have detained unto a future
judgment.

Fidelity is another virtue so essentially necessary in this design, that to
suppose a good servant without it, were to make a man without reason. Let it be
therefore your principal care to keep your hand undefiled from the touch of
whatsoever you cannot justly call your own. Neither let any opportunity, or
probability of concealment ever tempt you to lay your fingers on that, which
your conscience tells you not, is warrantably yours. For a bird of the air will
tell the matter, and what is so unrighteously detained, must either be with
shame refunded, or (which is worse) with impenitency kept, to the treasuring up
of wrath against the day of wrath. Besides observe, how great an happiness it
is to be bold-faced in the conscience of our own integrity in this behalf; when
like Moses and Samuel, we are able to present a challenge to the whole world,
if they can charge our hands with any thing that is theirs.

But it concerns you also, to have no confederacy with any that have clammy
hands; no nor any connivence: for it is not the least part of fidelity to those
who do entrust us, to be as their eyes, and ears, to prevent all injurious
encroachments. And it is easy to conjecture, how great a conducement one trusty
servant is, to the stifling the enterprises, and throwing water upon the
gunpowder of those evil designs, whereby unfaithful Servants abuse their
Masters, and sometimes even blow up their estates.

There is another sort of Fidelity, though not of that consequence, yet not
less acceptable to those who shall employ you; when you shall be faithful to
their reputations, not only avoiding all reports and speeches which may cast
upon them any the least blemish; but at all times interposing your self in
their vindication, against the obloquy of those, who may traduce them.

And verily, as to ingenious spirits, nothing is more dear, than their
reputations: so is there not any thing which endears a servant to such Masters
more, than when he shall be overheard, either refuting such calumnies whereby
their good name was endangered, or giving the most favorable interpretation to
those just allegations to which their weakness, or oversight, might render them
obnoxious.

Temperance is the next which here comes to be mentioned; a virtue of that
expediency, that scarce any business is readily done without it: for he who
wants this moderator, and too deeply drencheth himself in that which is too
much, is like a man running in boots, unfit for any employment. For which cause
Solomon says, The sluggard shall be clothed with rags, because he cries, Yet
a little more sleep, a little more slumber. And truly it is not hard to
declame against the intemperate use of sleep, it being indeed, as it were, the
abatement of our life, and as either returning us into that condition we were
in in our mothers womb, or as anticipating that when in our graves; being as it
were to that end ordained, to put us in mind of our own infirmity, and that we
die daily. To be sure, we do not only deprive our selves of so much of our
lives, as is thus unnecessarily disposed; but we do also cut off from our
selves so much of opportunity to dispatch our affairs, as is by us this way
intemperately expended.

In both which respects of Health and Wealth, we may also advise you from
intemperance in meats and drink; being such, as most certainly decays the
body, and consumes the purse. Excess in these, being not only a pleasurable
evil, whereby we cut our own throats with no small delight, and put out natural
heat, with throwing on too much fuel. But it is also a costly vanity, the
dainty tooths of some, corroding so far into their estates, as to reach the
very vitals; and one mouth being more than enough for six pair of hands. For
what would supply a temperate rectified appetite with what is wholesome, at the
price of a few pence, will not allay the itch of one luxurious, with what it
shall think toothsome, at as many pounds: the one intending the satisfying of
hunger (which when it is done finds an end) the other like the itch of scabby
parts, the more it is scratched, the more desires it. And this caution deserves
your greater care, being in a City which abounds with fullness of bread; whither
all the dainties of the Kingdom have their confluence; and excess in eating is
ushered in with the greatest solemnity and abundance (I believe) of any place
in the world besides. The delights of Asia, so much talked of, as the
enervating poison heroic Spirits; being but as Kickshawes to those excesses
which the present luxury has excogiated; wherein the design, seems by repeated
proritaments, to deal by stomachs, as Cock-masters by their fainting duellists,
hold them up, that cannot stand of themselves, to a fresh encounter.

And though this excess of eating may be as hurtful to the body, and
consumptive to the purse; yet it is not in many respects so pernicious, as that
of drink; which by a sad fatality proves a deluge to Reason, and commonly
brings with it a flood of those debaucheries, which render us the scorn of
children, and detestation of sober men. And though I want not reasons of the
highest remark, yet verily I want words to importune you to a just abhorrency
of so great a mischief, whereby we unman our selves of the reason God has
given us, like swine wallowing in our own vomits; and rendering our selves both
the fitted instruments of every iniquity, and incapable of any good counsel
which might prevent us. As therefore your inclination now does stand averse to
this vice, so let me adjure you, by all that is dear and sacred, that you
continue at the greatest distance from it.

Here also let me put in a caution against intemperance and fantastickness in
Apparel; wherein this Nation is so immoderate, that they are most witty how to
be most antic. It Is not rare to see those persons exposed like owls, to the
ridiculous wonder of sober men, strut along, as if they drew after them the
admiration, and not the laughter of those that see them; when pitiful souls,
they are the Ignes fatui, which intelligent men follow with their scorn, and
usually expire in the silly impertinencies of their own vanity. And therefore
expensiveness in Apparel, is certainly as great a foolery, as men are guilty
of; when at huge rates, they purchase those things, for which they are no more
valued, than a fore-horse for his feather. For if Apparel be beyond the Estate,
the only esteem you get thence, is of a prodigal fool; if but equal to it, you
have that esteem without it. For you may observe, that the value which we set
upon persons (beside that due to the endowments of their mind) is according to
their Rentals; and he that has an ample revenue, shall be respected, however
plainly clad: when a fine fellow without, by those that know him, shall have no
more esteem, than a poor rascal on a Stage, though in the array of a Prince:
and he that came in to King Henry the Eighth with an hundred tenements on his
back, sold to make him brave, would have had twice as many hats off the next
Term, if he had had the rent of them in his purse. It is therefore wisdom to be
neat, not gallant; and to wear such apparel as may show you are not sordid, and
neglect your self; not such as may make your purse look thin through the cost,
nor your judgment censured for the vanity.

What comes next to be laid before you, is the art of Silence; of no mean
consideration in the quietness of your life, and advantage of your affairs. And
therefore as in general, that talkative humor should be avoided, which
exposes a man very much to the censure of others, it being very difficult to
talk much and well: the Greek Adage being true, (...), much speaking is not
without much folly. Neither is it a little hard, so to manage that slippery
instrument, as that something shall not thence escape, which may be retorted to
your prejudice, especially if persons be talked of whom you cannot commend
without envy, nor dispraise without danger. Every one being smartly sensible of
the stroke of the tongue; and none being so ready to amend for being beaten, as
to be revenged of the beater.

But it is especially dangerous to speak any thing in the disparagement of
Women's Beauty, or Honor; for they are naturally waspish Creatures, and apt to
take pet; and by how much the more feeble, the more prone to revenge those
things, which an elated magnanimity would overlook, as too inferior a mark.
Through the consciousness of which imbecility, they lay their designs close,
and prosecute their mean concerns with more extreme revenges, than you can
easily imagine: being sure to do that at the first cast, which they are ever in
fear will not be effected by an after-game; and are fully taught that policy,
to shoot with Bullets, and not Hail-shot; and level their blow at the head, and
not the heel. Doing their business too, after the Italian mode; so that though
their disgusts, like that of Juno's upon the arbitrament of Paris, manetalta
mente repostum, yet it shall not break forth till you are secured; like the
cannon giving the blow, after the mark is torn in pieces. Therefore you may
observe in all story no Vindicts so transcendent as those of women, clear
particularly in Overburies Case, whom no indearments could ransom from being a
Victime of Feminine rage. Neither shall you find any thing of a more dire
immanity than the Parisian Nuptials on Bartholomew-Eve; which yet were hatched
under a French-Hood, and not a Helmet: for which cause those Fathers of
Invention represented all the Furies under the notion of women, and expressly
ordered, that Erinnys should be foeminci gencris. Neither is it a farthing
matter, whether what you have said, be true or no; unless by how much the
truer, by so much the more biting: it being with them, as the Historian said of
Nero, Quae facere gaudebat, audire gravabatur, their principal art being that
of concealment; and therefore they hate no dog so much, as the bloodhound.

But this is not to be understood generally; for there are of that Sex, very
many, whose sentiments are suitable to the delicacy of their constitutions,
being as innocent and harmless, as the most gentle Turtles, whose purer souls
know nothing of sin, more than what cannot be avoided by common infirmity; and
therefore, sweet creatures, are without any thing of gall; and are far from
thoughts of revenge, because they can think none so ill, as to deserve an ill
thought of them. To speak any thing which might, though but obliquely, reflect
upon such as these, were an impiety not to be expiated by the most submissive
acknowledgments. But there are besides these, those whose hearts are branded
with blackest Characters, by frequent commissions steeling their Consciences to
the perpetration of those villainies, which it is their greatest art to cover
over with a different appearance; to which end they rack their curious wits
(without doubt the most sublimated of any intelligence below that of Spirits)
to the greatest keenness, in inventing expedients to hide that, which they fear
not to commit; but hate should be known, and therefore prosecute with as cruel
spite him that should pretend a discovery, as if you had undertaken the public
unplaistering of a painted face.

But you are very much to be careful, not to discover the concerns of that
family wherein you live, for every man's house is his Castle, and should be as
his Cabinet; whence nothing should be divulged but by his permission. In the
reason of which we have so many examples, even of some slaves, who have endured
the extremest tortures, rather than discover their Masters secrets. Neither is
it any wise fit to babble of those things which you may possibly conceive are
of inconsiderable moment; for he that will indiscreetly tell any thing, is ever
suspected that he will tell every thing. And they that have some truth from
your mouth to begin upon, will thereon build such superstructure, as is
proportionable to their own imaginations: all which they stamp current and
passable upon the credit of that truth which you at first reported.

But especially let what is committed to you as a secret, be locked up by you in
an enclosure, not to be opened, but by the key of him that gave it. For most
intolerable is that vanity, which leaks out into the next company what was
committed by his friend, or is easily drawn in to discover what was so
entrusted; for no man but vilifies that person in his own estimate, who is
loose-bodied upon that account; and judges him a contemptible sponge, whom he
finds facile to be squeezed out of what he was so charged with.

And here you may also take notice, how expedient it is not to be talkative of
such designs, as are in your thoughts, of bargains to buy, or business to do;
for thereby you give great occasion for others to prevent you, if they judge it
worth the while: and those who come under the reach of your projects, are
thereby alarmed to circumvent you, and defend themselves; and it is no small
advantage in every affair, to take those we are to deal with unprovided. For
which cause the late Usurpers did represent their great concerns as already
done, rather than to be done; and there was no talk of what they purposed, till
'twas effected. And you may observe, that the sly Fox who silently snaps his
prey, shall alone troble the number, that a crew of babbling Beagles shall get
by their outcry: and it is your close lads who commonly effect those
businesses, which your great talkers can never compass.

Know also, that though there be a natural proneness to boast of our own
abilities; yet he is very unwise that talks of them, or of his own arts. For
it is one of the greatest parts of cunning, to endeavor not to be thought so:
and he that proclaims his own skill, beats the Drum to the alarming those he
has to do with; and summons every man to come well provided to deal with him,
that declares he goes always furnished with a sword and Buckler. And it is the
only benefit that an opinion of our wit and nimbleness begets us, that we are
confronted with that resolution which lies immovable on its own basis; or like
an Hedg-hogg, shows nothing to the teeth of our art, but its sharp prickles.

Nor is it fit to talk of our expectances, nor of our hope of such successes,
which depend upon the good will of others, which are set in lubrico; and if we
fall from such hopes so discovered, we fall as much in our reputations, as if
our casuality had been real; and expose our selves as much to the derision of
others. And such imaginary disappointments are not seldom retorted on us, as
the true returns of our own unworthiness: and it is but a just confidence that
others take in this kind to deny us, when they see us so rich in hopes, but
not so in performance. However, he that antedates his own enjoyments, and
pre-occupies them in his discourses, does truly according to the Proverb,
Reckon his chicken before they are hatched; And, Sell the bears skin ere it be
caught.

But be warily silent in all such things as are bandyed in difference between
others: for he that blows the coals in others strifes, shall be sure to have
the sparks fly in his mouth. It being hard to make even such an amicable
interposition as shall not admit of a sinister interpretation. All men almost
being led by their passions and prejudices, and their own interest; and scarce
a man that will weigh his own cause in the balances of Justice. And therefore
you will be necessitated in such cases either to deny your own reason, and be
towed about at the pleasure of others, or expose your self to the disgusts of
those, who judge of your sentiments, not by the truth and reason of them, but
by their own passions.

But it is vilely odious to be an instrument by incentive relations to add fuel
to the animosities of dissenting parties, and be a talebearer to keep up that
fewd, which might otherwise expire through want of nourishment. For beside that
such practices usually prove pernicious, and they that deal in them, as it
were, hold a fox by the ears, and seldom part without a snap, or a scratch, if
not worse: It is the Devils work to blow the coal of dissension; and on the
contrary, the peacemakers are reckoned a part among the seven Beatitudes.

It Is therefore every ones duty to bury all corroding language in eternal
oblivion: and it will be your wisdom to have your tongue dipped in Oil always, in
Vinegar never: I mean, not to convey any such relations as shall have a
bitterness in them; nor give any such answers in your own cause, which shall
not be lenitive. For how much a soft answer pacifieth wrath, I believe you need
not look back upon ancient examples, how thereby Gideon quieted the
Ephraimites, or Abigail David, when Nabals churlish answer had not a little
incensed him; your own occasions will give you experience enough of this
nature: neither will there need much to persuade you, if in such occurrents you
consult your reason, and not your passion. For the truth is, it is a foolish
praefractoriness that cannot stoop to a submission; and it is surely no less
then madness to think that what was ill done by casual oversight, will be made
amends for by a stubborn reply.

And here 'twill not be impertinent to advise you to be of a meek and calm
conversation, by no means apt to take pet at matters of less moment, for such
captious persons are like the weathercock, which every wind disturbs, and
disposes into a different Aspect; by which, as they contract no small
disquietness to themselves, so they become very unacceptable to others. But
where there is just cause given, it is much better to let the wasps alone, then
by contending with them to bring a swarm about your ears: Yet much more
inconvenient is it to be a man of strifes, and to study occasions to quarrel
with others; so that none can come near you without a collar of prickles. For
by that means you will be looked upon as a fire in all companies, who make ready
the hearth of a dry burnt discourse for your entertainment, and set out of the
way, as too combustible to come near you, what is free and debonair.

And besides too, such tempers, by their frequent collision, do strike fire out
of those flints, where otherwise none would have appeared, and raise up enemies
out of that dust, which if not stirred, would never have flown in their eyes.

But it is an hundred times better to study the good will of all, rather then
to make an enemy of any; and to be of that obliging spirit, as to gain the
affection of every one (except, as Tacitus says of Sejanus) Quorum voluntas
non nisi scelere quaeritur: Whose kindness is to be had not but by a
consociation in wickedness. For there is not a Creature so contemptible, which
may not be something beneficial, and whose friendship may not be rather
valuable then its enmity. And therefore kindnesses done meet with requitals
many times beyond what could be expected; and it is a story well known, That he
who proved a Surgeon to the lame Lion, had his life afterward saved by the
same Lion.

And verily, how far a constant affability prevails for the gaining of men,
make trial, and you will find: for daily experience shows, that we make those
creatures our play-fellowes, which are mansuete and gentle; but keep at a
distance those, which are fierce and cruel: and the surly grim Mastiff lies
without doors, when we make a Lapdog of him tha it is affable.

What I have next to advise you to, is, the practice of Frugality, a virtue
expedient for all, but chiefly for you, who like the Silkworm, must sp n your
riches out of your own boson, having such mean expectations of helps from
abroad. That that I have to leave you, being but little at the most; and if I
had much, and you being the eldest, might challenge the greatest share, yet
there are nine besides, and a possibility of more, which must all be furnished
out into the world as well as you: and well 'twill be, if God give me life and
ability to do that. So that the case stands with you, as in Military affairs,
where it is running but once, and no hopes of your ever rallying, if you be once
routed. I have furnished you into the way that you are in, not only according
to my power, but in truth beyond it; therefore if you shipwreck now,
conclamatum est. Be careful then to play your fore-game well, for an after-game
will have no place with you; and such wit will be but Phrygian wisdom, where
they are wise too late. There will be no hopes of a second setting forth, if
your first miscarry. And in truth, no man takes that course, but goes upon
great disadvantages. For like those who intend to sow Corn on woody grounds,
not only exercise that Husbandry which is common to every ^rop, but also ^id
out of the way with much labor those bushes and rubbish which cumber the the
Land: So you will find your self not only to colluctate with those
difficulties which usually occur in every design, but also with those
prejudices which every one will take up, upon your first miscarriage; and
you will find it much more hard to repair a credit once impaired, then to keep
that in a flourishing greenness which was never blasted.

Be sure therefore to go out into the world like a sheet of clean paper, where
no blurs or scribblements are to be discerned; but let your reputation be like
that Virgin purity, not stained with any thing which may render you suspected
to the time to come. For that is the best frugality which is sparing of our
credit, which can never be custodited with too great jealousy, nor expended
but with the greatest loss. Nor yet think that credit which is gotten with the
expense of money, unless God shall so bless you, as that it should be a shame to
you not to be Noble: For he that expects repute, having a good estate, by being
sparing, is like the man who would bring his horse to live with nothing; so he
that would get credit by spending high, whilst his Estate is low, does but blow
a Bladder, which will burst with a stink. And be sure of this, that the first
step to reputation (next to do virtuously) is to have something: and therefore
lay out no money, but what necessity extorts, or such conveniencie as will be
sure to return with a good Cargo: For observe the old Rule, that A penny saved
is two pence got; and the way to much is by a little, for the greatest sum
which can be imagined, was begun in a penny; and it is worth your minding, how
much he had for his horse, who sold him but for an halfpenny a nail doubled.

And therefore be skilled in that part of Arithmetic, which is Addition, and
not Substraction: for when there is an inclination to take out, and you think
it is but a small matter; consider how many dry blows the poor Countryman
gives, to earn no more in an whole day, to sustain his Family with bread, then
thou squanderest away on thy sweet tooth, or thy vanity.

And take notice, that as the most ample Structure had but one (...) at the
first, a cornerstone at the beginning: So be certain, that an estate is
casilyer propagated from something, though never so small, then from nothing;
and he that has one shilling, may much sooner get five, then he a penny, who
has not one farthing. Therefore that Grasier who left behind him some
thousands of yearly Revenue, took care to save when he was a poor Drover so
much, as bought a Calf to begin with. And you may observe, there is still the
same proportion from saving a little to make it more; and he that is not frugal
in what is small, no wise deserves to be trusted with much.

But this is of especial consideration, if you shall be entrusted with the
keeping of your Masters Cash: For on that look with as jealous an eye, as you
would do on a plague sore, if a thought come in your mind of employing one
penny of it for your own use. For know, all that is there must be accounted
for; and 'twill be ten to one odds between the easiness of taking out, and of
returning it back again.

A very fit Partner for Frugality, is Industry; That what is by sparing saved,
may be with diligence improved; and what is so improved, be again spared. For
frugality alone is but single getting; but joined with industry, is double:
like those beams of the Sun, which by a repercussion from the earth, make that
heat not to be endured, which would be hardly warmth otherwise. And there,
where much cannot be done at once, diligence effects it by degrees, producing
by a frequent repetition as great an heat, as more vast abilities but less
active. And it has been observed, that it is not less gainful to Navigate in a
small Vessel, which makes quick and frequent returns, then in that which
returns but seldom, though deeply laden. Therefore the wise Solomon directs the
sluggard to go to the Be and Ant; which infirm creatures plainly show how much
the assiduity of an industrious labor can effect. And verily it is an ill
humor, when because our means suit not with our ends, we will not pursue those
ends, which suit with our means; and because we cannot do what we will, we will
not do what we can; depriving our selves of what is within our power, because
we cannot do the things that are above our power: When indeed that is the way to
do much more then we can, by doing the many littles that we are able.

And this industry truly effects things beyond our own expectations, when we
are not discouraged by dissiculties, but incited; and throw not up the business
as desperate, because not presently pervious. And let me tell you, of all
tempers there is none more to be avoided, the edge of whose activity is soon
abated: for they vilely despond at those things as impossible, which a more
tough diligence does easily superate. For which cause, when the Historian had
reckoned up the many difficulties and dangers which Cosmus that first Duke of
Etruria had to counflict with, in his Infant-government; he concludes with this
Epiphonema: Haec omnia alioqui inexpugnabilia Cosmus patientia and industria
sua facile vicit. And verily it is no wise the part of a man, succumbere
difficultatibus, and give up the Set, because the Cards prove cross, but by a
generous antiperistasis, be hottest in our prosecutions, when the coldest air
blows on our designs; and like true Spur-nags, amniti clivo, strain hardest
against the Hill; or like Thunder, tear it there most, where we meet with the
sturdiest and most rugged Oak. You need never fear but even the tallest Cedar
will fall at your foot, to whose root you applied incessant strokes. On which
consideration I was much taken with his device, who placed for his Impress a
pair of Compass's, with this Motto, Constantia and labor; the one foot being
fixed, the other in motion.

Besides, let me tell you, that nothing shall conciliate to you more friends,
while you are a servant, then an indudustrious officiousness, whilst you are
ready to do what the looks and nods of others intimate that they have a mind
to: For as we love mettle in Brute creatures, and take delight when Dogs or
Horses show their ready motion at our whistle or chirrup; so there is nothing we
take more pleasure in, then a diligent and willing servant: for he merits no
thanks that does what he is bidden, which otherwise would be exacted; but we
set an estimate on him, as exceeding our expectations, who by his readiness, as
it were, anticipates our commands.

Neither let it molest thee, to do those services which are mean, if they be
honest: For there is nothing vile, but what is wicked; nor cause to be ashamed
of that, which is not facinorous. In the sense of which, we find Fabritius,
that illustrious Roman, then tending his own Gridiron, when the Samnite
Ambassadors came to petition him for peace. And the truth is, it is the mere
effect of our pride and vanity, that we stamp those things as dedecorous, which
are good: for bonum and honestum are terms convertible; and the Philosopher
defines that honestum, quod honor dignum est. Hence it is that very slight
persons among us scorn to put their hands to that, which formerly Kings
Daughters made not dainty of. And you may take notice that she is set out to us
as skilled in Cookery, whose Brother was Solomon in all his glory: but this is
the abjectness of the age we live in, that idleness is an ornament, and the
greatest Gentility is to do nothing; when as it is action only that is noble;
and not only the Celestial bodies are in continual motion, but he that is most
high, is purissimus actus.

The next principal consideration wherein your care is requisite, is the choice
of your Company, wherein every person receives as great an allay, both in his
reputation and disposition, as waters which pass through Minerals do, in their
tastes and operations: For we see it common, for the world to judge what men
are by their familiarities. And that it should be so, depends upon the most
natural reason: for we see that all things avoid that which is heterogeneous;
and not only Animals, but even conflated Metals eject out of their substances
the less solid parts: and the liquid bodies of Water and Oil, are as precise in
their separations: so that as they are all concording in general principles, so
are they each as schismatical in their private natures; whereby they not only
preserve their specifical differences, but prevent a confusion, and final
reduction to their Original Choas. Hence we see that promiscuous commixtures
are Monsters in Nature; and as what God has joined, he will have none to put
asunder: so what he has thus put asunder, will he that none should join
together. And for this cause we read those Analogical injunctions, not to Plow
with an Ox and an Ass, nor wear Garments of Linsey and Woolsey mixed together. I
have said all this, only to let you see, how impossible 'twill be for you to
be thought a person of integrity, whilst you converse with those that are
vicious: And this the rather, because we see that all persons affect such as
are like themselves, or those that they may make such; and if you be neither,
you either condemn them as being different, or are condemned by them, because
of your difference; and you will find the same censure past upon you, by all
that make judgment of you.

But you will also find that the danger of evil company, is not less then the
discredit. In matters criminal it many times falls out, that our laws involve a
guilt, not only upon the principal Actors, but also upon all the company; as
in matters of riot and murder. And in cases of treason even silence is
capital; and in such company you will be engaged, either to betray your friends
life, or expose your own. Thus Jaureguius who attempted the murder of the
Prince of Orange, did not only bring destruction upon himself, but on Venerus
also, who though he dreaded to commit the fact, yet kept his counsel that
attempted it: and the discovery of the last was made merely by observation,
that he was seen keep company with the former.

But this is not the greatest danger that evil company brings with it; a deeper
mischief is, that it depraves the mind, and leaves that tang and filth upon
the intellectuals and affections, as is not to be absters'd without much ado by
better counsels. And the fatality of this mischief is seen by the contagion of
it upon the purest minds: Joseph having learned in Egypt to swear by the life
of Pharaoh. And the natural proneness that is in us to evil, makes us spungy to
receive this unhappy tincture, and spreads the venom of it at such a rate,
that there are few that find an antidote strong enough to prevent it. And the
dismal overthrows of many, coming out into the world well disposed, who have
been profligated hereby, ring so shrill a peal to all that are observing, as
that we may well condemn him as brutish, who is not affected with it. For if
you bespeak those whose fortunes are deplored, and ask the reason why they are
so, scarce one of them but shall tell you, that it was evil company that did it.

There being therefore an innate propensity in man to association; Anachorism
being an affect rather of must and melancholy, then of choice and election: It
being also a part of our belief, the Communion of Saints; which consists not
only in that of the spirit, but also in personal converse. And Earl Goodwyns
observation of the Confessors Cup Bearer, when he stumbled with the one foot,
and recovered himself with the other, showing that we have need of the
assistances of one another: For if one fall, the other shall help his fellow;
but woe be to him that is alone. It Is not therefore the least part of our
wisdom, to make choice of such company, as may be of use to us, and not an
hindrance in our concerns.

It is therefore good to choose such for your familiars, as (if otherwise well
qualified) excel in their Way: for as it is a felicity by fate bestowed on some
to lead the Cry in every Art and Science, and ingenious Mystery; so there is
an innate disposition in such, ad captandam laudem, to skim off the Cream of
their abilities, and bestow them as a largess upon the company they converse
with; by which means you may obtain those excellencies in Epitome, which they
got together with much rubbish and cumber. We read therefore, that upon this
account the rarer Artists of ancient time in Philosophy, Zography and
Sculpture, thought it worth the while to undertake long and dangerous
peregrination^ into foreign parts, only to converse with those whom fame
reported to excel. And without doubt these walking Libraries are of the
greatest use; and knowledge never comes in more richly fraighted, then when it
sets sail from such continents. It Is therefore observed, that Francis the first
King of France, though he came to the Crown young and unlearned; yet by his
delight in the discourses or Learned men, (whom he would always have about him)
he attained so great ability, as exceeded the proportion of the most learned
Princes of his time. And I my self knew a person taken raw from his studies
(being chosen into the House of Commons before he was twenty one) and who from
that time very much laid aside reading; yet by associating himself with the
most knowing men, contracted so great a sufficiency, that I have heard him
discourse of Philosophical and Theological controversies, as much to my
admiration, as it was beyond what I did expect. And I also observed, that he
did greatly vindicate himself from that contempt which his youth might subject
him to, by his accompanying with such persons as were esteemed wise: for the
world could not but conclude, that he either was wise, or would soon be so,
whose company was such. And you will sinde this a rare advantage in conversing
with knowing men, that you will have at hand those who are able to advise you,
and willing too, if you be but so to take it. For there is a natural indulgence
that every knowing person has over those that are ignorant, which makes them
willing and ready to enlarge to them the relief of good counsel, when they need
it. And if counsel be the strength of Kingdoms, it can be of no less use in our
private concerns, if God give us an heart to ask and take it: for when young
men are advised by those like themselves, giddy headed, and precipitate (which
commonly they like best, because it suits their humors) they are entangled
like young Rehoboam in those encumbrances, whence they cannot explicate
themselves by a too late repentance: therefore take such for your companions,
who have already sowed their wild oats, and are by long hunting grown too
stanch to set an haunt; by which means you will reap the benefit of their
dear-bought experience, and prevent your own.

But chiefly take care to fix upon such company, who are persons studious of
their reputations, men not of a dirty and degenerous temper: For some there
are, whom nature has molded up of the coursest clay; whose not only brains
represent mere rubbish, but their very dispositions are of those sordid faeces,
which give a tendencie to condescend to the most ignoble and abject things;
whence they will never think much (howsoever vilely) to abuse, or betray you;
when as those who are of an elate and generous spirit, have a natural
reluctancie to those things which they judge unworthy; and are hardly induced
by the extremest necessity, to comply with that, which degenerate tempers never
make dainty of.

And upon this account also, never sort your self with such persons as are
below you; for as their reputations will not bear an equal balance with yours,
so must yours be as much deprest, as may make it even with theirs; and so must
your expenses be as much beyond your own proportion, as their quality is below
that which you pretend to: and they will have a confidence to slip their heads
out of the collar, and leave you to pay all, as if they had done you a kind of
courtesy, in acknowledging your superiority. And it is pretty to observe how
such will claw the itch of your petty ambition with such titles of dignity as
they think will please you, till they have laid you in a sweat, and made your
pores open, and you become melted to effund according to their humor.

But above all, avoid such company as are given to drink; for with whom are
wounds without cause, but with them that are mighty to drink strong drink? The
drunken man being fera humana specie, and therefore such are as unfit for
converse as she-Bears and Lions, who conscious of their own ferity, walk alone;
while more mansuete Creatures associate themselves in Flocks and Herds. Clitus
slain by Alexander, and an hundred more examples, tell what a Devil is drink;
which if it reign any where in the possessed most, it is in our own Country;
where they ply their business beyond compare, and are computed to drink more
Sack in a year, then any other Nation does in three. And though the German did
bear away the Bell for drinking; yet it was rather long, then much, being
content to pelt his enemy at a distance: Whereas we are after the modern way of
fight, altogether for down-blows, being impatient till the opposite have a
total rout. The drinking of Healths too, being a design like that of the
servants of David and Saul at the Pool of Gibeon, where they took each other by
the Beards, and every one smote his fellow under the fifth rib, that they fell
down together. If therefore you love your body, your soul, your credit, or your
purse, let such persons be imprisoned (for the most part they are) in the
Tavern or Alehouse, and do not you come near them.

Neither let such be your associates as have been nefarious, or have a brand of
guilt upon them; for judgment, though it be slow, yet it is sure. And though
God have long patience, yet he has long hands too, and reaches the guilty at
a great distance, between the sin and the punishment; which does not seldom
involve with it, after the Persian mode, their familiars too. Neither do we
read any other immediate cause of the death of Ahaziah, then that he was in the
company of King Joram, then, when God was executing judgment upon the house of
Ahab. In the sense of which, story tells of St. John the Apostle, that he run
out of the Bath into which the Heretic Cerinthus came, lest, as Corah and his
company, he should be involved with him in the same judgment. For which cause
we read of that advice, Come out of her my people, and be ye not partakers of
her sins, lest ye be partakers also of her plagues.

But let such be your company, as for whose sakes God may bless you also; such
as Joseph, of whom it is said, Genesis 39.5. That after the time that Joseph was
made overseer of Potiphars house, that God blessed the Egyptian for Joseph's
sake: and the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had, in the house, and
in the field. And verily, when we read that God would have spared five Cities,
for the sake but of ten persons, Genesis 18. and that God did spare one of them
for but the conveniencie of Lot, Genesis 19.21. we cannot sufficiently take a
seantling how far the interest of a good man does impose upon the Almighty; and
what an advantage it is to have a share in their prayers, who have so much of
favor in the Court of Heaven. But besides, consider what a benefit it is to be
conducted in the ways that are good, by the splendour of the virtue of those
that are our familiars; to have such about us as shall be ready to say, Come
let us go up to the house of the Lord; and present thee with motions of
well-doing, instead of those, who shall play the Devils part, and tempt thee to
evil.

Now in thy conversation with thy familiars, be advised in a few things.

1. Let not thy friendship to them induce thee at any time, to do that which is
evil. The saying of St. Augustine may well be applied, Amicus Plato, amicus
Cicero, sed magis amicus Christus. The greatest friendship is to be useful for
heaven. And where the highest relations wherein nature has obliged us,
entrench upon that interest, we have a warrant to supersede our compliance: For
he that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me.

2. Let not thy affection overbalance thy prudence, and draw thee to things
prejudicial to thy credit, or dangerous to thy estate: For he is none of thy
friend, that would injure thy reputation; nor art thou thine own, if thou
would damage thine own concerns for another. Friendship indeed is a sacred
thing, and deserves our dearest acknowledgement; nor any one thing is there,
wherein a man shows himself more a man: But alas, (that I may speak like a
Schoolmaster) Vbi gentium, quo terrarum abiit? If thy spirit should be so
generous, as to engage thee beyond thine own interest, in the relation of a
friend; where will thou find a correlative? Ancient story tells indeed of a
Damon and Pythias, Pylades and Orestes, which mutually contended which should
dye for other; and Talkative Greece has not been sparing to tell their
praises: But now terras Astraea reliquit. And the present age is so far from
this kind of friendship, that it is hardly found responsible in common
gratitude; but most men then shake off their friends, when they have no need of
their friends, or their friends have need of them. Besides, if you go to
Ludgaie or the Counters, you shall not find so many persons blaming the
prodigalities of themselves, as cursing the ingratitude of their friends; who
left them in the lurch, when then they had drawn them in to be obliged. And
verily it is a pitiful solace for a man, whom suretiship has made sure, and
intricated in the confinements of a loathsome prison, to consider, that he is
become so, for those who frollick it in that liberty, which they obtained by
bringing him into the net; or that the world should say of him, he was a man of
a good nature, and no bodies foe but his own.

3. Discover not those concerns to any of thy familiars, which may revert
either to thy damage, or discredit, if present friendship shall be changed into
unexpected enmity: For it is a pitiful and precarious life, which depends upon
the taciturnity of another; and that is a slender credit which holds by the
weak thread of another silence; who may disclose thy counsel, either by a
natural talkative humor, or by the power of Wine, or a design to oblige
another by thy betraying: For besides that there is an impossibility in some
tempers to stand out a siege, and not be expugn'd, when closely plied, as we
see Sampson himself twice in this kind routed; so is it a miserable captivity
to lie at the mercy of another, and at his discretion to be hanged, drawn and
quartered, with those very instruments which were of thy own supplying. And men
generally upon such advantages are as imperious, as a Maid that is heir to her
Mistress; and take pleasure to make that yoke pinch and wring, into which thine
own folly thrust thy head, and from whence thou have not confidence enough to
pull it out.

4. Reserve to thy self always a liberty of breaking company; and give up the
pursuit, when the Cry hunts not according to thy judgment, or thy private
concerns sound a retreat: For as it is little prudence to buy, by what another
bids; so is he as little wise, that to keep pace with another expenses, will
put his own purse out of breath. And verily, as I have thought it unjust that
another should force me to pledge an whole one, because he began it, without
respect had whether my body or head will bear it; so I think it is then wisdom
to leave thy friend, when he proves an Ignis fatuus, and would lead thee into a
quagmire, entangle thee in contests and animosities not easily explicated; or,
expect that thou for company should bleed as many ounces as he; the repleated
veins of whose estate may allow phlebotomy, when thine wants juice of Raisons.
Therefore balance thou thine expenses, not by the poise of another spending,
but by the juster weight of thine own abilities; and think it good manners then
to break company, when to put on were like the accompanying with a foul woman,
for which thou must dearly smart afterward.

But be especially advised, not to have any familiarity with the Maidservants
of the family where you are, more then what conduces to the dispatching of
general affairs, and such an affability as is common and due to all: for those
kind of cattle have commonly the Stuttle-bee, and are as weary of a single
life, as Nuns of their Cloisters, and therefore catch at the very appearance of
a match; and if you show them any kindness more then ordinary, they interpret
it affection, and make no dainty to challenge you upon that account: wherein if
you correspond not, they hate you worse then an old decayed woman does a young
flourishing beauty. And therefore they rake Hell to find out inventions to
reck their spite on you, and value not how they wound their own reputation, so
that they might stick yours through it; like Richard the Third, who scrupled
not to make his Mother an whore, that he might prove his Brother illegitimate.
Neither will their malice thus have its bellyful, but refuses satiety till you
be ruined. Of which the City of London has given too many, and too pertinent
examples, where have been those, who by false accusations have brought those
young men to shameful exits, whom they could not bring down to their unworthy
designs.

There is therefore scarce any subject deserves your more abundant caution,
unless it be the treachery of a fellow-Prentice; who if he be facinorous, you
may well hang up votivas tabulas, if you do escape him: For the Devil is not a
much more cunning tempter, then such an one proves, whose design is to lessen
his own crime by your copartnership, or to facilitate the excentions of his
wickedness by thy consociation; wherein he congratulates himself in this at
least, that he shall have company in his punishment, and that thou art involved
in the same condemnation: Though his design be, by thy betraying to excuse
himself, and expose thee, like the Turkish Asapi, to blunt the edge of the rage
of the offended. Therefore incredible are the Artifices that those blouded
miscreants have to betray innocent Lads, and decoy them into destruction. And
happy is he whom God keeps, and indues with so much prudence as to avoid the
danger: But if such occurrent should befall you, be settled upon the basis of
faithfulness and honesty; and like the German, when he has to deal with the
nimble Italian, be resolved that nothing shall ravish thee from those
principles of Truth and Justice, which thy judgment is convinced of.

To this advice concerning your company, I may subjoyn that which relates to
your discourse, wherein observe,

1. That your discourse be rather little then much; for a fool is known by his
much speaking: and it is much better to be esteemed too morose and reserved,
then by an impertinen babbling, to be the subject of others derision; besides
the danger of speaking that which may be questioned, cannot be recalled;
whereas, Little said may be soon amended.

3. Let it be rather free then affected; for there is nothing acceptable of
this sort that is not natural; for a very clown in his own language comes off
better, then he that by a Romantic Bumbaste does thunder-thump his hearer into
an aequilibrium between scorn and wonder.

3. Let it be rather wise then witty, for much wit has commonly much froth;
and it is hard to jest, and not sometimes jeer too; which many times sinks
deeper then was intended or expected; and what was designed for mirth, ends in
sadness.

4. Let it be of that Virgin-parity, which knows no stain of that which is
obscene: for if evil communications corrupt good manners, it is in nothing more,
then if they be filthy. And as it is a double iniquity to talk filthily of what
was done wickedly; so is he justly condemned as vile, whose discourse is
obscoene; because out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

5. Let not thy discourse be to deride the infirmities, or natural
imperfections of another: For in this case, what our Lord said to the accusers
of the woman, may be said to all: He that is without sin, let him throw the
first stone. There being no man that blames another, but himself comes under
the lash in some other kind. It being as natural for men to err, as to be;
and the purest Gold of upright men, that ever we read extant, had yet something
of an allay. And no doubt but thine own conscience will condemn thy self, while
thou art the sharp reprehender of another folly. Besides, it argues a dirty
temper, to be so Sive-like, as to let pass the finer Flour, and take pleasure
only to toss about the Bran, and refuse, which even the best Wheat is not
without.

But to make a scoff of natural defects, is to make a mock of the God of
nature; who acts nothing in vain, or without its reason. It might (it may be)
be somewhat excusable for thee to deride the wants of another, if thou had
been the workman in thine own composure; but while that thou were fearfully
and wonderfully made, and now can not add one cubit to thy Stature: So should
another defects be the motive of thy thankfulness, and not the object of thy
laughter; considering that thy perfection is the effect, not of thine own care,
but the Divine goodness.

6. Do not concern thy self in thy discourse, with the public management of
affairs of State: For it is a kind of serious madness, to interest our selves
in the disposure of those things which are so much above us, in the judgment
whereof we are generally deceived: It being the intent of Statesmen to reserve
their designs concealed, and study to appear what they least intend. But
should thou be in the right, thou art never like to be asked thy counsel; and
so all thy contrivance is but to make a man of clouts for thy self to play
with. But the humor of some is abominable, to murmur at Authorities, and
please themselves in complaining of their Superiors: Whereas it is the
principal part of subjection, to submit our selves to the discretion of those
that rule us; and the first step to Rebellion, is, when instead of doing
commands, we dispute them. The best way to prevent the evil effects of
Government, is, not to quarrel with their actions, but amend our own. For as
that Englishman answered seriously, who (when the English were driven out of
France, in the time of Henry the Sixth, being upbraidingly asked by a Frenchman,
when they intended to return into France again) said, When your sins are
greater then ours: So will the removing of evil government (when at any time
God shall bring it) be, not the effect of thy murmur, but repentance; for which
cause the Historian does well reckon up evil Magistrates among the effects
Divinae actionis, as Famines and Pestilences, which we cannot otherwise
prevent, but by repenting.

7. But especially let not thy discourse entrench upon that veneration, which
is always due to the Divine Being, his Attributes, Ordinances and Words: for as
it argues a great profaneness, not to dread him that ought to be feared, who
shakes not the earth only, but also heaven: so can it be never safe to play
with such edge-tools, as cannot be unwisely used without danger; or make a
jesting business of that, for which God has said he will in no wise hold a man
guiltless. And verily, it is a strange impiety our days are grown to, whereby
not only as formerly, men make a sport of jeering Godliness, but they make no
spare of jeering God himself; and seem to know the Scriptures for no other end,
but to use them as Tennis-balls for recreation. But if God be in heaven, and
thou upon the earth, and therefore should thy words be few, there is a greater
reason that they should be reverend.

My next advice should be for the choice of your Recreations, wherein perhaps
you may think advice is not so pertinent; because trahit sua quemque voluptas,
and every man chooses recreation as he is inclined; yet, I suppose, it is not
amiss to desire, that here, you should love with discretion, and direct your
thoughts that way, from whence may (if not the most of emolument) yet certainly
the least of damage ensue. That you should not make your recreation your
business, nor (as one quibled not unwittily) your vacation your vocation, I
need not admonish. Necessity has imposed that law upon you, to work or not
eat. You being, I hope, of too much spirit to play the parasite, and pitch up
toyls to catch Dear in a platter: But were it not so, I should abhor the
thought of your living uselesly; and be like a Sponge, which breeds no
moisture, but only is squeezed out of that which it extraneously contracteth.
And surely more despicable creatures the world bears not, then those
Grasshoppers and Butterflies, which are only employed to sing away their time,
and buz about in the warm Sunshine.

Therefore in general, such recreation is to be chosen, as may relax, or unbend
the mind or body from their too intent devoires, not such as may retund and
weary them. For which cause, as I always thought, that they would give a
pitiful account of their time spent, who sit up till midnight at Cards and
Dice: So had I never any fancy to those recreations, which as they exercise
not the body, so they rather disturb, then relax the mind. Besides the
provocation to passion and vain speaking, whereby we highly displease God,
while we design to please our selves. Without doubt those recreations are
best, which mix pleasure and profit together.

For which cause, the reading of History or Geography, are not of the least
note, and proper for those whose trade (as yours) being for standing and motion
of the body, have a meet relaxation in the sedentary posture of reading.
Besides the delight which the mind may take in the account of passed times, or
the discovery of remote Lands, and enjoy with ease and quiet the discoveries
which others have made with care and travail, and manifold hazards: Whereby you
will not only reap a greater delight, then those that go to visit curious
Structures, or beautified Gardens; but also attain so great accomplishment, as
may render you acceptable to all ingenious persons; completing not only your
own knowledge in the affairs of the world and foreign parts, but also enabling
you to discourse with those, who at their great costs, have been ocular
spectators of remote Regions. And moreover (which is not a small advantage) you
will be furnished with such a stock of examples, of the successes which good
and bad have had before you, as may be not of a little conduct to you in your
own affairs; and as lights on a rocky shore, be useful to prevent your ship
wrack.

And further too, you will not be interrupted by this kind of divertisement
from being at hand, to attend upon such occurrents as may accidently present
themselves: for he verily was not out, whose Proverb was, Keep thy shop, and
thy shop will keep thee. Attendance to him that drives a Trade, being as
necessary to thriving, as the eye of a Master to make an Horse fat; not only
preventing thereby the mishaps, which many times befall through absence; but
also being ready to take occasion by the forelock, and make use of any thing
which comes to your advantage: which if you're out of the way, goes to another
place, and never inquires after you any further; meeting with such things as
quite justle out all those thoughts which they had of you. It is therefore very
expedient (like a short bowl) to lie in the way, and in likelihood to be knocked
up nearer the Mistress.

But if this be looked upon as too melancholy and restrained, and you seem to
need more of motion, and a freer Air; to walk with some friend in the open Air,
is a pleasurable and healthful recreation; when you have not only the pleasure
of discourse to delight the mind, but also the agitation of the walk, to
exercise the body: For the way which some delight in, when business is over, to
sit and tope at a Club, is like the hanging of a Blote-Herring in the smoke,
when a close room, and the steam of Tobacco, must needs be as conducing to
health, as Lincolnshire-Fens are expedient to prevent an Ague.

The Dancing and the Fencing-School (the recreations of some) are both subject
to alike inconvenience in this, that they draw to company (for the most part)
not commendable; and the refunding of such conventions, is (for the most part)
into a Tavern; Such company seldom breaking up, without a parting cup. But they
have besides too, their particular evils. The first inducing thee to show thine
abilities among the Ladies; where, if not advised, thou art drawn in, beyond a
retreat; or at least, to frisk away much of thy time and estate. The other
exposing thee to such contests, wherein, while it pretends to enable thee, thou
art often left in the lurch; thy skill being beaten out of the field by a
resolute fool-hardiness, and thine art (used to conflict with art) finds it
self opposed with that courage and passion which with unlearned blows designs
not so much its own defense, as thy ruin. So that not a few more, taught in
the art of Fencing, have miscarried, engaging upon the confidence of their
skill, then ever were by that their skill defended.

But the great divertisement of the present age, is the frequenting of Plays;
which in the practice of it among us, doubless is very vicious, where the
design is laid, rather to corrupt youth, then to inform it; and matter is so
apparelled, as seems rather to irritate lust, then to ab^^^ it: Persons
generally coming from thence, not often much the wiser, very often much the
viler.

The courting of Ladies is a pleasant (indeed) and gentile divertisement; so I
call it; for he is mad that makes it his business, or thinks it worth his
while, to set a seal upon a bubble: yet I must tell you, it is accompanied with
not a few, nor small inconveniences: for you can hardly be fantastic enough in
your attire, to suit their fancy; nor your discourse vain enough to fit their
humor: for though some few of them will Philosophize, the generality of them
are so futile, that you have little cause to wonder the Poets imagined Venus
concreta spuma. Besides, for the expense, a Coach and six Horses is not more
costly; for he that courts a Lady without gifts, calls an Hawk without a Lure;
which they are free to receive, not to requite; looking upon what you give, not
as the effect of your bounty, but their merit; and that you are richly rewarded
with some kinder sneer, or more affable compliance.

But also, a Treat is as necessary an Appendix of this practice, as a good Log
for Christmas, which they value merely by its cost; wherein to be provident, is
esteemed base; and you are dirty, if you examine how you are particularly
cheated.

Moreover, this practice is not without its danger: for if it be a beauty under
covert, it is impossible to act your love so Platonically, as not to give
offense to the yellow stockens; and then remember, Jealousy is the rage of a
man; and if it be possible to know when it began, you shall never know when
'twill end.

If it be an associated beauty which you wait upon, you are sure to find that
stock dear to buy, because it is vy'd for. And they have the art to raise the
commodity, by the contention of the bidders: So that there is nothing to be had
there, but what is inhanc'd. Besides, in this you're certain either to quarrel
with your Rivals for the feather of her fancy in dangerous contests, or be
reflected upon (if you are wiser) as cowardly, degenerous.

If it be a solitary beauty you court, which as yet is intemerata virgo; so
that none besides take to the sent; she will not long be so: for your
attendance will be but like the Fowlers Stale, the appearance of which, brings
but others to the net. And therefore they delight to have such an one showed,
and how related; which though it may be you are shy of, and would enjoy yours
by your self, yet they hate this kind of privacy, thinking that ware judged
marketable, that has store of customers. But besides, though your intentions
perhaps are general, yet the facile woman thinks you have a particular
affection, and judges that while you but court her as a Mistress, you woe her
as a wife; and so is apt, either to engage her own affection beyond the reach
of an honorable retreat, or has thence confidence enough to challenge you
with those promises and obligations, which your frolic tongue might be free to
utter, but you not free to make good. And which is worse, the world is apt to
impose upon you too, and either judge you vain, to level at that mark which you
intended not to hit; or perfidious, to desert those colors for want of Pay,
under which you listed your self as a Volunteer. But this is not all; for fair
faces, and taking behaviors, are apt to enkindle irregular desires, and engage
the fancy in those amorous Flames, which if those you treat are too honorable
and chaste to comply with, you may be induced to quench in the Barathrum of a
common sewer; and then into how deep a Ditch you plunge your self, Solomon will
tell you; whence we must not expect you to emerge, but with a carbonadoed body,
and decocted estate; which God forbid.

But of all Recreations, there is none more healthful or more delightful, then
to ride abroad on a good horse; whereby you have not only the fresh Air, and
the delightful prospect of pleasant Fields, variated as you make your journey;
but your body is exercised without its own labor, and the spirits actuated
without weariness. An Horse being a creature destinated by the Divine
appointment for the ease and delight of man: Of that Air and generous spirit,
that while his loftiness scorns servitude, he yet seems to take pleasure to do
service to you, and acts not out of a foreign compulsion, but an innate metal,
being for ease and ornament; and therein going beyond that of gay apparel.

But to buy an Horse, and not be able to judge of him; or to keep an Horse, and
not be acquainted with his concerns, whether he be well or ill, duly ordered,
or otherwise; is the highway to be abused, and to make a vexation of your
pleasure: For in putting off an Horse, men commonly use the largest
consciences; and those which will scruple at the Tithing of Anise and Cummin
otherwise, will in this case make no bones of a Sirloyn of Beef. It Is therefore
best to buy, not upon report, but your own judgment; which you may easily
attain by observation, and the comparing of an unsound Horse with a sound one;
having a curious eye, that lets pass not any thing without note, from the
lip to the very heels, bringing every part to a strict examination. And be
advised never to buy an Horse which you see has a fault; for it is a chance
(when you have bought him) if he have not faults which you did not see.

In the experience which I have had in this kind, I have observed, that it is
better to buy an Horse that is fat, then otherwise; because then you may be
sure good meat will make him so, which 'twill never do with some: and it is to
be supposed, that no man will bring his Horse to market out of flesh, if a
small matter will make him so: Moreover, store of flesh is an argument that
that Horse has not been surfeited; or if he has, that it is well worn out.

I have further taken notice, that it is not good to buy an Horse that has any
disparity in his shape, as, long postern'd, inward knee'd, narrowwasted;
because the principal excellency in an Horse, being his strength and
nimbleness; what may render him defective in these, makes him so much useless.

It Is also best, not to lay out money upon an Horse that has not good going.
For that being the end, for which commonly men buy, that they may be
accommodated in their easy carriage, you will find that Horse hard to put
off, which has not this to recommend him. It Is therefore very good always
before you buy, to feel the Horses going under you; for you thereby may not
only best judge of his pace and mettle, but also discover any lameness or
imperfection, which he would not discover when managed by a Rider, who
endeavors its concealment: For which cause also, it is very expedient to run an
Horse in hand upon the stones or some hard gound while another rides him; for
the Horse having his tread free, to make his complaint with it, and pressed with
the weight of the Rider, will discover any foundring, strain, or old infirmity,
which otherwise he would make no show of. But this discourse may be more
seasonable many years hence, if it shall please God so to bless your substance,
as that you may bear the charge of such a convenience: For an Horse is a great
eater, and will not be maintained without a very considerable cost; which no
wise agrees with him, that has not a purse proportionable to bear it. Indeed,
when out of the eater comes forth meat, and an Horse is for profit, as well as
convenience, the case is altered; but this seldom happens to those in the City.
And as seldom is it, if ever, that those who are not very flush men, and keep
house in Town, do not therewith ride their Estates off their legs, and bring
themselves to a speedy ruin.

As to what concerns your converse with men, let it be your choice to deal with
those which are honest; which yet so deal with, as to prevent the mischief, if
they should deceive you, and prove to be Knaves. For as there are many, to whom
conscience of their duty is as forcible as an hundred obligations to bind them
to do uprightly; so are there not a few, who make pretended sincerity, as a
cloak to cover their deceit, and make it their business to fish with that bait;
whom to discern is as dissicult, as the invention of the Philosophers Stone;
and you will be never taught it, but by dearbought experience.

But be most cautious of those that speak the fairest, especially if that be
subitane, or extraordinary: for though it be a common way to give pills in pap,
and administer that which is bitter, wrapped up in sweet-meat; yet this is so
natural, that it is still in use; and stratagems are all in general thus
contrived, though diversifyed in mode and figure. And what he said by his own
experience so many years ago, Tuta frequensque via est, per amici fallere
nomen; you may meet with five hundred, who can by their own experience tell you
the same still.

But then be wary to conceal your suspicions, lest of a dubious friend you make
a doubtless enemy; and he that before only intended to serve his own ends of
you, now designs to vent his malice too.

Yet however, do not profess animosities with any man: for besides that it is
most unchristian to keep anger overnight; and we have no other promise of
being forgiven of God, then as we forgive one another; it is doubtless very
imprudent: For there is no creature so inconsiderable, which may not find an
opportunity to vent its spite, with thy mischief; which God has admonished us
of, in that he has made the Elephant, the biggest of Beasts, obnoxious to the
Mouse, the least of them; by whose running up his Trunk, he is more plagued,
then by any of his stoutest adversaries. And story tells of the most valiant
Kings, who have fallen by the hand of the meanest Rascals: and I remember I
read of a Turkish Vizier slain in the very Divan by a Gregarian Soldier, whom
he had many years before abused, who by a long perplexed contrivance, had from
that very time laid a train for the execution of his revenge; which he resolved
to effect, though certain to perish in the adventure. Therefore if any disputes
or offenses do occur, which it is hard always to avoid; let them be acted with
as little passion as may be; that the concerned person may plainly see, that
the contest was not the effect of thine envy, but interest; and then too, let
thy next congression be with as serene a look as may be: For as we use to say;
The second blow makes the fray; so the next meeting either makes up a quarrel,
or perpetuates it.

But on the other hand, be ready to oblige all with real kindnesses, at least
kind words: For, as William Prince of Orange was wont to say, That man is
little worth, who is not worth a salutation: So may we say, That man is of
little remark, who is not worth a few fair words, that cost nothing. And
verily, this kind of affability and officious respect to men, conduces not a
little to attract their good opinion: And the contrary disgusteth those many
times, who are not unwise men; and causes them to set a note of dislike upon
those, who have passed by them without that acknowledgement of respect, which
they conceived due to themselves.

You shall moreover find a principal way of obliging others to consist in the
art of conferring courtesies handsomely; so to bestow them, as that they may
have the best side turned outward, and be made most acceptable. In which
respect it is best to anticipate the expectation of the receiver, and do before
you're asked: For there are many modest tempers, that strain so much upon their
own inclinations to entreat a kindeness, that they think in so doing they have
dearly bought it. But if you are requested, what you intend to do, delay not;
for hope deferred makes the heart sad; and 'twas Seneca's observation, Qui cito
dat, his dat. But if thou art asked, and must deny, let the party see 'twas not
out of choice, but necessity; and hand it to him with such soft words, as may
even oblige him, in the handsomness of the repulse.

Yet in this, and indeed in all other affairs, the tempers of those persons you
deal with must be carefully observed: for many spirits are like gravelly Land,
whose heat and barrenness is such, as never requites the charge bestowed on it.
You will therefore generally find courtesies thrown away upon persons that are
proud or covetous: the one being of that fondness, as to think all but his own
desert; the other of that baseness, as to set a very low value upon the highest
merit. To do a benefit therefore for such as these, that will be costly to you,
with hope of requital, proves like money and pains expended in the quest of the
Philosophers stone; which has hitherto evaporated in smoke and frustration.

You may hence observe, that the studying of the dispositions of men, is of
great use; not only in what I have said, but also in the management of all
affairs: For it is much more easy to act a design upon a man, to which he is
naturally inclined, then otherwise. Therefore he that intends to bring a
covetous man to act liberally, may as well expect to make a Water Spaniel of a
Sheep, or good meat of a Whetstone. It Is best then to make use of such in the
chanel wherein they run; and those commonly are free of their words, who are
close of their coin; and will be ready to do you any kindness wherein they may
speak for you, when they had rather part from their bloods, then let you have a
penny of their money. And if you expect that such as these should do
handsomely, when in the fag-end of a bargain you leave a piece of Plate, or
suchlike gratuity to their disposition; you are as certainly disappointed, as
if you should look that a dogs tail should afford you frankincense. And verily
that story is here worth the remembering, of the Justices Clerk sent by his
Master to present an whole Boar to him, who lately dyed worth so many
thousands, got by saving. The young man gives a Porter eighteen pence to bear
it thither, big with expectation that the gratuity would be proportionate to so
fair a present; which having presented with such words as were likely to give
it the best acceptance, the rich Chuff draws his purse, and after a long
preamble of good counsel, that he should be a provident husband of what was in
this kind bestowed upon him, gives him twopence: and as the man was requited,
so was the Master.

On the other hand, it is no sinall prudence to make choice of such, if you are
concerned in an Arbitration wherein matter of money may be in controversy: for
those of a free spirit with ease part from such sums as not much, which your
close Sirs would strain at like a Camel.

To this purpose it is very expedient to be skilled in Physiognomy; I mean the
art of discovering the tempers of persons by their looks: from whence no doubt
there is a more exact discovery to be made, then by any relations or reports
whatsoever: and for my own part (I may say) I have been in this respect the
least deceived: For though it be possible for men to cover their passions, and
conceal their cross dispositions from any betray their words may make of them,
till they are ready to act; yet it is not possible for them to obliterate those
Characters of Nature, whereby it is not hard to read them without their leave.
And though it sometimes falls out, that by custom and vice; men are not
(sometimes) what Nature made them; yet that alteration is made by such habits,
as leave a sufficient mark of themselves behind, and make the discovery rather
more easy then difficult. The attainment of this Art is not so easy by any
documents whereby you may be instructed, as by your own private observation,
and the comparing of the experiences of men's actions, with the former judgment
which you passed on their looks; or a posteriore comparing your apprehensions
of their present looks, with what you know of their passed actions; which
transfer as a direction to your conceit on all parallel Phyfiognomies.

Neither will you find it less expedient to discover men's present thoughts by
their present looks, then their inclinations by their features: For if he that
carped at the form of man, found fault only in this, that he wanted a window
in his heart; Nature has something cleared her self in that, for that Vultus
est indicium quid vultis: discovering (do what we can) in sudden appearances,
those sentiments of our mind, which we would should be for ever concealed; and
commonly we discover them so much the more, in being vexed that we cannot but
discover them. To do which, there must be a quick application of the eye, to
the looks of him whose sentiments you would discover, at that very time when
you think he is pincht; that you may judge by the face which he makes, whether
it wrings him or no. There is also much of discovery to be made of the
resentments of others by their sudden speeches, which even from very discreet
persons sometimes bluster forth, and are not examined by the Court of guard;
and then especially, when passions are up, or affections violent. It Is
therefore the part of a wise man, to be a diligent observer of every word that
passes, though with as little observation from others as may be, that you do
observe: For all such suspicion begets caution; and in vain is the net laid in
the sight of the bird.

And here on the other hand, it is of great use to conceal your own resentments,
not to winch when you are touched to the quick; but to dissemble your sense,
till you have a due opportunity to discover it to your advantage. For it very
often is, that we spoil our affairs by disclosing them before they are hatched;
and turning them out into the world (as ripe for execution) which have still
need of the secundine of further advice and consideration. For which cause, as
time is the first of all things, so is it the principal too; it being almost
impossible to do any thing well, that is not done timely.

Neither is it less useful, many times, to cover altogether our apprehensions,
and seem to take no notice of those things, which indeed do give us just cause
of regret; especially too, when those we are to deal with, are either too
mighty for us, or we expect may be beneficial to us. Upon which account, I
remember I have read of Cosmus, that it was not the least thing conducing to
the inurement of his infant-dominion, that he had the art of dissembling the
insults of the Spanish pride, and the envy of his suspicious Neighbors. And
therefore those forward tongues, or peevish tempers, which fling as soon as
touched; and make it more to vent their present heats, then consult their future
conveniences; Not only create to themselves many troubles, but also pull off
the hair of those opportunities, which otherwise in due time might have fairly
presented themselves.

Yet on the other side, there is no greater remora to men's affairs, then that
delatory slowness, which, however the fair gale of opportunity blows, yet love
to put off till to morrow; and then set out like a Coach and six Horses, with
such tedious preparation, that before all things are ready, the Game's started
to their hand, and they come just the day after the fair; when with an irksom
difficulty they are put to it to retreive those things, which but a while ago
flew fair before them.

And here you may take notice, that in the use of men, it is of huge advantage
to observe the time: for there is not that man to be found, whose temper is so
even, as not to expose him sometimes more waxy for impression, then at other
times. And if it were not so, the very contingencies that happen, do
differently dispose us: For which cause we are more inclined to be free to
others, when a prosperous gale has breathed upon us; and are ready then to
give a crabbed answer, when some peevish occasion before has angered us. And
the Crasis of men, as it is very diverse; so are they more or less complying, as
the present predominant humor is accidentally sedated, or made sharper. And
therefore as choleric persons are commonly peevish till they have dined, that
the stomach have something in it, to employ the active humor; so are those that
are phlegmatic, or melancholy, rarely free, or debonair, till their more
ponderous and dull ingredients are warmed and made more active by the
adventitious heat, which wine, or some strong liquor contributeth; or their
spirits awakened by some such pleasant company or discourse, as may leave some
tang behind it. And therefore choice of time will as much difference the
success of your applications which you make to persons, as wind and tide with
or against, shall speed or retard a passage.

And for this very cause, in such cases, it is not ground enough to give up your
hopes as desperate, because you succeeded not at the first; for a second or
third time may find the humor better disposed to receive the impressions
which you intended.

But however, be always advised never to resist one humor with the like: For
it is excellently advantageous when passion is up, to look on, and with a
sedated mind to observe the indiscreet passages which then occur, whereby
every person lays himself open at such a rate, as renders him not a little
obnoxious to the retorts of him, that with a composed spirit takes notice of
them. And that this is so, is easily discovered, if you reflect, when you are
returned to your own bent, upon that exorbitance and indiscretion, which in
those wild fits you flew out into. For which cause, to oppose passion with
passion, seldom produces other effect then a too-late repentance for both. And
'twill be found abundantly better to put on your Mittens, and handle the
passionate with as much softness as may be. And I have known men of that tune,
whom in the fit you would have thought irrefragable, plan'd by this means to as
much smoothness, as could reasonably be expected. And whereas if in snuff and
distaste you may fling away from such re infecta; a little patience and good
words may do your business, and send you away with what you come for.

But take this as a general caution, to deal as little as may be with those
over topping men, to whom a man cannot with confidence come and demand his own.
Upon which account I Will tell you a public story, of which you may make a
private application. It was disputed in the days of Queen Mary, in a Parliament
then holden, whether if the Queen should have a Child, the Tutelage of it, and
some places of strength, should be put in King Philips hand; the King offering
his Bond, faithfully to deliver up his trust, if the Child should dye. And the
greater number of the House inclining to the affirmative, as concluding that so
great a Kings Bond was an ample security; the Lord Paget stands up, and
demands, if the King should refuse to do as he is bound, upon the death of the
Child, who shall put his Bond in suit, and where? which demand was so
difficult to find an answer, that the business fell without more ado.

And it is much one, to have dealings with those, who have so great an influence
on our affairs, that we must be content with what measure they will give us: for
to knock off, or contest, if we like not our matters, is the loss of our
friend, and a greater advantage.

Be also advised in all dealings of importance, to manage them by Letter, and
not by Message; which do so frequently forget, or mistake, that your business
is made a quite different matter, then 'twas when you sent it.

But this should be especially observed, when such answers are given, as you
may suspect may prove offensive; for sent by the mouth of another, there may be
a word put in, which may so inflame the sense, as to make that intolerable,
which out of your mouth was directed with a passable contrivance.

And for the same reason, it is not good to take pet at any such returns as come
at second-hand, when you may be denied in some easy request: for I sometimes
have known, when an answer has been brought, enough to divide the most
intimate friends; which when 'twas inquired into, proved no more to the mind
of the party that sent it, then George a Green, to the man in the Moon.

And you will find it as false to judge by report, when the actions of men come
under dispute: For the misapprehensions of men, not seldom distort and wring
that out of joint to make it most monstrous, when the party that did it was
candid in his thoughts. And the prejudice of men adds so much to this score,
that they will have often a bunch for an horn: and the matter is not much,
there, to find a knot, where it is beforehand resolved to find it or make it.
Therefore, as in matters of news, I have always observed to make such an
abatement, as may bear a proportion with the faction of the relater; so you will
find that as needful in the reports made of men; for you may be sure, that
ill will does never speak well.

But because I spoke before of treating by Letter, you must be advised to be
therein very wary, because there is your hand as a witness against you; so that
as to matter of weight, which may produce suit, it is not amiss to observe what
is said of Tiberius Caesar, That some of his Letters to the Senate were ex
consulto ambiguae such as he intended should be interpreted, not according to
the plain words, but the concernments of those whom he had to deal with: For
such words may be found out, and so placed, as shall amount to a promise in the
apprehension of the Reader, who is conscious of the matter you treat of, which
will not be so construed in the judgment of those who may come to take
cognizance of the matter in question.

If God shall so bless you, as that you live to serve out your time, with such
approbation of industry and faithfulness as shall manumit you with a good
report; 'twill not be amiss to have by you some general advice concerning your
setting up, because God knows whether I shall then be alive to judge of those
particular concerns, which may induce or dissuade it.

What I have therefore here first to advise you of, is, that you look upon this
business, as that which deserves much advice. There being not a few, who by
their haste, and precipitation in this affair, have ruined their fortunes; and
while they have been weary of being servants, have made themselves in a short
time perpetual slaves to indigence and want. For if having once set up, you
then miscarry, it proves like the blasting of a young sprout, which, if not
thereby utterly killed, yet becomes so checked and dejected, that it never
attains a fresh and flourishing condition after. It concerns you therefore to
look before you leap, and not to be induced by the name of Master and a Shop,
to skip into that in haste, from whence you will be shortly turned out with
shame.

It has been observed, that they seldom prove well, who set up young; that age
being for the most part precipitate, and forwarder to do then to consider, and
also apt to pre-occupy the success of things, by a too promising hope; and like
young Setters, to set an Haunt instead of a Covie; whereby they are many times
grossly abused, and err at such a rate, as admits of (only, if any, yet) a
difficult recovery. Whereas those that like Bobbed Partridges have been rust in
the net of deception, by what they have observed at others charge, are much
more wary, and cautelous of being again trapan'd. Besides, age does give a
natural allay, like a Bartholomew-dew, cooling the immoderate heat and rashness
of younger years.

It is therefore taken notice of, that young men do then prosper best, when
they have either served as Journey-men unto some wary Stagers; or have the
happiness to be taken in as partners unto such. Whereby, as Bears by their
grown Cubs, they are taught to catch the prey with the greatest cleverness and
certainty, and with the least hazard.

It Is not amiss here also to admonish you, that great Rents have very often
broke the back of young beginners; who before they could get acquaintance, and
gain custom to defray the charge of so great expense, are drained dry, to the
very vital blood, and expire like a Candle for want of fat to feed the fire
on it. Consider therefore, that omne principium est debile; and it is wisdom to
dispose all thy projects in a proportion to that infirmity: For he that arms
himself beyond his own dimensions, is encumbered with his own Furniture, and
commonly falls the more ridiculous subject of others scorn and triumph. Be
therefore advised to begin warily, having as the first, so the last game to
play; and as one jested, it being all one, and one all; it concerns you so to
dispose it, as may admit of the least hazard.

Nor is it less good counsel, to begin low, according to the advice of the
Countryman, to eat your brown Bread first: If there were no other reason, at
least, because it is shameful to come lower. And experience tells us, that that
Bullock which has been fed with Hay, will almost starve before 'twill be kept
with Straw: for though there be nothing more easy then to come down, so
there is nothing more difficult then to bring our minds to it.

But further, as those Structures which are raised highest, have always their
foundations laid lowest; so you can hardly instance in any great estate, whose
beginning was not with such a providence, as consulted for mean things. And
this doubtless may be rendered as the principal cause, that so very few of those
prove successful, who have been furnished out into the world plentifully, by
their friends: For building thereupon with too much confidence, they set out at
such a rate, as before they have run far, breaks their wind: whereas they who
come forth under-hatcht, conscious of their own infirmity, ride with a strait
hand; and if they are wise, put not into a gallop, till their wind be well
rackt; and by that means prove of good spur-mettle to the last.

And now let me tell you, there is no one thing deserves the care of a young
beginner more then his servants; who, if they be beaten to the world, and know
how to do any thing, they are cunning enough to abuse and cheat you: Their
opportunities too being such as are hard to avoid. Let me therefore in this
particular give you something of advice.

1. Be sure never to trust any of them that have a colloguing, fawning way: For
they are persons whom nature has, as it were, cut out for deceit, and not
only fitted with habiliaments, but also a natural promptness thereto: and if I
may tell you mine own experience, I remember not that I ever had to do with any
of them, which proved otherwise. And they are generally of that impudence, that
like those at Cape Bon Speranz, they will pick your pocket, and look in your
face; pretending always most, what they intend least. And therefore there is
especial need of your caution in those very things, which they profess most
against; they being generally like her, who made the world believe she could
endure no Eggs, till it was found that her usual breakfast was a groatsworth.

2. Never make your self over-familiar with your servants, nor take them for
your play-fellows; for familiarity begets contempt, and contempt breaks the
neck of obedience: It being very rare that those servants are ready to do, that
are not kept in aw; but will be rather disputing your commands then doing them;
which beware that you admit not: It being better in many respects, to err in
commanding what is not convenient, then to amend it upon the advice of an
ordinary servant, they being encouraged by such a condescension, to argue with
you the expediencie of your commands ever after, and upon that account to use
such language, as is not to be endured; which to remedy, when got an head,
you will be necessitated to use such sharp corrosives, as may against your mind,
if for your turn, part you and your patient.

3. Never acquaint a servant with that secret which may be to your prejudice if
revealed: For when once you stand upon their courtesy, they then grow
insolent, and make no bones to retract their service, when they know you dare
not exact it. Beside, how base a servitude is it to have our noses held to the
Grind-stone by those, which we know are bound to obey us? and so to stand in
fear of their discovery, that however abused, we must be mealymouth'd.

4. Expect not to oblige an ordinary servant by your kindnesses. For I could
never see any of them, but were like those fera animalia, which upon every
distaste return to their natural ferity, and forget all bonds of kindness they
received from you. Besides, they have a general comment, whereby they interpret
all your favors; which they judge to be the effect, not of your goodness, but
their own desert; and conclude, that you are therefore kind to them, because
you cannot be without them; which conception having once imagined, they grow as
touchy as Wasps, and upon every ruffle bid you provide your self.

5. Be not in a servants debt, if you can make any shist to come out of it: For
they look upon the forbearance of their money, as so great a kindness, which if
you take not care to requite, they will take care to do it themselves; and assure
your self, it is no good Husbandry in any thing to let them be their own
Carvers. And which is worse, they take occasion thence to grow refractory, and
insult; which by all expedients should be avoided, in a Country where Laws are
so little severe in this respect, and wherein what they are, it is dedecorous to
use them.

6. Let your behavior to your servants be with a general equanimity, and even
temper; not finding fault through the peevishness of your own humor, but the
justness of their demerit: For no one thing does more impair authority, and
abate a readiness to amend those things for which they are increpated, then
when it is observed, we are of such a temper, as we call in Dock out Nottle:
sometimes stumbling at a straw, and another time leaping over a block.

7. Let your servants be supplied in all things meet for them, in sickness and
in health: For all such things are what they bargain for. And it is great
iniquity to require service from them, while you give not what you contracted
for, to them. And truly in this case it is better rather to exceed then
otherwise, if it be done with due providence and caution: For it is nastily
base, that the world should say, we increased our wealth, with what should have
been put into our sevants bellies.

8. Be not inclined to an Evesdropping, and underhand harkening what your
servants say in their privacies: For it is rare (even though they love you) but
at one time or other you shall hear them curse you. And at such times, I have
observed, they are apt to prattle that which they never mean, and please
themselves in a way of speaking freely, as the Collier that called my Lord
Mayor knave, when he was got upon Bristow- causey.

9. Observe that due decorum which our Laws require, not to turn away a servant
without a quarters warning, unless in such cases wherein it is perilous to keep
them: it being indeed very unjust, that those whose livelihoods depend upon
employment, should at your pleasure be exposed to want, without such
foreknowledge, as that they may provide for themselves. And 'twill also condemn
you of such rashness, as will not easily find a fair excuse: All such
occurrents too, as they disaccommodate them, not failing to bring along with
them their inconveniences on you.

Lastly, let your care be, that in all things your servants give God his due:
for it is in vain to expect that they should be just to you, when they observe
that you are careless whether they are so to God; and will never scruple to
abuse you their Master below, when they have liberty given them to offend thine
and their Master above. And verily in this case, the danger's great, where
there is a freedom given to do wickedly: For besides that all righteousness is
like a Golden-chain, so depending upon one another, that he who makes no
conscience of breaking one, may upon the same account break all: It Is just with
God to punish one sin with another, and permit those to deal unrighteously with
you, whom thou permittest to behave themselves wickedly to him. And moreover,
it is not to be doubted, but as God blessed the house of Potiphar for good
Joseph's sake: so he has a proportionableness of vengeance to execute upon
those families, where his name by any one is much dishonored.

But now there is a different manner of acting to be exercised toward those,
who shall be taken by you as Apprentices; for their concerns are much different
from those of an ordinary servant, you being become to them loco parentis: They
giving no small part of their portion for your Education, and expending no
small part of their lives in doing you service; and therefore you are concerned
to own such in a more then ordinary acknowledgement. And as they to that end
became your servants, that they might in due time become Masters, so are they
to be used in all respects as those slips futurae spei, which justly exact your
care and encouragement; and therefore to be managed, not tyrannized over: and
so to be used, that while you drive on by them your own advantages, you
remember also, that you are bound to promote theirs. And therefore I cannot but
congratulate the integrity of those, whom I have heard rejoice in the
prosperity of those who had been their Apprentices. And with as much
detestation have I abhorred the unworthiness of those, who by cunning practices
have blasted the hopeful fortunes of their young servants; envying the thriving
of such as have escaped their hands; grudging that any Water should go by their
Mill, to help the Grist of those, who were so many years servants to theirs.

And indeed consider, how many arguments there are to induce your tenderness
and care, when the hopes and future joys of a careful Father shall be put into
your hands, to stand or fall at your discretion; who has (it may be) drained
himself beyond his ability, to furnish his son into your service; and has been
willing to deny himself of his present conveniences, upon the account of his
future hopes; which shall either flourish, or be blasted, as your discretion
and care shall be disposed. And verily, as we lament the fall of a Family that
has been undone a posteriore, and mourn over the ruins of a blown-up Estate;
so I think we may the more justly bemoan an anticipated undoing, when that
estate is nipt in the bud or flower, which if kindly and cautelously dealt
with, might have grown to that vastness, that the Birds of the Air might have
lodged under the Branches of it.

And truly, who can without laments consider, how many hopeful Youths come up
to that great City, who are miserably exposed to ruin, by the neglect of those
they are bound to, who being secured in their own concerns, by the security
given by friends, leave the young men to run riot at their own wills, and undo
themselves with the opportunities which they put into their hands, while they
are jolly at their Country-houses, and give them rope enough to hang
themselves; whereby the wretched Father is not only disappointed of his
pregnant hopes which he had conceived, but (poor heart) is involved in a debt
which he never feared. Therefore to such as these, it behooves you to behave
your self with such a prudence, as may conduce not only to the effecting of
your own business, but also the promoting of their concerns.

Your next thoughts (it may be) are concerning a Wife; and it is possible you
may dispute with your self, whether you shall marry or no; wherein to give you
advice, were as pertinent as the directions of Almanack-makers, who may tell
you, that in March you must sow Seeds; when in that month the weather may prove
so unkind, as that to sow them in the ground, were all one as to throw them in
the Kennel: many circumstances very much altering the case in the expediencie
of wiving: Therefore what our Lord speaks in this matter, Matthew. 19.12. he
speaks (...), to him that is able to receive it.

It Is true, the married life is charged with many encumbrances; and I think
it is without dispute, that the single man (if he can so content himself) lives
much the freer. But yet doubtless much may be said on the other side: for the
trouble of business has a kind of delight in it: And if I may speak mine own
experiences, who have had in this kind as much as most men; I may truly say,
that I never was better Fleas'd, then when I had most to do. Business by its
motion adding an heat to the spirits, while the unimployed, like standing
water, corrupt with their own idleness. Secess, through our pravity, not
affording us so much opportunity for Divine Contemplation, as laying (...) open
to the illaqueations of Satanical suggestion. Wherefore, we read David never in
worse case, then when idle on the roof of his house; and doubtless there is no
good man but thinks him in better tune, when he said of himself, that he was
persecuted as a Partridge upon the Mountains. Besides, there is a natural
tendencie, whereby God has inclined all things living to a delightful
paintaking in this kind: whence we see the Beasts of the Field, but especially
the Fowls of the Air, denying their own conveniences, and with so much
affection making provision for their many young ones. And if God have not
indu'd us with as passionate instincts, it is because we have reason to produce
in us more powerful effects.

But if we should here fall into a discourse, how much the discommodities of
the married life are compensated with the conveniences which a good wife
brings; we might possibly be involved beyond our design: For not to speak of
that content, which is to be had in reciprocal indearments, where acts of love
endeavor to outvy each other, and you are attended upon sick and well, with
that affection, which like Musk and Amber gives a most pleasing acceptableness:
what a satisfaction is it to have a friend, which as Paul said of Timothy is
(...), and does naturally care for our affairs? into whose bosom we may freely
discharge our thoughts, and expect such secrecy, care, and assistance, as none
else have a like inducement to afford.

If therefore such thoughts as these shall prevail with you, to enter upon the
married life; yet be advised not to engage therein, but with such consideration
as becomes a business, wherein you must know a very great measure of the
contentment of your future days depends.

And here let me first give you a caution against that abominable baseness,
which trapans innocent women to their utter undoing: When those Citizens (which
in truth have nothing) make show of much, and draw in great matches, with that
appearance, to the shame and misery of a broken Fortune. Whereby women of good
Estates, are not only brought to nothing; but made worse then nothing, being
entangled with the incombrance and charge of Children, for whose maintenance
there is no provision. And therefore I adjure you, that with a just abhorrencie
of so great and such unchristian perfidiousness, if your endeavors should be
so blasted (which God forbid) that you must sink, you sink alone, rather then
involve in your calamity the innocence of a Wife and Children, which should be
of that dear respect to you; and be guilty of that cursed treachery, to leave
her without house and home, who lest her Fathers house to come to yours.

And for this cause, do not marry 'till you find that you can stand on your
own Legs; being in such a thriving way, as with the continuance of Gods
blessing, may afford an handsome supply for such expenses, as a married life
brings with it. Being in such a capacity, your thoughts may then be employed in
the care how to choose a good Wife; when chosen, how to obtain her; and when
had, how with discretion to behave your self to her.

As for the first, be advised to choose such for a Wife, whose fame is like that
Crystal, which has not so much as a sand-spot in it, not only in respect of
her own Reputation, but also of her Relations: there being a kind of
immortality in a good name, which does over-live us, and is entailed by the
surest conveyance upon our Posterities; so as that there is no fine and
recovery in this case allowed; no time wearing out this blemish, nor merit
sufficient to wash it off. Therefore it should be your care, that this may run
in the purest channel, where no soil nor mud may defile it; but that you may
receive it, as uncontaminated from others, as it ought to be your care so to
transmit it unto yours. And if those who breed horses, have an espicial caution
to prevent (even those only ocular) blemishes which may be traduced to the
Foles; it concerns us doubtless much more, to be wary of bringing that into our
Families which may stick as a blemish into following Generations.

And upon this account, such choice is to be eschewed, as may bring an
hereditary deformity or disease: For what an unkind sight is it to see a man's
house stockt with crook-backs, when the Gibbous Children shall represent the
distorted crook-shoulder of their Mother, and carry always about them the
public testimony of your indiscretion? For though some emolument might present
its self, which might induce you to make such an one your bedfellow; yet
surely nothing should prevail to take her for a breeder, and leave your name
running in the winding-Chanel of a crooked deformity. The like may be advised
concerning Hereditary diseases, when the King evil, or suchlike which the
Mother has, may run in the blood of her offspring; and you may see that flesh
rotting before its time, which you expected would have been some support to
your memory, when you should be dead and gone.

And truly upon this score of our Posterity, it is very expedient to make
choice of an handsome venture: For that we see, that comely Mothers have, for
the most part, as comely Children; and as rare is it, that those who are not,
have other Children then such as are like themselves. And though beauty be of
its self, an object fitted for our affection, being a perfection not
apprehended but by a rational Creature; yet doubtless it is for this reason
even prudentially eligible, because a beautiful Mother gives hopes of a fair
breed; and Daughters that are handsome, are either put off with less portions,
or to better Fortunes. And such men are not a little advantaged in finding that
suit facile, wherein their own comelyness has been their spokesman.

Let your next care, which I should have made the first, be her Religion;
whereby I understand not only the profession of the truth, but such a
Principle infused from above, as does dispose to an holy and circumspect
conversation: For as not one of these least advantages of the married life, is
mutual society; so doubtless there can be no such communion, as where God
himself makes up the third party. And the fellowship is not only that of
affection, whereby as Jonathan and David they become one soul; but that also,
whereby they become onespirit, and are mutual helpers of one another faith and
joy.

And besides too, there is from this Principle so much of inducement, not only
to bear with such things, and act upon such accounts, as will not be done upon
any other score; but also to avoid such temptations, as morality would stoop
to; and to say as Joseph, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God!

Her disposition also does require your especial care, being a matter not a
little conducing to your peace and comfort: For some persons are of that uneven
temper, that they are not one whole day friends with themselves; and therefore
when they are in the frets, will find a Gall in a Dove, and take occasion to
quarrel at a Ball-rush, not because it has some knots in it, but because it
has none; and have enough to charge upon your score of what they want, if not
of what they should have, to be sure of what they would have. Whereas there are
others again, that nature has allaid with an unwillingness to quarrel, and can
hardly tell how far their patience can be extended; but if provokt beyond that
bent, they will tear like thunder; and are as soon returned again to as clear a
Sunshine, as gives no remembrance that it was fowl weather. And this surely is
not an inconvenient temper: For whereas those that are sheepish, can very
difficultly preserve themselves from being weather-born; and those that are
waspish, are, as Solomon says, a continual dropping; and the poutish are like
a charnel-house, where sorrowful and glum silence make a solemn mourning:
These, like a smart April-shower, rain to make the earth look greener, and use
frowns and tharp words, as Kings do Soldiers and hounds, only when they are
necessary, and in season: Then only appearing to be angry, when they lie under
a necessity of vindicating their concerns from neglect, or themselves from
contempt.

And under this title of disposition, we may also bring in her frugal
inclination, which is not the least of the feminine virtues: for all that Sex
is much for outward ornament, because conscious there is not much within:
Wherein every thing is valued not by the decet, so much as the constitit; and
all is thought mean, that does not exceed: and for you to interpose to moderate
the expense, would be an argument of either want of affection, or a generous
spirit. Such an one therefore whose natural composure is an allay to that
extravagance, is like Mother of Pearl, which breeds its own treasures, being
very fine, and fed to as much content, with the third of that cost, which must
be laid out upon the soft back, and dainty tooth of another. And let me tell
you, there is much in the education of young women, when they have been bred up
frugally, and not nurtured in that sensuality, which imploys all thoughts,
rather how to please the appetite, then appease hunger; and how to be vain and
gallant, then decent and comely. And let me also tell you, there is much in the
natural neatness of some women, who are cut out, as it were, to make a fair
show with a little, and will appear very neat and handsome in that which is but
ordinary, and evince their Gentility by their gate and behavior. Whereas, some
others are like a Sow with a Saddle, on whom whatsoever cost you bestow, they
shall never look otherwise, then like Gold in Ore, which may be rich, but is
unpollished; their bravery hanging on, as if shak'd there with a fork, and they
in their rich apparel look as like Gentlewomen, as a Clown in a Buff-coat and
Bandeleers, does like a Soldier. And therefore on such as these, your expense
must be lavish, and cost extreme: For they know that what they wear is only
handsome, because rich; and that they are as careful in preserving, as they are
neat in wearing, showing no more courtesy to a Sattin-gown, then some would do
to a Russet-coat; slattering out that in a few months, which would have done
another credit, it may be, as many years.

What is next to be thought for, is a portion, wherein as your care should be
wary and provident; so should it be also gentile and noble: not on the one hand
to take in a charge without what to maintain it; nor on the other hand, to
bargain for a wise, as if you were higling for an Horse in Smithfield: For as
prudence would teach to consult by a good portion, for such a charge as all
Wives bring with them; so the nature of such a transaction should induce us to
behave our selves in it, with such a nobleness as becomes it.

And in the matter of wiving, things being for the most part carried on by
affection, so in this respect are we chiefly concerned to make use of our
discretion: For a fair Wife without a Portion, is like a brave House without
Furniture, where a man may please himself with the prospect, but there is
nothing within to keep him warm: and a Wife with a good portion, but with
conditions unsuitable, is like the fat land in the Wild, where there may be
wealth, but in truth little pleasure besides. Therefore let a good face
persuade you to call, good conditions to alight and enter, and a good portion
put you to bed: For where wealth only is, there will be a cold affection; and
where affection only is, there will be a cold content: For as he observed,
sine Cerere and Baccho, friget Venus; so will content look pale, and love wax
feeble, where there is not an Estate to keep them plump and fair.

It Is true indeed, to marry an unendowed Wife is more dispensable, where there
is such an Estate as does not need a portion: For in such a case your love has
a greater proof, and may be supposed to lay a greater obligation; and possibly
you may expect a submission to your will more, and a greater compliance to your
desires. Though I must tell you that many in that respect have found themselves
mistaken; no persons being more exorbitant in their excesses, then those which
brought the least with them. And as those are commonly the proudest when
preferred, who before were the meanest; so those wives are generally the
costlyest, who put least into the bag to maintain it. But in truth, this whole
affair depends so much upon the good temper and prudence of the Wife, that no
other Argument; or consideration will answer your desires, if they be wanting.

But be advised; however unendowed the woman be, let not her kindred be
necessitous; I mean falling from what they had: For in confidence of your
relation, they will not fail to hang upon you: and in case that you think it
much, you will be judged unkind and churlish; and the wife for their supply,
must either prove unnatural to them, or else be tempted to become less faithful
to you.

But if it be your purpose to raise your Fortunes by a Wife; it is the first
advice to look high enough, because it is possible such an application may
prove; and if it do not, the discredit is the less, to be disappointed in an
arduous attempt. And however, the probability is the greater; for he that hews
at a well-spread Oak, though his strength may fail to get it down, yet is more
likely to be supplied, then he that only aimed at some simple Ha^^.

It is best too, to fix upon some growing Fortune; such a person whose
Relations by prospering in their way, make a fair addition to the present
portion; for all that comes in on free cost: and though not to be trusted in,
as no dead men's Shoes are; yet if it comes, it does well; and so much the
better, because not looked for.

And the same reason should induce to marry such as are akin to Land; I mean,
that have not many Heirs to stand between them and an Inheritance: For money is
a disposable commodity, and in the passage does easily stick to the hands of
those who have the power to transmit it. But Land is an apparent visible
Estate, which the Law has so provided for, that it cannot be diverted, or
concealed. And therefore is found sometimes running in those channels, which lay
off, in a great unlikelyhood, in respect of the first Fountains; as I could
particularly give instance in a person well known to me, into whose hands an
Estate fell in less then twenty years, between whom and it, there were six and
twenty persons who intervened.

And here also may regard be had, to such Relations whose good word and
countenance may be an help and furtherance to you in your way: For it is an old
saying, A friend at Court, is as good as a pound in a man's purse: and there is
a kind of Smock-Simony, which may be more lawful and more gainful then that of
the Black-coat; when a man may be Son-in-law, or kinsman to the next good place
that falls, or at least may be handed in to such a convenience, as where one
may converse with gain, or by experience and counsel may be fairly put on; or
by the reflection of the Sun which shines on such a friend, may be made more
lightsome and perspicuous to the view of those, which we have a mind should
see us.

Having thus fixed upon your choice, the next consideration is how to obtain
her: Wherein it is of principal use, to discover the highest affection: for as
there is no person so unlovely, but thinks her self worshy to be loved; so is
there a natural inclination in love ^o beget love, and (unless in some
particular exceptions) seldom fails of procuring, if not so much kindness, at
least so much commiseration, as gives an aptitude to condescension.

Especially too, if love be recommended with such becoming importunity, as well
admits of no denial; when Rhetoric is not strained by a bumbaste expression;
but such words are found out, as seem to be only dictated by affection,
wherein the heart has the greatest, and wit no other share, then to give them
a lovely pronunciation.

Wherein such constancy must be observed, as may give the greatest evidence of
your affection: for women being sensible that this is that wherein their
strength lies, and that they are never likely so to domineer, as now, when
your hopes are dead or alive as they smile or frown; they take pleasure to
Tantalize you, and show their own pre-eminence; and do by you, as those
Chirurgions, who though they intend to make a cure at last, yet to serve their
own turns, keep you long in hand, and intermit their lenitive emplaisters, with
those which may corrode and vex you. And in truth, women never so well revenge
themselves on men, as when they send them sneaking away, disappointed in their
expectations: and that which is the mischief on it, the business is not acted in
a corner, but the world must be a public witness of the defeat; when in the
midst of all your gallantry, you are routed Horse and Foot, and triumphed over
by such an enemy, as gives no other reason why she will not, but because she
will not.

And therefore in such cases, they must be dealt with, as Stalkers do with
bobbed Partridges, give them time till they may be brought about again: for
their own inconstancy will not let them be long in the same mind, but that
Weathercock which stands to the cold North to day, you my find (perhaps) to
the warm South to morrow.

And here observe also, that there is not a little Rhetoric in gifts; of which
Solomon says, That they blind the eyes of the wise: Wherein it is discretion
to make choice of such, as may be not so much costly as pertinent; such as are
likely to gain her acceptance, by fitting her humor, rather then by drayning
your purse; and such too, as may most and longest be exposed to view, and be
the opportunest Orators in your behalf. And for this cause your costly treats
must be of rarer use, which are almost forgotten as soon as the taste is off
the Palate; and are then only useful, when by their jollity they may allay an
austerer temper, or you are in hopes that by a more public condescension,
there may be a stop given to any purposes of retracting: Otherwise doubtless
privacie affords the best woing; and they will then comply most, when they may
hide their blushes in your bosom.

But if you fail of your expectation, and your suit want success; let it be
your care to come fairly off, by no means endeavoring to abate your disgrace
in the disappointment, by casting any blemish upon the person you have made
service to: For as I always abhorred that love, which because it could not
speed, was converted into hate; so have I thought their come-off no less
unworthy, who to qualify the blemish of their being denied, have made no bones
to throw dirt in their faces, where before in their officiousness they would
have kissed their breeches. It is therefore doubtless more noble to let the
world see, that you had integrity in your intentions, and were rather
unfortunate then base; mistaken rather in the thoughts of your own worth, which
is common to men, then in the conceptions of her worthiness; and being still
desirous to keep those as friends, whom you cannot obtain as nearer relations:
For verily methinks it is very unjust, not to prosecute those ever with all
common courtesies, to whom one ever presented any conjugal pretensions.

But if you be so successful as to obtain, be remembered it is now the time to be
considerately joyful, and to observe the golden mean of moderated freeness: not
to lash out into such extravagance, as may render you suspected to the sober;
nor guilty of any such poorness, as may justly subject you to the censure of
the wiser: For as the day of our espousals, should be the day of the gladness
of our hearts; so is it great folly to let the stream then overflow its banks
at such a rate, as that the Chanel should be the shallower for it ever after.
For though I am no enemy to Nuptial Feasts, yet I have thought them no less
then mad, which to fit others with Wedding-Gloves, have brought themselves in a
few years to want working-day Shoes; running so far in debt, to make that one
day joyous and paunch-gutted, as has made all the rest of their days mournful
and pinch-bellyed. Whilst others therefore wish you joy, know the foundation of
it must be in your selves; and that is likely to be most, which so begins, as
that it may hold out, and takes care that the Garments of the following years
may be made (at least) by the pattern of the Wedding Clothes.

Being now safely moared in the happy harbor of a well-disposed wife, let it
be your first care to promote her Piety; which I do not speak of as it is thy
duty, but as expedient to advance your content and welfare: For as doubtless
it is no mean policy to be good; God either giving such his blessing in the
things of this life, or recompencing the want of these with the things of a
better: So is Religion not the least of those means, whereby all societies are
preserved in their particular interest, being called Religio (as some will) a
religando, binding our minds in the conscience of such duties, wherein no
other consideration would prevail with us.

And upon the same score, it is great prudence to preserve in the freshest
greenness, that conjugal affection, which if it did not at first bring you
together, yet doubtless should be of prime design in this condition; Love
being like that Salt and Sugar which does season, and make acceptable those
occurrents, which without it would bite upon the Tongue, and beget disgusts
most indispensible. And verily those Husbands are Fools, who think to have the
subjection of their Wives, not by the exercises of affection, but the asserting
their own authorities: For whatever is compelled, waits for an opportunity to
be denied; and they that rule over the unwilling, find the trouble as great to
keep in obedience, as the pleasure to be obeyed. All compulsory being a violent
motion, which upon every cessation of the vis motiva, returns again to its
natural bent; when as that which is from a principle within, moves regularly,
and is commonly most active in opposition. For which cause we read that Love is
as strong as Death, and many Waters cannot quench Love; it being that active
affection which makes us willing to do, willing to suffer, willing to give, and
willing to forgive: for Love covers a multitude of sins, not only by
overlooking them, and allowing the fairest interpretation to all that will
admit it; but by being ready to condone what might be done amiss, and accepting
of any acknowledgement for satisfaction: Thus sodering by a speedy composure
those casual breaches, which disaffection still makes wider; so that what was
at first but accidentally offensive, by after-exaggeration proves to be the
cause of a final separation. And therefore without doubt there should be the
greatest caution to preserve this affection like the Apple of the Eye, which no
mote may offend; and to compose those strifes with the greatest speed, which
may give an allay to a mutual kindeness: for doubtless they are inexcusable,
who upon occasional discontents affect a sullenness, and think to give a weight
to their anger by the continuance; whereas in very deed, all that time the
Heart frets; and Love, if it do not lie a bleeding, yet grows faint, for want
of the exercise of kindeness; and will not be long ere it fall into a
consumption, if such occurrents be but as frequent, as they are pernicious. And
surely in this case it is vain to strain ceremony, and expect who shall comply
first: for we will not say who is the stoutest; but of this we are sure, they
that comply first, they are the wisest.

And here observe too, that it is greatly expedient (if such disputes happen) to
avoid all such language as has any bitterness in it: For all such sinks deep
into the mind, and is hardly obliterated with any after-excuse, giving cause
to suspect that it was the issue of a festered heart, and that a precipitate
passion did not produce it, but discover it: so that what might easily be
composed, as to the matter of the offense, proves almost remediless, as to the
words.

And with this, you may take notice, that nothing is more mischievous then such
an expression, as may profess a disaffection: For assure your self, there is
much of wisdom, even there to make semblance of the highest love, where it is
but indifferent; and to behave your self with all such expressions of
kindeness, as may give no cause to suspect that you love not: For if once they
are persuaded of that, they take you for an enemy, and make it their business
to plot against you, and lay contrivances to advance their own interest with
whatsoever hazard of yours. And if once it come to that pass, you may bid
farewell to your peace and content while you live together: For the joint
interest between the man and the Wife is the great soder of their affairs, that
which does cement their designs, and concenter their purposes. For as it was
said that they twain shall be one flesh; so is it intended therewith, that
their interest (twofold before) should become one, that with a joint endeavor
they may drive on the good of both; which therefore should be tendered with as
great a caution, as that Rin'd which causes the Graft and Stock coalescere, and
thrive together.

For which cause, I ever thought it no prudence for man and wife to have two
purses. The Bed and the Purse being two things, wherein a mutual sharing breeds
kindness and confidence; and they are seldom double, where there is not
division. For, as without doubt there is all the reason, that she who joined
hey Stock to yours, and put in her Portion, should enjoy so much of her own, as
to please her self in that to which she has a particular liking: So is it
best, that she do that out of the common Purse; wherein it is like she will use
greater prudence and moderation, then where she is her own carver without
inspection. And as on the one hand, a private purse does incline to a private
design, and tends to promote an interest that is too particularly their own:
So on the other hand, where they are kept short, and deprived of that freedom
to command your purse in a measure that is convenient, they repine at their
restraint, and either wish in their hearts that you were removed, or apply
themselves to such shifts as are base and degenerous; supplying their desires
by such unhandsome means, as many times prove not only dedecorous to them, but
pernicious to you: For while you refuse to supply their expenses on the score
of your kindness, they are induced to seek for those that will; and think it
just to make repayment in that coin, which whether you will or no, they must
have in their own keeping.

And for this cause, it is greatly expedient to be as accommodated (as prudence
will allow) to the humor of the wife, so as may be most to her content. For
there is none of them which marry with an intent to be slaves, but promise to
themselves that pleasure and convenience in your Society, which they conceive
themselves incapable to enjoy without you; which if they want from you, their
own wit induces them to seek elsewhere. Whence it is, that I have known some
who came to the Bride-house with the greatest affection, promising to
themselves as much content in an Husband as their love and good opinion had
raised their expectations up to; but after, being disappointed in their
experience, and finding the Tavern and company sharing so deep in what they
looked for, they grew desperately discontent; and thinking it equal to requite
their neglect with the like, they soon found out those who would attend upon
them with that courtship and complacence which their grumbals would not. And
verily who could think the thing unreasonable? for while friends on both sides
did lament the mishap, they could not but acknowledge that the thing was just:
For by our nature, home is animal politicum, and especially the woman, whose
very creation was for society, and with the design that man might not be
alone; and therefore above all things, they hate Anachorism, and can with no
patience endure to be mewed up till midnight, while you, it may be, are
clubbing it at a Tavern: and you cannot think it a wonder, if at such a time
they sport with your servants at home, when you are abroad; which you may judge
done not for knavery, but mere divertisement.

And further, do but consider how long that love is like to last, where the
blundring Husband comes home like a sous'd Hogs-head, with a steam of smoke and
drink would almost choke a Greenlander, who has been fed with blubber: Imagine
now how acceptable such a Porpise must needs be to the neatness and curiosity
of a well-bred woman, who cannot but loath a spectacle of that deformity; and
cannot but contemn that ridiculous poll, which blatters forth any thing that
comes next, to the just provocation of a more stayed and temperate judgment; so
that what should deserve their love and respect, becomes the loathed object of
their contempt and scorn.

And that which is the mischief on it too, to see the codled fool take upon him
in that tune, and exercise his Husbandly authority, like a Mayor of Queenborow,
and with as much discretion: when the discreet woman sees her head nodding out
his commands, with less wit then a Gander on a Green; which she does, and
laughs at, grieving in her heart that providence has joined her, where an
Horse and an Ass must draw together: And then you may bid farewell, not only to
that love which you might have had, but also that authority you should have:
for never think that that woman submits willingly, to whom her Husband
behaves not himself like a man of understanding.

And by this you may perceive how much the discretion of the man conduces to
the marring or making of the Wife. For of how many hopeful women does daily
experience give us an account, whom their Husbands folly has miserably undone,
while they have cared rather to be serviceable to their own present humors,
then their future content; or have thought it better to deal in hacking and
hewing, then in a gentle bending those plyant Osiers, which might easily have
been wrought, as prudence would have had them?

And I believe you will find with an easy observation, that wives generally
are easier drawn then driven; and that there are very few, even of the best of
them, which will fairly bear to be sowrely told of those things, which yet they
are willing to mend. And therefore all such plasters must be softly applied;
and a wariness had, not to find fault in the hearing of others, which may
beget a distaste in those things, where no unkindness would be taken upon a
private rebuke. And in very deed, the reputation of a Wife in this point of her
sufficiency, should be tendered by us as a choice concern, especially among
those over whom she exercises any thing of command: For you will soon find a
very small matter will give those occasion to despise her authority, who by
your conviction shall be judged worthy of blame. And truly it is hard to
vindicate young Wives from the contempt of their Servants; who will much more
readily deride their petty indiscretions, then obey their reasonable commands;
especially when the new maid is an old play-follow, and is almost to learn the
difference between sport and obedience; or is some stanch Trout that has been
so beaten to the world, as has put her, though not out of the need, yet out of
the conceit of being commanded. And therefore to assert the Wives authority the
more, it is best that she rule the roast altogether in the house; and if you
interpose, it should be rather by way of advice and assistance, then
superiority. And in very deed they are pitiful souls, which cannot let the
women alone with their Pipkins and Pies, but are peeping to find fault in the
feminine jurisdiction; and esteem it one of their eminent virtues, that they
are very frugal in Dripping and Kitchinstuff.

But the truth is, there is a great deal of reason that the Wife should always
be born with, as the infirmer; there being many occasions not only to disturb
their discretion, but also to perturb their passion; the crasis of their bodies
being more humid, and subject to that Planet which is most mutable. Besides the
many infirmities which Childbearing brings; the obstructions, fumes, and
opilations which befall their more delicate constitutions: upon all which it is
meet, we should give honor to the wife, as the weaker vessel; not contending
with them, because we are more robust, but bearing with them because we are so.

Yet in all such things wherein you comply with the desires of the Wife, it is
much the best to act in it freely: For if they must watch to take you in the
humor, or work it out of you by their own art, they congratulate their own
skill, and acknowledge no kindeness; so you lose the thanks, and lay no
obligation: whereas the main design should be to engage affection by
kindnesses flowing, and not strained; and even there, where necessity denies,
the refusal should be so conveyed, as that she may perceive 'twas so, because
it could not be, not because you would not that it should be.

If providence so dispose of you, as that you marry a Wife that brings Children
with her by another Husband, as your concerns are more, so ought the exercises
of your prudence too: And the rather, because there lies on you that general
suspicion, which all Father-in-laws labor under. And therefore to prevent
that, it is good to walk by that general rule, To do by them in all things, as
if they were your own. And verily this (not only a conscience of your duty
should induce you to) being placed by providence in the room of a Father; but
also a dread, lest such a successor should be given you, who may retaliate on
yours the unkindness or injustice you have exercised to them. And doubtless, if
ill-gotten goods bring such a canker with them, as soon eats out the estates
they come to; there is none devours with a greater greediness, then that of the
Orphans and Widows money; God having taken that title upon him, that he is the
God of the fatherless and widow, to let the world know, that he has a peculiar
Guardianship of the concernments of such, and will himself revenge their
injuries, though their impotence make them more liable to suffer, and less able
to vindicate their sufferings. And withal, your care should be as studious for
their education, that being not the least wherein we show our paternal
kindeness to those that are ours. And if the Fowls of the Air leave not their
youngs ones, till they have showed them the way to get their own livings; it
should be your chief endeavor to do that business for them, which death
prevented their own Father in, that he could not do. Neither think much that
the Mothers kindness seems most to these: for there is reason that she should
compensate the Fathers loss with a more abundant tenderness, and express that a
double-portioned affection, which before ran in a duplicated, now but in a
single chanel.

Now supposing you to be in the way of Housekeeping, let me give you some of
my experiments for your direction: and the first shall be a caution to avoid
those Hangers on, that are the flies which attend the flesh of others Tables,
and requite you with their maggots; such as your chare-women, and men at a
call, who make it their work to rob you under a finer notion then that of plain
stealing; or at best, like those beggars who give you an half-farthing wand,
that they may receive your twopence. Such as these shall your servants have to
serve their turn with a wet-finger; and pay them largely, not with their own
money, but your meat: which if you connive at, they praise you highly, and you
are their very good Master; and when they have undone you, shall do you this
kindeness, to say it is pity, for you were no bodies foe but your own.

Yet think not much to be free in the relief of those you know to be poor, and
labor with industry to get their own livings: For Alms to the idle, is like
grease to a Cart-wheel, which makes it go round the easier, but still upon the
same axle; whereas supply to those who are wanting, yet laborious, or
impotently necessitous, is a debt due to their want; yet of that nature, that
while we pay what is their due, God accepts it as a loan, and has put himself
under an obligation to make repayment. And truly I have observed, that while I
have known many undo themselves with riotous Housekeeping, entertaining
needless guests, and idle-bellies; I could never yet meet with any, who could
say he he was the poorer, nay, not the richer, for such acts of charity, as
were done to the needy: But that such distributions, like the loaves of our
Savior among the 4000, leave behind them more baskets of fragments, for the
heirs to give away, then the principal was in quantity, which the Father so
expended.

Yet let me tell you, it is no wisdom to make your servants your Almoners, and
allow them the liberty of disposing your Charity; for one hand to give, is
enough in a purse. And that Charity is the best, which has the spirit of
discerning; and like that Boy, gives Honey to the Bees, but has a whip to drive
away the drones.

Be here advised too, not to be given to the humor of costly entertainments:
For I have often seen that men of that fancy, have inverted the Calendar, and
have found their Fasts after their Festivals; who when they have spent all,
have been as welcome to their guests, as a former Wives old Clothes to a
new-marryed Bride. Besides, the obligation which you lay by your cost on those
which are entertained, is for the most part as far below it, as the Church of
St. Faiths is beneath Paul's Steeple. For the most at such encounters, are more
concerned to censure your expense, then acknowledge your kindness; and
generally jeer at some things you might fail in, rather then fairly accept what
you courteously intended.

But the entertaiment of great persons is a greater vanity: For such think they
oblige you, in doing you the honor to eat up your Cheer; which to them who
fare sumptuously every day, is scarce looked upon as extraordinary; so that
instead of accepting your civility, they resent it as an affront that it was no
richer; and what shall be indeed profusion in you, will be looked upon but as
the Wrens pissing in the Sea to them.

But what I have here said of entertainment, I intend not of such as are
accidentally guests, persons that come to visit in kindeness: for unto such as
these, entertainment is due, and ought to be free, and proportioned to the
quality of the persons concerned, with that heartiness and plenty, as may
abundantly speak for you, that they are welcome: and in very deed, such
intercourses as these, are necessary to preserve a mutual friendship, and keep
alive the remembrance of that kindred and relation, which otherwise, like
unremoved Logs, would grow into that earth, which at first begat them.

But what house soever you keep when friends are with you, let your ordinary
and private fare be never costly; but such, as though the best in its kind,
yet plain and wholesome, to fortify Nature, and nourish, not to tickle the
Palate: for to please the dainty tooth, is an expensive humor, and doubles
that charge which Housekeeping brings; while the sauce is more then the
Meat; and it is as dear to cook a Dish, as to provide it. And verily the vanity
of some deserves our wonder, who are of that Heliogabalian stomach, to which
nothing does relish which is not dear, and fancy fish most when farthest from
shore; then only loving Pease, when they are searce to be had; and Cherries,
when they are tied on sticks.

In buying provisions, be your own Caterer; wherein at least you may have this
convenience, that you may please your selt. Beside, however faithful your
servant may be, so that he lets down no g^ats without a strain; you cannot
expect that he should part with your coin, with that care and difficulty as you
would your self, whose daily feeling how much provision does pinch, makes wary,
and hard to be drawn to expense.

But be chiefly advised not to run on the score; for you may be assured, that
with greater advantage you may take up money at use to pay ready down: For
there is none of them all, but reckon how they forbear, and will be sure to be
allowed, not only because they must stay for their money, but trust; there
being nothing so certain in this world, as that which is present. You will also
find that a true Proverb, That the best is best cheap: For besides that in
flesh, there is much the less quantity of bones for the weight, where they are
covered almost twice of the thickness; in all other things you will find much
the less waste, because that which is good goes down without scraps, while
parings and refuse go a great way in what is not. Servants making no scruple to
cast that to the Dogs, which they are soon apt to think is not good enough to
themselves.

Be you also assured, that the best of Servants must be over-lookt: for it is
rare to find those, who will not make waste: and as it is fit they should have
to the full, their meat being a great part of the wages of their work; so are
there few, but do labor under fullness of bread; and none that consider of what
they would be glad, when they come to keep a poor house of their own.

In your buying Provisions, you will find it the best to go to their Fountains:
for the farther from thence, so much the dearer. There being no second-hand but
so licks his own fingers, as that while he has his gains, the Commodity is
inhanc'd; and that which is his livelihood, must be what you give more then he
paid.

It Is also best to buy by the great: All Chapmen complying much sooner for much
then for a little; their gains by so much being the more considerable, and
their put-off the greater. But then must your expenditor be wary, and so give
out the store which you have provided, as remembering the place to spare, is
never at the bottom. Beside the much more easiness to lurch the greater
quantities, where a little taken is not discerned: for which cause, it is not
safe to trust a Servant at an whole heap; there being very few of that
integrity, as then to keep their hands from picking, when none can witness they
did prevaricate; or if they be such, it is not safe to tempt with opportunity.

If God shall give you Children, it is the duty which each Mother to her
offspring owes, to be its Nurse, as well as Bearer; and therefore not to be
neglected, but then only when necessity makes the excuse: but if you put them
abroad, choose out a Nurse by these directions; whereof I have had so good
experience, that in the placing out of fourteen of you, I never yet had cause
to remove one, till it was time that you should be brought home.

1. Let her be a lively woman; those stiring spirits not only having fewer
dregs to make their milk unwholesome, but their cheerfulness exhilarates the
Babe, and gives it a more pleasurable life and motion too; while such whose
mettle cannot abide to sit, must dance the child about, or give it some such
agitation and divertisement; when lumpish women let it hang in arms, till it be
almost cripled for want of change.

2. Then let her be healthy complexioned, of such fresh ruddiness, as gives
account she is not infirm: But chiefly care that she have no hereditary
mischief, such as may be sucked in by yours unto its detriment, may be
remediless.

3. Let her be such a woman too as is much given to be cleanly; so great
conducement unto health, depending upon neatness in us all: But especially in
such little ones, whom Nature has not molded to perfection; but that it is
purging out a more abundant excrement: For which cause, we may daily see the
very Brutes officious in this kind of care.

4. Then be she such an one as lives not by the penny, but has a Cow or two at
least, or such supplies as may prevent the pinching of the belly through want:
For where the purse must bleed for every pint of Milk the Child must eat,
'twill be not much improbable it many times may go without. Whence it is
observed, that meant is much less free in all such houses (howsoever rich)
where all comes in by daily purchase, then at the Farmers, from whose Barns and
Stores there come supplies, for which no present money was expended.

Be careful too, the Husband be not given unto drink: for at some time or
other, he will come home in such a tune, as may endanger much the little
weakling. And if in such disturbances they many times do mischief to
themselves, it is not but to be feared a greater mischief may accrue to such a
little one as cannot help its self.

And it is best there be agreement 'twixt the man and wife: for none can tell
what hair-brained tricks there may be done, when they are in a rage; or how the
Child may suffer then, when they can scarcely be distinguished from those are
mad: For such contests which happen between men and wives, are mostly managed
in so much heat, as frequently produce such actions as we then repent of, when
we cannot help.

If thus you are provided, be not then too hasty in the fetching of it home: at
two years end is soon enough; and that is confirmed by my experience in not a
few, all kept abroad till they could run about the house alone.

But when they are brought home, be not a means to spoil your hopes with too
much fondness. The less the Child is loll'd in Arms, the better. And by so
much the food of it be good and plainer, by so much healthier you shall have
it: For all sweet things do cloy the Stomach; and diet multiplied in variety,
does pose concoction to digest it, which better deals with simple food; from
whence much easier, and more surely, it does contract a firmer nourithment. And
though Physicians generally decry the use of Milk, as too too Phleginatick, and
not convenient; yet does mine own experience as much assert it; there being ten
of you, who I believe may vye with such a number of any one man's in the world
beside, for health, strength and straitness, who have been all true Trojans at
a Milkbowl.

And surely it is best, not to stint Children in their food; so that suppers be
light, and not too near to bedward: For those that are, are generally made more
greedy by denial; and if they light on opportunity, will gorge themselves into
a surfeit; when they that usually feed while they will, know when they have
enough; and make not much then to give out, when as their fare is of the
daintiestiest.

It Is also best to break your Children of their wills, even with the soonest;
and bring them to that pass, to know your will, not theirs, must be their Law:
For it is a plague that is most intolerable, to please them in their humors; and
as pernicious to themselves, there being sometimes a necessity their minds
should not be followed, which then they fret and sum at to their hurt; when
as, when once they are taught but to submit, and kept to that, they forthwith
leave off to dispute, and readily comply with that, which not their fancy, but
your judgment shall think fit; and without blubbering, and stir, and cries,
give up themselves to a silent obedience: which is most easily effected by such
a constant tenor of behavior, as is not in and out, but they made certain what
to trust to.

Be also here advised, not to torment your Children with the curiosity of
Apparel, when they (to keep their clothes neat) must be restrained from
exercise, as necessary for their health, as is their meat. Nature having so
disposed the inclination of young things, that they are game some all in such a
measure, that the more slothful creatures are very lively in then youths; and
the young Calves and Lambs do skip and play, while their more sober dams look
gravely on: And it is because there are more most and cruder h^^nours ordained
to afford a freer nourishment for supply of growth, that stand in need of a
discussion, and digestion more abundant. And very ^^^fe's none of us, though
much in lined to deny our selves to serve our pride, but think it a restraint,
vexatious enough, to be confined to touch not, raste not, handle not. And it is
well worth the laughter, when the mimick Dame is trickt as neat as hands can
make her, to see with what a caution she is aware, lest ought should touch her
that defiles; and is in need of a glass cover, where bravery may well be seen,
and yet secured. Then what vexation is it for a child that is full of life, and
fond of play, to be kept in without a motion, lest it should foul its apron, or
put a knot or curl out of its proper situation!

When they are grown big enough to send to School, it is best to place them out
at board: for Children when put out to board, are taught be times to make their
party good with others; and learn some measure in that art, to oversee their
own concerns, which they have so much need of in the world. For in a kind of
little Commonwealth they learn those subtilties in smaller Volumes, which
afterward does help their practice in their weightier affairs; when those more
elderly trapan the younger, till they abused, grow wiser, and learn more wit by
their experience, which they soon exercise upon the rest. And surely I have
seen so much of craft among these young ones, to bring to pass their projects,
and cunning wariness to shun and disappoint an opposite contrivement; that I
have thought it could not be, that any Cat should mouse so well, as that thus
practiced in all taking arts, when but a kitling.

Besides the great advantage of their mutual derision, when it is a shame to do
those things which are unhandsome, which they will not fail to vex the faulty
with; by which means I have known some soon reclaimed, when sober counsel, yea
too, and correction was without effect.

Nor is the help which they afford each other in their learning less
considerable; when those less knowing may consult the wiser, and have a
satisfaction more accommodate unto their understanding, then by instruction
that is supereminent.

They are too, under such a constant Discipline, so over-lookt, and sixth to
mulde the main design, and set beside occasions of diversion; that without
doubt, if God do give wherewith to bear the charge, there is no expedient like
this for their Education; provided that you use the greatest caution, both for
their manners, and their learning: For great are the impressions that exa^^pre
gives in that to waxy age, which generally is prone to close with that which in
its consequences is pernicious.

For which cause I Have observed many tincted with such looser habits, as have
undone their Fathers hopes, and prostituted them to such a dirsolution, was
irrecoverable. Besides too, the loss of time, when placed with those whose
faculties afford not, or negligence endeavors not that he should be improved,
is of that sort which hardly can admit of a redemption; when seasons of
instruction are knocked out by following casts, which are more fit to kiss the
mistress of their present age.

It Is therefore best to place them where they may be in a constant course of
pions government, with such who are not factiously Religious, but rather for
the practice of it then the prattle, and for the power of it then the show: For
you must know, an high concernment is depending here, and the eternal interest
of a soul. Good Education having such an influence on the future life, that God
takes Abraham's seed as members of his Covenant, because he knew their nurture
would be pions, that he would teach his children, and his household after him.
And truly this might be persuasive, not only with the sober-minded, but with
those too, lets piously affected: For there are few sent out from Schools,
where a prof^^^er Genius has been predominant, which have not proved very
dissolute; as might be instane'd in, in many hundreds, (...) convenient.

Therefore let the Master be of that unblameableness, as may give greatest
confidence no ill example may be given: For if the best of us are more inclined
to follow those that lead us by practice, then by precept; surely those tender
years, (less capable to judge the verity of what is said, and have their will
conducted by their understanding) may well be tincted with that dye they see
their leaders colored with.

Let him be also not a Linguist only, a person skilled in, and able to teach
the Tongues; but also one that has a lively fan^ie, and expressive: for little
is it for to speak, if not to speak to purpose, or with such taking efficacy
as may lead captive the affections: and truly matter most important, if not
laid down with such array of words and elegancie as becomes it, does seldom
take even wiser judgments, unless in the immediate exercise of a severe
discretion, and odds as much, as beauty clothed in rags, and set out in its
rich attire. And such a witty Genius thus instilled into those greener heads
when first informed, is like a dash of Musk and Amber, which gathers strength
by atter-use, and gives an excellent perfume unto those things, which otherwise
would prove but mean.

And let him have an art to mould the Tongue unto a graceful Elocution, and
such a way of Speech as runs like Oil, and smoothly strokes the Ear unto an
itch would still be farther scratcht; For what advantage is it, when tender
Tongues are timely set in tune! which makes the self-same matter differ from
its self, as much as Bowbel chimes do from the clanging of a Kettle.

Let him be too of a Gentile and generous demean, a person set beyond the state
of a mere Scholar, whom Learning has no farther favored then the head; but
one that fetches thence a fair accomplishment for all concerns; when like to
woaded Cloth, he takes all other dies with greater luster and more ease: One
that may set impressions on their youth of all gentiler qualities, and give
them such a taste of noble-mindedness, as may beget in them a value of their
reputations; and takes them off from what is unhandsome, with giving them a
sense that it is below them. Which way to deal with youth, is as far beyond the
course of that severity which only practices with them as with slaves, fit
for no other nurture then of blows, as is a principle of inward life, above
that motion which is only violent: For when as the one cease with the force,
and is no longer then the fear indures; the other (when once habited) will bear
them company unto their Graves; and when they are men, restrain their thoughts
from what is vile, and be a spur to such designs as may prove noble and
heroic. And who can think it is a mean to breed up liberal Children and
ingenuous, to cow their spirits, and depress them to such a dirty servileness,
as knows no spur, but that of smart, and acts all duty still in the Bridewel of
severe correction? And Government, which should have following obedience drawn
after it by sense of benefit and kindeness, is like to tyranny with hang and
draw, driving before it those, who only do, because they must; being beaten
out of love with what they should delight in, by being beaten. When the proud
Poedagogue struts in his state, his Lads like quaking puddings all about him;
and thinks that Boy will prove a Rebel, which looks not with as much
abjectedness, as Venus when trapan'd by Vulcan. And don't you think that Youths
when thus brought to their postures, to stand like Vagabonds fast at a
Whipping-post; or at the best, like sneaking Tailors, are in a mighty
forwardness to act their parts on the Worlds Stage, and be brought forth to
such pre-eminence, as by their birth and wealth they may have hopes of!

And verily it is of great importance, that he who has the government of
youth, should be a person of a great discretion; as being (not only to bend
their irregularities by the rectitude and straitness of unerring principles,
and give fixation to the fluctuating of their wild and looser thoughts by such
a Discipline as keeps them still intent to all the documents and exercises of
virtue) but also to over-see the manners of so many, and with all vigilancie to
prevent the pullulating of those roots of bitterness their hearts are full of:
To deal in bending every slip, accordingly as it can bear it: To have
discerning of their different affections, and move them all, by such expedients
as are accommodated most unto their several inclinations: To moderate in all
their differences, and give such judgment as may easily evince his equanimity
unto them all. How great his prudence should be, and his moderation, that shall
be judge without Law, of what shall be done amiss, making what he please an
offense, and punishing that offense as he please. What judgment to discern the
difference of tempers, and choose out that diversity of application, which is to
be dispensed as is most suitable to each particular Genius; withal the
condescension too, to the infirmities of youth, and the allowance must be made
unto those brains which are but gristles, and difficultly apprehend what
conceived is as plain as is a Pike-staff, there being nothing-hard to those
that do already know it.

But verily you will find no choicer requisite, then that his spirit be elate and
generous, and such as naturally scorns to stoop to those things that are
unhandsome, though no eye be conscious: For great are opportunities which do
occur to those that have the Tutorage of Youth, to over-bear them for their own
advantage, and to compensate that wherein they loose, by freedom from those
punishments, which like the Papal Pargatory they carry in their keeping. Beside
the manifold temptations to pinch them in their diet, which no expedient can
prevent in the degenerous and sordid-spirited: and no man wisely can commit the
sustenance of his, which should be free, and of the largest, to supply the
growth of younger years, unto such base and avaritious tempers, as think
there is nothing vile which does bring gain.

When placed thus abroad, be careful that you don't divert their studies, nor
interrupt their strict attendance by avocations home, at any time which is not
general: for all such callings off, don't only intermit the business they are
employed in, and loose that time which might be profitably spent; but they go
retrograde, and loose those things which they had got: Their Memories, like
leakie Casks, soon letting out those rudiments which were with greatest
difficulty there instil'd. And which is worse, they are thereby taken off and
made less apt for those impressions which Learning gives, while love of
idleness and play is more habituate, and they disturbed in application of their
thoughts, by the remembrance of that pleasure which they had at home.

But though you keep them thus abroad, yet let them still be furnished with
such supplies of money as you may conceive are suitable to such expense as
Children use: for thereby they will be well instructed in that wariness and
caution, which is required in all bargain-making, and in that petty trading
that is among themselves, and loss, it may be of to them some precious pence,
they learn the art to deal in greater matters, and shun decoys which might draw
in to things of disadvantage.

But when at home, or when abroad, be careful ever to exact an absolute
obedience, to have your will observed as a law; for by that means you will much
facilitate your government of them, and make by custom much more tractable all
their designs to you; which may be done with as much ease as love, provided
that the course be constant, whence Youth like Naggs which are well paced, will
take pleasure and delight in it.

When now they are fit to put into the World, be careful that, and now, you do
dispose them; for there is no loss so great, as not to be put in a Way; nor can
there be a greater mischiet done us, then not to be bred up to some convenient
employment; nay though provided for with a most large subsistence: For
doubtless there is not one whom God designs to be an idle drone, when we read
Adam, though in Paradise, was set to fill the Ground; nor any that was made
only for sport and recreation. And verily, a viler race we hardly know, then
those among us, whose pastime is their only business, and their consults how
they may spend their time and their estates, in Riot, Cards and Dice; and rack
their laboring Tenants, to supply their prodigal excesses: Contemning those as
pitiful Mechanics, who by some useful art conduce to Commonwealth, while they
themselves are without any Mystery, and only know such arts as make them
vile. Therefore if God shall so far bless you, as that you have an ample
patrimony to bequeath to yours; yet bring them up in some such way, wherein
they may be useful unto common good, and able to promote their own concerns:
For there is no reason that is more evident (except Gods curse upon ill-gotten
goods) why such Estates which Fathers in the City get, are quickly run out by
their Heirs, then that they are bred up, not to get, but spend. Beside the
common penury of those (even in their large revenues) who have no means to add
to, but do spend their yearly income, whereby their wants of money greater are,
then those who by some gainful Trade provide for their own maintenance. Hence
do we daily see those Gentlemen out-vy'd, who only live upon their means,
though of some hundreds by the year, by such mean Trades, which by a wary and
industrious management, afford a fairer and more free subsistence, and have a
ready cash supplied by daily gettings; when those with empty pockets long for
the rent-day, with an anxious expectance. And which is worse, their Children,
which have been bred up to bear a share in sport and prodigal profusion, are at
the end turned off without any portions suitable to the quality they have been
bred in; whereby they become pitiful Parasites, to lick their fingers at elder
Brothers Tables; or if they have more spirit, seek their Fortunes by such
expedients, as do conclude them in untimely ends.

But be advised of two things, in the disposing of your Children into the World.

1. Weaken not your Estate so far for their provision, as that it grow faint,
and not able to hold out for your own handsome subsistence: For though the
stock should be free for the supply of the Branches; yet so, as that there may
be to keep its self lively. I my self knew a person of good worth, the gray
Hairs of whose Estate looked thin for lack of moisture, which was too freely
expended upon his numerous offspring; and I have often grieved at the sight of
his retrenchments, to see his Chanel brought so low, as unable to bear a
weighty Vessel, merely to afford a larger current for his derivations.

2. So order your matters, that your Children may ever know, that the branches
bear not the root, but the root them; and so reserve your Estate in your own
hands, as to command their obedience by their future expectances. For as it is
retrograde, that the River should go back to feed the Fountain, and Children
treasure up for their Parents; so is it rare to find out that affection, which
shall ascend to such a proportion as it descended. And the vast experience
which the World affords of persons whose indulgence has undone them, and laid
them prostrate unto their contempts, whom (had they still reserved what to
bestow) they might have found as servient to their nods; may well induce the
wariest caution here, and make you wise still to retain the power, as to
command the spitting in your Parlour while you live.

And now you are supposed to be in the last passage of your life, like ripened
Corn in such a tendencie, as gives back to the Earth that bare it. And here be
not concerned in such contrivancie, as may design a pompous Funeral; for cost
expensively laid out on that, will very little turn unto account; and don't
agree with such reflects as should be made by us upon our Graves. It more
concerns us to take care to make us friends of the unrighteous Mammon, and be
such Stewards of those things with which the heavenly providence has entrusted
us, as best agrees with those designs, for which he has professed that he does
give them to us. And though there be no merit in Alms-deeds, as Popish Doctrine
would persuade us; yet to do good, and to communicate, are such sacrifices
wherewith God is well pleased. And there is much in that Speech of the Angel to
Cornelius, Thy prayers and alms-deeds are come up in remembrance before God;
being there rendered as the reason why Peter with the Gospel is sent unto him,
besides the many promises made of repayment of what shall be so laid out; so
that it is not to be doubted, but the best use that we can make of our goods,
is, that they be employed in the relief of the necessitous; and that the best
way to treasure up, is so to spend. If therefore God shall bless your substance
with increase, remember that there is always this interest due to him; and
while you take care to provide for your own Family, let not Gods Household (the
poor) be unprovided for: which will be an expedient so to take your leave of
this the present world, as that your exit may be with a plaudite. And ten times
better 'twill be for you to have the poor to follow your dead corpse, with
their acknowledgements of your Charity and Almsdeeds, then to have the
Town-talk of you, that you left thousands behind you in your Coffers. And
verily, that is an unthrifty providence, that with a many bags designs to make
a purchase of the Town-talk, which for the most part proves to be sinistrous,
when much more happily we may be carried hence, perfumed with that acceptable
remembrance which our perspicuous virtues leave behind us; and if we may call
this ambition, there is certainly no better can befall us.

A Discourse on the Worth of a Good Name.
Eccles. Cap. 7. Verse. 1. A good man is better then precious ointment.


WE read, Matthew. 26.7. of a woman pouring an alabaster-box of ointment on the
head of Jesus; and John 12.3. we are told the person and the quantity; but the
action there, is not applied to the head, but to the feet of Jesus: Not that
this was not the same time when the ointment was poured on his head, or that
John mistook the head for the feet; but that the Spirit might relate both the
anointing of his feet, and therewith Mary's wiping his feet with her hair; and
the end of both, which is there declared, that it might be for his burial; and
the reason of that, from the practice of the Jews, who were wont to anoint the
bodies of the dead; and that, not only that by the odor and fragrancie they
might prevent any less acceptable smell, which the body might offend with, but
(I suppose) more chiefly to preserve the body from putrefaction: For which
cause we read, Luke 23.56. of spices and ointments, prepared for the body of
Jesus. And this their custom, it is like, was continued from the time of Jacob,
whom Joseph commanded his Physicians to embalme, done with so much curiosity,
that forty days were spent about it; and that, but the usual rate of those who
were embalmed, Genesis 50.3. And this ad perpetuandam memoriam mortuorum, which
all Nations have had a desire to.

Some by stately Structures and Sepulchers of highest value, as Artemisia by
her Husband Mausolus.

Some by material representations; as the Romans by their imagines Majorum.

Some by Cities built, or Castles, and called after their own names; as
Alexander the Great by that in Egypt; and of later times, the Duke d' Alva by
the Citadel at Antwerp; four Towers of which bare the Characters of his Name
and Title.

And some by preserving the body entire by curious ointments and embalmings; at
which the Egyptians were such excellent Artists, that I have read of one body,
kept in its due shape for two thousand years: and to this preservation of the
memory does the Text allude, preferring a good name to that purpose, before
precious ointment.

For putting the question in the last verse of the former Chapter, Who can tell
what shall be after him under the Sun? What remembrance there shall be of a man
after he is gone hence; he adds, A good name is better then precious ointment.

So that you may see here, as it were, the Wiseman stepping forth with a pair
of balances in his hand, and therein weighing a good name against precious
ointment; upon which trutination you have the censure given on the right hand,
that a good name is the better.

In the words we may observe, 1. What is here preferred A good name. 2. To what
it is preferred as the better, o precious ointment.


In the handling whereof, we will first show what a good name is, and then why
the best embalming.

As to the first: a Good name is a laudable conception of a person which has
seized the minds of others, arising from something of worth, which they
apprehend by him.

This conception arises from something whereby we perceive a person to have
gone beyond the common rate of men, or at least common corruption.

Whence diverse persons have obtained good names, as they have excelled,

1. By some profitable invention, whereby they have been useful in their
Generation to the good of others; in which respect we find the Scriptures
recording, Jabal the father of them that dwell in tents, and Tubal-Cain the
instructor of every artificer, Genesis 4.20, 22. Thus also in heathen Story we
find the memories celebrated of Eurialus, the first inventer of Houses, and
Triptolimus of the Plow. And so that Faustus the inventer of Printing;
fortunate by name, and by success, shall not want an honorable remembrance
while the Press knows how to imprint Characters in his Memorial. And thus those
Philosophers, the Inventers of curious and ingenious discoveries, perpetuated
their Memories to Posterity; and Aristotle's Monument is still lasting in his
Writings when the costly Sepulcher of Mausolus is no where to be found.

And this is such an embalming, that the Heathen deified those who were the
Inventers of profitable Commodities; as Liber the finder out of Wine, and Ceres
of Corn, enrolled in the Catalogue of their gods.

2. By being publick-spirited, and willing for the general good to deny their
self-interest. Thus Cym^n the Athenian is memoris'd not one'y for his Piety to
his Father, and his Martial acts, but especially for his Charity, in that he
laid his great Possessions common for the poor Athenians in a great scarcity of
Victuals. Thus we have the Decii, Horatii, and Fabii, registring their names
among the Romans, in that they accounted it Dulce propatria mori. And the
Scriptures record Jehojada, buried among the Kings, because he had done good to
Israel, 2 Chr. 24.16.

3. By being useful to promote and advance the concernments of their own
Families, by providence and industry; whence that Houswife in the Proverbs, who
considers a field and buyeth it, etc. is dismissed with this Elogium, Give her
of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates, Prove.
31.31. When those unprofitable drones, who spend their time to trick up
themselves, that they may see and be seen, perish in their own rottenness. And
when such as refuse to give to the poors bellies, that they may make gallant
their own backs, shall like a candle expire in their own stinks: Then the dead
Dorcasses shall have the coats and garments showed, which they made while they
lived to cloth the naked with; and shall be followed out of the world with
this discourse, that they were full of good works, and alms-deeds which they
did, Act. 9.36, 39.

4. By being publick-blessings to the places where they live, to the Families
they have been of, like chariots and horses, for public defense and ornament,
2 Kings 13.14. like Abraham, and Jacob, and Joseph, and David; such as leave
behind them, not only imitable acts, like the faith of the Grandmother Lois,
and the Mother Eunice; but in the remembrance also of whom, God should please
to do good to their Posterities, 2 King. 8.19. such who are for Walls and
Bulwarks; for whose sakes God will spare a sinning people.

5. By being exemplary in acts of Moral virtue. Thus we have Aristides
registered for his Justice, Regulus for his fidelity, Scipio for his
continency, Curtius for his moderation, who was Dictator ab aratro; and Tubero
for his contented poverty, who did caenare fictilibus in ipso Capitolio.

6. By Faith and Patience, and the exercises of Grace; by which some have
purchased better names then of sons and daughters, Isai. 56.5. Whence the
Apostle says, Jam. 5.11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job. Ye have heard
of the faith of Abraham, and the constancy of the three children: and you may
see a Catalogue of Worthies, whom it has pleased God himself to register, Heb.
11. of whom it is said, All these obtained a good report; such whose names are
written, not in earth only, but also in heaven.

Now why such a good name is better then precious ointment preserving the
memory more then the best embalming, will appear, it we consider,

1. That it is the most certain expedient to continue our Memorial: a man may
be deprived of other means, which he may design to himself, by the iniquity or
Executors; but this a man is sure himself to put out of doubt. Miltiades the
Athenian, though forbidden burial, yet has raised up to himself a never-dying
Monument by his virtues. And Supio, though interred in his own house, has left
his memory better preserved then if he had been pressed with a Pyramid.

2. That it is the most durable. Herod robbed and spoiled the Sepulcher of
David, but could not spoil his memory: that God himself remembers many years
after that he was fallen asleep, as an argument why he should show mercy to
his Posterity. This is the way to place a man's Memorial beyond the reach of
men. It sometimes so falls out, that those who by their Funeral-pomp have been
placed inter superos, among the Gods above; at the next turn have been
dispatched ad inferos, rendered vile and accursed by all imaginable indignities:
Like Claudius Caesar whom Seneca reigns to be thrust out of Heaven, and sent
down to Hell. But a good name admits of none of these misadventures, often
shining brighter by obscuration: as T^ritus says of C^ssius and Brutus, whose
Effigies were not showed it the Funeral of Junia; Praefulgebant Cassius, atque
Brutus eo ipso, quod effigies eorum non visebantun.

3. That it is the most perpetual expedient: Not only most durable against the
force of men, but also most permanent against the tyranny of time. This is it
which that Edax rerum can make no prey of. But when the most lasting Marbles
fret, and prove unfaithful unto their inscriptions; when a deluge of
forgetfulness drowns the most pompous Funerals; then a good name shall buoy up
the memory, and preserve it from the common inundation.

4. That this is an expedient of our own making. Embalmings, costly Sepulchers,
are done for us, not done by us: But a good name is that whereby we embalme our
selves. 'Twas a true Maxim of the Stoics, Quae extra sunt, nostra non sunt,
like that of the Poet, Et genus, and proavos, and quae non fecimus ipsi, vix ea
nostra voco. But in this, like the Phoenix, we gather together for our selves
spices, and celebrate our own Funerals.

5. That God himself is willing in this respect to be the Physician, and embalm
the deceased with this sort of embalming. You may therefore observe, how that
through the whole Book of the Kings, the Lord is pleased to break the boxes of
his sweet Odors over the Sepulchers of the good Kings; so that as Paul says, 2
Cor. 5.1. When the earthly house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have
a building of God, an house not made with hands: So may we say here, that when
the stately Sepulchers of the interred, shall crumble into dust, then shall the
good men have their Epitaphs (...), not made with hands, but such a Sepulcher,
whose maker and builder is God.

6. That this puts a vast difference between those that are embalmed with it,
and such who are not. We in our thoughts put no great odds between two wicked
men, though the one lie under a stately Monument, the other on a dunghill, but
we fear that they may be both gone to their own place: But we have a far
different estimate of a good man, though cast out into the Common-shore, then
we have of any wicked person, however sumptuously interred: For which cause we
find so vast a difference made between the exit of Jehoram, and that of
Josiah, 2 Chro. 21.20. and 35.29.

The Text thus explained, may be applied,

First, for our instruction in these particulars.

1. Hereby we may see the way, how we may emerge out of the common Grave, how
we may render our ashes discernable, among those which are cast out into the
common Urn: How to disappoint Death, that great Leveller, that with his Sithe
cuts all down, and lays all in the Swarths of the wide field of this world:
How, though a Diogenes, you may beard an Alexander; when those who caused
terror in the land of the living, lie all down in the pit among the
uncircumcised in the grave, Ezekiel. 32.20. and in that very day all their
ambitious thoughts, and all their oppressive thoughts perish; and their
remembrance perishes from the earth, and they have no name in the street, but
they shall be forgotten as untimely births, Job 18.17. Then shall the good man's
name, like Aarons Rod, blossom among the dryness of the rest of the world, and
his remembrance be perspicuous. His life being discernable in the luster of it,
having endeavored to make his light shine among men. And verily, hereby you
may know how to prevent the stilness of the Grave, the hushness of Death, and
the forgetfulness of the Lethean Lake, when we go hence, and shall be seen here
no more: By this means we may volitare in ore piorum; and being dead, may yet
speak, Heb. 11.4. When your imitable holiness, patience, faith, godliness,
justice, and sobriety, may be the instructers of future Generations; and they
that are yet to be born, shall tell their Children, as an encouragement to
well-doing, in what eminent acts of Grace you have appeared for God; and in how
great works of protection and goodness, God has appeared for you.

2. Hereby you may know how to cast Rose Water upon your own Rosemary; how to
perfume your own relicts, better then by the costly ointments and spices of the
Merchant; how you may render your selves grateful and acceptable to the
remembrance of good Men, Angels, and God himself: for by this means is Noah's
name honorably remembered by the holy God, many hundred years after he had
slept with his Fathers in the Grave, Ezekiel. 14.14.

3. By this means you may know how to prevent the ill-husbandry of your Heirs,
and to raise up better Pillars to the perpetuating of your names then that of
Absalom. A certain Judge of this Land lying on his deathbed, making his Will,
wherein he bequeathed great possessions to his Son; said of them, Nunc mea,
nunc hujus, and postea nescio cujas: which words of his proved something
prophetical, there being scarce any thing left of those large possessions to
the fourth Generation. So uncertain, so very uncertain a mean is acquired
wealth, to continue our memories to the remaining world; therefore how much
better is it to have thy name registered among the Acts and Monuments of good
men, then to rear up material Monuments to our selves, or to have our names
continued by a doubtful Posterity?

4. Hereby you may know how to save your Executors the labor, and cost too, of
going to Rome for a Saintship. There is an easier, readyer, and better way to
do it, and that without waiting either the Popes pleasure or leisure: there be
many in his Catalogue of Saints, that are not so in men's thoughts, and there is
reason to believe neither in Gods court-roll; not there, where those names are
written which are written in Heaven. But those who in the Popes Hag^ography are
exalted to Heaven, many of them may be feared to be cast down to Hell; and some
of those raised up to Heaven, whom he has cursed with bell, book and candle.
But whosoever by an upright life, has written himself a Saint, in the
acknowledgement of his own conscience, and of good men, shall find it also so
written in the Lambs book of life.

Lastly, hereby, on the contrary part, you may be informed,

1. How vile it is to bury our selves in a dunghill, and make the stench of our
corruption more noisome then otherwise it would be, by an unprositable life;
when we do not only render our selves not desired, by being useless in our
Generation; but are, as it were, kicked out of the world by our Relations, as a
cumber and burden to the earth we tread on; when we are only consulting how
to eat, and drink, and sport our selves; and are like the fatted Swine, whose
death is desired, because then only profitable: When men neither by any useful
employment increase their own wealth, nor by any acceptable quanties engage the
affection of others, but are like smoke to the eyes of those which they
converse with, by crabbed conditions, and by prodigality and ill-husbandry have
with their own hands buried their Estates, they may well expect like a Candle
which has first consumed all its own fat, to go out in a stink, and as they
deserve, like Coniah, to be buried with the burial of an ass; so will their
memories be soon as rotten as their putrified corpse; and instead of that
embalming of a good name, which is better then precious ointment, their
remembrance shall be abominable to their own, and noisome to all that are good.

2. How detestable is it by a debauched life to render your Posterity ashamed
of your remembrance, when you burn a brand of repreach upon your succeeding
Generations by unhandsome acts; so that they blush to hear your name mentioned,
and wish that your memories might be buried with a speedy oblivion. The Law
says, Deuteronomy. 23.2. that a bastard shall not enter into the tabernacle of the
Lord to the tenth generation. And verily, how often is it that the Generations
to come very long after, are reproached with those acts of uncleanness,
oppression, cruelty, and villainy, which were committed by the Forefathers! and
as is said, Cant. 8.7. of love, that many waters cannot quench it, neither can
the floods drown it; if a man would give all the substance of his house for
love, it would be utterly contemned: So may we say, that no cost can purchase
off this blot; no expense, no Heroic worth of Posterity can purge away this
reproach; but like a fretting canker it eats through the most solid Marbles,
and leaves an ugliness which no hand can mend; a filth which no soap, no nitre
can wash off; a stench that all the odors of Arabia cannot prevent the odious
resentment of it.

3. How abominable a thing it is, to be the patterns of notorious wickedness to
the Generations to come, and have your names registered among the black Regiment
of those who have been the Bell-weathers to the residue of the World, to lead
them forth into those actions which are facinorous; when like Jeroboam the son
of Nebat (who is so often mentioned in Scripture, as a cursed pattern of
impiety and idolatry to the Kings that followed) you should be remembered as the
authors of wickedness to others. As Cain, who though so many thousand of years
since, yet is recorded as the first murderer, 1 John 3.12. For as those men's
names are worthily historied, who have been patterns of well-doing to the
residue of the world (as that Lambert of Greenwich, who is memoris'd as being
the first in the resurrection of good works, after the demolishing of Abbeys,
building the first Almshouse in Queen Elizabeth's days:) So is it the just
demerit of those, who by wicked practices have led the van in that black Legion
of evil doers, that they should have their names branded to Posterity; and be,
as it were, hanged up in the chains of a just detestation, for the terror of
others. Hence is it that in Divine story Chams impiety is both recorded and
accursed.

4. How lamentable is it, by notorious wickedness to entail curses upon our
Posterities, which they may smart for, either with us, as Corah, Numb. 16.3.
Achan, Josh. 7.24. or after we are dead and gone, as Jehoram, 2 King. 9.25.
when not only we bring a speedy destruction upon our Children, as it fared
with Jeroboam, from whom was cut off, him that pissed against the wall, so that
of him there was none shut up nor left, 1 King. 15.29. But also burn those
marks of Divine vengeance, which are never worn out, as Gehazies leprosy
cleaving to his posterity for ever, 2 King. 5.27. and Gods curse upon Elies
House, 1 Samuel 2.31. which you may see sadly felt, by the following Generations,
1 Samuel 22.18, 19. 1 King. 2.27. And hence it comes to pass, that Posterities,
though less flag^tious, yet approving the sins of their Forefathers, do smart
under those severe judgments, which the Fathers enormities justly merited;
yea, and sometimes too, when they have been forgiven to the Progenitors; as the
sins of Manasses required of his Posterity, though pardoned to him. And from
this cause it is, that some Parents do not only prove cheats to their
Posterities, leaving then shows only, instead of substances, while they leave
them ill gotten goods, which like Pillars of Salt quickly resolve into water,
and flect away from those that possessed them; but they do also (as it were)
kindle a fire in their own Houses, and lay trains for the blowing up of their
Families; when the curse of God justly due for their sins, like a Fire long in
kindling, breaks out at last, to the utter ruin of their Posterities, and
subversion of those designs of greatness and perpetuity which they had
imagined. Hence we see those stately Structures built, that they might be the
Mansion houses for their following Generations, and therefore called after
their own names, either quickly changing their owners, who by ill-husbandry and
riot throw themselves into the mouths of greedy Usurers, or else Gods severe
judgments of the Sword or Pestilence, soon root them out thence, and in a few
years it is scarce remembered that any such had a being there. Sin being of the
nature of that leprosy spoken of, Lev. 14.44. which will not be cleansed, till
the house be broken down, and the stones thereof, the timber and the mortar be
thrown out into an unclean place.

The next Application of the Text may be to exhort us,

1. To lay our selves decently in our Graves. It was the ambition of the
Ancients, that at their death, they might lay down their bodies in comely
postures. And even they that laid violent hands upon themselves, were chiefly
solicitous in this, that they might not fall so, as to become an unseemly
spectacle. Thus far certainly the same mind concerns us all, that we go not
out of the world in an uncomely manner: not wallowing in our own vomits, nor
hurried hence with our own luxury and intemperance, and as it were dig our own
Graves with our disorders; cutting asunder the thread of our lives, which
otherwise it is probable might be much longer protracted: For our lives are
short of themselves, but much shorter do we make them by our excesses; when we
quench our natural heat by slouds of intemperance, and contract those diseases,
which like an eager canker soon devour us, or else deprive our selves of our
own reason, becoming sots; and burying our understandings before our bodies; or
in distempered fits exposing our selves to dangers and precipices, to the
breaking of our necks, or otherwise hastening our departures.

For what more direful sight can there be, then to see a man not made a brute
only by his slot, but that comely body which God has given, rendered most ugly
and deformed; and either carbonadoed with hotter lusts, or inflamed with hotter
drinks, or discerpt and mangled with inhumane wounds, and carved out before
their burials, as a fitter feast for worms?

But it more concerns us, that we do not by wicked and nefarious acts, expose
our selves to a dedecorous and shameful end, as the just guerdon of our
demerits; and become an horrid spectacle to all but our very enemies, when even
those good men, who rejoice in the justice exercised on us, yet abhor the
thoughts of us, and our wickedness, which brought upon us so severe a
vengeance; our relations returning with shame on their faces, wishing that our
lives had never been, rather then so ended.

On the other side, how much more happy are they, who lay themselves down in
the bed of honor, ending their lives in some noble explots, wherein though
death prevented them of a triumph, yet have triumphed over death its self,
leading it captive, and out-living their Funerals; employing future ages in
prolix discourses, to celebrate their worth, and publick-spiritedness: The
sense of this made the Spariane women taking leave of their sons and friends
going to battle, wish that they might either receive them alive as Conquerors,
with applause; or else with joy follow their Funerals, as of those who had
valiantly expended their lives in their countries defense. It being, in their
opinions, the first degree of happiness to live usefully, the second to dye
valiantly, and so honorably.

And therefore when we hear of those who have expended their lives in some
worthy enterprise for their Countries defense, in some notable discovery of
unknown Regions, or in some magnanimous act of fortitude, constancy, justice
or equity, in some general calamity, tumult, or epidemical madness: We cannot
but congratulate their worth, though we bemoan their mishap, and prosecute
their exequies, at how great a distance however, with our acknowledgement and
admiration of their merit; though cast overboard, it may be into the Ocean; or
torn in pieces by the roaring Cannon; or overwhelmed with some breach; or
exposed to the Fowls of the Air, or Beasts of the Field, in some far remote
Country; or devoured by the inhumane mouths of greedy Canibals: yet we
acknowledge, that though they were buried ignobly, yet they departed
strenuously, and took their leave of the world, not as unprofitable ones,
disgracefully kicked out of it; but as those, who left behind them desires of
them, and have that honorable interment in the minds of those who are
virtuous, which they were denied by the iniquity of their present fortunes: and
though we wish that our exit out of the world may be more successful yet we
cannot but wish that it may be no less glorious. Hence we emulate Sampson,
though buried under the ruins of that great Palace, because in his fall he was
fully revenged of Gods and his enemies. And we rather approve of the death of
valiant Vriah, though slain by the Sword of the children of Ammon refusing to
lie with his wife on David's motion; then if he had melted away in the softness,
and ease, and indulgence of his beloved Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11.11. And without
doubt, those holy Martyrs when they expired in torments, being consumed in the
flames, and (as it were, translated out of this world in a fiery Chariot) sent
their beholders back with wonder at their Faith and Constancy, and secret
wishes that they might be enabled by Gods Grace to bear so great and sharp a
brunt, and by such a death to glorify God.

For which cause, we read in Ecclesiastic story of those who upon such
Spectacles, ultro se cruciatibus obtulerunt; publicly professing themselves
Christians, and exposing themselves to the tormentors cruelty; and as the
Apostle speaks, not accepting deliverance, that they might receive a better
resurrection.

To go out of the world perfumed with the excellent odor of a good name; that
like Demetrius, 3 John 12. we may have a good report of all men, and of the
truth its self. A good report,

1. For thy devoutness toward God. Nothing more ornaments our persons, nor
credits our names, then holiness: for though it often expose us to the scorn
and derision of naughty men, yet those, while they scoff and deride the good,
secretly admire and honor them; there being that luster and brightness in
holiness, that though it dazzle the eyes of the perverse, so that they hate to
look upon it, yet they cannot but acknowledge its beauty, and reverence those
whose faces are made illustrious by it: For we observe, that there is impressed
upon the nature of man, an acknowledgement of that which is good, to be good,
though their corrupt affections and lusts will not let them comply with that
good they know; and consequently, they hate those that do, as the public
reprovers of their vice; the rectitude and uprightness of good men as a rule,
being applied to their obliquity, discovering their exorbitancie and
transgression: yet what their inward esteem of holiness is, may be calculated
by the impression it makes upon their minds, manifested by those (...)
Captains at Ramoth-Gilead, 2 King. 9. who, while they call the Son of the
Prophet a mad fellow, after the wicked gaise of their deboist Tongues; yet show
what estimation they had of him, in that as soon as they knew his Message, they
presently haste and blow with trumpets, proclaiming Jehu is King; a business of
that import, as would have cost every one of them their lives, if it had not
succeeded, and therefore requiring mature deliberation, though it appears not
thought of before. And hence we may observe, how far even a show of holiness in
that Impostor Mahomet prevailed to attract followers. And in later times in
Africa, what feats the Scrifii effected by the same means; making themselves,
from poor Schoolmasters, to be the absolute Commanders of the most rich and
flourishing Countries there.

But how much more excellent fragrancie has an holy life in the nostrils of
all those that are truly godly, who cannot but prosecute with all affection
those, who in the remotest parts of the world, they hear are in this kind
exemplary; their memorial being as a sweet smelling Nose-gay, which they desire
often to repeat the sent of; and in the recordation of their virtue, take no
little delight, having their graces actuated, and made more lively, by the
remembrance of their faith and good works. And here you may see, how excellent
it is to be one of the Stars in the Firmament of Gods Church, to shine like a
light in the world; to be of public conduct and direction to others: so that
our death should be like the fall of the General of an Army, not of a private
concern, but public loss; when our departure is like the Eclipse of the Sun,
which leaves men in a maze, and seems to bode some general calamity.

And this is the more, as we are of more general use, and frand in the way of
service to others; when we are as a candle set in a candlestick, to give light
to them that are in the house, the less of the family, or the greater of the
Church and Kingdom. How deservedly therefore did Jeremiah and all Judah mourn
for Josiah, and all the singing men and the singing women spoke of him in their
lamentations, and made it an ordinance, that they should lament him, because of
his goodness, according to all that was written in the law of the Lord, 2 Chr.
35.25 26.

But this is yet more perspicuous, when it is a light shining in a dark place,
when a man appears illustrious in Holiness and Religion, though the residue of
the world lie in profound ignorance and profaneness; when like Noah we are
found upright, when all flesh had corrupted their way before God, Genesis 6.12.
7.1. And like righteous Lot in the midst of a wicked Sodom; when the whole City
from every quarter appear in notorious violence, and unnatural lust, Genesis 19.
When like Elijah, we are very jealous for the Lord of Hosts, then, when we
think our selves only left. From which cause, we see how precious the names
are, of Peter Waldo, John Hus, Jerome of Prague, Wickliff, Martin Luther, and
others, who were like Sparks of shining Diamonds amidst the dark and ruder
rubbish of the rest of the world.

2. For our sobriety toward our selves, for our temperance, moderation,
continency, that we have known what is that golden mean, that debita
proportio, which does not run out into drunkenness, luxary, gluttony, or
whatsoever is in the excess of superfluity: Nor yet that covetousness which
does deny the lawful use of those things which God has given us. Neither
melting in jovialities, nor confined with too much morosity; not precipitately
hasty, nor delatorily flow; not squandringly profuse, nor churlishly detaining;
but behaving our selves like Adam in Paradise, in the midst of our enjoyments,
having our Weights and Measures by us; allowing our selves such a quantity, as
right reason, and our conveniences, require of us.

3. For our righteousness toward men, that we have behaved our selves toward
all others, in all things, according to all those rules which justice does
require, being careful to perform the duties lying up on us, in the several
relations wherein we stand to others. As we are general Citizens of the world,
that we give every one his due, honor to whom honor, fear to whom fear; to
visit the sick, cloth the naked, relieve the necessirous, right the oppressed,
bear with the weak, entertain the stranger, give drink even to an enemy: that
every creature has tasted of your justice; your cattle grieve that they have
lost so good a Master, when, as Solomon says, you have been merciful to your
beast.

If you are Husbands, leave a name behind you, that you did love your wives,
as bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh; that you gave honor to them as
the weaker vessels: That you provided things honest before all men; living with
them according to knowledge; and furthering their faith and joy, as being heirs
together of the grace of life.

If you be Wives, leave a name behind you, like those ancient holy Women
mentioned, 1 Pet. 3.4. that your care was not to trick up your bodies, but
adorn your souls with habits of virtue; and to be perspicuous in the ornament
of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price; that
your plots were not how you should spend the day, or what tacling discourse you
should have at the next idle visit; but that you did consider a field and buy
it with the fruit of your hands: that your lives were not taken up with
murmurings, and querulous clamours; but that you did open your mouth in
wisdom, and that in your tongue was the law of kindeness.

If you are Parents, leave a name behind you, that you brought your children
up in the fear and nurture of the Lord; that you did not go before yours with
the dark Lanthorn of a loose and profane conversation, but that you did shine
before them, in that holy exemplariness, whereby you might be a pattern to them
of purity, and an holy life.

If you are Masters, leave a name behind you, that you always had a sense upon
you, that you also had a master in heaven; to whom you must give an account:
that it was your care, not only that your servants should serve you, but they
should serve the Lord; and had rather they should loose a days work, then that
God should loose an hours service.

If you be Magistrates, let not your dead hands smell of bribes; but let it be
said, that vice was your utter enemy, which neither for fear or affection you
would show any countenance, but that you made it your business to be an
incourager of those that do well, and a terror unto evil doers.

As thou art a Subject, let it be said of thee, that thou were none of those
who did speak evil of dignities, nor refusedst to yield a ready compliance to
any of those burdens, which may conduce to thy Princes honor, and thy
Countries welfare: but did consult for all such things, as make for general
good, and public peace.

If men speak of you, as you are a member of the Church, let them celebrate thy
obedience to those that had the rule over thee in the Lord: That thou were not
factious, but as thou contendest for the faith once delivered to the Saints; so
thou were careful not to break the golden chain of brotherly love, for the
scruples of opinion, but tookst care to preserve the unity of the faith in the
bond of peace; being convinced that there is more prudence to overlook gross
infirmities, then to be apt to separate; and that there is more Christianity in
amending our private faults, then in reprehending public enormities: Having
always such a conversation as is becoming Godliness, and not denying thy
Christianity by thy works. Thus to go out of the world, is to carry baskets of
all sweetsmelling Flowers along with you, to cast into your grave; and put
Rosemary into the hands of those who do accompany your Funeral; and give a
kind of immortality to your own memorial.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK.
ADvice concerning Religion, as it includes the care to save a man's own soul
Page. 5 Cautions concerning Religion in that sense Page. 7, 8, 9 Of Religion,
as it includes devotion toward God Page. 10, 11, 12, 13 Of Virtues requisite
in an Apprentice Page. 14 Of Veracity Ibid. Of Fidelity Page. 15, 16 Of
Temperance Page. 17 to 22 Of Taciturnity Page. 22, to 31 Of Affability Page.
31, 32 Of Frugality Page. 33, to 33 Of Industry Page. 38, to 41 Of the choice
of Company Page. 42 Of the danger of ill Company Page. 43, 44, 45 Directions
for the choice of Company Page. 46, to 53 Of Conversation with Familiars Page.
53, to 60 Of Discourse Page. 60, to 65 Of the choice of Recreations Page. 65,
to 78 Of converse with men Page. 78, to 95 Of setting up a Trade Page. 95, to
98 Of Servants Page. 99, to 108 Of Marriage Page. 108, to 111 Of the choice of
a Wife Page. 112, to 129 Of Behavior to a Wife Page. 129, to 143 Of House
keeping Page. 143, to 150 Of Children their Nurses Page. 150 to 153 Of their
Education Page. 153, to 166 Of their disposing into the World Page. 166, to 170
Of Funerals and Alms deeds Page. 170, to 173 A Discourse on the worth of a good
name Page. 175, to the end.
Books lately printed for Hen. Eversden.
THe Pens dexterity completed: Or, Mr. Rich his Shorthand now perfectly
taught. Prince 1 s. 6 d.

Theodulia: Or, a just Defense of hearing the Sermons, and other Teaching of
the present Ministers of England. By J. T.

The Friendly debate, Third and Fourth parts: at 4 s. 6 d. bound.

A Crew of kind London Gossips, all met to be merry, complaining of their
Husbands: with their Husbands Answer in their own defense. To which is added,
Ingenious Poems, or Wit and Drollery: at 1 s. bound.

Pearls of Eloquence: Or the School of Complements.

A serious Examination of the Independents Catechism; and therein, of the
Nonconformity to, and Separation from the Church of England. By Benj. Camfield.
Price 2 s. 6 d.

FINIS.

