THE TRIAL and CONDEMNATION OF Several notorious Malefactors, at a Sessions of
OYER and TERMINER which began at the Sessions House IN THE OLD BAILY, With the
Names of those who received Sentence of Death, Burnt in the Hand, Transported,
and to be Whipped.
And most remarkably of John Sadler, who Whipped the Child to Death at Ratcliffe.
MAjor Theophilus Oglethorp was Indicted, for the Murder of Captain John
Richardson, a Gentleman belonging to his Majesty's Guards; the manner of which,
according to the Evidence was, that they two on the 10th. of January last,
being at the Black Posts, near Charing Cross, the Prisoner began a Health To
the confusion of all double Hearts, who did not declare themselves as they
meant, which the Deceased interpreting to be meant of him, flew into a violent
Passion, and gave very gross language, which the Major not being longer able to
endure, drew, as likewise the Captain, but not being suffered to hurt each
other, they went from thence to the Cross Keys Tavern, where the heat continued
so that the Deceased struck the Prisoner with his Cane, whereupon they left the
House, and within three hours after met by Clarendine house, where they drew
upon each other, and made several Passes: And the Captain, 'ere any could come
up to part them, was run into the Belly and out at the Back: and had received
another Wound in his Back, of which the next Morning he Dyed: But the Evidence
being no ways able to prove a former Grudge or prepense Malice, the Jury found
him Guilty of Manslaughter.

John Sadler, A Bailiffs follower Received his Trial for Murdering a Girl about
13 years of Age, on the 24th of December last, at Ratcliff: Which Inhuman
Barbarity was acted, as follows. He being a Lodger or Inmate to one Lattice
Wigington, a Semptress, who Instructed Children in that Mystery: The Deceased,
as she pretented, having wronged her of some trivial Sum of Moneys, and being
her Apprentice, with whom not long before she had 5 pounds. She got the
Prisoner to help give her Correction, who tied up the Child by the Wrists, and
with whip-cords, after he had stripped her, beat her 3 or 4 hours, still rubbing
the Wounds with Salt: And the Woman who was Condemned the last Sessions for the
same Murder, stopped her Mouth with an handkercher, lest the Neighbors should
pity her Outcry for the hard cruel usage: In three days she dyed: whereupon
the Prisoner fled: but being taken, upon his Trial, was found Guilty of wilful
Murder.

Isaac Smith was tried, for that he, in the Company of Two more, on the 24th of
January 1680. stole eighteen pair of Fustian Drawers from one Richard Rider in
Little Saint Bartholmews. The Proof being plain against him, he was found
guilty to the Value of 10 d.

Robert Rouse a Sailer was Indicted for stealing an Hundred Pieces of Eight,
being the Coin of Spain, out of a Boat: his Plea was that being Shipwracked
about 2 Leagues from Shore, the Master and Thirteen men more putting several
Baggs of Money into the Long Boat, stood from shore, where, in that Confusion
this Money being left behind, he converted it to his Use, but upon demand, made
it up, and delivered it again: which not being contradicted by the Evidence, he
was acquitted.

Mary Naples was Indicted for Murdering her Male Infant, but it being proved
she had a Husband, it was not comprehended in the Statute of King James,
provided for the preventing lude women from Murdering their Bastard Children,
so she was found not Guilty.

Thomas Cranvil, Mary Cranvil, Elizabeth Hurst, Elizabeth Stone, were Indicted
for breaking open the House of Richard Rawlins, and taking from thence goods,
to the value of 3 or 4 pounds. And again Indicted for breaking open the House
of Thomas Sims, in the Parish of White Chapel, of both which Robberies, they
were all found Guilty, except Mary Cranvil, who was not capable by Law to commit
any Felony in the presence of her Husband.

John Robinson was Tried for opening the Chamber of John Fountain of Lincolns
Inn Esquire; with Pick-locks, in September last, and taking thence 6 Silver Plates,
6 Spoons, and other Plate, with some wearing Apparel, to the value of 15 l.
having sold the Plate to a Goldsmith, upon his being apprehended he confessed
the same, and now upon full Evidence was found Guilty.

William Logans, and Elizabeth Laramore were Tried for Stealing 20 Dozen of
Gold and Silver Buttons, out of a Button sellers Shop in ^^lbourn; the manner
of the Fact was, That they coming to cheapen Buttons, whilst the Master of the
Shop was busy, the former of the Prisoners conveyed the Buttons into his
Breeches, and departed; but being pursued, was taken in the Black Bull Inn
Yard, with them about him; his Plea was, That he was in Drink, and that the
Woman put them into his Breeches, but the Felony being plain, he was Convicted,

Alice Turburg, vel Turnpery, was Tried for taking a Gold Chain from off her
Masters Child's Neck, valued at 4 l. some of which she sold to a Goldsmith, and
another part delivered to her Mistress, saying she found it in the Fire, but
the place where she had sold part of it being found, the Fact was plain, and
she found Guilty.

Samuel Smith, living in St. Martins Lane, was Indicted for Ravishing one
Dorothy Palmer, a Girl about 11 years of Age, which according to the Evidence
of the Girl was thus, he being her Grandfathers Apprentice, who is a Harness
maker, on the 24 of January last, she going there when all the Family except
the Prisoner were abroad, he got her into a great Chair, and forced her, giving
to boot the foul Disease, which upon search was found upon him, of which the
Girl complained not of till two days after, when he being Apprehended and
carried before a Magistrate, confessed the Fact, but it not being known whether
the Girl did consent or not, and some other nice point in Law, he was found not
Guilty.

John Bully, alias Edwards, a Popish Priest, was brought to the Bar in order to
his Trial, the Witness for the King being ready, but upon the reading his
Indictment, he delivered a special Plea, Signed by Edward Saunders, Counselor
at Law, by which he desired he might stand it, certaining that he had formerly
been Tried for the same Fact at Lancaster, and that he having been then
acquitted, had not taken any Orders from the Sea of Rome since, and in the sum
denied that he was a Priest, whereupon he was Ordered to be continued till next
Sessions.

John Baly and Tho. Mace were Tried for a notorious Burglary and Felony by
them committed about 2 years since upon the House of Peter Vakery in the Parish
of Stepny, where they in the Company of one Mathes, who now discovered them,
set up a Ladder to a window, and opening the Casement, entered and took from
thence about 200 Yards of Farindines and Morenas, to the value of 150 l. to
which one of them, viz. the latter Pleaded Guilty, and the former, upon full
Evidence where they had sold them to a Broker who lived in Long lane, was
Convicted of the Felony and Burglary.

Mary Smith was Tried for that she on the 12 of January last came into the
House of Thomas Burt betimes in the Morning, and pretending to be a Neighbors
Maid, desired to Light a Candle, when watching her opportunity, she stole Lace
and Linen to a considerable value, as likewise another Indictment upon the
same account for stealing a Silver Cup: And likewise a third time Indicted for
Stealing a Hat by the dexterous way of Glimmering, or pretending to Light a
Candle, of all which she was found Guilty.

Richard Eaton received his Trial, for Robbing a Ship lying at Deptford, and
taking thence one Sea bed, with Rugs, Blankets and other Furniture, as likewise
Peuter, and about sixty pounds of Raysons, being the goods of Thomas Daniel,
the whole being offered to sale were stopped and he apprehended: he pleaded he
bought them at Chatham, but not being able to prove it, he was found Guilty.

John Smith being Tried for stealing a Cane with a Silver Head, upon plain
prooff, was brought in guilty to the value of 10 d.

Edward Sing, lately a Secretary to Mother Cellier, was brought to the Bar, for
speaking several Seditious Words, at the Rainbow Coffee-house, near Temple Bar,
and for disparaging the Kings Evidence, saying there was no Popish Plot, but a
Presbyterian Plot, and that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was Murdered by the
Presbyterians, but the Evidence not being in readiness, he was deferred for
another time. Its said he has a Pension of 20 s. a week allowed him to go about
to Coffee-houses and public Meetings to disparage the Discoverers of the Plot.

Dorothy Mills, was Tried for stealing several parcels of goods, from her
Mistress, as Linen, Woollen and Peuter, and upon prooff of the Fact, was found
guilty to the value of 10 d.

John Ariss was Tried for Stealing of 2 Mares, one in Northamptonshire and the
other in Warwickshire, but the Evidence coming home upon him, he confessed the
Fact and was found Guilty.

One Hugh Watson was Tried, for speaking several Treasonable Expressions, which
were as follows: He coming into a House in Old Brainford to light his Pipe,
the Woman of the House fell into a Discourse with him, telling him he should be
a Gentleman by his chilliness, to which he answered he was, whereupon she
replied, what one of my Lord Bellasis Gentlemen? his answer was Yes, and had
been so ever since April last, at 4 s. 6 d. a week, which he received from a
Muster-Master in the Tower. And that there were 30 or 40000 in Pay, Expecting
Orders every day to fall upon the Protestants, And, that he quartered in Drury
Lane: And his Captains name was Mews. For this he was apprehended: but upon
his Trial, He said, and alleged, He spoke but in jest, and for want of other
Discourse: And feigned himself, as most did believe, half distracted: He was
acquitted.

There were 7 Men, and 3 Women received Sentence of Death: viz. John Sadler,
Will. Abot, John Baly, Thomas Mace, Roger Maden, J. Aris and Jo. Robertson,
Sarah Smith, Eliz. Stanes, and Eliz. Hurst. five burnt in the Hand, 1 to be
Transported: And 8 to be Whipped.

FINIS.
London, Printed for T. Davies. 1681,


