THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF Sir John Friend, Knight. FOR Conspiring to Raise
REBELLION IN THESE KINGDOMS, In Order to A French Invasion: Who upon full
Evidence was found Guilty of HIGH TREASON, AT THE Sessions House in the Old
Bailey, March 23th 1695/6.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, MDCXCVI.

THE TRIAL OF Sir John Friend, Knt. On Monday the 23 th. of March, 1695/6, At
the Sessions House in the Old Bailey.
Proclamation for Silence, and Attendance upon the Sessions being made, as
usual, The Court proceeded to call the Jury Impannell'd, and to the Trial of
the Prisoner.

Clerk of the Crown. SET Sir John Friend to the Bar.
Sir John Friend, Hold up your hand.

Sir. J. Friend, My Lord, Mr. William Courtney is my Principal Witness, and is
now in the Gate House, and I humbly move Your Lordship he may be sent for.


L. C. J. H. Is he your Witness? What is his Christian Name? Why did you not
desire this before?


Sir J. Friend, My Lord, I did not hear of him till last Night, and I humbly
beseech Your Lordship, that You would be pleased to let him be sent for.


L. C. J. H. I will tell you what you shall have; If you will appoint your
Agent to come, he shall have an Habeas Corpus ad testificandum, and he shall be
sent for. You might have sent to Me this Morning, and he might have been sent
for.


Sir J. Friend, I did not know it till last Night.


L. C. J. H. You shall have a Habeas Corpus ad testificandum; make what have
you can, you shall have a Habeas Corpus.


Sir J. Friend, My Lord, be pleased to give a Rule of Court.


L. C. J. H. That cannot be, it must be a Habeas Corpus ad testificandum.


Sir J. Friend, It will be a long time before he can come, and I desire nothing
but --


L. C. J. H. It shall be ready presently.


Sir J. Friend, If it may be --
It will be a great Prejudice to me if he be not here.

L. C. J. H. I believe it will be time enough.


Sir J. Friend, Supposing it should not be, it will be a great prejudice to me.


L. C. J. H. We are not in such haste, we don't spur you on.


Sir J. Friend, I beg Your Lordships Pardon, I am not --


L. C. J. H. Officer, Make a Writ of Habeas Corpus ad testificandum. What is
his Name, James Courtney?


Sir J. Friend, William Courtney.


L. C. J. H. Give him his Christian Name.


Sir J. Friend, William Courtney, My Lord.


L. C. J. H. Let him go with it to the Crown-Office immediately, and bring the
Writ Sealed, and I will Sign it.


Cl. of the Cr. Sir John Friend, Hold up thy Hand, You stand Indicted by the
Name of Sir John Friend, Knight.

The INDICTMENT.
London, ss. THE Jurors, etc. Present. That whereas an Open, Notorious, Public
and Cruel War for a great Time has been, and yet is Carried on and Prosecuted
by Land and by Sea by Lewis the French King, against the most Serene,
Illustrious and Excellent Prince, our Lord, WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of
God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
During all which time the said Lewis the French King, and his Subjects, were,
and yet are Enemies of our said Sovereign Lord the King, and His Subjects, One
John Friend, late of London, Knight, a Subject of this Kingdom of England, well
knowing the Premises, not having the Fear of God in his Heart, nor weighing
the Duty of his Allegiance. but moved and seduced by the Instigation of the
Devil, as a false Traitor against the said most Serene and Excellent Prince,
WILLIAM the Third now King of England, etc. his Supreme, True, Natural and
Undoubted Lord, the Cordial Love, and True and Due Obedience and Allegiance
which every Subject of our said Lord the King toward Him does bear, and of
right ought to bear, withdrawing and intending to extinguish, and minding, and
with all his strength designing and endeavoring the Government of this Kingdom
of England, under Him of Right Duly and Happily Established, altogether to
Subvert, Change and Alter, and His Faithful Subjects and Freemen of this
Kingdom of England to Subjugate and Enthrall, in an intolerable and miserable
Servitude to the French King, on the First of July, in the Seventh Year of the
Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King, and diverse other Days and Times, as
well before as afterward, at London, in the Parish of St. Peter's Cornhill,
etc. Falsely, Maliciously, Devilishly and Traitorously, did Compass, Imagine,
Contrive and Intend, our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, then his
Supreme, True, Natural and Lawful Lord, of and from His Kingly State, Title,
Honor, Power, Crown Imperial and Government of this Kingdom of England, to
Depose and altogether Deprive; and our said Lord the King, to death and final
destruction to bring, and to move, stir up, procure and Aid the said Lewis the
French King by Armies, Soldiers, and his Subjects, to invade, fight with,
overcome and subdue this Kingdom of England, and to make and cause a miserable
Slaughter amongst the Faithful Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King,
throughout His whole Kingdom: And he the said John Friend, to the said Enemies
of our said Sovereign Lord the King, then and there, during the War aforesaid,
was Traitorously Adhering and Aiding; And to the same most Wicked and Devilish
Treasons, and Traitorous Compassings, Intentions and Purposes aforesaid, to
fulfill, perfect and bring to effect, and in prosecution, performance and
execution of that Traitorous Adhesion, he the said John Friend, as such a false
Traitor during the War aforesaid, to wit, on the said First day of July in the
Year aforesaid, at London, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, and diverse other
Days and Times, as well before as afterward, there and elsewhere in London
aforesaid, Falsely, Maliciously, Advisedly and Traitorously, and with Force and
Arms with one Robert Charnock, lately Convicted and Attainted of High Treason,
in Contriving and Conspiring the Death of our said Sovereign Lord the King, and
with diverse other false Traitors, to the Jurors aforesaid unknown, did Meet,
Propose, Consult, Consent and Agree, to Procure from the said Lewis the French
King, of his Subjects, Forces and Soldiers, then and yet Enemies of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, great numbers of Soldiers and Armed Men to Invade
this Kingdom of England; and to Levy, Procure and Prepare great Numbers of
Armed Men, and Troops, and Companies, against our said Sovereign Lord the King,
to be raised and formed; and with those Enemies, to and upon such Invasion and
Ingress into this Kingdom of England, to join and unite Rebellion and War
against our said Sovereign Lord the King, within this Kingdom of England, to
make, levy, and carry on, to depose our said Sovereign Lord the King, and Him
to Kill and Murder: And further, with those said false Traitors, on the said
First of July in the Year aforesaid, at London, in the Parish and Ward
aforesaid, Traitorously did Consult, Consent and Agree, to send the said Robert
Charnock, as a Messenger from him the said John Friend, and the said other
Traitors, to the Jurors unknown, to and into the Kingdom of France, in Parts
beyond the Seas, to James the Second, late King of England, to Propose to him,
and Desire him to obtain of the said French King the Soldiers and Armed Men
aforesaid, for the Invasion aforesaid to be made, and to give and deliver to
the said King James, and other the said Enemies and their Adherents,
Intelligence and Notice of such their Traitorous Intentions and Adhesion, and
all other the Premises; and to inform them of all other particular Matters and
Circumstances referring thereunto: And also to receive Intelligence from them
of the said intended Invasion, and other things and circumstances concerning
the Premises; and to signify, report and declare the same to the said John
Friend, and the said other Traitors in this Kingdom of England, for their
Assistance, Encouragement and Aid of the said Enemies of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, in the War aforesaid: And to stir up and procure those Enemies
the more readily and boldly to Invade this Kingdom of England, the said
Treasons and Traitorous Intentions, Imaginations and Purposes of the said John
Friend to perfect and bring to pass: And the more easily to execute, carry on
and perform all the Premises, he the said John Friend, during the War
aforesaid, so as aforesaid, continued, to wit on the First of July, in the
Seventh Year aforesaid, at London, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, Falsely and
Traitorously did procure and obtain, and received and had a Commission or
Writing, purporting a Commission under and from the said James the Second, late
King of England, to Constitute him the said John Friend to be a Colonel of
Horse, in the Army to be levied and formed within this Kingdom of England, by
him and other false Traitors against our said Sovereign Lord the King. And in
Prosecution of the said Pretended Commission, by him the said John Friend so
obtained and accepted, and the said Treasons, and all the Traitorous Intentions
aforesaid, the sooner to be executed, performed and fulfilled, he the said John
Friend afterward, to wit, the said First of July, in the Seventh Year
aforesaid, at London, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, Falsely, Maliciously,
Advisedly, Privately and Traitorously, diverse Soldiers and Men Armed, and ready
to be Armed, with Force and Arms to Rise and Fight; and War and Rebellion
against our said Sovereign Lord the King within this Kingdom of England, to
make and carry on; and to and with the said Enemies of our said Sovereign Lord
the King, Foreigners and Strangers, Subjects and Soldiers of the said Lewis
the French King, Invading this Kingdom of England, to and upon their Invasion
and Entry into this Kingdom of England, then shortly to be expected, and
together with him the said John Friend to be joined and united; and in Troops
and Companies to be formed, did Levy, List and Retain, and caused to be Levied,
Listed and Retained, and diverse sums of Money in and about the Levying, Listing
and Retaining the said Soldiers, and Men Armed and ready to be Armed for the
Purposes aforesaid, on the said First of July, in the Seventh Year aforesaid,
at London aforesaid, Falsely, Maliciously and Traitorously, did give and pay,
and cause to be paid; and those Soldiers and Men, the Traitorous Intentions and
Purposes aforesaid, ^hen and long after had in readiness. And also on the said
First of July, in the Year aforesaid, at London aforesaid, diverse Horses, and
very many Arms, Blunderbusses, Muskets, Pistols, Swords and Rapiers, and other
Warlike things and Instruments, Falsely, Maliciously, Secretly and Traitorously,
he did buy, gather together, and procure, and caused to be bought, gathered
together, obtained and procured, and in his Custody had and retained, with
Intentions to use the same in the said Invasion, War and Rebellion against our
said Sovereign Lord the King, to depose, throw down, and deprive our said
Sovereign Lord the King, of and from his Kingly State, Crown and Throne of this
Kingdom of England, and Him to Kill and Murder: And all the other Traitorous
Intentions and Purposes of him the said Sir John Friend to fulfill, perfect and
fully to bring to effect against the Duty of his Allegiance, against the Peace,
etc. And against the form of the Statute (...) such case made and provided, etc.



How say you Sir John Friend, Art thou Guilty of the High Treason whereof thou
stand^ Indicted or not Guilty?


Sir J. Friend, Not Guilty.


Cl. of the Cr. How will Thou be Tried?


Sir J. Friend, By God and the Country.


Cl. of the Cr. God send you a good Deliverance.


Sir J. Friend, Amen, I do not question it.


Then the Clerk of the Crown began to call over the Jury.

Sir J. Friend, My Lord, I have some thing to move, if Your Lordship please: My
Lord, If any matter of Law does arise, I humbly move that I may be heard by
Counsel, that I may not be destroyed without Law.


L. C. J. H. If any matter of Law does arise on the Trial, and you tell us what
that Matter of Law is, if the Court sees it a Matter of doubt, the Court can
assign you Counsel.


Sir J. Friend, My Lord, I am no Lawyer; I hope as Your Lordship is of Counsel
for the King, so you will please to be so for me, for I am no Lawyer, and know
not whether it be matter of Law or not; so I beseech Your Lordship to tell me
if it be Law or not Law.


L. C. J. H. We are bound to tell you so, and to be Indifferent between the
King and the Prisoner, and to let you have all the Benefit of the Law possible,
and will do so.


Sir J. Friend, I do not Question it, my Lord.


Cl. of the Cr. Crier, Make Proclamation.


Crier, Oyes, Oyes, Oyes, You Jurymen, etc.


Cl. of the Cr. Sir John Friend, Hold up thy hand; You the Prisoner at the Bar,
Those Men that you shall hear called and personally appear are to pass between
Our Sovereign Lord the King, and you, upon Trial of your Life and Death; If
therefore you will Challenge them, or either of them, your time is to challenge
them as they come to the Book to be Sworn, and before they be Sworn.


Sir J. Friend, My Lord, How many may I Challenge?


L. C. J. H. You may Challenge, that is, Except against Thirty Five, without
showing any Cause; If you have good Cause against any more, you may refuse them.


Sir J. Friend, It may be, my Lord, I may mistake, I desire of your Lordship
that I may have timely notice of the Five and Thirty.


L. C. J. H. You shall know it.


Then the Jury were Sworn, whose Names were as follows, Thomas Clerk. Thomas
Emms. Henry Hunter. Thomas Poole. Peter Parker. Samuel Jackson. Nathaniel Long.
John Child. William Walker. John Sherbrooke. William Prince. Joseph Moorewood.


Then the Usual Proclamation for Information was made, and those who were
Summoned to be of the Jury, and not Sworn, were Discharged.

Cl. of the Cr. Sir John Friend, Hold up thy Hand; You Gentlemen that are
Sworn, Look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his Cause: He stands Indicted by
the Name of Sir John Friend, Knt. as in the Indictment ( mutatis mutandis) and
against the Statute in that Case Made and Provided. Upon this Indictment he
has been Arraigned, and thereunto Pleaded Not Guilty; and for his Trial has
put himself upon God and his Country; which Country you are: Your Charge is
to Inquire, Whether he is Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands
Indicted, or, Not Guilty. If you find him Guilty, You are to Inquire what Goods
and Chattels, Lands, and Tenements he had at the Time of the High Treason
Committed, or at any Time since. If you find him Not Guilty, you are to
Inquire, Whether he fled for it; If you find he fled for it, you are to Inquire
of his Goods and Chattels, as if you had found him Guilty: If you find him not
Guilty, nor that he fled for it, you are to say so, and no more, and hear your
Evidence.


Mr. Mountague, King's Counsel. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen
of the Jury; This is an Indictment of High Treason brought against the Prisoner
at the Bar, Sir John Friend, for associating himself with, and aiding of the
King's Enemies, for procuring an Invasion from France, in order to depose his
Majesty King William: and in order to effect these his wicked and traitorous
Purposes, the Indictment sets forth, that the Prisoner at the Bar, Sir John
Friend, upon the first of July last did meet and agree with my Lord Ailesbury,
my Lord Montgomery, Mr. Chernock, Sir William Parkins, Sir John Fenwick, and
Coke; and there they did agree among themselves how they should procure an Army
from France to come and invade this Kingdom; and that they would raise a
considerable Number of Men to facilitate the Landing of the French Forces. The
Indictment charges the Prisoner in particular with agreeing to send Mr.
Chernock as a Messenger to the late King James, to inform him of this their
Design, and also for the obtaining and procuring a Commission from the late
King James, to constitute him a Colonel of Horse for the raising of a Regiment,
to procure the said Forces. It does charge him likewise with laying out and
expending several Sums, in listing and keeping several Men in a Readiness to be
Soldiers in his Regiment, and for buying several Arms and Horses to be made
use of in this intended Rebellion. The Prisoner to this has pleaded not
Guilty. We will produce our Witnesses, and we doubt not you will see Cause to
find him Guilty.


Silence being proclaimed, the King's Attorney General opened the Indictment
thus.

Mr. Attorney General, Sir Tho. Trevor. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
the Prisoner at the Bar, Sir John Friend Knight, stands Indicted of High
Treason, for Compassing and Imagining the Death and Destruction of the King,
and likewise for adhering to the King's Enemies. Gentlemen, the Overt-Acts laid
in this Indictment for the proving the Treason, are, That the Prisoner did
accept of a Commission from the late King James for raising a Regiment of Horse
in this Kingdom, in order to join with the French Forces when they should
invade it; and that there were several Meetings and Consultations between him
and several other Persons, in which it was resolved to send a Messenger, (viz.)
Mr. Chernock, into France, to desire of the late King James that he would
prevail with the French King to send a Number of Men from France to come over
and to invade this Kingdom; and to assure him that he with others would be
assisting upon the said Invasion, with a good Number of Men and Horses, when
they came; and that he did accordingly raise Men, and provide several Arms;
that he listed the Men, and had them in Readiness, to join with the French
Forces when the Invasion should be. These are the Overt Acts laid in the
Indictment; the Evidence to be produced to prove the Treason and Overt-Acts,
will be in this manner.

Gentlemen, you will see by the Evidence that there has been a Design and
Conspiracy on foot for several Years to Assassinate the King's Person, and to
have an Invasion from France at that time by an Armed Force here to subdue this
Kingdom. The Prisoner at the Bar about two Years ago had a Commission sent him
from the late King James to raise a Regiment of Horse, which he accepted of:
there were several other Commissions likewise sent to the Prisoner, and he did
in pursuance thereof appoint his several Officers, and listed several Men for
that purpose, and expended several Sums of Money for the retaining of them.
That his Lieut. Colonel was to be one Brice Blair, and for his Major one
Sclater: this Sclater, it seems, his Father had been a Clergyman, and he did
engage to bring in Men into his Troop that were Clergymen, who refused to take
the Oaths; one of his Captains was to be one Everard, another was to be one
Richardson, with several other Officers which he had engaged in the Design,
with which he had appointed to make up his Regiment.

Gentlemen, you will hear further by the Witnesses that about May or June last,
they having raised a considerable Number of Men that were ready here, there
were several Meetings that were had between the Prisoner at the Bar, and
several other Persons, in order to send one over, in order to procure Force
from France to invade this Kingdom. The first Meeting you will hear of, was at
the Old King's Head Tavern in Leadenhall-street; there were present the
Prisoner at the Bar, my Lord Ailesbury, my Lord Montgomery, (...) Pelling, Sir
John Fenwick, Charnock, (who was lately executed) Porter, and one Cook, at that
Meeting. You shall hear what the Debates were, and what was the Resolution, and
that was to send over Charnock: several Debates there were among them who to
send; at last it was resolved to send over Charnock to France to propose to the
late King James their Design, and to desire of him to prevail with the French
King to furnish and send 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000 Dragoons; and
empowered him to assure the late King James, that whenever he should land
with those Forces, they would be ready to join him, and assist him with near
2000 Horse; among them they undertook to do so much: accordingly this Charnock
did undertake to go upon this Message: About a Week after they were to meet
again, for Charnock was unwilling to go on such an Errand, without having an
Assurance from them that they still continued in their Resolution taken up, for
acquainting King James what they would do; and about a Week after they met at
Mrs. Montjoy's a Tavern, where were the Prisoner at the Bar, with those of the
same Company as before; and Mr. Charnock did desire to know of them whether
they did still agree to what had been proposed and resolved on before, that so
he might not go on this Errand, without very good Assurance that they did all
agree to assure the late King James that they would assist him upon his
Landing* if they had but notice of his Landing, when and where he would land;
and withal, they desired that he would make haste. And observe, Gentlemen, the
time of this Meeting was May or June last, as soon as the King was gone to
Flanders; and they thought this a very fit Opportunity when the King was gone,
and the Forces drawn out of England to Flanders, and very few Forces in
England, and therefore a very proper Reason for the Invasion to be made. Mr.
Charnock went over accordingly to France, and about a Month after returned
again, and told them that he had acquainted the late King James with the
Resolution that had been taken here, and that the late King James told him that
he thanked them for their Readiness to assist him; but that at that time the
French King could not spare any Men, so that at that time their Design could
not be accomplished; therefore it was respited till last Winter, and last
Winter you will hear their Design was renewed again; and about January last,
Sir George Berclay came over from France with several Troopers, pretending to
be discharged; and they entered into a Conspiracy to Assassinate the King, and
to prepare for an Invasion; that was to be done first, to facilitate the
Invasion, which was immediately to follow upon it; and they thought they should
not have a good Assurance of Success so long as the King lived: and I hope
every Body will take notice how precious that Life is to be accounted of by us
when the Success of their Conspiracy depended upon the taking that Life away.

Gentlemen, you will hear this Design of Assassinating the King, the Prisoner
at the Bar was acquainted with, but did not approve of it, for he thought it
would be a Disservice to the late King James's Affairs; but he was at the
Meeting with those Conspirators, Charnock and Berclay, and others, and got
acquainted with it, as you will hear.

You will hear further, that about January last, when the Invasion was intended
to be made, the Prisoner had frequent Meetings with this Blair his Lieut.
Colonel, and other his Officers, to consider how to prepare and be in a
Readiness; at that time Blair, and the Prisoner, and Captain Richardson met at
a Place in Exchange-Alley, and there were Discourses among them; and Blair said
there was a very considerable Roman Catholic sent over to the late King James,
and he would bring the last Orders from him; and Sir John Friend said, he knew
very well of it that it was so, that he should have these Orders quickly. At
another time this Blair and the Prisoner Sir John Friend, met at Jonathan's
Coffee-house, and from thence he took him in his Coach along with him, and
there they had great Consultations about the Affairs of his Regiment: and the
Prisoner told him, that they must be good Husbands of their Money, for if this
Invasion should miscarry, he should not have Money enough to carry on his
Trade: That he would take care to mount many Officers that could do it
themselves, but many of them could not do it at their own Charge; and those who
could not do it, he would take care to do it for them. They had then a
Discourse of the Thoulon-Fleet coming about, and that it was thought proper not
to stir nor make any Appearance till the Thoulon-Fleet came about: And the
Prisoner said, he would not put his Foot into the Stirrup till then, but would
keep it private, lest they should be seized; and that he would skulk about till
every thing was in a Readiness, and advised Blair to do so too. And you will
hear it further proved, That about May last the Prisoner did pay 20 l. to this
Blair, to reimburse him what Money he had laid out on the Affairs of his
Regiment; and it was in this manner, They had all heard that Parker was in the
Tower for High Treason, and that he had made his Escape, to which the Prisoner
at the Bar was privy, and that it had cost 300 l. and that the Prisoner had
laid down an hundred Pounds of it; but this was paid in order to be paid him
again, and was assured by one Johnson a Priest, that he would see him paid, and
accordingly one Piggott went over to France, and that Piggott had the 100 l.
paid him again by the late King James, to repay Sir John Friend; but when he
came back, Piggott thought fit to keep it, and Sir John Friend durst not ask
him for it, because of the Advantage the other might take upon him, so did not
dare insist upon it. But when Blair pressed him for Money that he had laid out
upon the Regiment, he told him that this Piggott had received an hundred
Pounds, which he had laid down upon the account of Parker, and that he ought to
pay it him, but had refused so to do; and therefore, says he, if you will
prevail with this Johnson the Priest, who was obliged to see me paid, to get
this 100 Pound paid me accordingly; you shall have 20 of the 100 Pound: and
thereupon Blair did prevail with Johnson to assist in the getting this 100
Pound from Piggott, and then the 20 Pound was paid to Blair by Piggott, at the
Desire of Sir John Friend, and upon the Solicitation of Johnson. These Sums you
will find were paid by Sir John Friend to Capt. Blair, who was his Lieut.
Colonel, and to whom he entrusted the Management of the Regiment in great
measure.

Gentlemen, I have opened to you the Substance of the Evidence against the
Prisoner, and I hope you will take care to observe from the Evidence to rectify
any Mistake of mine.


Mr. Solicitor General. Mr. Attorney has opened all this Matter very fully to
you, and we will call our Witnesses to prove the Matter in the manner that has
been opened. Call Mr. Porter.


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, before Capt. Porter is sworn, I desire to know whether
he be a Roman Catholic or a Protestant.


L. C. J. H. Why do you desire to know that?


Sir J. Friend. I beg your Lordship's Pardon, I desire to know whether he be a
Roman Catholic or a Protestant.


L. C. J. H. If he be a Roman Catholic, it is no Objection against his
Evidence: Is not a Roman Catholic a good Evidence?


Sir J. Friend. I desire to know whether he be a Roman Catholic or no? A Man
ought to know. Pray my Lord --.


L. C. J. H. Will you ask him, whether he be a Christian?


Sir J. Friend. I desire to know whether he be a Roman Catholic or a
Protestant?


L. C. J. H. It is not a proper Question.


Sir J. Friend. Pray my Lord, I beg your Lordship, I beg that Favor.


Mr. Sol. Genesis The Answer to that Question is to accuse himself.


L. C. J. H. The Question is, whether it be your Right or no to know that?


Sir J. Friend. I desire to know that, for I would not do any thing that might
offend the Court in the least.


L. C. J. H. The Question is improper in it self, and an improper time to move
it.


Sir J. Friend. I beseech your Lordship --.


L. C. J. H. The Question (I say) is improper in it self, and an improper time
to move it, I cannot see you have a Right to ask it: If Capt. Porter will answer
it, it must be voluntary.


Sir J. Friend. As you are a Gentleman, I desire to know, Mr. Porter, whether
you are a Roman Catholic.


Mr. Porter. I am not bound to accuse my self, I am a Witness.


L. C. J. H. I told you the Question was improper; you shall have Right done
you: But if he be a Roman Catholic, he is a good Witness; his Religion and
being a Roman Catholic may subject him to several Penalties, and make him
liable to be prosecuted by several Acts of Parliament; and no Man is to answer
any Question that may endanger him coming under the Penalty of any Law, or to
accuse himself.


Sir J. Friend. I do with Submission desire it, it is no great Matter for him
to say whether he be a Papist or a Protestant.


L. C. J. H. If so, you need not ask it.


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, I beg your Lordship, I beg it.


L. C. J. H. You have my Opinion, and I think the Question is not to be
answered.


L. C. J. Treby. It is his Lordship's Pleasure that I do deliver my Opinion;
and it is, that no Man is bound to answer a Question that tends to subject him
to the Penalty of any Law. If you ask him whether he be a Deer-stealer, or a
Vagabond, or guilty of Petit-larcenary, the Law will not force a Man to
discover it against himself. Now for the purpose, whether he be a Popish
Recusant, if he were not trained up in that Religion, it is to ask him to
accuse himself of as great a Crime as you stand charged for: But if it were
only that he were a Roman Catholic, there are very great Penalties and
Forfeitures that he is liable to in his Estate, and perhaps without his
Confession cannot otherwise be proved against him. We must keep the Law even and
steady between the Prisoner and the Witness. By the Law he is not bound to
discover.


Mr. Justice Nevill. I am of Opinion, his Confession that he is a Roman
Catholic does subject him to a Penalty; and unless he does voluntarily answer
of himself, he is not bound to make Answer and accuse himself.


Mr. Justice Rokesby. I am of Opinion, it is not a Question that can, of Right,
be imposed upon him as necessary to be answered: he may if he will answer it,
but he is under no Obligation, for his Confession does subject him to Crimes
for which he may be prosecuted.


Cl. Cr. Swear Mr. Porter.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Mr. Porter, do you know Sir John Friend?


Mr. Porter. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you give an Account to the Court what you know of him about
the Invasion.


Mr. Porter. About the latter end of May last, or the beginning of June, we had
two Meetings, one at the Old King's head in Leadenhall-street, and one at Mrs.
Montjoys: there were present at it my Lord Ailesbury, my Lord Montgomery, Sir
John Friend, Sir William Parkins, Mr. Chernock, Sir John Fenwick, my self, and
one Cook, I don't know his Christian Name: After Dinner Mr. Goodman came in. At
both these Meetings it was consulted and agreed, to send Mr. Chernock over to
France, to invite the late King James to come over to England, and to prevail
with the French King to furnish him with 10000 Men, viz. 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse,
and 1000 Dragoons. Mr. Chernock made this Reply, I don't care to go on a
foolish Message, and therefore let me know what you promise to do. Whereupon
all of them did promise, that every one would endeavor to come in to assist at
the Invasion with a Body of 2000 Horse, wherever he would appoint. That
Meeting was upon a Monday. -- We had two Meetings.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You say there were two Meetings, pray how long afterward was it
before you had the second Meeting? What, was the second Meeting to confirm the
first?


Mr. Porter. Chernock did tell me, he was to go in 2 or 3 Days after the second
Meeting.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What was the Occasion of the second Meeting.


Mr. Porter. Chernock did desire that we might meet, that he might see if we
were all agreed in our Resolution.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What do you know of a Commission for Sir John Friend to raise a
Regiment of Horse?


Mr. Porter. I know nothing of it, but as I did hear from Peoples Talk: I did
hear him say, he would be as ready as any Man, when the time came; but I did
hear from Mr. Chernock, and Sir William Parkins, that he had a Commission.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But was the Prisoner at the Bar present at the second Meeting?


Mr. Porter. He was at the second Meeting.


L. C. J. H. But what were their Names? those who were present at the second
Meeting, Mr. Porter.


Mr. Porter. I was at the second Meeting, the Prisoner at the Bar was there; I
cannot tell whether Montgomery or Goodman were there, but the Prisoner at the
Bar was there at both Meetings.


L. C. J. H. Pray remember and recollect your self: Who was there at the first
Meeting?


Mr. Porter. Would you have me name them, my Lord? -- There was my Lord
Aylsbury, and my Lord Montgomery, Sir John Friend, Sir William Perkins, Sir
John Fenwick, Mr. Charnock, Mr. Cook, and my self: we Dined there, and after
Dinner Goodman came in.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Mr. Porter, When saw you Charnock afterward?


Mr. Porter. I never saw him 'till three or four Days after I was taken about
the Riot, and he told me he had been in France, and that he had spoken with the
Late King James; who told him that the French King could not spare so many Men
that year. And that he had been with my Lord Aylsbury, my Lord Montgomery, Sir
John Friend, etc. with that Message from the Late King; so he told me.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray give an account what Meetings Sir John Friend has been at
last Winter?


Mr. Porter. At the Nagg's-Head-Tavern in James's- Street. I was another time
with Sir George Berclay, and Sir John Friend; I cannot tell what Discourse they
had, for they whispered together; there were no public Discourses that I
heard. There were Sir George Berclay, Sir William Perkins, my self, Mr.
Ferguson, and one Homes, at the Naggs-Head in James's- Street.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Was there any body else there?


Mr. Porter. Mr. Charnock came in after Dinner, and one Harrison.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What is he?


Mr. Porter. He is reputed a Roman Priest.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What was that Meeting for?


Mr. Porter. I don't know what that Meeting was for.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What did you Discourse of?


Mr. Porter. There were several Whisperings in the Room, but I know not what
they were about. One time Sir George Berclay told me, that some People, not so
violent, wrote over to King James to stop this Business; then you will have no
Letters to Night, said Sir John Friend. If any thing be hid from me behind the
Curtain, I am not fairly dealt withal, and I will proceed no further.


L. C. J. H. Mr. Porter, I will ask you this Question; Did all that were
present at the first Meeting at the King's- Head in Leaden-Hall-Street, agree
to send Charnock to the Late King James into France at the second Meeting?


Mr. Porter. Yes, my Lord, all of us did at the second Meeting. We desired Mr.
Charnock to assure for us to the Late King James, that we would all meet him at
his Landing, at the head of 2000 Horse.


L. C. J. H. Did Sir John Friend agree to it?


Mr. Porter. Yes, my Lord, positively at the second Meeting at James's- street.


L. C. J. H. What was said there?


Mr. Porter. My Lord, we did all agree that Captain Charnock should go over
with that Message we agreed on at the first Meeting; and he was to go over in
two or three days.


Sir J. Friend. I would ask him if he has done, and has no more to say?


Mr. Porter. I have no more to say.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Now call Blair.


L. C. J. H. What Answer did Charnock bring back?


Mr. Porter. He told me the French King could not spare so many Men that year.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Swear Blair.
Do you know the Prisoner at the Bar?

Mr. Blair. I am sorry to come on this account, Sir John, with all my heart.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Give an account Mr. Blair of what you know of Sir John
Friend's Commission to raise Forces, and what was done upon the whole matter;
turn your face that way, and the Jury will hear you the better.


Mr. Blair. All is true what I writ in my Papers.


Mr. Soll. Genesis All is true! you must tell now what you know.


Mr. Blair. I saw the Commission, and I read it.


L. C. J. H. What Commission was it?


Mr. Blair. It was a Commission from King James, to Sir John Friend.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray did you see it?


Mr. Blair. I saw it at his Lodging in the Strand.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Whose Lodgings?


Mr. Blair. At his Lodgings in the Strand, in Surry-Street.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Who showed you the Commission?


Mr. Blair. He showed it me himself.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What was it for?


Mr. Blair. For Raising a Regiment of Horse for the King's Service.


Mr. Attor. Genesis How long ago?


Mr. Blair. It is very near a year ago, or there abouts.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Who was to be Colonel of the Regiment?


Mr. Blair. He was nominated Colonel himself.


L. C. J. H. Who was the Commission to?


Mr. Blair. To Sir John Friend.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray give account what was done upon it, and what Officers he
did appoint?


Mr. Blair. He promised to make me Lieutenant Colonel.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What other Officers?


Mr. Blair. Sir John told me one Richardson was to be one of his Captains, and
I brought one Fisher to him, and he was to be one of his Eldest Captains.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Who else was the other Officer, can you remember?


Mr. Blair. One Captain Evans told me he was to be Captain Lieutenant, and one
Vernatti was to be a Captain.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Do you remember who was to be his Major?


Mr. Blair. I think he was not positive himself who should be his Major; but
afterward I spoke with Captain Barnesley, who had been a Lieutenant in King
James's Service, a Lieutenant of Horse; sometimes he accepted of it, and
sometimes he refused it.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What did you do as Lieutenant Colonel?


Mr. Blair. I endeavored all I could to get Officers for him, who would bring
in Troopers.


Mr. Attor. Genesis You must speak out.


Mr. Blair. I endeavor it, I am so ill I cannot; I endeavored all I could to
get Officers for him that could raise Troopers, and I endeavored to get what
Men I could get my self.


Mr. Attor. Genesis And what did you get, what Officers did you procure for him?


Mr. Blair. I have told you.


Mr. Attor. Genesis One Vernatti, Fisher, and one Mr. Hall a Merchant at Deal.


Mr. Blair. All is down in my Papers.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray Sir, what Troopers? did you engage any Persons to be
Troopers?


Mr. Blair. I my self? Sir, yes, Sir.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Can you name any of them?


Mr. Blair. Yes, in my Papers.


Mr. Attor. Genesis If you have any Papers about you, you may use them to refresh
your Memory.


Mr. Blair. I have none, but all is down in my Papers that I Signed before the
Council. Bertram was to be my Lieutenant.


Mr. Montague. You say you were constituted a Lieutenant Colonel; who made you
so?


Mr. Blair. I had only the Promise of Sir John Friend.


Mr. Attor. Genesis But did you lay out any money? or did Sir John Friend pay you
any money for this Service? Pray give an account of it.


Mr. Blair. Yes, I had several small Sums of money of him.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What was it for?


Mr. Blair. It was to encourage, and drink with the Men to encourage them.


Mr. Attor. Genesis But did Piggot pay you any Money, and by whose Order?


Mr. Blair. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray give an account of that.


Mr. Blair. He paid me first twenty Pound, and then twenty Pound more.


Mr. Attor. Genesis By whose Order?


Mr. Blair. By Sir John Friend's Order.


Mr. Attor. Genesis How do you know Sir John Friend ordered him to pay you?


Mr. Blair. Because it was on account of Money he had once parted with to
facilitate Parker's Escape out of the Tower.


Mr. Attor. Genesis How do you know Sir John Friend advanced any Money toward that
Escape?


Mr. Blair. He told me so himself.


Mr. Attor. Genesis How much?


Mr. Blair. A Hundred Pound.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What did he say of that 100 Pound, how he was to be paid it
again?


Mr. Blair. He told me King James had ordered the payment of it in France, at
St. Germains, when Piggot went over, and that I think he went over immediately
afterward, that he did receive it, and when he came over, he refused to pay it
him, and so he never had it, but only that 40 Pound as I can learn.


Mr. Attor. Genesis How much?


Mr. Blair. That 20. and 20 Pound more.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Did Sir John Friend tell you so?


Mr. Blair. Yes, that he had received 100 Pound, but he would not pay it him;
but if I could get so much Money of him, he would allow it me out of that
hundred Pound.


Mr. Attor. Genesis When was the first 20 Pound paid, about what time?


Mr. Blair. I set it down in my Papers.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Cannot you tell what time it was, last Summer, or Winter?


Mr. Blair. It was about the last of May, or June.


Mr. Soll. Genesis That was the first 20 Pound, when was the last 20 Pound paid?


Mr. Blair. The last 20 Pound was paid when I was Sick, after Michaelmas.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Who was by when the last 20 Pound was paid?


Mr. Blair. Mr. Piggot paid me five Pounds: I had it at several Payments, at
Jonathan's Coffee-House; five Pounds of it the last of the twenty Pound, the
other at two or three Payments besides.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Do you know any thing of Sir John Friend's receiving a Letter
from the Late King James?


Mr. Blair. Yes, he told me he had.


Mr. Attor. Genesis When was it?


Mr. Blair. Truly Sir I cannot tell you that.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Was it within twelve Months past?


Mr. Blair. Yes, I believe it was.


Sir J. Friend. I cannot hear half what he says.


Mr. Blair. Sir John, You told me you received a Letter from the Late K. James.


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, I cannot hear what he says.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Had you at any time any Discourse with Sir John Friend about
Colonel Sclater?


Mr. Blair. Yes, he told me Sclater was to bring in ten Horses, and that he
designed to make him Lieutenant Colonel. He said he would have two Lieutenant
Colonels in his Regiment; and when I was not satisfied with that, Sir John
Friend told me that he should be Captain of a Troop of Non-swearing Parsons,
for he believed he should have a Troop of them, and they should be Independent.


L. C. J. H. Who was to Command that Troop?


Mr. Blair. Colonel Sclater was to Command that Troop.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You say Sclater was to Command a Troop of Non-swearing Parsons.
You say Sir J. Friend and you met at Jonathan's Coffee-House.


Mr. Blair. Yes, Sir, several times I met him there.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What Discourse had you there?


Mr. Blair. I called him aside to speak to him, and it was when Mr. Fisher was
there.


L. C. J. H. Turn your Face that way.


Mr. Blair. I called him out and desired to speak with him, a little before the
Horrid Conspiracy broke out, and told him what I heard from Fisher about the
Discovery; and Harrison the Priest and he told me they had heard of it, and
were afraid it would ruin King James in his Affairs.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What was that Conspiracy?


Mr. Blair. This last Horrid Assassination.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Was it the Conspiracy against the King's Life, and seizing the
King? Was it before it broke out that he told you so?


Mr. Blair. Yes, Sir, before it broke out; and very shortly before it broke out.


Mr. Attor. Genesis You say you met Sir John Friend, and he took you into his
Coach?


Mr. Blair. Yes, he took me in his Coach to St. Martins le Grand, and said, He
would do nothing till the Thoulon Fleet met the Breast Fleet; and by that time,
says he, we shall be all taken up, and you may skulk about the Town better than
I: You must be a very good Husband of your Money, for Money will be very
scarce: What do you think will mount you, said he? I cannot tell, said I; that
is according as I am mounted. I will mount, said he, but few indigent Officers.
That was the most material that past at that time.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What was you to do when you were to skulk about?


Mr. Blair. There is the Letter from Sir John Friend for the last 20 Pound.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Is that his own Hand?


Mr. Blair. I think so.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What have you heard Sir Joh. Friend speak about Sir Joh.
Fenwick?


Mr. Blair. I have heard him say, He believed he should command the Regiment he
was engaged in, and that Sir John Fenwick had Four Troops of Horse in a
readiness.


Mr. Attor. Genesis For what purpose were these Four Troops to be in a readiness?


Mr. Blair. For the Descent.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Is that Sir John Friend's Hand?


Mr. Blair. I suppose so, Sir.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Have you seen him write?


Mr. Blair. Yes, Sir, I think it is a little like it.


Jury-man. Ask him, if he saw him write the Letter.


L. C. J. H. Did you see him write it?


Mr. Blair. No.


L. C. J. H. He does not say so.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Did he ever afterward tell you that he had writ such a Letter?


Mr. Blair. Yes, Sir.


L. C. J. H. Read the Letter.


Then the Letter was read, which was to this purpose:

Mr. Blair, Tuesday Morning.
Sir, You may much wonder you have not received an Answer of yours before: I
have been afflicted with the Gout in my Hands and Feet, that I have not been
able to put Pen to Paper. I thank God I am now something better. I hope to be
in London on Thursday next about Twelve at Jonathan's Coffee-House, if the
Weather don't prevent me; if not, I shall not come till Monday morning. I
desire you to meet me at that Hour; for it is not convenient to write a Jot
more, for some Reason I can give you. I am your affectionate Friend,

John Friend.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Did Sir John meet you at that time?


Mr. Blair. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Attor. Genesis How did that Letter come to your Hand?


Mr. Blair. I believe there came one with it when I was a-bed to the Door of my
Lodgings; my Wife brought it up to me; and I do not know of any other way.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Did Sir John Friend afterward meet with you at Jonathan's
Coffee-House?


Mr. Blair. He did not speak a Word of the Business.


Mr. Attor. Genesis But did he meet with you?


Mr. Blair. Yes, Sir; and accordingly I had the Order for 20 Pound.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Do you remember you Dined with Sir John Friend near the
Exchange in January last?


Mr. Blair. Yes, I think I did.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray what Discourse passed between you and him then? Who were
then at Dinner besides Sir John Friend and you?


Mr. Blair. That I must refer to my Papers.


Mr. At. Genesis If you can remember what discourse past between Sir John Friend
and you.


Mr. Blair. It is down in my Papers; I am sure it is.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know Capt. Ridley? Was he with you any time when the
Prisoner was there?


L. C. J. H. Silence in the Court: It is a strange thing. Pray Gentlemen keep
silence.


Sir J. Friend. I cannot hear one word.


L. C. J. H. He speaks of a Letter that you sent to him, that bears Date on
some Tuesday, that you would be in Town, and meet him some Thursday following
at Twelve a Clock: Did you hear that? And he me met you accordingly, and there
was order taken for the last 20 l. that was paid him: Did you hear that?


Sir J. Friend. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. H. Go on; You say you met at the Coffee-House: What was done between
you and him?


Mr. Blair. Nothing but the Order.


L. C. J. H. Who did he give the Order to?


Mr. At. Genesis Was Harrison there then?


Mr. Blair. Yes, He came before I came away.


L. C. J. H. And did Sir John Friend give you the Order?


Mr. Blair. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the Order?


Mr. Blair. To pay that Money.


Mr. At. Genesis How much was the Money?


Mr. Blair. Twenty Pounds.


Mr. At. Genesis And was it paid afterward?


Mr. Blair. Yes Sir, all paid.


Mr. At. Genesis Who paid it?


Mr. Blair. Mr. Piggott came in afterward, and paid me 5 l. before Sir John.


L. C. J. H. Was this the first 20 l. or the last?


Mr. Blair. No, the last.


L. C. J. H. What was this Money paid to you for?


Mr. Blair. I believe to support Men to go on about the Business.


L. C. J. H. You believe so?


Mr: Blair. Yes, I am sure it was so.


L. C. J. H. Did you ever demand any Money before?


Mr. Blair. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. H. For what?


Mr. Blair. I demanded it for Drink for the Men I was to bring in, to cherish
them, and keep them together.


Mr. Just. Rokeby. To what purpose was you to drink with them, and cherish
them? bring them into the Regiment?


Mr. Soll. Genesis Had Sir John Friend any occasion to pay you any Money upon any
other account, but that 100 l.?


Mr. Blair. Not that I know of.


Mr. Soll. Genesis You don't understand the Question. Had you any other dealing
with Sir John Friend but concerning the Regiment, upon the account of which Sir
John owed you any Money?


Mr. Blair. No, never in my life.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember any Meeting between Sir John and you, when Capt.
Ridley was present?


Mr. Blair. Yes, I remember it was at a Chopp-House.


Mr. At. Genesis What Discourse had you then?


Mr. Blair. He said --


Mr. At. Genesis Who said?


Mr. Blair. Ridley, That there was a Gentleman lately gone over to France about
ten days before, and that he was a very sensible Man, and a Roman Catholic,
about sixty Years old; what he was I cannot tell, naming no Man.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he go for?


Mr. Blair. He said he believed he went to receive the last Orders.


Mr. At. Genesis What did Sir John Friend say on that?


Mr. Blair. Sir John Friend said he knew not, and said no more.


Mr. At. Genesis What were the Effects of that Order?


Mr. Blair. The Lord knows, I know not.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you know Mr. Charnock?


Mr. Blair. Yes, I knew him, and met him accidentally last Summer, and did not
think to see him so soon; he told me he was come from France; but who sent him,
I don't know upon my Life.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray have you heard what Sir John Friend said of Mr. Ferguson;
was he to be an Officer?


Mr. Blair. I don't know that. Sir John Friend told me he would Join him.


Mr. At. Genesis Did Sir John Friend tell you so?


Mr. Blair. Yes Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis When did Sir John Friend tell you so?


Mr. Blair. A good while ago, two Years ago and above Sir, as near as I can
remember.


Mr. At. Genesis Did Sir John Friend tell you of Ferguson's bringing in any Men?


Mr. Blair. Yes Sir, he said he would bring in a great many.


L. C. J. H. Sir John Friend, will you ask this Witness any Questions?


Sir J. Friend. If they have done with him.


L. C. J. H. The King's Council have done with him.


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, as to a Commission, Does he charge me with a
Commission from K. James?


Mr. Blair. Yes, Sir.


Sir J. Friend. I desire to know if it were Signed or Sealed, or what Date it
was, whether 2 or 3 Years, or 5 Years, or when it was?


Mr. Blair. I cannot tell indeed Sir John.


Sir J. Friend. But what Date was this Commission?


Mr. Blair. I cannot tell, but it was in Paper, Signed above, James Rex; and
below, by his Majesty's Command, Melford; and there was a little Seal on the
Margin.


Sir J. Friend. It is the hardest thing in the World, you have charged me with:
You were recommended to me for a very honest Gentleman; you have often writ to
me, Sir, my necessities are very great: You have sent to me several times, Sir
it is a very dead time, I am ready to Starve, for the Lord's sake let me have a
little Money: I never gave him any but for Charity, God knows my Heart. I desire
to know if you have not done this? Pray Sir answer me to that: There is a God
you must give an account to as well as I; Answer me if you have not writ these
Lines to me?


Mr. Blair. I have done this, Sir John.


Sir J. Friend. -- and whether the Money I gave you, was not on mere Charity?


Mr. Blair. Ay Sir, But I had expended so much Money on your Business, that it
had reduced me to that Condition. God knows it cost me many a Pound to do your
Business, more than I had of you.


Sir J. Friend. You were pleased to say, you Listed a great many Persons for
me: Who were they, and what were their Names?


Mr. Blair. I gave a List into the Council.


Sir J. Friend. I know nothing of that.


Mr. Blair. I brought several Officers to you Sir. I told him I brought in
several Officers to him, and made him acquainted with them.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell him as many as you can name.


Mr. Blair. I have named the Officers already.


Mr. At. Genesis Name them again, Recollect your Memory.


Mr. Blair. Did not I bring Capt. Fisher to you, with a promise that he should
be Eldest Captain?


Sir J. Friend. No Sir, You never brought Fisher to me.


Mr. At. Genesis These are Questions of your asking, which he Answers.


Mr. Blair. I brought Fisher to you, and accordingly you dined at Capt.
Symonds, and there was Capt. Ridley, Richardson, and Fisher, and in my own
hearing you Listed Fisher, and promised him he should be your eldest Captain,
on condition he would bring in a Troop. This is true; and Fisher promised
accordingly.


Sir J. Friend. Who were the Men you Listed?


Mr. Blair. I never spoke of Listing, only of Encouraging.


Sir J. Friend. Did not you speak of Listing a great many Men?


Mr. Blair. No, only of Encouraging; I did not speak of Lifting, I hope my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell him what you did say.


Mr. Blair. I said, I had Money from you for Encouraging those that were Listed;
and you told me it was impossible to do it but we must have Money now and then,
and we must be good Husbands, you told me, Sir John. Did not I bring you Mr.
Cole that Lives at Deal? Did not his Brother-in-law Mr. Robinson and Mr.
Gillibrand Dine there? Did not we Dine with you?


Sir J. Friend. I know nothing of that, I do declare.


Mr. Blair. My Lord, I brought these 3 Gentlemen to him, and we Dined together.


Jury-Man Where did you Dine?


Mr. Blair. We Dined at Hackney, when Sir John Friend Lived at Hackney at his
own House.


Sir J. Friend. When was it?


Mr. Blair. Above a Year ago or thereabouts, as near as I can remember. And do
you not remember Sir John (if you do not dash me out of Countenance; I
endeavor to speak nothing but Truth, So help me God) we were merry over a
Glass of Wine? Cole was your Mothers name; and did not you promise him to make
him next Man after the Commissioners in the Excise? And said I, Sir John what
will you give me? O, says he, you are to have the Regiment. And this was before
Mr. Cole and Mr. Robinson his Brother-in-law, and Mr. Gillibrand now at Deal.


L. C. J. H. Was Cole to be any thing in the Regiment?


Mr. Blair. He was to be a Captain my Lord, and to bring in a Troop. I am sick
and weak my Lord, and cannot speak out.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any more Questions?


Sir J. Friend. My Lord I do not remember half.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember any Discourse, -- Nay do not speak to the Jury.


Sir J. Friend. I must depend upon the Jury, I have not heard half what he
says, I hope the Jury have taken care of it.


L. C. J. H. It has been repeated what you complained of; but will you ask him
about the Letter?


Sir J. Friend. Was it my Letter?


Mr. Blair. Yes.


Sir J. Friend. How came it to your hand?


Mr. Blair. By a Porter, I think my Wife brought it to me.


Sir J. Friend. What was it for?


Mr. Blair. In order to pay the last twenty Pounds; and now I am sure it was,
it comes into my mind.


Sir J. Friend. You say you saw me write a Letter to King James.


L. C. J. H. Who showed you that Letter? You say he wrote to King James, Who
showed it you?


Mr. Blair. He showed it me himself.


L. C. J. H. When was it?


Mr. Blair. About a Year ago.


Mr. At. Genesis And did he say he had an Answer to it?


Jury-Man. You said you saw him write a Letter.


Mr. Blair. No, I say I saw a Letter.


L. C. J. H. What would you have him asked? What Questions you would have him
asked propose to the Court. Did you see him write that Letter?


Mr. Blair. No, he showed me a Letter, he said he wrote to King James: And I
remember a passage to confirm it, at Pigott's Mothers House; I Dined with him
and some others that day, and I told him I was so well pleased with the Penning
of it that I told him I believed Ferguson had a Hand in it; at which he was
very angry, and has not been my Friend ever since.


L. C. J. H. Can you remember any of the Contents of the Letter?


Mr. Blair. Really, My Lord, I am very apt to fail of that; but it was about
Business of the King and about his Regiment, and that affair I am positive of,
if I were now to Die.


Mr. At. Genesis I would not have the Jury go away with a mistake, the Jury-Man
said he saw him write a Letter.


Mr. Blair. No, no.


Jury. That was the occasion of asking the Question: When was that Letter?


Sir J. Friend. When was that Letter writ?


Mr. Blair. About a Year and half ago.


Sir J. Friend. I declare in the Presence of God, I never wrote one.


Mr. At. Genesis Do not mistake, Sir John; he said you showed him a Letter that
you said you wrote.


Mr. Blair. I declare in the Presence of God, I saw that Letter.


Sir J. Friend. Do not do any thing unseemly, -- But when a Person charges me
with writting a Letter --


L. C. J. H. He said you showed him a Letter that you said you had writ to King
James, and that it was so well writ that he believed Ferguson had a Hand in it,
and he thought you took offense at it.


Sir J. Friend. In the Presence of God, my Lord, I did not. I have no Witness.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you any other Questions to ask him?


Sir J. Friend. No.


Mr. Common Serj. Let him sit down, and not go out of the Court.


Sir John Friend speaks to the Jury.

Mr. Sheriff. Speak to the Court.


L. C. J. H. You speak so low that the Court cannot hear you, speak so as the
Court may hear you.


Sir J. Friend. I shall, my Lord: He is a Roman Catholic, and I hope to have a
Witness that he is so; Will that be heard?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir stay till we have done with our Evidence. Bertram: Call
Mr. Bertram, give him his Oath. Do you know Mr. Blair?


Mr. Bertram. Yes Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis How long have you known him?


Mr. Bertram. This 8 or 9 Years.


Mr. At. Genesis What Discourse have you had with him about any Regiment?


Mr. Bertram. Capt. Blair has told me for these two Years almost last past,
that Sir John Friend was to have a Regiment of Horse raised about Town, and
that he was to be Lieut. Colonel, and that I was to be Lieutenant under Capt.
Blair in the Regiment; and he Obliged me to bring in as many Men and Horses as
I could into this Regiment: And he told me one Capt. Fisher, and one Vernatty,
and one Cole were to be Captains in this Regiment.


L. C. J. H. What were you to be?


Mr. Bertram. A Lieutenant, Sir.


L. C. J. H. To whom?


Mr. Bertram. To Capt. Blair: And Capt. Blair told me several times, that he
had Letters from beyond Sea relating to that purpose.


L. C. J. H. This is no Evidence against Sir John Friend; but he is called to
confirm the Evidence of Mr. Blair. But Mr. Blair spoke of him before he gave
his Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis Sir John Friend asked what Men Mr. Blair had engaged: Now we
produce Mr. Bertram, to declare what Men he had engaged.


L. C. J H. His Evidence hurts you not, but only affirms what Mr. Blair had
said. The Kings Council have now done Sir John Friend, you may call what
VVitnesses you have a mind to call.


Sir J. Friend. May I speak my Lord?


L. C. J. H. Yes, you may.


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, In the first place I wait for one of my VVitnesses.
Mr. Porter says, That I was at a Meeting at the King's Head in
Leaden-hall-street, but how many were there I cannot tell; but there was not one
word spoke of any thing of that Nature; but we were drinking a Glass of Wine,
and Sir John Fenwick at that time came in. Says he, Come I will desire you to
go to our end of the Town, and take a Dish of Meat with us; and I went up
thither, and there was not a word spoken. Gentlemen, I am a Protestant, and
they are Papists, and care not what they say: They think they merit Heaven by
destroying Protestants by what they say, and they are not to be believed, that
is the reason I put that Question; and they are not VVitnesses to be allowed,
and for that I appeal to your Lordship; they think they merit Heaven by
destroying Protestants. My Lord, They are not good VVitnesses against
Protestants, by 25 Edw. 3.


L. C. J. H. Do you hear me? Are all Papists not good VVitnesses to prove a Man
a Traitor by 25 Edw. 3. Who says so?


Sir J. Friend. I appeal to the 25th of Edw. 3.


L. C. J. H. It cannot be.


Sir J. Friend. Is there not such a Statute?


L. C. J. H. There is no such thing.


Sir J. Friend. Read the 30th of King James I. Chap. 4.30. Car. II. and other
Statutes. Papists, or reputed Papists, are not to be believed against
Protestants, who are by them believed to be damnable Heretics.


L. C. J. H. There is no such thing; Where is your Statute?


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, the first Witness that I sent for from the Gatehouse
is not yet come; if your Lordship will please to stay: Pray Sir, it is very
Material.


L. C. J. H. Will you call any Witnesses in the mean time, or any thing else?


Then Mr. Courtney was brought into the Court by the Keeper of the Gatehouse.

L. C. J. H. Call William Courtney. Is this the Witness you would have, Sir
John Friend?


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, may I ask one Question?


L. C. J. H. Yes, ask what Questions you will.


Sir J. Friend. Mr. Courtney, I desire you to speak what you know of Captain
Blair.


Mr. Courtney. I do know this Gentleman: I have been a Prisoner in the
Gatehouse above a Month; Captain Blair at the same time came in there, or a Man
mentioned in the Proclamation, and knowing I was an old Acquaintance of his,
came to me, and when I was told Captain Blair was come to see me, I desired him
to come down to me; and when I saw him, I told him, I hoped he was not in the
Proclamation. He told me he was, but that he was innocent, and knew nothing of
the Plot, nor Privy to any thing like it: And several others in the Place can
say, that Captain Blair said he knew nothing of a Plot, but that he was as
innocent as a Child Unborn.


Sir J. Friend. What did he say of me?


Mr. Courtney. I know now nothing of that.


Sir J. Friend. Do you know any thing of his being a Roman Catholic?


Mr. Courtney. I know nothing of that, Sir John; he bore the Character of one.
I never saw him at Church.


Mr. Just. Rokeby. How long have you known Captain Blair?


Mr. Courtney. I have known him these six or seven Years,


Mr. Just. Rokeby. How know you him to be a Captain?


Mr. Courtney. I know nothing of that; He was called by the name of Captain
Blair, all the time I knew him; I know no other.


Sir J. Friend. Did you not hear he was a Roman Catholic?


Mr. Courtney. I heard that Character of him; I never saw him at any Church;
there are several Witnesses of this, Sir John, as well as I.


Sir J. Friend. Sir, you are a Stranger to me; but a Note was sent to me to
desire that his Lordship would please to send for you, for that you might do me
some Service. -- Call Mr. Carpenter. Do you know any thing of Mr. Blair. Mr.
Carpenter?


Mr. Carpenter. No, Sir, I don't know him.


Sir J. Friend. Do you know him to be a Roman Catholic?


Mr. Carpenter. I have heard of him to have such a Character. I know nothing of
his Religion, only as I have heard some say.


L. C. J. H. Mr. Courtney, go to the Keeper, let him carry you back to the
Gatehouse.


As Courtney was going out, he whispered to one, and said he could say
something else. Then the Person that heard him say so, told Sir John Friend,
that Mr. Courtney had something more to say in his behalf.

Sir J. Friend. My Lord, Mr. Courtney says he has something else to say.


L. C. J. H. I pray let him speak.


Sir J. Friend. Let that Gentleman come up, Mr. King, he has something else to
say.


Mr. Courtney. Two or three days after that time, a Gentleman and an Ensign in
the Army, Mr. Boley, were reading the Flying Post in Prison; and in that Flying
Post it was said, that Captain Blair was making a Discovery that he was
Lieutenant Col. to Sir John Friend; and that he received a great deal of
Subsistence Money: In the mean time, Blair came in, and said, What, have you got
the News? Yes, said I, the Report is, That you have made a Discovery of a
Conspiracy against the King. Blair answered, They might put what they pleased
into the News Paper; but that he knew nothing of Sir John Friend, and he had
received none of the Money. This was a Surprise upon me when he spoke, for he
was bemoaning his Conscience; and his Wife told me, he was very much concerned
that he should go against his Conscience, and said, she was sure it would break
her Heart.


L. C. J. H. Did he tell you so?


Mr. Courtney. He told me so on Friday Night; as he was lying on his Back very
ill, I asked him how he did? He clasped his Hands, and told me, very Ill, very
Ill. What, said I, have you got a Cold? O! No, said he, Life is Sweet; and if
it were not for Life, I should not do what I do.


L. C. J. H. Did he tell you he went against his Conscience?


Mr. Courtney His Wife and he both told me so. -- I knew nothing of my being
Summoned here to day,


Mr. Just. Rokeby. Who were the Persons that were present? You say there were
two Persons present with you, and you heard his Wife say so.


L. C. J. H. You say two Persons were by, when you and he and his Wife, were
reading the Flying Post.


Mr. Courtney. I was walking up and down the Room, and Blair came in, and asked
what was the News? Said I, the News says, you make a great Discovery against
Sir John Friend, and that you have received a great deal of his Regiments
Subsistence Money; but he said, he knew nothing of it.


L. C. J. H. Who were there?


Mr. Courtney. The Ensign, now a Prisoner, who I suppose can ^ay the same.


Mr. Just Rokeby. Let Blair be brought in.


Mr. Sheriff. Make way for the Witness, that he may come in, and not be crowded
to Death; stand down Mr. Courtney.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, let Mr. Courtney repeat before Mr. Blair what he said
of him.


Mr. Courtney. I told my Lord, that in my Chamber one Ensign Bole, a Prisoner
in the Gatehouse, hearing the Flying Post cried about, ordered it to be brought
in to him; in the mean time Blare came in. I asked him if he had got the News?
He asked me what News? I said, there is in the News-paper, that you are making
a Discovery; and that you were to be Lieutenant to Sir John Friend. You
replied, they may put what they please into the Flying Post, but said you, I
know nothing of the Matter.


L. C. J. H. How long ago was this?


Mr. Courtney. This was when the News-paper came out on Friday last.


L. C. J. H. But did he talk of going against his Conscience?


Mr. Courtney. On Friday Night I came to see Blair, and his Wife was with him;
and he was clasping his Hands, Groaning and Mourning in a miserable condition,
and I thought giving up the Ghost: He was in so miserable a condition, because
the Prison was very cold and no Air. I asked if he would drink a Glass of
Brandy. He told me no. I understand, said I, that you are going to Morrow to
Hicks's Hall to Witness against Sir John Friend: O, says he, Pray God direct us
all; Life is Sweet. Says his Wife, he would never do it but to save his Life;
he goes against his Conscience, and so said he. Said I, you have the Character
of an honest Gentleman, ever since I knew you; have a care you do not wrong
your Conscience. O, says he, that is the only thing, the only thing, or to that
purpose, and showed all the Remorse in the World. I speak this Innocently, and
with a great deal of Pity. This has been communicated to one and another, and
so I am sent for.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you hear what he says, Mr. Blair?


Mr. Soll. Genesis You have heard what he says.


L. C. J. H. What do you say? You have heard what Mr. Courtney says on Friday
Night last, in relation to your going to Hicks's Hall the next day.


Mr. Blair. This Gentleman crowded himself upon me; he had a Cup of Brandy in
his Hand: God knows I desired no Company, My Lord. Says he, Captain Blair, I
have heard you have been a very honest Gentleman all along, and hear you are
going to Hicks's Hall to Morrow, pray God Almighty direct you, and that is all
I have to say to you. I was very Sick, but for any thing of Remorse of
Conscience, as I hope for Salvation, I never expressed it to him, nor any body
else.


L. C. J. H. Did your Wife say you went against your Conscience?


Mr. Blair. No.


Mr. At. Genesis Did that Gentleman thrust himself into your Company, or did you
desire him to come in?


Mr. Blair. No, he thrust himself upon me.


Mr. Courtney. There was a Sink, and the Door half open. I heard him Moan and
Lament. --


Mr. Blair. Keeper said I, now I beg of you, that no body might come to me but
my Wife Mr. At. Genesis Swear the Keeper.


which was done

Did Blair desire any body should come in but his Wife?


Keeper. No body but his Wife, unless they Thrust themselves upon him.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know of his coming to him?


Keeper. No.


Mr. Blair. I always desired the Maid to lock the Door on the inside, that no
body might come in but my Wife; and my Wife told me the other Day lying on my
Bed, Do not speak, for Christ Jesus sake, for they come to Trapan you; My Wife
came in when this Gentleman came to me; for Christ Jesus sake, dear Blair said
she, do not speak one word, for you do not know but it may be a Trapan.


Mr. Courtney. If I may have leave to say it, on the word of an Honest Man she
said no such thing. But your Wife told me you went against your Conscience.


Mr. At. Genesis What was you taken up for?


Mr. Courtney. I was five times taken up, and at last Committed for Words.


Mr. At. Genesis Where do you live?


Mr. Courtney. In Southampton Buildings.


Mr. Blair. I never heard or thought of any such thing as this.


Mr. Courtney. Truly Blair, I speak in compassion to you, pitying your Soul.


Mr. At. Genesis What Country Man is Blair?


Mr. Courtney. An Irish man born.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you any Estate in England? How came you to go to Blair?


Mr. Courtney. I have known him a long time; I have been several times with him
at the Coffee-House: I cant say I am intimately acquainted with him; he was
never my Bottle Friend.


Mr. At. Genesis How came you to go to him? for he never ordered any body but his
Wife to come to him.


Mr. Courtney. They may say what they please, he could never go to the
necessary House, but through my Chamber.


Mr. At. Genesis You say nothing to the purpose.


Mr. Courtney. This of Boles reading the News, and his saying he knew nothing
of the Plot, was Boxed about, and so I am sent for -- As for coming to his
Chamber, I think it no ill thing to visit a man when Sick.


L. C. J. H. Blair, Did you say you never knew any thing of a Plot?


Mr. Blair. Yes, I told him I knew nothing of an Assassination or Invasion, by
way of Discourse. But I was not to express my self among such People as they
were, to give any hints to such as they were, Women and others, of things I had
given an Account of to the King and Council.


L. C. J. H. Have you any more Witnesses?


Sir. J. Friend. I have; I desire Mr. King may be called?


L. C. J. H. What Questions do you ask him? For what must he be called?


Sir. J. Friend. I desire to know of him whether Mr. Porter is a Papist.


L. C. J. H. What say you Mr. King?


Mr. King. I am of Opinion that Mr. Porter is a Papist, and was always taken
for a Papist, and never for a Protestant.


L. C. J. H. And Sir J. Friend, What do you take him for?


Mr. King. I take him for a Papist, and no Protestant, nor ever was.


Sir J. Friend. Did you ever hear me use any Reflections against the Government?


Mr. King. When any Reflecting words were started in Discourse, he desired them
to forbear, and, said he, I don't like any such words, I have been acquainted
with him these 20 Years, he Married a Relation of my Wives Husband.


Sir J. Friend. You mean her former Husband.


Mr. King. Her former Husband, Thomas Cole.


L. C. J. H. Have you any more to say?


Mr. King. I have heard him say, if he had not taken the Oaths to King James,
which were binding upon his Conscience, he would as freely take the Oaths to
the present Government as any Man in England. But said he, I will live
peaceably under the Government, tho because I don't take the Oaths I am double
Taxed.


Sir J. Friend. I desire Captain Cane may be called, Mr. Cane, I would know
whether Captain Porter or Blair be Roman Catholics, or if you know what I am.


Mr. Cane. They were so reported to be at Epsom; and I have been acquainted
with Sir J. Friend several Years: We have been concerned together in the
Traind-bands, in the Tower Hamlets, and have been in Company with him several
times, and I never heard him give any Reflecting Language against the present
Government in my Life; and when any Reflecting Language has been against the
Government, he would say forbear talking.


Sir J. Friend. I cant well hear him.


L. C. J. H. He says he takes Porter to be a Papist, he was so reputed at
Epsom, and says he has known you a great while, and never heard you Reflect
against the present Government since the King came in.


Sir J. Friend. Pray my Lord, ask him whether he Beleives me to be a Protestant?


Mr. Cane. I always took him for a Protestant.


Sir J. Friend. I desire Mr. Carpenter may be called.


Officer. Call Carpenter.


Sir J. Friend. I desire to know whether or no Mr. Porter be a Roman Catholic,
and Mr. Blair?


Mr. Carpenter. I have been at Epsom several times, and it has been so
reported there: But for Sir J. Friend, I have known him several Years. I keep a
Brew House as he does, and I have known him a great while, and have had
Occasion to be in his Company, and to see him on the account of Partners,
coming in to Trade together, and I never knew any thing of him but that he was
a quiet and peaceable Man, that did frequent the Church, I know no otherwise.


Sir. J. Friend. Will you please that the Statute Book may be sent for?


L. C. J. H. Yes, it shall. Have you any more Witnesses?


Sir J. Friend. Yes, a great many more Witnesses.


L. C. J. H. Then call whom you will.


Sir J. Friend. I desire Mr. Hawkins may be called, my Lord; I desire he may
give an account what I am, whether I am a Roman Catholic or a Protestant.


Mr. Hawkins. I have known Sir J. Friend these 20 Years, and have had to do
with him a great while before the present Government, and since; and have heard
him speak no Reproachful Language, slightingly or reflectingly against the
Government. As to his Religion I did always believe him to be a Protestant of
the Church of England, and always went to Church.


L. C. J. H. What, since the Revolution?


Mr. Hawkins. I believe he has.


L. C. J. H. Have you known him go to Church?


Mr. Hawkins. I have been out of Town, and have not seen him so frequently as I
use to do.


Sir. J. Friend. I desire Major Mold may be called for.


L. C. J. H. If you have done with him.


Maj. Mold. My Lord, I have known Sir J. Friend many Years, 20 Years: I have
always looked on him to be a sincere strict Protestant: I have been in his
Company several times since the Revolution, and never heard him talk
disrespectfully of the present Government, and have been in his Company several
times.


Sir J. Friend. I desire Dr. Hollingworth may be called.


He did not appear

Sir. J. Friend. I desire Mr. Lupton may be called.


Mr. Lupton I desire you to give an account of me.


Mr. Lupton. I have known Sir J. Friend about ten Years; he was pleased to
Employ me as a Chaplain in his House, a very considerable time before, and
after the Revolution: We always used Prayers in the Family, and prayed for the
present King and the late Queen Mary, at which Sir J. Friend was many times
present.


Mr. At. Genesis How long was it since?


Mr. Lupton. About four or five Years, as I remember. When Sir John's Family
was lessened, he was pleased to say, my Family is now lessened, and I am going
into the Country, and shall have no occasion for you at present, but if ever I
make use of a Chaplain again, I will desire you to come to me again.


L. C. J. H. How long is it since you left him?


Mr. Lupton. About five Year: and as to his being a Papist I have often had
discourse with Sir John about it, and he was pleased to speak of it with
Detestation of their Principles, and that he did abhor them.


Sir J. Friend. Have you heard me speak any thing of an Invasion, how I would
venture my Life in such a Cause?


Mr. Sheriff. Speak out that the Court may hear you.


Mr. Lupton. I have heard him often say, That though he could not comply with the
present Government, he would live peaceably under it, and that he would never
be in a Plot; and I never found any thing by him, but that he was a very worthy
honest Gentleman.


Sir J. Friend. Pray let Mr. Hodely be called up. Sir, pray tell the Court, and
the Jury, what you know concerning me, and my Life and Conversation.


Mr. Hodely. I believe, my Lord, Sir John Friend is a very settled Protestant
of the Church of England I have frequently discoursed with him upon it: I have
a couple of Children that are his Nephews, on whose Account I am forced several
times to wait upon him, and trouble him. He has often said he would never be
in a Plot; and which makes me the better remember it, his Words were, If you
catch me in the Corn, put me in the Pound. Sir John Friend did frequently
express himself with a great deal of Detestation against King-killing, or
Assassinating a Crowned Head.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray, Mr. Hodely, what were the occasions of such Discourses
between Sir John Friend and you, concerning the Government, and with reference
to any Plot against it?


Mr. Hodely. Indeed I cannot tell upon what occasion; such Discourses there will
be on some occasions: I don't remember any occasion of it.


L. C. J. H. How long ago was this?


Mr. Hodely. I believe Five or Six times within these Two Years.


L. C. J. H. Had you the same Discourse?


Mr. Hodely. I cannot tell as to the same Discourse; but these were his Words,
He would be in no Plot.


L. C. J. H. Have you any thing more, Sir John?


Sir J. Friend. I could bring a great many more.


L. C. J. H. Call whom you will.


Sir J. Friend. I would not give you the trouble.


L. C. J. H. Call who you will.


Sir J. Friend. Then call Mr. Willis, and Mr. Hemins: I hope your Lordship does
not forget what I proposed about the Statutes being brought.


L. C. J. H. No, we don't forget it.


Sir J. Friend. I desire, Mr. Willis, you will give an Account to his Lordship,
what you think of my being a Protestant; and how I have behaved my self in
every Respect.


Mr. Willis. I have always taken for granted, That all who come to Church are
Protestants; and I did always take Sir John Friend to be a Protestant: The
Acquaintance I have had with him was since I lived in the Parish of Hackney,
and have had some Conversation with him sometimes, and friendly Visits; but I
don't remember any Discourse, at any time, relating to the Government, either
one way or other. I confess I was never very often with him, but his Discourse
was obliging and prudent always when I was there.


L. C. J. H. When did you see him at Church?


Mr. Willis. I cannot call to mind justly when it was; he may be at Church
sometimes, and I not see him; for our Seats are very distant, and the Pillars
between, that we cannot see one another.


L. C. J. H. Have you seen him there within a Year or two?


Mr. Willis. He has been above a Year from Hackney.


Mr. Montague. Can you say you have seen him there this Four Years?


Mr. Willis. I cannot say what I don't know; I cannot call to mind: I would not
say any thing I don't know, though I am not upon my Oath.


Sir J. Friend. I desire Mr. Hemins may be called: I could call a great many,
but all to the same effect.


L. C. J. H. Whom you think fit; call whom you will.


Sir J. Friend. But one thing I desire before -- --

If these two Gentlemen, Blair and Porter, and none but these two; if they are
Papists, they are not good Witnesses against a Protestant, to prove him a
Traitor, by 25 Edw. 3. For that Statute says, He that is Indicted must be
proved Attainted, which cannot be by the Evidence of Papists; and that because
they do refuse to take the Oaths of Allegiance required to be taken: And
therefore I humbly beseech your Lordship that you will be pleased to tender
them the Oaths; for there is a Statute, 3 Jac. 1. c. 4. I desire they may be
tendered their Oaths.


L. C. J. H. That is not the present Business at this time. We must go on with
the present Business.


Sir J. Friend. They are not substantial Witnesses; for this is the Law, as I
am informed. I only speak as I did at first, before ever they were sworn: I
desired to know when 'twas convenient for me to insist upon this, before ever
they were sworn. I asked whether they were Papists; that they would not tell
me, that was not allowed of; it was overruled by the Court. But there is such
a Statute, and my Witnesses have said that they are Papists; there lies a great
deal upon it, my Lord; and I humbly beseech your Lordship, I hope you will not
take it amiss that I do insist upon it.


L. C. J. H. No, by no means, I will take nothing amiss.


Sir J. Friend. 25 Edw. 3. 30 Car. 2. 3 Jac. 1. c. 4. I desire may be read; for
there it is, That if any Roman Catholic swear against any Protestant, who are
by them accounted Heretics, they are not to be believed; for the Priest can
absolve them from all Oaths: And they use Equivocations, and mental
Reservations, and may have a Dispensation for such Forswearing, and afterward
for all Villainies; and therefore they are not to be credited, and their
Evidence is really none, till they shall renounce those Matters and Principles.
Therefore I humbly beseech your Lordship that these Statutes may be read.


L. C. J. H. Read the Statute, 3 Jac. 1. c. 4.


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, your Lordship was pleased to promise me, That if any
thing should arise that was Matter of Law, my Counsel should be heard; pray let
me know if there be any Matter of Law in it; and if there be, I humbly beg my
Counsel may be heard.


L. C. J. H. Let us know first if there be matter of Law.


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, my Life is in danger, I am as clear as a Child unborn.


L. C. J. H. If the Court did think there was any Color in this Objection you
make, we would let you have Counsel; nay we would do it now, if we could do it
by Law.


Sir J. Friend. How do you say, may it please your Lordship?


L. C. J. H. If there were any Color in what you say, in Relation to a Papist
being no Evidence, we would hear your Counsel. I would be glad to hear that
Counsel that would own your Objection; the Statute shall be produced, and we
shall see if there be any such thing, or any thing like it.


Sir J. Friend. I don't understand the Law, my Lord, not I. I would be glad to
hear Counsel, for my own satisfaction.


L. C. J. H. Look you, Sir John Friend, you shall have what is fit to be done.
You desire to have the Statute read, and it shall be all read.


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, I desire that 25 Edw. 3. and 30 Car. 2. may be read.


L. C. J. H. What Chapter?


Sir J. Friend. I have it down here.


L. C. J. H. Then read the 25th. of Edw. 3. Gentlemen of the Jury, Sir John
Friend desires the 25th. of Edw. 3. the Statute on which he is indicted, may be
read.


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, I beseech you that I may speak one Word before you go
on to read this Statute. My Lord, I am advised by Counsel, a Consultation to
levy War is no Treason, without Rebellion, Insurrection, and Invasion; and
inviting Men over is no Treason, unless a Foreign Prince be invited to come
with his own Subjects. I am no Lawyer; I leave that to your Lordship likewise.


Clerk reads the Statute.

Sir J. Friend. I don't think that is the Statute.


L. C. J. Holt. Yes, that is the Statute you mention.


Sir J. Friend. I do not know whether that be the Chapter; I have not the
Chapter.


L. C. J. Holt. Read the Statute of 3 Jac. 1. c. 4.


Sir J. Friend. There may be a Mistake in the Chapter; I have not the Chapter.


L. C. J. H. This is the Statute relating to High Treason, and has in it those
very Words that are in your Paper which you have read to the Court.


Sir J. Friend. Read the 3d. of K. James 1. c. 4. which relates to the tendering
the Oaths to the Papists; the Oaths appointed to be taken by the Statute; they
ought to have the Oaths tendered to them.


L. C. J. H. That is another time.


Sir J. Friend. Pray, my Lord -- --


Cl. of the Cr. O here it is.


Sir J. Friend. No Roman Catholic is capable of having an Oath administered to
him to be a Witness.


L. C. J. H. Read it out.


Sir J. Friend. I only speak of Roman Catholics: I am told that Roman
Catholics regard not any Oath, because they have Priests that can absolve
them; and therefore I only speak this, because I know not how their Oath can
sway with any one. Therefore your Lordship being my Counsel, I would desire, my
Lord, that if there be any thing that I have omitted, that you would please to
help me. Your Lordship was pleased to say, You were my Counsel, and that you
would assist me, (for I am as Innocent as the Child unborn) however these Men
have sworn against me: This is a hard thing, and to lay this upon a Gentleman,
and that by these two Papists, it is a very hard thing.


L. C. J. H. Have you any Witness to prove that these Men have no Reason to
charge you thus? Have they any Displeasure or Malice against you?


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, I have been so kept up, I have not had time for any
body to come to me. I had no Counsel till Saturday.


Mr. Baker. That is a Mistake.


Sir J. Friend. I had it not till Friday in the Afternoon. I have been kept so
close, that I had no body to come to me. Indeed I had an Order, but there was a
Mistake in that Order, so that no Friend could come to me, that I might inquire
into Things.


Mr. Soll. Genesis You had Notice of your Trial, on Tuesday last.


Mr. Baker. I did attend Sir John Friend, and gave him notice of his Trial on
Tuesday last, and desired to know if he would name his Counsel; and he was
pleased to Name Mr. Northy, and Sir Bartholomew Showers; who did refuse to come
after Orders were procured for them, and by that Reason, a great deal of Time
was lost: Then I went to Sir John Friend again last Wednesday, not hearing of
him, and I asked him, Why he had not named his Counsel? He told me, Counselor
Northy would not come till he had spoken with Sir Bartholomew Shower. The next
Day came Burleigh to me, and brought me the Name of the Person he would have. I
immediately procured an Order, and went away with it; I take it to be Mr.
Welding, and he desired that Burleigh, and Underhall might come to him; he had
an Order the same Minute he spoke for it.


L. C. J. H. When was it?


Mr. Baker. On Thursday. Where is Burleigh?


Sir J. Friend. I desired they would put into it, Lieutennant Colonel Tatton
and Cash; but they put in neither of these Men; but took up my Kinsmam Cash,
and put him into a Messengers Hand.


L. C. J. H. Sir John Friend, If you had any Witness, and had not been as fully
prepared for your Defense as you could be, you should have moved for your Trial
to have been put off till another Day. But now I say, Have you any reason to
offer that these Witnesses have any Malice against you?


Sir J. Friend. My Lord, I am no Lawyer, I have not the Liberty of Counsel; and
it is a hard thing for a Man to suffer at this rate; for these are things out
of my reach, I am disappointed in every thing.


L. C. J. H. Have you any more to say?


Sir J. Friend. No, my Lord, I have no more to say.


Then Mr. Solicitor General spoke to the Court and the Jury, to the Effect
following:

I am of Counsel in this Cause for the King, against the Prisoner at the Bar;
and it is my turn to Sum up the Evidence. The Prisoner cant say but he has had
a very fair Trial, and has no Reason to complain, for all the rest of it shall
be alike. He and you may very well remember, that Persons of the same Quality
in former times, have not had that fair Dealing; and though all things are very
well now, yet Time was when it was not so: When Innocence was not a Safety for
a Man; when not his Life, much less his Laws and Liberties were secure to him:
Time was, when the Protestant Religion, and the Church of England (of which the
Prisoner at the Bar, Sir John Friend, says, he is and boasts himself to be, and
with very good Reason the best) Time was, I say, When that Religion was in
Danger, and when that Popery (for which he reflects on the Witnesses now) was
like to Overrun us. And had not his Majesty, with the Hazard of his Life, and
great Expense Rescued us, no body doubts, but that all in a very few Years,
would have been made good upon us now. And it is a very melancholy Thing to
consider, That there should be a sort of People among us now, so in love with
Popery and Slavery, as to have a Mind to bring it about again: And it is a very
ungrateful Thing, that when his Majesty with danger of his Life then, and
several times since, has endeavored to defend us, there should be a Party of
Men among us, who should endeavor to invade his Country, and fall on his
Subjects in his Absence, in order to Subvert his Government. I will not accuse
particularly the Prisoner at the Bar, to have had a Hand in the Assassination:
But very plain it is he knew of it. This, among others, is a very ungrateful
thing; when another Person is engaged for my Defense, I should contrive and
design against his Life, and be for invading of him. If the Prisoner at the Bar
be not Guilty of what he has been accused, nothing of this relates to him: But
if what has been given in Evidence, be true of the Prisoner at the Bar, he is
one of those Persons that has done all that he can to subvert the Government
and to effect the Invasion of the Country.

The First Evidence given in against him was by Mr. Porter; and he gives in
Evidence that at the King's Head in Leaden-hall-street, there was a meeting of
several Persons, among which the Prisoner at the Bar was one, and that, in
order to consider of the best means for the bringing back of the late K. James.
They concluded at last the best means would be to send some body over to France
to Invite K. James hither, and to entreat him to prevail with the French King
to send over with him 1000 Horse, a ^000 Dragoons, and 8000 Foot, and that he
should make what have he could to Land with them here; and to Encourage so to
do, they promised their Assistance, and that they did not doubt to meet him
with 2000 Horse. The person pitched on for this Errand, was one Charnock,
lately executed for High Treason. But upon this proposition Charnock was very
diffident, whether this was the effect of a sober consideration or not, and
therefore would not undertake it till he had satisfaction that they still
continued of the same mind: And therefore another Meeting was proposed and
agreed upon of the same persons, and that was to be at Mrs. Montjoy's Tavern:
There they all met again, and the Question being put, Whether they were of the
same Opinion or not; they did declare themselves all to be of the same Opinion,
that Mr. Charnock should go to France on the Message agreed on at the Kings
Head, and make as sudden a Return back as he could to give them an Answer.
Captain Porter tells you, that Charnock brought word that the French King could
not then spare them that Force that they desired. Hereupon it was put off, and
their design was deferred till last Winter, and then it was likely to take
place very lately.

The next is Cap. Blair, and he tells you 2 years ago Sr. John Friend showed
him a Commission that he had received from the late K. James to raise a
Regiment of Horse, of which he himself was to be Colonel. He tells you, it was
Signed by K. James at the top, and Countersigned by Melford at the bottom; and
that he had a great many consultations with him, and considerations about
raising this Regiment; and that he was to be Lieutenant Colonel, and was to
provide as many Officers as he could, and that he did provide several Officers,
particularly Captain Fisher, Captain Vernatti, one Cole, one Bertram; and he
was to be a Lieutenant in one of the Troops. A great deal of the Evidence he
gives against Sr. John Friend was out of his Own mouth, and that is as strong
an Evidence certainly as can be given. He does for that purpose tell you that
One Evans was to be one of the Captains of his Troop; that Colonel Sclater a
man grown somewhat in Favor with Sr. John Friend Rivaled this Blair, that Sr.
John Friend told him he would have Two Lieutenant Colonels, and this person
should be one, and that he took very Ill, and did Resent it to Sr. John Friend,
and therefore he told him he would make him a Captain of a Troop of Horse that
should consist of Non-swearing Parsons. He tells you likewise there were listed
several Men; but the particular Persons he could not remember: But they were in
the Papers he had given in to the Council. Sir John Friend told him Mr.
Richardson was to be another of his Captains of Horse, and one Mr. Cole,
another Captain; and to bring in several Men. He tells you he received from Sir
John Friend some Sums of Money, and that Sir John Friend having laid down 100
l. about the Escape of Parker out of the Tower (for which was laid down 300 l.)
Sir John Friend was to be reimburs'd this 100 l. from St. Germans; and that one
Mr. Piggott had re^eiv'd it for Sir John Friend, but refused to pay it to him;
and that Sir John Friend was contented he should have 20 l. out of that 100 l.
provided he could get it of Mr. Piggott: But Capt. Blair not having so much
Interest himself as to get the Money of Mr. Piggott, applies himself to one Mr.
Harrison, alias Johnson, by which means he got that 20 l. He tells you
afterward, he was pressing on Sir John Friend to have another 20 l. Sir John
was contented he should have it, if he could get it of Mr. Piggott. Capt. Blair
produces a Letter that Sir John Friend writ to him, and excuses himself, That
Mr. Blair had not heard from him, but that he would meet him at such a time at
such a Coffee-House; in the Letter the Business of their Meeting was not
expressed: That he met accordingly, and there was Mr. Harrison and Mr. Piggott,
and 5 l. of the Second 20 l. was paid; this Second 20 l. was paid on Account of
Charges Mr. Blair had been at, in Drinking with the Listed Men to encourage
them. There was another Letter that Sir John said he writ to King James; he
showed him this Letter at Mr. Piggott's Mother's House. He told Sir John it was
so very well Penned, he suspected it was not Sir John Friend's Penning, but Mr.
Ferguson's: He tells you, That thereupon Sir John was very angry, that he
suspected him not to have penned that Letter. This showed the Intelligence; and
that this Letter was upon the Inviting King James. He tells you likewise, That
Sir John Fenwick told him that he had Four Troops ready for that Service; and
tells you also, he was to be one to serve in this Regiment under Sir John
Friend: That Mr. Ferguson was to bring in a considerable Number of Men to him;
and all this was to be put in Practice when the Thoulon Fleet came about to
join the Breast Fleet: And likewise, when he was with him in his Coach, he said
they must act very warily, and be good Husbands; and that it had cost him so
much Money, that if the Fleet did not come quickly, he should want Money to
carry on his Trade. These are positive Witnesses against Sir John Friend, as of
his own Knowledge, and most of it from his own Mouth. Sir John Friend, he tells
you, was a good Protestant, and the two Witnesses Roman Catholics; but this is
no Objection against their Evidence. It was never known before, but that a
Roman Catholic may be a very honest Man, and a good Witness; though Sir John
knows very well, that they are not very good otherwise; yet they may be allowed
to be good Witnesses: For those that were Witnesses against them that lately
died, were engaged in the same Design with them, which was to Assassinate the
King; and certainly, if any thing could have taken off their Evidence, it
should have been that: But that was so far from making them no Witnesses, that
it strengthened their Evidence. For though a Roman Catholic may be a very
honest Man otherwise, it is more likely for him to engage in such a Design than
any other Man; and Sir John Friend might not find enough of other Religions,
than that of the Roman Catholic, for that Design; and so it is plain he
engaged with those who were most likely to engage in such a Design. As to what
Mr. Courtney tells you of Capt. Blair's Discourse with him in Prison, he tells
you that Discourse did not go so far as he pretends; but Mr. Courtney grafts
upon it. Capt. Blair tells you he intruded into his Room, when he had given
Order, That no one but his Wife should be permitted to come in. You have heard
the Evidence against the Prisoner, and if you believe what our Witnesses have
said, Capt. Porter and Capt. Blair, then certainly Sir John Friend is Guilty of
all the Crimes charged in the Indictment: And I hope you will be so Just to
your Prince, to your Country, and to your Friends, as to find him Guilty
accordingly.


Mr. Cooper, one of the King's Council, spoke to the Court and the Jury to this
Effect.

My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,

I do not think there is any thing necessary to be said to the Court; and I
think, hardly to the Jury: But (if possibly we may) to convince the Prisoner at
the Bar, that he has not, nor shall have, any hard Measure; but that he is
Guilty of the Crimes whereof he stands accused in the Indictment: And to show
you that there is no Weight in his Defense, the First Part of his Defense is
from some Discourse he would object against Capt. Blair, in the Prison of the
Gate House. One Part of that Discourse is upon his first coming into the
Prison, and then his Objection amounts to only this; That Capt. Blair, when
pumpt by some of the Prisoners, would not confess to them that he was engaged
in that horrid Design: But how empty that Objection is, I would leave to them
who would judge whether a Man (newly taken into Prison, and in Company with
Persons who would not have liked him, nay, may be, have destroyed him in Prison
for that very Confession of his) were likely to own it.

Another Discourse was on Friday last, the Day before he was to go to Hick's-
Hall, and then this Person intruded himself into his Chamber, when he had
ordered that no Body should be permitted to be let in; and he comes with a Cup
of Brandy in his Hand, and good Advice, That he should have a Care what he did;
and then he said Capt. Blair did express some Reluctance about the thing he was
going upon, the next Day: If that were true (but he denies it) when going to
depose a Truth against an old Friend and Companion, it was no more than what he
did when he first came into Court, when he was going to depose a Truth, That he
told Sir John he was very loath to depose that against him, which he was forced
now to do.

Another Part of his Evidence is, That he brings Witnesses to Prove the
Evidence against him was by Roman Catholics, and he a very good Protestant of
the Church of England: If that be true, all that can be gathered from it is,
That a Papist engaging in so black a Design, may be a very good Papist; but I
am sure you will all agree with me, that he was a very bad Protestant. But
whether or no Papists may be Absolved by their Priests their false Swearing, I
cannot tell that, for I am not acquainted with their Religion; it may be they
may; but I am sure, the disservice they have done to the Popish Cause, after
they had Served it so long, will be one of the last things they will ever
Absolve them of.

Another thing he insists on is this: He has brought two or three Clergymen to
Evidence for him that he was very cautious in talking Reflectingly against the
Government, and that he was not, nor could not be in any Plot; and it is to be
observed, that at all times, that That swims uppermost, and is most frequent in
all Discourses, that a Man is most engaged in: They say nothing introduced
those Discourses, but that at all times he frankly declared he was not in any
Plot, nor would not be one way or other; as the way that Weak Men and Children
discover their being engaged in a thing, is by their constantly discoursing
upon it, and declaring that they would not be concerned in it.

Another Particular he has just offered at, is a Point of Law; but that
dropped, and he waved it: He would have had it, That no Roman Catholic could
be allowed as an Evidence against a Protestant. What weight there is in that,
Gentlemen, I doubt not but the Court has given you good Satisfaction in. I
would do the Prisoner right; But I would have you consider, That the Prisoner
has not only been Charged with a bare Conspiracy; but that he was Engaged in
consulting an Invasion, in order to drive out His present Majesty, and Depose
him from the Crown, which is High Treason by our Law, which way soever it be
done; whether by a Stab, or Shot, or Levying War.

In the last place, I would take Account of the Consultations held, wherein he
admits he was present at the two Meetings, where both say he was present; he
only differs in one Point from the Witnesses: He says, Nothing was talked of at
these Meetings, but general and indifferent things; but the Witnesses have
Sworn what the Discourse was. There is one thing more, that is, Mr. Bertram's
Evidence; not that we produce it against the Prisoner, but to support what was
Sworn by Capt. Blair. And this is in order to satisfy the Court, That there is
nothing said against the Prisoner, neither Maliciously nor out of any Envy; for
Capt. Blair did acquaint Mr. Bertram with the thing at least Two Years ago, and
confirmed it with this Circumstance, That he was to be Capt. Blair's
Lieutenant, and Capt. Blair Swears the same thing. There is Concurrence of
Evidence against the Prisoner, and great Levity in his Defense: Therefore we
leave it with you.


Then my Lord Chief Justice Holt Summed up the Evidence, to the Effect
following.

Gentlemen of the Jury,

Sir John Friend, the Prisoner at the Bar, is Accused for High Treason; and the
Treason that is mentioned in the Indictment, is, Conspiring, Compassing, and
Imagining the Death of the King. To Prove this Conspiring and Compassing the
King's Death, there are two particular Overt-Acts mainly insisted upon; The
One, The Agreeing to send Mr. Charnock into France to King James, to persuade
the French King to send over Forces to Assist them, who were to furnish other
Forces to raise War within this Kingdom, in order to Depose the King. The other
Overt Act, Is having a Commission for Procuring and Levying Men, to be ready,
in order to Join with the French upon their Invasion, and this for the
Restitution of King James, and total Extirpation of King William. These two, as
I told you, are the two Overt-Acts that are mainly insisted upon; and to Prove
him Guilty of these, there are two Witnesses; One is Capt. Porter, who spoke to
the First; The other is Capt. Blair, who spoke to the Second. Capt. Porter
tells you, about the latter end of May, or beginning of June last, he and Sir
John Friend, and others he mentioned, were at the King's Head Tavern in
Leaden-hall-Street, and there they entered into Discourse about the Return of
King James, and did consider among themselves which was the most Effectual way
and means to have him Restored: Thereupon, it was Agreed among them, to send a
Messenger to France to King James, to desire him to solicit the French King to
furnish him with 10000 Men to be sent into England, 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and
1000 Dragoons: And that they did agree when these Forces were sent over, that
they would be ready to meet and Join them with 2000 Horse. The Messenger they
Agreed to send, was with them at that very time, and that was Mr. Charnock,
lately Tried and Executed. This being determined, Charnock makes ready to go on
this Expedition; but before he went, it seems, he had a desire to meet with the
Company again, for a further Discourse of this Matter, and see whether or no
they did Persevere in the Resolution they formerly took. Thereupon there was
another Meeting about a Week or Fourteen Days after, I cannot tell which, and
that was at Mrs. Montjoy's, and there were Sir John Friend, and Captain Porter,
and others, of the same Company that were before at the King's-Head, and there
they entered into the Debate of this Matter; the Question was, Whether or no
Charnock should be sent into France, as was formerly determined; and then it
was determined that he should go; and it seems, Capt. Porter said he went in
two or three Days afterward. And Capt. Porter tells you further, that Three
Weeks or Five Weeks (sometime afterward) Mr. Charnock comes back, and Capt.
Porter was taken up upon the Riot, and did not see him upon his first Return,
but afterward he met with him and spoke to him, and asked him, What he had
done, and what were the Effects of his Negotiation? He told him, he had done as
he was directed; That he had been with King James, and that King James had
spoken to the French King; but the Answer returned was this, That the French
King for that Year had Occasion for his Forces to be otherwise employed, and
could not spare them that Year. Capt. Porter asked him, Whether he had been
with the rest? He told him, he had acquainted them with the same thing.

The next Evidence is Capt. Blair, to the other part of the Indictment, which
is for Raising of Men (not Levying of them) he having a Commission from King
James, for Engaging of Men to be of his Regiment, of which he was to be Colonel
himself, and to provide Officers. Capt. Blair tells you, Two or Three Years ago
he was with Sir John Friend, and Sir John did produce a Commission that he had
from King James, to be a Colonel of a Regiment of Horse that he was to raise.
He was to raise them himself, and to appoint what Officers he thought fit: That
he Read the Commission, and it was Signed at the top James Rex, and
Counter-signed Melford. Sir John Friend promised Capt. Blair, he should be
Lieutenant Colonel of that Regiment; and told him, That he should get as many
Men as he could; That Mr. Vernatti was to be one of his Captains; That Captain
Blair brought Mr. Fisher to Sir John Friend, to be his First Captain: And that
there was one Mr. Sclater, a Man in Favor with Sir John Friend, and he was to
be another Lieutenant Colonel, as he told Capt. Blair, saying, It is no matter
if I have two Lieutenant-Colonels in my Regiment: At which, Capt. Blair took
great Offense, and did express as much to Sir John Friend. Thereupon, Sir John
Friend told him it should not be. I will, said Sir John, make another Provision
for him; he shall be a Captain of a Troop of Non-Swearing Parsons, and that
should satisfy him. Besides this, in order to raising of Men (no Men were
Levied) and for Engaging Men to contract to come in, and be of his Regiment, He
tells you there was Expended a great deal of Money to Caress them, and keep
them together, and to carry on this Design. Whereupon Capt. Blair came to Sir
John, and made Complaint that he wanted Money to carry on the Design. Upon
this, Sir John Friend tells him, There is 100 l. due to me, which I ought to
have upon this account, viz. because I laid down 100 l. in order to the
facilitating the Escape of Col. Parker out of the Tower, and there is one Mr.
Piggott had Directions to Pay me that 100 l. but I cannot get it of him; You
shall have 20 l. of that 100 l. But how is this to be had? Why, there is one
Mr. Harrison alias Johnson has an Interest in this Mr. Piggott, to whom he
made his Application, and thereupon 20 l. was Paid him about the latter end of
June, or the beginning of July last. After this, Capt. Blair said, he had
Occasion for some more Money some time after, about Michaelmas, and he was very
Importunate with Sir John to obtain it from him: I will give you the manner how.

It was out of the same Sum that he had the other 20 l. He writes to Sir John
Friend a Letter, and Sir John returns this Answer, and that by a Letter under
Sir John's own Hand, and he knew it to be his own Hand: In the Contents of the
Letter are that which is remarkable; the Letter bears Date some Tuesday
Morning, directed to Capt. Blair; the Letter was delivered at his own House,
and this was to meet him on Thursday next, at Jonathan's Coffee-House at the
Hour of Twelve. Accordingly Capt. Blair comes to Jonathan's Coffee-House, where
he does meet Sir John, and Mr. Harrison was there, and there he does receive
some Money: So that now this Letter does not depend for its Proof, barely upon
his Hand, but upon the Contents, and the subsequent Action thereupon; and this
is a great Evidence, because the Letter directs him to meet at Jonathan's
Coffee-House, and Sir John Friend does meet with Capt. Blair at that Place and
Time; and that there was a Discourse of the Design of the French Invasion. He
farther tells you, there was a Discourse between him and Capt. Blair, How that
Sir John did not at all scruple his being concerned, but did according to the
Tenor of the Discourse past, tell him, That he would not stir till such time
as the Thoulon Fleet was come about; thinking that if he did, there would be
danger of his being Apprehended: And therefore that he would sculk about, and
bid Capt. Blair should do the same; a very great Argument that he continued
still of the same Mind; for this Discourse related still to the former
Business, viz. That he was to raise a Regiment of Horse, in order to the
Restoration of King James; and it also, has Relation to the French Invasion,
which was expected on the same Account for about Two Years. There was a great
Intimacy between this Capt. Blair and Sir John Friend, and a great Trust Sir
John reposed in him. And you are told of a Letter to King James: Sir John tells
him, That he wrote that Letter himself. Capt. Blair says he read that Letter;
and that it was so well penned, he believed Mr. Ferguson did pen it: Upon
which, Sir John was angry. Then you have, Gentlemen, Mr. Bertram called to be a
Witness, to prove, That Capt. Blair told him he was to be Lieutenant Colonel;
and that before the Discovery of this Plot, and the Assassination, That Sir
John did intimate something of his Knowledge of it, That he heard of such a
thing, but did dislike it; for he thought it would be the Ruin of King James's
Business. So that this, Gentlemen, is the Sum and Substance of the Evidence
against the Prisoner:

But now you are to consider what Sir John can say on Behalf of himself.

First, He makes an Objection against the Credit of the Witnesses; That they
are not to be believed upon this Account, because they are known to be Roman
Catholics. Their Consciences indeed, as to Oaths, are somewhat large,
especially when they swear against Protestants: And therefore, says he, they
are not to be allowed against Protestants as Witnesses; at least, their Credit
is not sufficient to induce a Jury to believe them. At First he alleges, That
there is a Statute that disables them from being Witnesses. There is no such
thing, nor is that at all a Diminution of the Credit of their Testimony: For, I
must tell you, they are Legal Witnesses: Though there are several Laws to
punish them as Roman Catholics; yet no Law that renders them Infamous, or
Incredible Witnesses, that I know of; for you must know, Gentlemen, that
Papists are Christians, and they do swear by the same Evangelists, as we do.
And for that Objection, That they look upon us as Heretics, and may be
absolved for swearing falsely: It has been well observed by the King's Council,
they would never obtain any Dispensation whatsoever, when by their Swearing,
they do a Papist Mischief, so they are good Witnesses as to their Credit and
Competency. But then he insists upon it, that Blair is not to be looked upon as
a Witness; and he tells you why, First, That he had denied he knew any thing of
the Plot: The Occasion of that was this; when he was in the Gate House, there
was News in the Flying Post or Post Boy, where it was alleged that Blair had
confessed all; and that thereupon Blair did say he was innocent. You are to
consider the Weight of that Objection: Suppose he had said so at that Juncture,
and did own that he knew nothing at that time; by a Man's disowning of a thing,
because he would not confess, or trust those Men with his Confession, that
therefore he is not to be believed when he comes and swears it positively, that
is no Argument. For now Blair is called to confront him, he tells you he did
not say he knew nothing of a Plot, but denied being privy to, or being
concerned in the Business of the Assassination, so that he did not deny wholly
to be in the Plot, but in the Assassination. Then for the other Matter: On
Friday Night last it seems this Courtney coming to Blair's Chamber, where Blair
was, he takes notice to him of his Discovery; says he, you are to be a Witness
to morrow against Sir John Friend at Hicks's Hall, I pray God direct you. He
says, Blair seemed to be much troubled, that he took notice it was against his
Conscience; and that he and his Wife said it was against his Conscience. Blair
denies that positively, and says he believed he came in to catch him. He
farther tells you, that his Design was to keep himself free from all Company;
and that he gave Order that none but his Wife might come to him; that this his
coming in surprised him; that this Man rushed in upon him without his Consent;
that he did never say it was against his Conscience. Besides that, you must
consider the Nature of the thing, that when a Man is to come the next Day to
give an Evidence to the Grand Jury, it is not to be thought he should be so
unwise a Man as to tell another, it was to swear against his Conscience.
Therefore Gentlemen you are to consider the Evidence that Blair has given, and
the Validity of it.

Then Sir John Friend does insist upon another Matter. Says he, I am a
Protestant: Is it likely that I that am a Protestant should Conspire,
Confederate, and Encourage such an Invasion against the King and Kingdom? And
to prove that he is a Protestant, he has called two or three Witnesses that
have known him some twenty Years, others many years; that have frequently been
in his Company, and that tell you they did never know any time when he
reflected against the Government: Nay, I think one of them says, he was in his
Company when he did reprove such Reflections. And then one that was his
Chaplain in his House is called, and he tells you that he read the
Common Prayers in his House since the Revolution; that Sir John Friend was
present while they prayed for the Present King and the Late Queen Mary, and
that he says he has been gone from him about five Years, and has had very
little Converse with him since. Another says, he has been in his Company
diverse times, and had several Discourses with him, and that he should say, that
tho he could not conform to take the Oaths to the Present Government, yet he
would live peaceably and quietly under it; and that one Expression he had was
this, If they catch me in the Corn, let them put me in the Pound. This is the
Sum and Substance of his Defense; you are to consider the Weight of that, and
whether it is sufficient to balance the Evidence that has been given for the
King against the Prisoner. It is plain, tho he was a Protestant, he was no good
Friend to the Government, nor could not take the Oaths to it. I have known a
great many Men that go to Church, and are present at the Prayers, but whether
they join with them or no, I know not. But now you are to consider whether or
no Sir John Friend being a Protestant, he would not be in a Plot because he
said so, is such an Argument as shall be sufficient to make you disbelieve the
Credit of this Evidence.

Another thing he insists on is a Matter of Law. In the Statute of 25 Edw. 3.
which has been read, and does contain several Species of Treason, giving an
Account what shall be Treason; One is, Compassing and Imagining the Death and
Destruction of the King; the other is, the Levying of War. Now, says he, there
was no War actually Levied. To this Objection I must tell you, If there be only
a War to be Levied, a Conspiracy to Levy War barely in it self is not Treason:
But if the Design and the Conspiracy be either to Kill the King, or Depose the
King, and the Way and Method proposed to effect it is to Levy War, the
Consulting thereof to Levy a War is Treason, and a Treason which is mentioned
in 25 Edw. 3. for the Words of the Statute are, If any Person shall Conspire,
Imagine, or Compass the Destruction or Death of the King, such Conspiracy or
Imagination is Treason, if made out by any Overt Act. Now because a Man designs
to do it by the means of a War, Agreeing and Consulting to Levy a War in order
to that Design, is High Treason. There is a Levying of War without Treason, not
aiming at the Death of the King; for if a Number of Men appear in a Warlike
manner, and this is not against the Person of the King, nor with a Design of
his Death and Destruction, but for a general Reformation of the State, and to
have better Laws, and to prevent those Abuses that they are offended at, this
War now to be Levied not being to Compass or Design the Death of the King, this
is not High Treason. But if the Purpose and Design be to Depose, or Destroy the
King, and this to be by the means of a War, this is High Treason; and it is an
Overt Act: So that, that Objection he makes in point of Law, is nothing in this
Case.

You have heard the Evidence, what it is, and you are to consider the weight of
it, and the Circumstances with which it is attended, to prove the Credibility
and the Probability on one side and the other: And if you do not believe that
Sir John Friend was so concerned as you have heard the Witness Depose, then you
are to Acquit Sir John Friend. But on the other side, If you do believe the
Evidence against Sir John Friend, you are to find him Guilty by what the
Evidence has sworn against him.


Jury-man. We desire to have the Letter with us.


L. C. J. H. You may look on it here.


Then an Officer was sworn to keep the Jury safe; and they withdrew to consider
of their Verdict.

After a very short time the Jury returned, and the Clerk of the Crown spoke to
them thus.

Cl. of the Crown, Gentlemen, answer to your Names. Thomas Clerk.


Mr. Clerk. Here.


And so of the rest.

Cl. Cr. Gentlemen, Are you All agreed in your Verdict?


Omnes. Yes.


Cl. Cr. Who shall say for you?


Omnes. The Foreman.


Cl. Cr. Sir John Friend, Hold up thy Hand. You of the Jury, look upon the
Prisoner; How say you? Is he Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands
Indicted, or not Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Cl. Cr. What Goods and Chattels, Lands or Tenements, etc.


Foreman. None, to our Knowledge.


Cl. Cr. Hearken to your Verdict as the Court has recorded it. You say that
Sir John Friend is Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands Indicted, and
that he had no Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements at the time of the High
Treason committed, or at any time since, to your Knowledge; and so you say all?


Omnes. Yes.


Then the Court Adjourned till Seven a Clock the next Morning, the 24 th.
Instant.

The next Day, at Seven a Clock, the Court being met, a Messenger came from Sir
John Friend to the Court, desiring that he might be heard a Word or two in
Arrest of Judgment.

Cl. Cr. Set Sir John Friend to the Bar.


Silence.

Sir J. Friend. I beseech your Lordship, that you will give me Leave to move in
Arrest of Judgment, because I am not Convicted of Treason. Mr. Porter says,
That I, with others, sent in May last to King James, to obtain Men from the
French King: And Mr. Blair says, that I had a Commission from King James to be
a Colonel of Horse; but this is no Levying of War, and therefore I am Convicted
but by one Witness.


L. C. J. H. Sir John you were not Indicted for Levying War, but for Compassing
the Death of the King: And as for your Commission to raise Men, you gave Money
to Blair your Lieutenant Colonel to give to the Men that were to be of your
Regiment.


Sir J. Friend. I thank God I am as innocent as a Child unborn of Assassinating
the King.


L. C. J. H. The Overt-Acts for dethroning the King are Overt-Acts for
Compassing and Imagining his Death.


Sir J. Friend. I desire your Lordship to hear my Counsel.


L. C. J. H. We cannot enter into Examination of that Matter now. You had
Yesterday a long Trial.


Sir J. Friend. I desire I may have Counsel for the satisfaction of the World.


L. C. J. H. No Counsel, that understand what a Counsel should do, can say any
thing for you in this Case: Though it be no Treason barely to conspire to Levy
War, yet it is Treason to conspire to levy War to dethrone the King.


Sir J. Friend. I desire that I may have the Liberty of Friends to come to me
to take care of my Soul that little time that I have to live.


L. C. J. H. Yes, by all means.


Then the Court proceeded to the Trial of Sir William Perkins: And after the
Jury had brought in their Verdict against him, they adjourned till Five-a-Clock
that Evening.

About Six of the Clock the Lord Mayor, Mr. Common Sergeant, and a sufficient
Number of the Justices, returned into Court, and Proclamation being made for
Attendance, the Prisoner was brought to the Bar.

Cl. Cr. Sir John Friend, Hold up thy Hand. Thou stand convicted of High
Treason for Conspiring the Death of our Sovereign Lord King William III. What
have thou to say for thy self why Judgment should not pass against thee to dye
according to the Law?


Sir J. Friend. I have said all already.


Cl. Cr. All manner of Persons are commanded to keep silence while Judgment is
giving, upon pain of Imprisonment.


Note, The Sentence was pronounced against Sir William Parkins at the same time.

Mr. Common Serj. You the Prisoners at the Bar, Sir John Friend and Sir William
Parkins, have been indicted for High Treason in conspiring the Death of the
King; for Trial thereof you have put your selves on your Country; which Country
have found you guilty. The Crimes you are convicted of, are the greatest a Man
can commit. Murder and Robbery are Injuries but to private Persons; but to
contrive the Destruction of the King, is letting in Ruin upon Thousands of
People. For Robbery and Murder there may be something pleaded for
Justification, as for private Revenge, etc. But to set, conspire, and debate
the Destruction of a Prince, the best of Men, the Father of his Country, no Man
had ever any Color of Excuse for that. I would not add to your Unhappiness; I
am sorry for the severe Judgment that you have brought upon your selves. All
that remains for me to do, is, to pronounce on you the Sentence. And the Court
does award,

THat You, and each of You, be carried to the Place from whence you came, and
from thence be drawn on a Hurdle to the Place of Execution, and be there
severally Hanged, but cut down while you are alive; that your Privy Members be
cut off; that your Bowels be taken out, and burnt before your Faces; that your
Heads be severed from your Bodies, and your Bodies be divided into four
Quarters, and your Quarters to be at the King's Dispose: And the Lord have
Mercy on your Souls.


Then the Court Adjourned to the 22 d. Day of April.

FINIS.

