THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF Col. Adrian Scrope. Mr. John Carew. Mr. Thomas
Scott. Mr. Gregory Clement. Col. John Jones. Who sat as Judges upon our late
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES.

Together with Their several Answers and Pleas, at the Sessions House in the
Old Bailey, Friday the 12th of October 1660. before the Commissioners of Oyer
and Terminer appointed by His MAJESTY for that purpose.

JAMES 2. V. 13. For he shall have Judgment without Mercy that showed no Mercy.

LONDON, Printed for John Stafford and Edward Thomas. 1660.

THis day being Friday the 12th. of October 1660. The Kings Lords Justices for
Trial of several persons who had a hand in the Death of our Late Sovereign,
Sat in the Sessions house in the Old Baily, and called to the Bar the persons
following Viz.

Col. Adrian Scroope. John Carew, Thomas Scot. Gregory Clement. John Jones.
Col. Adrian Scroope was first called to his Trial, who having accepted against
several of the Jury, at last had such a one as he agreed to.

Proclamation being made, and silence commanded, the Indictment was Read, and
One of the Kings council stood up and spoke to this Effect.

Gentlemen of the Jury, You have heard by the Indictment of several that did
assemble themselves together to compass and take away the Life of the King our
late Sovereign, among which persons the prisoner at the Bar was one, who under
his Hand and Seal did consent to the said Murder, First by setting Hand to the
Commission which gave being to that Bloody Court, and afterward by Signing
that bloody Warrant which occasioned the severing his Head from his Body, which
we can prove by several Witnesses.

The Court call for the VVarrant for the King's Execution, and went to show it
to one of the VVitnesses. which when Col. Scroope saw, he said,

My Lord let me see it, if it be my hand I will not deny it.

The VVarrant it is carried to him.

Scroope. My Lord I do not deny but it is my Hand.

Mr. Masterton one of the VVitnesses is sworn.

Kings Council. Whether did you see this Gentlemen sitting among the Judges of
the King?

Masterton. My Lord, I was at the High Court of Justice so called, several
Times, and I saw the prisoner at the Bar sitting among them, and particularly
on the 27th. of December, being the day on which Sentence was given.

Scroope. My Lord, pray ask this Gentleman whether he and I were ever in
company together that he should know me so well, for I never saw him in my Life
before to my knowledge.

To which it was answered, That he in person answered to that Name, and was the
Man.

Several other Witnesses were sworn to the same purpose.

Colonel Scroope desired that one might be asked if he could tell whereabout he
sat; To which the Witness answered,

My Lord, I cannot say that possitively, I cannot remember such Circumstance so
long; but to the best of my remembrance, he was the uppermost Judge on the
right hand.

Sir Richard Brown was sworn to give Evidence concerning several treasonable
words that he should speak about the Kings Murder.

The Act for constituting the High Court of Justice was likewise read; and Col.
Scroop owned that to be his hand which subscribed thereunto; saying, he did not
desire that witnesses should be sworn to more then was needful.

The Kings Council then spoke to the Jury, and told them; That they had heard
by six several Witnesses that the prisoner had sat among the Kings Judges; and
by three that he sat the day which was by them called, the day of Judgment.

The prisoner said, that he had a great disadvantage in answering to such
learned Men, who were to plead against him, and said, That he would not
undertake to justify his person, but desired Time and Council to answer to
matter of Law.

The Judge. That is where you have matter of Law.

The Prisoner answered, My Lord, I was not of the Parliament, I beseech you
take notice of that; and that which was done, my Lord, was by a High Court of
Justice, who had a commission from the Parliament. My Lord, It was that
Authority which was then accounted the supreme Authority that the generality of
the Nation submitted to; having received command from that authority it was in
obedience to the same that I sat, I was promrted thereunto by that command: I
have not time to bring these things to a Head, because I have been these six
weeks close prisoner in the Tower, that I could not get council to prepare
myself? therefore my Lord, let me have some time and council to provide myself
to plead.

My Lord I was no contriver of that business only executed the command.

To which was answered, That that which he called the Parliament was no
Parliament; that there was no color of Authority to justify them; and that if
the whole House of Commons had been sitting (as these pretending that Authority
were not a sixth part) yet they could not act against Life of the least Cripple
at the Gate without the King, much less against himself.

Col. Scroope. I say my Lord I am but a single person, and if there be mistakes
I am not the only single person that have been misled, I hope that an Error in
Judgment, will not be accounted an Error in Will, and shall not be accounted
Malice, Truly my Lord I must say this, and I desire your Lordship to take
notice of me, that I am without any malice at all. After several things of the
like Nature hoping that Authority of the the Rump-parliament would clear him
and be taken as a sufficient Plea for his aforesaid Treasonable conspiracy, The
Judge asked him if he had anything further to offer in the case, which he being
not able to do; The Charge was given to the Jury, who never went out of the
Court to give in their Verdict; and being asked according to the form, whether
the Prisoner at the Bar were Guilty of the High Treason whereof he stood
indicted or not Guilty.

The Foreman said GVILTY. and so they said all.

VVhereupon the prisoner was taken from the Bar and Shackled with chains.

The next who was called to the Bar was Mr. John Carew, who after the
Formalities of the Court was passed as aforesaid, and the ^ndictment read, he
was charged by the Kings Council as follows.

The Prisoner at the Bar stands Indicted for (not having the fear of God before
his Eyes) Imagining, Contriving and compassing the Death of our Late Sovereign
of blessed Memory; for the proof of this there are several things in the
Indictment which do discover their private imagination, which is that they did
meet and consult, etc. there is a statute of the 25t: of Edward the third
against Imagining, Designing, or compassing the Death of the KING, which ye are
to enquire after.

There was a thing called the High High Cuurt of Justice, in which bloody Court
our Sovereign was Tried, and this Gentleman was one of those Miscreants that
had the confidence, nay, the impudence to sit among them, and afterward Sealed
to that bloody Roll whereupon he was Executed.

Several Witnesses being Examined spoke to this effect,

That they saw him several days in that Court sitting among those who were
called the Kings Judges, and particularly on the 27. day of January, 1648. on
which day the Sentence passed; also knew that to be his hand which was to the
Warrant for the Kings Execution, And for Establishing A High Court of Justice.

Whereupon the Prisoner was asked what he had to say for himself? who answered,
that he came not there to deny any thing that he had done; that whereas what
was done in the case was Ushered in with these words, [Not having the Fear of
God before his Eyes] He did declare it was not done in such a Fear, But in the
Fear of the Holy and Righteous Lord the Judge of the Earth.

Where at the Court was much Troubled and Disturbed that he should make God the
Author of their Treason and Murder.

But he went on to this purpose

When this came about there was an Ordinance where in my name was set, which
when I saw I stroke it out; I leave it to the Lord to Judge, I thought not well
of it, and so was very unwilling to appear in it, there being as I thought
enough beside me to be employed in it, and therefore I speak the truth as it is
in Jesus, to show how I had the Fear of the Lord before me, I say as to what I
did was upon this account; I did it first in Obedience to the then Supreme
Authority of England, and after the Lord gave answer to Solemn appeals.

Running on after this rate the Court were wearied with his discourse and put
him on to plead to his Indictment.

He desired he might declare the grounds whereupon the Parliament proceeded,
and give the Grounds and Reasons of the Fact.

To which the King's Council said, Then you must needs confess it. Whereupon
he acknowledged, that he was there, and proceeded against the Act of
Parliament; But was told (as the Court had often said before) That neither the
Lords nor the Commons, jointly or severally, had any power without the King;
and that the Power then in being had not the least color of Authority for what
they did; and that it was not a thing to be debated without denying our
Allegiance, that the Subject can hold up his hand against his Sovereign.

After the Lord Annesley made a learned Speech, declaring the illegality of
their proceedings, that when a Treaty was concluded with the King, and
accordingly all things like to be settled, he and some others had contrived and
designed to keep the far greater part of the Members out against their
Allegiance, the Laws of the Land, and against the privileges of Parliament,
etc. making themselves an arbitrary Parliament and driving away the rest, etc.

But Mr Carew being not able to say any thing in defense of his high charge:
the Jury never went out for it, but presently brought him GVILTY.

Mr. Scot was brought next, and after all the Formalities of the Court were
over, he first pleaded the Privilege of a Parliament Man, several Witnesses
were produced against him, That he so gloried in the death of the King, as to
say, That he desired it might be written upon his Tombstone to the end all the
world might know it; as also other things, which expressed his malicious
forwardness in that horrid Murder. The main part of his pleading was to
justify the Authority of the Rump-Parliament, which being so often answered
before, need not here be incerted; The Jury soon concluded with him likewise,
and found him Guilty.

Mr. Gregory Clement petitioned the Court to wave his plea of not Guilty; which
the Court granting, he confessed the Indictment.

Col. John Jones confessed that he was present at giving Sentence against the
King, only denied the form of the Indictment; whereupon a Jury was without his
excepting against any, quickly sworn, and according to his own Confession,
found him Guilty.

The Judge in a very Learned Speech endeavored to make them sensible of the
hainousness of the Sin, and persuading them to Repentance, prayed God to have
mercy upon them, and read their Sentence upon all together.

You shall go from hence to the place from whence you came, and from that place
shall be drawn upon a Hurdle to the place of EXECUTION, and there shall HANG by
the NECK till you are half Dead, and shall be cut down Alive, and your
Privy-Members cut off before your Face and thrown into the Fire, your Belly
ripped up and your Bowels Burnt, your Head to be Severed from your Body, your
BODY shall be divided into Four QUARTERS, and Disposed as his Majesty shall
think fit.

All were Shackled with Fetters and carried to the Presse-yard.

FINIS.

