THE TRIAL AND CONVICTION OF Sr. Sam, Bernardiston, Bart. FOR HIGH-MISDEMEANOR
AT The Session of NISI PRIVS, Holden at GUILD HALL, LONDON, For his Majesty's
Court of KINGS BENCH, Before the Right Honorable Sir George Jeffreys, KNIGHT
and BARONET, Lord Chief Justice of ENGLAND, On Thursday, Feb. 14. 1683.

LONDON: Printed for Benjamin Took, at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

I Do Appoint Benjamin Took to Print the TRIAL of Sir Samuel Bernardiston,
Baronet; and order that no other Person presume to Print the same.

Geo. Jeffreys.

THE TRIAL AND CONVICTION OF Sir SAM. BERNARDISTON, BARONET. FOR
HIGH-MISDEMEANOR, AT The Session of NISI PRIVS, Holden at GUILD HALL, LONDON.
THere being in Hillary Term last an information in the Court of King's Bench
preferred by his Majesty's Attorney General against Sir Samuel Bernardiston, for
a very great Misdemeanor; upon Oath made that he was so extremely indisposed,
that he could not appear in Person without danger of his life: the Court were
pleased to respite his Recognizance, (which he by order of the Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, entered into the last Vacation to
appear in this Court the First day of this Term,) and to allow him the liberty
of Pleading to the Information by Attorney, which he did. And Thursday the
14th. of February, 1683. being the Session of Nisi Prius after the Term holden
for the City of London and County of the same, was appointed for the Trial of
this Cause, and accordingly then the same came on, and was tried before the
Right Honorable Sir George Jeffreys, Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice of
his Majesty's Court of King's Bench, in this manner.

Clerk. Call away Crier.


Crier. You good men of Nisi prius, summoned to appear here this day between
our Sovereign Lord the King, and Sir Samuel Bernardiston, Baronet, answer to
your Names and save your Issues.


Cl. Thomas Vernon and his Fellows. Vous avez plein Inquest. Call the Defendant
Sir Samuel Bernardiston.


Crier. Sir Samuel Bernardiston, come forth or this Inquest shall be taken by
your default.


Mr. Williams. He appears.


Cl. Gardez vostres Challenges. Swear Thomas Vernon.


Cr. You shall well and truly try this Issue between our Sovereign Lord the
King, and Sir Samuel Bernardiston according to your Evidence. So help you God.


Cl. Percival Gilburn, who was Sworn, and so the rest.


The Names of the Twelve were these.
Thomas Vernon, Jur. Percival Gilburn, Jur. Edward Bovery, Jur. William
Withers, Sen. Jur. James Wood, Jur. Robert Masters, Jur. Samuel Newton, Jur.
George Torriano, Jur. Kenelm Smith, Jur. Thomas Goddard, Jur. Thomas Amy and
Jur. Richard Blackburn. Jur.
Then they were counted, and Proclamation made for Information in usual manner.

Mr. Poultney. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury; this
Cause is between the King and Sir Samuel Bernardiston, and it is upon an
Information exhibited by Mr. Attorney General, wherein he sets forth, That
there having been lately a Horrid Plot discovered (as appears by the
Convictions of those that have suffered justly for it, and by the Evidence that
has been given of it, has been made so apparent, that I do not question, but
that no man but who either has a hand in it, or else bears a good will to it,
does at all scruple the belief of it) Sir Samuel Bernardiston the Defendant
intending to scandalize and vilify the Evidence, wrote a Letter wherein are
contained these Sentences.

The return of the Duke of Monmouth to White Hall, and his being received into
extraordinary Favor of his Majesty, has made a strange alteration of affairs
at Court; for those that before spoke of him very indecently, now court, cringe
and creep to him. His Grace complained to the King of the scandalous
misrepresentation that was made of him in the Mondays Gazette, upon which the
Gazetter was called to account for it, who alleged for himself, that a Person
of great Quality sent him in writing the words therein recited, commanding him
to put them in the Gazette. Yesterday being the last day of the Term, all the
Prisoners that were in the Tower upon the late Sham Protestant-Plot, were
discharged upon Bayl. Mr. Bradon who prosecuted the Murder of the Earl of
Essex, the Information put in against him in the King's Bench by Mr. Attorney
for a pretended Subornation etc. was not prosecuted, and his Bail was
discharged. And the passing Sentence upon the Author of Julian the Apostate,
and the Printer of the late Lord Russels Speech was passed over with silence.
Great applications are made to his Majesty for the pardoning Mr. Sidney in the
Tower, which is believed will be attained, and that he will be banished. The
Lord Howard appears despicable in the eyes of all men; he is under guard at
White Hall, and it is believed will be sent to the Tower, for that the Duke of
Monmouth will accuse him concerning the Testimony he has given, and the
Papists and High Tories are quite down in the mouth, their Pride is abated,
themselves and their Plot confounded, but their Malice is not aswaged. It Is
generally said the Earl of Essex was murdered. The brave Lord Russel is afresh
lamented. The Plot is lost here, except you in the Country can find it out
amongst the Adressers and Abhorrers. This sudden turn is an amazement to all
men, and must produce some strange events, which a little time will show.

And then he goes on further, and says in another Letter these words.

I am to answer yours of the 27 and 29 th. past, and truly I cannot but with
great sorrow lament the loss of our good Friend honest Mr. John Wright, but
with patience we must submit to the Almighty, who can as well raise up
Instruments to do his work, as change hearts, of which we have so great an
instance in the business of the Duke of Monmouth, that no Age or History can
parallel. I am now thoroughly satisfied, that what was printed in the Mondays
Gazette is utterly false, and you will see it publicly declared so shortly.
The King is never pleased but when he is with him, has commanded all the Privy
Council to wait upon him, and happy is he that has most of his favor. His
Pardon was sealed and delivered to him last Wednesday. It Is said he will be
restored to be Master of the Horse, and be called into the Council Table, and
to all his other places, and it is reported he will be made Captain General of
all the Forces, and Lord High Admiral, etc. he treats all his old Friends that
daily visit him with great Civilities, they are all satisfied with his
integrity, and if God spares his life, doubt not but he will be an Instrument
of much good to the King' and Kingdom. He said publicly, That he knew my Lord
Russel was as Loyal a Subject as any in England, and that His Majesty believed
the same now. I intend shortly to wait on him my self. It would make you laugh
to see how strangely our High-Tories and Clergy are mortified, their
Countenances speak it. Were my Shesorary to be moved for now it would be
readily granted. Sr. George is grown very humble: It Is said Mr. Sidney is
reprieved for 40 days, which bodes well.

And then, Gentlemen, he goes on further, and in a third Letter says,

The late change here in public affairs is so great and strange, that we are
like men in a dream, can hardly believe what we see, and fear we are not fit
for so great a mercy as the present juncture seems to promise. The Sham
Protestant-Plot is quite lost and confounded. The Earl of Mackensfield is
bringing Actions of Scandalis Magnatum against all the Grand Jurymen that
indicted him at last Assizes.


L. Chapter J. That is the only true thing in the whole.


Mr. Poultney reads --

And the several Gentlemen that were indicted in Cheshire and Northamptonshire
will bring their several Actions at Law against them.

And, Gentlemen, then in a fourth Letter are contained these Expressions.

Contrary to all men's expectations, a Warrant is signed at last for beheading
Col. Sidney at Tower Hill next Friday. Great endeavors have been used to
obtain his Pardon, but the contrary Party have carried it, which much dasheth
our hopes, but God still governs.

Gentlemen, all this the Information says, he has done against the peace of
the King, his Crown and Dignity. To this he has pleaded Not Guilty. We will
call our Witnesses, and if we prove it, we question not but you will find him
Guilty.


Mr. Recorder. May it please your Lordship and you Gentlemen of the Jury; I am
of Counsel for the King in this cause. Upon the opening of these Letters to
you, you cannot but wonder much more than he does that wrote them. His matter
of wonder was one way, and I suppose your matter of wonder is another way, that
a man, such an one as he is, should have that confidence to write such Letters
as these are. Gentlemen, I do not doubt but you observe in the Series of these
Letters how he has traveled through all the transactions of this horrid
Conspiracy, that was of late contrived against the life of the King, and the
life of his Royal Highness, and for the destruction of the Government; and how
he does endeavor to turn it all into ridicule, and to magnify the men, that
have come to public Justice for being concerned in that horrid Conspiracy, as
being very brave men. The brave Lord Russel he is lamented as a brave man lost;
The Earl of Essex, he forsooth was murdered, and Mr. Bradden who prosecuted
that murder, he is a brave man, whom I suppose some of you have heard of, and
what is become of him, how he is convicted of one of the most notorious Facts
that ever was acted by man in any Civil Government, which was that Bradden
should go up and down to get witnesses to make it appear to the World, as
though somebody had murdered that Earl. Thus you see he goes through the
Conspiracy from one thing to another, and calls it a Sham Protestant-Plot, and
all to ridicule the discovery, which by these very Letters you may easily be
satisfied of the reality and extent of. You see how he magnifies his Julian,
but he likewise is come to condign punishment for that most pernicious and
scandalous Libel. In the next place he comes to the Duke of Monmouth, and tells
you what a brave man they have in him, to be their Captain General, and he did
not doubt but to see him come to it; and sets forth that he has denied all the
Plot, and how he does persist in that denial. And this Gentleman has raised his
confidence in these Letters to that degree, that I think, any man that has
lived any time in this Nation, cannot but wonder, that ever there should be
such an impudent action committed in it. Gentlemen, we shall call our Witnesses
and prove it positively upon him, that these Letters he did write, and then I
suppose he will give an account how he came to write them.


Mr. Herbert. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury. I
have but one word which I desire to observe; for the opening of the Case, and a
right understanding of the matter will have a great influence upon the proofs.
And I shall not insist upon any thing that has been opened at large out of the
Letters, but one thing I would observe to you, and that is out of the last
Letter. Great endeavors have been used to obtain his pardon, but the contrary
Party have carried it, which much dasheth our hopes. So it seems by this that
the Faction, the Party, have their hopes still, and it seems likewise the
Writer of these Letters, has a very great share in them. We have Gentlemen,
nothing to do here before you, but to prove that Sir Samuel Bernardiston was
the Author, Writer and Publisher of the Letters, which contain that which is
charged in the Information, and that we question not but to prove clearly
without contradiction.


Call Mr. Blathwait.


who was sworn.

Mr. Herbert. Pray give in the Letters.


which was done

Mr. Recorder. Pray Sir, look upon those Letters, and give the Court and the
Jury an account where you had them.


Mr. Blathwait. Gentlemen of the Jury, these three Letters Sir Samuel
Bernardiston upon the 10 th. of December, before the King and the Lords of the
Council did own to be of his handwriting. I marked them at that instant of
time, and I am well assured they are the Letters he owned to be of his
handwriting.


Mr. Williams. Did he own them to be of his handwriting?


Mr. Blathwaite. Yes.


L. Chapter J. Did he own them all three?


Mr. Blathwaite. Yes, my Lord, he did.


Mr. Williams. Pray Sir, who are they directed to?


L. Chapter J. Mr. Williams, He is informed against for writing not for
superscribing.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I ask that question for this reason, He is indicted for
writing and publishing, therefore I would know who they are directed to.

Did he say they were published by him, or sent to any one?


Mr. Blathwaite. He did not deny but that he had published and sent them.


Mr. Williams. Did he confess it?


Mr. Blathwaite. He did not deny it.


L. Chapter J. I suppose they on the other side will give an account where they
were taken.


Mr. Herbert. Yes my Lord. Swear Mr. Atterbury.


which was done

Mr. Recorder. Hark you, Mr. Atterbury, do you know any thing of these Letters?


Mr. Atterbury. If you please to let me see them, Sir.


Mr. Recorder. Show him them


which was done, and he looked upon them, and gave them in again.

Mr. Herbert. Did you hear Sir Samuel Barnardiston own them to be his Letters?


Mr. Atterbury. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I had a Warrant from
Mr. Secretary Jenkyns, about two months, or ten weeks ago, to apprehend Sir
Samuel Barnardiston, and I did, according to Order, by Virtue of that Warrant,
apprehend him, and carry him before His Majesty. When he was there, those three
Letters I had just now in my hand, were then shown to Sir Samuel Bernardiston.
I marked them, and know them to be the same; Sir Samuel Bernardiston did own he
wrote them Letters all three.


L. Chapter Just. Were the Superscriptions upon them all, as they are now?


Mr. Atterb. Yes, they were all as they are now.


L. Chapter Just. What say you, Mr. Blathwaite?


Mr. Blathwaite. Yes, they were just so, the same Superscriptions.


Mr. Atterb. His Majesty asked him, Who subscribed them? --


L. Chapter Just. Superscribed them, thou meanest, they are not subscribed.


Mr. Atterb. Yes, my Lord, superscribed them; and he looked on them once again,
and said, They were superscribed by one of his Servants, and so ordered to be
carried to the Post House.


Mr. Recorder. Where is Nehemiah Osland?


Jury-man. My Lord, We would ask the Witness, Whether he did own, that he sent
them to the Post House?


L. Chapter Just. He says he ordered his Man to superscribe them, and so to carry
them to the Post House.


Mr. Williams. Look you, Mr. Atterbury, Did he say he directed any of his
Servants to carry them to the Post House, upon your Oath?


Mr. Atterb. I am upon my Oath, Sir; I say, that he did say, that they were
superscribed by some of his Servants, he could not say which of his Servants it
was, and then they were sent to the Post House.


Mr. Williams. Pray, Sir, mind, and answer my Question, Did he say he directed
any of his Servants to carry them to the Post House?


L. C. Just. Did he take any Notice to you, or did you understand by him, that
they were sent to the Post House by his consent?


Mr. Atterbury. Yes, my Lord, I did understand him so.


L. C. Just. Did he write these Letters to keep them in his Pocket, do you
think, Mr. Williams?


Mr. Williams. I do not know what he designed them for, my Lord; nor do I yet
know, till they are read, what is in them: But I ask him this Question, Did he
say he sent them to the Post House?


Mr. Atterb. With your leave, I remember one thing more, my Lord; while he was
in my House, (for there he was in Custody two days or more) talking about these
Letters, says he, I wonder how they were taken, they were sent to Sir Skippon,
or some such Name he named.


Mr. Recorder. Swear Nehemiah Osland.


which was done.

Mr. Herbert. Look upon those Letters, Sir, show him them.


which was done.

L. Chapter Just. Is this man's Name Osland?


Mr. Recorder. Yes, Nehemiah Osland. Do you know any thing of those
Superscriptions?


Osland. Two of those Superscriptions I writ by his Order as his Servant.


Mr. Recorder. Which are those two? Then he gave them into the Court.


L. C. Just. Can you tell whose Hand is the other part?


Osland. I did not see it writ, but the Hand is somewhat like Sir Samuel
Bernardiston's Hand.


L. Chapter Just. You believe it to be his Hand.


Osland. Yes, I do.


Mr. Williams. Did you ever see the Inside of those Letters that you say you
superscribed?


Osland. No, I never saw the Inside.


L. Chapter Just. What Directions had you about them, after you had superscribed
them?


Osland. I had no direction but to leave them where I used to leave his
Letters, and that was in a Window that Sir Samuel Barnardiston always left his
Letters in, and from thence one of the Boys used to carry them to the
Post House.


Mr. Williams. Sir, Did Sir Samuel order you to superscribe those three
Letters, and send them to the Post House?


L. Chapter Just. He said he superscribed them by his Command, and left them in the
place that Letters used to be laid that were to go to the Post House.


Mr. Recorder. Pray Sir look upon those Letters again.


L. Chapter Just. Whose hand is the Superscription? Is that Sir Samuel's too?


Osland. I believe it Sir Samuel's hand.


L. Chapter Just. Show that other Letter to Mr. Blathwaite: that say you to it Sir?


Mr. Blathwaite. Gentlemen of the Jury: This is another Letter that was seized
and brought before the King and the Lords of the Council, and this Letter was
afterward owned by Osland, to be writ by him by Sir Samuel Barnardiston's
order.


L. Chapter Just. Did Sir Samuel own this Letter to be his Handwriting too?


Mr. Blathwaite. No, he did not, but Osland did own it.


Mr. Recorder. My Lord, We prove it otherwise to be Sir Samuel's Letter,
because it is not his hand but his Man's. You Osland, Do you know who writ that
Letter?


Osland. I writ it.


Mr. Recorder. By whose order?


Osland. I transcribed it out of a Copy given me by Sir Samuel Barnardiston, as
I was his Servant.


L. Chapter Just. And did you write the Superscription too?


Osland. Yes, I writ the Superscription.


L. Chapter Just. In order to what? To go down into the Country too?


Osland. In order to go where it was directed, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. Where was that?


Osland. Into Suffolk to Sir Philip Skippon.


L. Chapter Just. This Letter was written at London, was it not?


Osland. In Bishopsgate-street at Sir Samuel's House.


Mr. Williams. What is your name Sir?


Osland. My name is Osland.


Mr. Williams. Your Christian name?


Osland. Nehemiah.


Mr. Williams. Then, Nehemiah Osland, I ask you this Question upon your Oath,
when these Letters were superscribed by you, did you lay them in that Window
you speak of, or did you give them back again to Sir Samuel?


Osland. Sir, I am not so certain as to swear to these particular Letters; but
his usual Custom was, He would write a Letter, and then give it me to Copy: his
Closet door was near another Window, and there he would leave it. If it were
but one Letter, he would use to say, direct such a Letter to such a person, or
such a place, and when it was so directed, I was used to put my Letters there,
and thence one of the Boys came and fetched them to carry them to the
Post House. But sometimes he would send me down directly with it away to the
Post House, if he had not any other business for me to do.


Mr. Williams. But Sir, mind the question. I ask you again: Did you deliver
these Letters, or any of them back again to Sir Samuel Barnardiston, or no?


Osland. I cannot tell for these particular Letters. I tell you what the usual
Custom was in the House.


Mr. Williams. Pray when you had superscribed them, or Sir Samuel, what became
of them Letters?


Osland. They went to the Post House, as I believe.


Mr. Williams. How long have you served Sir Samuel Barnardiston?


Osland. Five months.


Mr. Williams. Did you serve any Body before?


Osland. No.


Mr. Recorder. Why, Do you think he does not serve him well now, Mr. Williams?


Mr. Williams. I know very well what I think of it Mr. Recorder.


L. Chapter Just. Well, come read them.


Clerk reads --

This is directed to Sir Philip Skippon Knight, at Ipswich, and dated November.
29. 83.


Reads

Sir, The Return of --


Mr. Williams. That is not Sir Samuels hand, I think.


L. Chapter Just. No, but writ by his Order.


Osland. I transcribed it by his special Order: For he came to me and gave me a
Letter, says he, Go and make a Copy of this Letter.


Mr. Recorder. And you did transcribe it exactly as it was in the Paper he gave
you?


Osland. I examined it after I had writ it my self, and read it over again.


L. Chapter Just. What did you write it out of?


Osland. A Copy he gave me.


L. Chapter Just. Was that Copy his Handwriting?


Osland. I did not see him write it, but I believe it to be his writing.


L. Chapter Just. Come read it.


Clerk reads --

Sir,
The return of the Duke of Monmouth to White Hall, and his being received into
extraordinary favor of His Majesty, has made a strange alteration of Affairs
at Court: For those that before spoke of him very indecently, now court,
cringe, and creep to him. His Grace complained to the King of the scandalous
misrepresentation that was made of him in the Mondays Gazette, upon which the
Gazetter was called to account for it, who alleged for himself, That a Person
of great Quality sent him in writing the Words therein recited, commanding him
to put them in the Gazette.

Yesterday being the last day of the Term, all the Prisoners that were in the
Tower upon the late sham Protestant Plot, were discharged upon Bail. Mr.
Bradden, who prosecuted the murder of the Earl of Essex, the Information put in
against him in the Kings Bench by Mr. Attorney (for a pretended subornation)
etc. was not prosecuted, and his Bail was discharged. And the passing Sentence
upon the Author of Julian the Apostate, and the Printer of the late Lord
Russel's Speech, was passed over with silence. Great applications are made to
his Majesty for the pardoning Mr. Sidney in the Tower, which is believed will
be attained, and that he will be banished.

The Lord Howard appears despicable in the Eyes of all men, he is under a Guard
at White Hall, and believed he will be sent to the Tower, for that the D. of M.
will accuse him concerning the Testimony he has given, etc.

The Papists and high Tories are quite down in the mouth, their Pride is
abated, themselves and their Plot confounded, but their malice is not assuaged.
It Is generally said, the Earl of Essex was murdered, the brave Lord Russel is
afresh lamented. The Plot is lost here, except you in the Country can find it
out amongst the Addressors and Abborrers.

This sudden turn is an amazement to all men, and must produce some strange
Events, which a little time will show.



Mr. Recorder. Now, go on to the next. The second Letter.


Clerk. Reads --

This is directed, To Sir Philip Skippon Knight, at Ipswich, Suffolk.


L. Chapter Just. That is one of his own writing.


Mr. Recorder. Yes, my Lord.


Clerk. It is dated London the primo December, 1683.

Dear Sir,
I am to answer Yours of the 27th and 29th past, and truly I cannot but with
great sorrow lament the loss of our good Friend honest Mr. John Wright, but
with patience we must submit to the Almighty, who can as well raise up
Instruments to do his Work, as change Hearts, of which we have so great an
Instance in the business of the Duke of Monmouth, that no Age or History can
parallel. I am now thoroughly satisfied, that what was Printed in the Mondays
Gazette is utterly false, and you will see it publicly so declared shortly.
The King is never pleased but when he is with him, has commanded all the Privy
Council to wait upon him, and happy is he that has most of his favor. His
Pardon was sealed and delivered to him last Wednesday. It Is said, he will be
restored to be Master of the Horse, and be called into the Council Table, and
to all his other Places^ And it is reported, he will be made Captain General of
all the Forces, and Lord High Admiral, etc. He treats all his old Friends that
daily visit him, with great Civilities; they are all satisfied with his
Integrity, and if God spares his Life, doubt not but he will be an Instrument
of much good to the King and Kingdom. He said publicly, that he knew my Lord
Russel was as Loyal a Subject as any in England, and that His Majesty believed
the same now. I intend shortly to wait on him my self. It would make make you
laugh to see how strangely our high Tories and Clergy are mortified their
Countenance speaks it. Were my Shesorary to be moved, for now it would be
readily granted. Sir George is grown very humble. It Is said Mr. Sidney is
reprieved for 40 days, which bodes well.

Mr. Kedder sat with me sometime this Evening.



L. Chapter Just. There is no more in the Record.


Mr. Recorder. No my Lord. Then go on to the third.


Clerk. This is directed, For Mr. Edward Gael, Linen Draper at Ipswich.


Mr. Williams. Is it likely he should write these Letters to a Draper?


L. Chapter J. It is, it seems, the ordinary riff-raff he writes. He thinks it not
below him to keep a Correspondence with all the scoundrels of his Party in the
Country.


Mr. Recorder. Ay, all sorts of Trades he is acquainted with.


Clerk. It is dated the primo December, 1683.


Reads --

Mr. Gael
This Evening Mr. Kedder came and sat with me --



L. Chapter J. Will you have it all read?


Mr. Williams. No, my Lord, we do not desire it.


L. Chapter J. Then read what is in the Record.


Mr. Recorder. Look where that Passage begins, The late Change. --


Clerk. Where is it Sir? It is not marked.


L. Chapter J. If you cannot find it out, then read the whole.


Clerk. Reads --

Mr. Gael,
This Evening Mr. Kedder came and sat with me, when acquainted him what you and
others writ me in reference to himself, as also of the Death of Mr. Wright,
which he was sorry for. He protested, if could persuade his Wife, he would
accept of Ipswich choice, notwithstanding all the Discouragement he had met
with. One more he acquainted me with, that had seen a Letter from Mr. Cutliffe
to Dr. Clegat, extremely discouraging him from coming to Ipswich, where if he
did come, said, would find himself mistaken, for that would never enjoy
quietness or peace, notwithstanding his Balsamic temper, etc. as he called it.
These things frights Mr. Kedder, who I am now persuading so soon as is up
again, to go down for a month or two, and then if does not like the place and
people, may return hither again. This I resolve to press hard on Monday, when
have promised to Dine with me, as also Mr. Hodges. Be confident, I shall think
nothing too much to effect this Business, though one or other still pulls down
as fast as I build up -- Here is now a Door of Encouragement opened for sober
men to come into public Employment. You will undo the Town of Ipswich if you
bring not sober men into play: For Gods sake consider of it. Persuade Mr.
Snelling, or some sober men, to come in their two Ports-mens places void for
other matters, refer you to Sir P. the late Change here in Public Affairs, is
so great and strange.



L. Chapter J. There begins the Passage in the Record.


Clerk reads --

The late Change here in Public Affairs is so great and strange, that we are
like men in a Dream, can hardly believe what we see, and fear we are not fit
for so great a mercy as the present Juncture seems to promise. The Earl of
Mackensfeild is bringing Actions of Scandalis Magnatum against all the Grand
Jurymen that Indicted him at last Assizes. And the several Gentlemen that were
Indicted in Cheshire and Northamptonshire, will bring their several Actions at
Law against them. Acquaint Mr. Snilling --


L. Chapter J. There is all that is in the Record.


Mr. Recorder. There are but two Lines more.


Clerk reads --

Acquaint Mr. Snilling we received the two Barrels of Oysters, and two Couple
of Ducks, and desire him to take money of Buckle for them. I rest,

Yours.



Mr. Recorder. Now go on to the next.


Clerk. This is the fourth Letter: It is directed to Mr. William Cavell, at
Brightwell near Ipswich in Suffolk, and dated London the 4th of December, 1683.
Shall I read it all?


L. Chapter J. No, no: If you can find that part that is in the Record, Contrary to
most men's expectations, there it begins.


Clerk. Reads --

Contrary to most men's expectations a Warrant is Signed at last for Beheading
Colonel Sidney at Tower Hill next Friday. Great endeavors have been used to
obtain his Pardon, but the contrary Party have carried it, which much dasheth
our hopes, but God still governs. Acquaint Buckle. --


L. Chapter J. There is all.


Clerk. Here is but a line more


reads

Acquaint Buckle, here is no news of Crafton Hoy, notwithstanding the wind is
fair, it is his practice always to loyter by the way. I rest,

Your loving Friend.



Mr. Williams. Pray let me see that Letter.


Mr. Recorder. We have done, my Lord, we leave it here.


L. Chapter J. Well, what say you to it that are for the Defendant?


Mr. Williams. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I am
of Counsel here for the Defendant Sir Samuel Barnardiston, and the question now
before you is, Whether this Gentleman be knowingly guilty of the writing and
publishing these four Letters that have been read here to you, and which of
them he is guilty of writing, and which not? I do not see see that his name is
put to any of them, nay, the Letters are not subscribed by any body, and that,
Gentlemen; you may see by looking upon the Letters. For the Evidence that has
been given, I beseech your Lordship to observe what it is. As to his publishing
of them I see no Evidence at all to prove him any way concerned in that: some
of them indeed are his own hand writing, and proved to be his Letters, by his
own confession before the King and Council; that Mr. Blathwaite and Mr.
Atterbury the Messenger swear directly, That Sir Samuel Barnardiston did own
the Letters, but for the fourth they say he did disown that to be his Letter,
and it is not so much as his hand; but what proof is it they have brought to
apply this to him? You see what a sort of proof is made: They produce you here
a young man that was (as it happened) his Servant at this time, and lived in his
Family with him in the nature of a Secretary, it seems; and how fit he was to
be entertained in that Quality, you I question not observe. He says, he did
Copy this Letter by the direction of his Master. It is well if he did not keep
a Copy himself by him of such a Letter as this for a particular use, as some
honest Servants have done before now, that have designed somewhat of advantage
to themselves: But that is his Evidence about this fourth Letter. That then
Gentlemen which we would offer on behalf of the Defendant, is this, Whether
there be any Evidence of the publishing of these Letters by Sir Samuel
Barnardiston, either of all or any, and which of them? All the proof that I
hear, comes from Atterbury, and the Clerk of the Council Mr. Blathwaite, which
is but this: Atterbury says, that Sir Samuel should say, they were sent to the
Post House; and Mr. Blathwaite says, he did not deny the publishing of them,
but he does not say, he confessed it. As to the sending to the Post House, if
it be true, I shall leave it to your Lordship how far that, my Lord, can be a
publishing of a Libel; whether that be a publishing within the Information, or
no? A Gentleman writes a Letter to a private Friend, and sends it to the
Post House; whether that be a publishing of a Libel, I leave it to you? For the
fourth Letter, this same trusty Secretary cannot tell you, whether he delivered
it back again to Sir Samuel, or no; or whether he put it in the window; or
whether he delivered it in at the Post House, only, as he believes, he laid it
in the window as he used to do other Letters. But whatever he believes must not
pass for Evidence, especially in mate^rs of this nature, it being a great
Crime, as the Information has set it forth. If then there is no proof (as with
submission I hope there is not) of the publication of these Letters, I suppose,
Gentlemen, you will not take it upon your Oaths, that he is Guilty of what he
is here accused of without Evidence. This Information, Gentlemen, does mention
several things which do very much aggravate the matter, if they were proved.
Many things are laid in it to induce the Information, and which may much
enhance the Crime, but of which I see no manner of proof at all. Many things
are mentioned as Facts leading to the main Fact, which is the great Offense;
but these not being proved upon him, I desire he may be acquitted of that part.


L. Chapter J. What do you mean, Mr. Williams?


Mr. Williams. Of all your Preamble.


L. Chapter J. What Preamble do you mean?


Mr. Williams. That he being a Person of a turbulent and unquiet Spirit --


L. Chapter J. Why Mr. Williams, would you have the Jury find that he is not so?


Mr. Williams. My Lord, there is no proof of it; or that he did do it with a
Design seditiously to disturb the Peace, that he did it with a seditious Intent.


L. Chapter J. You would have the Jury find, I warrant, that he did it piously, and
with a good intent.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, there is a middle way --


L. Chapter J. No, no, Mr. Williams, Let us have none of that Doctrine, we must
have a care of that, and your middle ways. For certainly the Law supplies the
proof, if the thing it self speaks malice and sedition. As it is in Murder, we
say always in the Indictment, He did it by the Instigation of the Devil: Can
the Jury, if they find the Fact, find he did it not by such Instigation? No,
that does necessarily attend the very nature of such an action, or thing. So,
in Informations for Offenses of this nature, we say, He did it falsely,
maliciously, and seditiously, which are the formal words; but, If the nature of
the thing be such as necessarily imports malice, reproach, and scandal to the
Government, there needs no proof but of the Fact done, the Law supplies the
rest. If the Fact were indifferent in it self, then to make a Crime of it, the
accidental Circumstances must be proved, but it needs not where the thing
implies malice in its own nature. You would have the Jury find he had no ill
Design in it; he did it with a good intent, I warrant you.


Mr. Williams. All I would ask, my Lord, is but this --


L. Chapter J. Do you think he did it to serve the Crown? If the Jury will take it
upon their Oaths that Sir Samuel Barnardiston wrote these Letters to serve the
Crown, you say something. Pray ask them that Question: Try if you can make them
believe that, Mr. Williams.


Mr. Williams. There is no Evidence given about his malice.


L. Chapter Just. Yes, the very thing is Evidence of it self.


Mr. Williams. Pray, my Lord, let the Fact lie upon its own weight: There is no
proof given of any of these aggravating things.


L. Chapter Just. How shall any man prove another man's malice, which is a thing
that lies only in a man's mind? How should any man know that I am malicious
against the Government, but by my Actions?


Mr. Williams. I lay it before your Lordship and the Jury.


L. Chapter J. No proof can be expected, but what the nature of every thing will
bear.


Mr. Williams. Then I pray this, my Lord, that I may be at liberty next Term if
we be convicted to urge this, and observe in mitigation of the Punishment, that
there was nothing of these things proved.


L. Chapter J. Urge what you can in its proper time, but offer nothing here but
what is fit to be offered.


Mr. Williams. Here are mentioned in this Information, (though it be by way of
Inducement, yet they must be proved) things that are matters of Record, but
they have proved none of them.


L.ChapterJ. Have you any of those Records here, the Convictions of my Lord Russel
and Colonel Sidney?


Mr. Recorder. Those things are so well known, I suppose they will not contest
them.


Mr. Williams. Sir, I must lay hold on all advantages for my Client. You have
made them part of your Case, pray prove them.


Mr. Recorder. Truly, My Lord, We did not think they would have made that any
Question, and we have them not here. They know it well enough to be true.


Lord Chapter Just. If you have them not here, go and find them; if they insist
upon it, you must prove them. I will stay till you fetch them.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, we would not hinder your Lordships business. --


Lord Chapter Just. No, no, It will be no hindrance, I will do something else in
the mean time. This is a Cause of public Example and Consequence, and I will
give it all the fair hearing I can.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, If you please there is I suppose no such haste of
Trying this Cause now, to hinder business and keep you here longer than needs.
This Cause may as well be Tried the beginning of next Term.


Lord Chapter Just. No, no, I will make an end of it now, if I stay never so long
for it; indeed the Defendant says, I am down in the mouth: It Is true, I have
got a little hoarsness, but I thank God, my heart is not down, nor I hope never
will be to serve the Government.


Mr. Williams. If they will, they shall find the Letters without the Records.


Mr. Jones. No, no, We must have the Records, though it is true, it is but
matter of Form, yet we must prove our whole Case.


Lord Chapter Just. Well, I will stay till they are fetched. Let the Jury stand by,
and I will go on and Try another Cause, and in the mean time, fetch these
Records. Do not make two journeys, but bring all that are mentioned in the
Record.


Then the Jury were set by, and the Court went on in some other Causes, and
about an hour and a half after, the Records were brought, and this Cause was
resumed, and Proceeded thus.

Lord Chapter Just. Well come, Have you those Records now?


Mr. Recorder. Yes, Swear Mr. Tindal.


which was done.

Is that a true Copy?


Mr. Tindal. Yes, it is a true Copy of the Indictment, Conviction and Attainder
of my Lord Russel. I examined it with Mr. Tanner.


Lord Chapter Just. Well, put it in.


And then a word of it was read by the Clerk.

Mr. Recorder. And here is the Record it self of the Attainder of Col. Sidney.


which was some part of it read also.

Lord Chapter Just. What say you now to it, Gentlemen, for the Defendant?


Mr. Thompson. My Lord, I have nothing more to say, than has been said.


Lord Chapter Just. All this was well enough known.


Mr. Jones. Ay, but they would give the Court all the trouble they could, by
making them send for that, which they could not deny.


Lord Chapter Just. Gentlemen of the Jury, Here is an Information exhibited against
Sir Samuel Bernardiston, and the Information sets forth this matter. It does
take notice of a horrid Conspiracy, a damnable Conspiracy, lately hatched and
set on foot for the Destruction of the King, and for the Subversion of the
Government, That there were diverse Persons who were Indicted, and stood
Convicted, and were afterward Executed for this horrid Conspiracy. Among the
rest, there is notice taken of my Lord Russel for one, and Colonel Sidney, (he
went by that name, Algernon Sidney I mean) for another, to be two of those
Conspirators that were engaged in that damnable Conspiracy for the Destruction
of the King, and Subversion of the Government.

Now Gentlemen, That these Persons according to the inducement of this
Information, were so Indicted, so Attainted and Executed (as far forth as is
recited in the Information) is proved to you by the two Records, which the
Counsel on the other side insisted to have shown, and which have been now
produced. The one is sworn to be a true Copy of the Conviction and Attainder of
my Lord Russel, and the other which they produced was the Record it self of the
Conviction and Attainder of Sidney. So that, as to that part it is plain, they
were Convicted and Attainted, both the one and the other, as Actors in that
Hellish Plot.

The next thing, Gentlemen, and which was so much insisted upon by the
Defendants Counsel, is this: The Information takes notice that the Defendant
Sir Samuel Bernardiston, being a man of a Factious, Seditious, Disaffected
temper toward the Government, a man of ill Principles, in order to disturb,
disquiet, and discompose the Government, he did cause several Letters, Four in
Number, to be Writ and Published, which Letters have been read unto you.

It has been objected, That in as much as the words, Falsely, Seditiously,
Maliciously, Factiously, and the like words are in the Information, they would
have you believe, That there being no Evidence of any such thing, as Faction,
Malice and Sedition, or that the man did it Maliciously, and Advisedly and
Seditiously (which are the words in the Premises, as I may call them, or the
Preamble of the Information) therefore they must be acquitted of that part. Now
as to that, I told them then, and tell you now, Gentlemen, That no man living
can discover the malicious evil Designs and Intentions of any other man, so as
to give Evidence of them, but by their words and actions. No man can prove what
I intend, but by my words and actions. Therefore if one does compass and
imagine the death of the King, that by our Law, is High Treason; but whether or
no he be guilty of this Treason, so as to be convicted of it by another, is not
proveable, or discoverable, but by some words or actions, whereby the
imagination may be manifested. And therefore my imagining, my compassing, which
is private in my own mind, must be submitted to the Judgment that Reason and
the Law passes upon my words or actions, and then the action it self being
proved, that discovers with what mind the thing was done; as in the Case I put
before to the Counsel. Suppose any man without provocation kill another, the
words of the Indictment are, That he did it Maliciously, Feloniously, not
having the fear of God before his eyes, but being moved and seduced by the
instigation of the Devil. Now all these things, whether he had the fear of God
before his eyes, or not; or whether he were moved by the instigation of the
Devil, and of his Malice forethought or no; these cannot be known, till they
come to be proved by the action that is done.

So that in case any Person does write Libels, or publish any expressions which
in themselves carry Sedition and Faction, and ill will toward the Government;
I cannot tell well how to express it otherwise in his Accusation, than by such
words, that he did it Seditiously, Factiously, and Maliciously. And the proof
of the thing it self, proves the evil mind it was done with. If then,
Gentlemen, You believe the Defendant, Sir Samuel Bernardiston, did write and
publish these Letters, that is proof enough of the words, Maliciously,
Seditiously, and Factiously, laid in the Information.

The Letters are Factious, Seditious, and Malicious Letters, and as base as the
worst of Mankind (though he had had all the Provocation that ever could be
given a man to Libel another) could ever have invented. And let Sir Samuel
Bernardiston put it under the Countenance, or under the Umbrage, or under the
Enamel of his Zeal for the true Protestant Religion, if he will; or if he have
a mind to it, to give himself any fine Name, by calling himself one of the
Sober Party, or the Godly Party, or the Upright Party; let him gild himself,
and paint himself as he pleases, yet the inside is Rotten, and it is Factious
and Seditious at the bottom to all intents and purposes whatsoever. And if he
be Guilty of it, as you Gentlemen are to Try and Consider, the greater the Man
is, the greater the Crime, and the more Understanding he has, the more
Malicious he seems to be: For your little ordinary sort of People, that are of
common mean understanding, they may be wheedled and drawn in, and surprised
into such things; but Men of a public Figure, and of some Value in the world,
that have been taken to be Men of the greatest Interest and Reputation in a
Party, it cannot be thought a sudden surprise upon them, no it is a work of time
and thought, it is a thing fixed in his very Nature, and it shows so much
venom, as would make one think the whole Mass of his Blood were corrupted. I
had thought the Act of Oblivion might have put Sir Samuel Bernardiston in mind,
That it was not fit any more to go down to White Hall, to make Uproars, and
Tumults, and Hubbub's.

But here is the matter that he now is accused of, and here is in it malice
against the King, malice against the Government, malice against both Church and
State, malice against any Man that bears any share in the Government, indeed
malice against all Mankind that are not of the same persuasion with those
bloody Miscreants, (I cannot give them a milder Name) I mean the Conspirators
in the late damnable Conspiracy, some of whom have been Attainted and Executed
for it. Here is the Sanctifying of Traitors, that were justly Sentenced to
Execution according to the Law of the Land, and at the same time there is
joined with it the most inveterate Insinuation against the Government that can
be, as though the King was prevailed with upon a sham Protestant Plot, to do
things in order to destroy the Government it self, and every one of the Sober
Party, as they call themselves. For these persons could not have suffered, but
as Condemned according to the Rules of Law, but these Letters carry an
Insinuation as if they were cut off by a Sham-Trick and design. For after the
good News of the Reprieve of Sidney was contradicted, the Warrant for his
Execution is taken notice of, and you see the manner of expression that is
used, their Party has prevailed, as though the putting the Laws in Execution,
and Hanging of Traitors, were such a thing, that a Party must be set up to
prevail to do it, and Mankind must be divided into Parties, their Party and our
Party, and the contrary Party, they have prevailed, and truly now our Party,
the Sober Party, as he calls it, are in a very sad condition.

Then here is, as I said, the Sainting of Two horrid Conspirators; here is the
L. Russel Sainted, that blessed Martyr, my L. Russel, that good Man, that
excellent Protestant, he is lamented, and what an extraordinary Man he was, who
was fairly Tried, and justly Convicted and Attainted, for having a hand in this
horrid Conspiracy against the Life of the KING, and his dearest Brother His
ROYAL HIGHNESS, and for the subversion of the Government. And here is Mr.
Sidney Sainted, what an extraordinary Man he was? yes surely, he was a very
good Man, because you may some of you remember, or have read the History of
those times, and know what share Mr. Sidney had in that black and horrid
Villainy, that cursed Treason and Murder, the Murder I mean of King Charles the
First of Blessed Memory, a shame to Religion it self, a perpetual reproach to
the Island we live in, to think that a Prince should be brought by pretended
Methods of Law and Justice to such an end at his own Palace. And it is a shame
to think, that such bloody Miscreants should be Sainted and lamented, who had
any hand in that horrid Murder and Treason, and who to their dying Minutes,
when they were upon the brink of Eternity, and just stepping into another
world, could confidently bless God for their being engaged in that Good Cause,
(as they call it) which was the Rebellion, which brought that Blessed Martyr to
His Death. It is high time for all Mankind, that have any Christianity or sense
of Heaven or Hell, to bestir themselves, to rid the Nation of such
Caterpillars, such Monsters of Villainy as these are.

Nay, In these very Letters is contained the very Language of that cursed
Murderer and Traitor Walcot himself, That God Almighty in his own time would
raise up Instruments. I know, Gentlemen, you have heard and read what that
bloody Traitor said to that effect; and you hear what expressions like it are
in these Letters, I am sorry for the death of our friend, honest Mr. John
Wright, but God can easily raise up Instruments to do his own work; the very
Language of Walcot. And I would have you take notice of it Mr. Blackerby, for I
would have you take warning by these things.


Speaking to a Gentleman that was taking Notes.

Mr. Blackerby. My Lord, I have neither said nor done any thing that should
give you occasion to speak thus to me.


Lord Chapter Just. These Letters tell you, God will be sure to raise up
Instruments, but what Instruments do they mean? Instruments of Rebellion, and
Faction, and Sedition, which they most falsely call, his own work. For it is
that Monstrous Sin Rebellion that they mean by it, Instruments of Treason,
under pretense of fighting for God Almighty they would fain be fighting against
the Government. It was the Language of the former times, wherewith they
destroyed the best of Kings, and subverted the best of Governments for a time,
and were very near having totally destroyed three Kingdoms, under pretense of
doing God good service. And when once a People pursue such Principles, and
under the pretense of Religion, endeavor to destroy Monarchy and Government it
self, it is high time for all honest men to look about them.

Nay, and you may observe, Gentlemen, another thing in these Letters, it is not
only the destruction of the Civil Government, the King and those that are in
Authority near Him that are aimed at, but all Persons that come with humble
Representations of their Loyalty to Him, all that Address themselves to the
King to show their Duty, and their dislike of that damnable Design and
Conspiracy against Him. For now (says Sir Samuel Bernardiston) all the Sham
Plot is quite blown off, and we cannot find any here, it is lost except you can
find it among the Addressers and Abhorrers in the Country, or among a parcel
of Clergymen. -- So that all Mankind, that ever thought themselves obliged to
congratulate that blessed and happy Deliverance, either to own our Thankfulness
to God for it, to whom we owe more than we are able to pay for his great Mercy
to us therein, or to express our Joy to the King, in humble Addresses,
Congratulating His Deliverance from the horrid Conspiracy lately designed
against Him, His Brother, and the Government; these Gentlemen, because they are
Loyal Subjects, and desire to show themselves so, must be branded with the
Names of Abhorrers, Torys, Addressers, Sham-Plotters, and all the Ignominy they
can lay upon them. This shows it was not only aimed at the Civil Magistracy,
but at all that dare be honest and oppose Faction and Rebellion.

As for any thing that he has said of me, Sir Samuel Bernardiston shall write
and speak of me as long as he pleases. But though he says, I am down in the
mouth; it is true, I have a little lost my Tongue by my cold, yet I hope I
shall never lose my Heart nor Spirit to serve the Government, nor forbear to
use my utmost diligence to see that such Offenders as these Persons, that
entertain Principles so destructive to the Government, be brought to condign
punishment. And be they who they will, were they my own Brothers, I should be
of the same mind, and in that mind I hope in God I shall live and die.

Gentlemen, the question before you is, whether the Defendant be guilty of
Writing these Malicious, Seditious Letters; for that they are Malicious and
Factious, no honest Man can doubt in the least, and I do not find that the
Counsel for the Defendant do offer to say any thing in defense of the Letters,
or can say, but that they are as venomous Malicious, Seditious, Factious,
Tumultuous Letters as can be Written, and I must tell you, tread very near upon
the Borders of High Treason it self. I am sure I may venture to call it Cozen
German to High Treason.

Now that he did Write and publish them, you have this proof before you: Mr.
Blathwaite tells you, That Sir Samuel did own three of them, acknowledge them
to be his own Writing before His Sacred Majesty in Council. Atterbury the
Messenger says, he was by too when he did before the King acknowledge the
Writing of those Three Letters. As to the Superscription to one of those Three
Letters, you have the testimony of Osland, the young Man that lived with Sir
Samuel Bernardiston, he Swears he Writ it by his direction, being his Servant.
And as to the Fourth Letter, this young Man does directly swear, that the
Original he Copied it by (for it is his Writing) he had from Sir Samuel
Bernardiston, and 'twas of Sir Samuel's own Writing, (which he knows well,
being acquainted with his Hand) and that Sir Samuel expressly directed him to
Copy it out, which he did by his Command, and this is the same Letter; and so
though it is not under his hand, yet it is under his Man's, and Written by his
direction. And he says he does believe the other Three to be his Handwriting.
So as to the Dictating and Writing of these Letters, you have as full and as
plain a proof as can be made.

And as to his Publishing of them, which is another part of the Information,
and of which Mr. Williams said there was no proof, I would say but this to you.
Is it not very preposterous, absurd and senseless, to think that ever it should
enter into any Man's imagination, that Sir Samuel Bernardiston would take such a
wonderful deal of pains and care to Write these Letters to Sir Philip Skippon,
and to the other Two Men, to tell them of his endeavors to take off Mr.
Kedders scruples, and persuade him to go down to Ipswich, and to desire them to
take care of the Sober Party, and endeavor to get Sober Men into play, and all
will do well, and that the Duke of Monmouth had denied all the Plot, and so
given the lie to the King and the Courts of Justice, and now there was a door
opened for Sober Men to come in, and God would raise up Instruments, and the
Sober Party will up again. Do you think, I say, he would Write all this Fustian
stuff, (for I can call it no better than stuff, though it be very malicious
stuff) and carry to his Man to Copy out, and Superscribe them and Seal them,
only to put them in his Pocket? If you can believe this, upon my word you have
a Faith able to remove great Mountains; but I assure you my Faith cannot get to
that strength.

But for further Proof of the publishing, you hear what the young man that was
the Defendants Servant says. He tlles you the usual way of dealing with Sir
Samuel's Letters was this, There was a Window near Sir Samuel's Closet, and
when the Letters were Sealed up, they were used to be put there in order that
the Boy according to the usual course might carry them to the Post House. And
he does believe these Letters (though he cannot Particularly and Positively
speak to them) were so used.

Besides all this, you have it by Atterbury Positively Sworn, that about the
same time that Sir Samuel Bernardiston did acknowledge before the King, that he
Writ those Letters, being in his Custody, he did say they were sent to the
Post House, and he wondered how they came by 'em. That proves it was done by his
privity. And beyond all there is this Circumstance, that the thing speaks it
self, they are directed to Men at Ipswich, where Sir Samuel Bernardiston is
known to have a correspondence, they take notice of the receipt of Letters from
thence, and of the Death of Mr. Wright, mentioned in those Letters, which shows
them to be Answers to Letters received, and must not these think you be sent,
but kept still in his Pocket? There is notice also taken in them, of their
Country affairs: Though they seemed to have met with some disappointment in
such a business about Mr. Kedder, yet they were resolved to go on, and desires
them to communicate this business of Mr. Kedder and Dr. Clegitt, to such and
such of our friends, and desire them to bestir themselves, and get in Sober
Men, such as Mr. Kedder among them. For it is mightily for our advantage, that
there should be Sober Men brought into play at Ipswich, and pray be sure to
keep the Sober Party up. These things in their own nature speak, that these
Letters were intended and Written, in order to preserve a correspondence
between those of the Sober Party in Ipswich, and their friends here, and
therefore you may easily conclude what was to be done with them.

So that, Gentlemen, this Information surely (if ever any was) is fully proved,
as it is laid in all the parts of it.

I would not have given you so much trouble at this time in an Affair of this
Nature, that has been so evidently proved, because your Question that you are
to Try, is only, Whether the Defendant be Guilty of this Offense, or not
Guilty? (You are not to inflict the Penalty, that is the Province of the Court
above;) but only because I see it is a matter of great Expectation and
Consequence. I would not we should be gulled twice in one Age, by the self-same
Men, and the self-same Way, into the same Treason and Rebellion, and all those
other Mischiefs, that dreadful Chaos and State of Confusion, Misery and
Destruction, that we were brought into in the late Times. And that has made me
take so much notice now in this Place of the Tendency of Things of this Nature,
that we may learn to beware of, and know these Men that carry Sheeps clothing,
pretend Zeal and Religion, but their Insides are Wolves. They are Traitors in
their Minds, whatsoever they are in their outward pretenses.


Then the Jury laid their Heads together in the place where they stood, and
being presently after agreed upon their Verdict, the Foreman gave it in,

That the Defendant Sir Samuel Bernardiston was Guilty of the Offense and
Misdemeanour Charged on him by the Information.

Which Verdict was Recorded by the Clerk.

FINIS.

