THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF JOHN GILES, That Notorious Ruffian, For that he,
in the Company of two more, fell upon, and Grievously Wounded John Arnold Esquire
OF Monmouth-Shire, One of His Majesty's Justices of the Assizes, in a place
called Jackanapes-Lane, between Bell-Yard and Chancery Lane, near Temple Bar,
on the 15th of April last past: With several Remarkable Circumstances
appertaining thereunto; the like Cruelty not happening in any Age. This being a
Warning to all Protestants, to beware of Bloody Papists for the future, etc.
THe Trial of John Giles being put off on Thursday last, by reason of his not
having, as he pleaded, his Witnesses in readiness, for want of timely Notice,
was brought on this Wednesday, being the 14th of this instant July, 1680. After
the Jury was Sworn the Indictment was read, being in Words to this effect, That
the Prisoner John Giles, of the Parish of St. Dunstans in the West, did on the
15th of April last past, set upon, and grievously wound, John Arnold Esquire one of
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Monmouth; and that he,
with the rest of his Accomplices and Abettors; did endeavor to take away the
Life of John Arnold Esquire etc. After which Mr. Arnold was sworn, and upon his
Oath did aver, that he having a matter of Debate between himself and one Mr.
Harbert, that was to be tried before His Majesty's Honorable Privy Council, he
came up out of Monmouth Shire to attend the same, and being arrived at London,
took him a Chamber; and that he being out somewhat late on the 15th of April,
about his Occasion, was coming through Bell-yard near Temple Bar, where he
observed two Men in Gray Camblet Cloaks to follow him, and by the glimpse of a
Candle that was brought out of a House, observed the Prisoner to be one of
them; they came out Laughing* till they came near to Jackanapes-lane, where one
of them stepping before him, the other cast his Cloak over his Head, and
forcing him, Vt and Armis, about Six or Seven yards into the said Lane, gave
him three or four Blows so hard that stunned him; so that he falling down, they
barbarously fell upon him, one of them pressing his Breast with his Knee,
whilst another run him into the Thigh near the Belly with a Rapier, the which
made him sensible of what they intended; so that whilst he endeavored what he
could to save himself and secure his Life from the Murderous Ruffians, they
wounded him in two places upon the Left Arm; two Wounds he received upon his
Breast, and one in his Belly, that slaunted through the Fleshy part about Five
or Six Inches; but they finding that their Swords would not penetrate deep into
his Breast, by reason of a Whale-bone pair of Bodice Quilted, that he privately
wore; they cried, Dam him, Rot him, he has got Armor on, Cut his Throat. Upon
which one of them, supposed to be the Prisoner, pulled out a Knife, and
endeavored to cut his Throat, the which he defended with his Hands to the
utmost of his power; so that through the Mercy of God they had not their Will
there; but notwithstanding, they Cut and Mangled his Face after a most
Barbarous Manner; and so eager were they to act then Hellish Mischief, that one
of them run his fellow Villain into the Leg for haste, the which he understood,
by hearing him say, Dam ye, you have spoiled my Leg, or words to that effect;
but as Providence would have it, before they could accomplish their Ends, a
Linkman coming out of a certain Door frighted them; so that leaving him for
dead, they put up their Swords, saying, Now pray for the Soul of Captain Evans,
which Evans was a Popish Priest, who had been lately Executed at Monmonth, and
so departed, Laughing aloud, at the dire Mischief they had done. Mr. Arnold
being asked what particular Marks he knew the Prisoner by, he said, That he
knew him not only by his Visage, but by his Voice; and that when he was
Apprehended, he picked him out from amongst several others, affirming then that
he was the Man, etc. Mr. Walter Moore, and Mr. Stephen Phillips being Sworn,
gave Evidence, That he being in Company with John Giles the Prisoner, an
Argument was raised by some of the Company about the Plot, which Giles
undertook to vindicate, saying, There was no Plot; and that they were Rogues
and Thieves that did affirm there was any, and that if any of the Popish Lords
should Suffer, it would bring a Bloodier War upon the Nation than has been
known these many Hundred Years: And going on yet further, to the Business of
Mr. Arnold, some of the Company was speaking what a Base and Barbarous Attempt
was made upon him, as they supposed, by some of the Popish Party; Giles
replied, Dam him, Rot him, they say he had Armor on, or more positively, that
he had Armor on; which being but the next day after the Assassination, no such
thing was then publicly known, etc.

It was further Sworn against him by Mr. William Richmond, That a little before
this Barbarous Act was done, they being together in St. Martins Lane, Giles
asked him, if he knew where he might buy a good strong Rapier? And that they
having walked about that Evening to several places between Eight and Nine of
the Clock came home to their Lodging, which was at the Kings Arms in
Drury Lane, where Richmond going up to his Chamber, left Giles a Smoking by
the Fireside, and as he was informed, about Nine, or somewhat past, he was
called out by some unknown Person, which was a little before the Mischief
Acted, and that he did not come to Bed that Night till about One of the Clock;
he being in the Chamber about Twelve, and seeing the Maid of the House making
the Bed, asked her, Who she made a Bed for so late, to which she replied, For a
Gentleman that was below, who would needs lie by himself; and that Giles as he
went by his Chamber Door to Bed, called to him and bid him Good Night, etc.

It was further Sworn by George Richmond, that Giles coming down to
Monmouth-Shire, he was asked for some Horse-hair which he had promised, to make
fishing-lines; to which he replied, that he had left a great deal at a Farriers
in Gloucester, but that he durst not stay to call for it, for fear of being
pursued, upon the Account of Mr. Arnold; and that having broke his Sword,, he
brought it to one Peter Darceys a Sword-Cutler in Vskley a place in
Monmouth-Shire, to be mended; who upon sight of it, said, How now Giles, What
have thou been fighting with the Devil? To whom he replied, as being confident
of him, knowing him to be a Papist: No not with the Devil, but with damned
Arnold; whereupon his Wife jogged him, bidding him have a care what he spoke,
lest he was overheard; the Witness beforementioned and the Cutlers-boy, being
then in the Shop, this being about the seventh of May last past.

These being the most material Points of Evidence for the King, his Council
stood up and made his Apology to the Court, saying, That if he thought the
Prisoner was Guilty of the base and barbarous Crime of which he stood charged,
he would not open his mouth in the Cause; but that if his Breviates were true,
by which he was to Plead in the Prisoners behalf, he doubted not but that he
yet might be proved Innocent: Upon which the Witnesses for the Prisoner were
called, being for the most part Welsh-People; Morgan Gibbeon, John Champion,
Elizabeth Edmut: swore that they or some of them were continually in his
company that Evening the Fact was committed, till the time he went to Bed, the
which was about 10 of the Clock as some Affirm, others Eleven; so that they
confounded themselves about the particular time, and often swore backwards and
forwards; especially upon any cross Question that was asked them by the Court.

Roger How upon Examination, If he knew where Giles was about 10 of the Clock
that Evening the Fact was done? Attested that he was sitting by the Kitchen
Fire smoking Tobacco, and that he saw him about half an hour past Ten go up to
bed: When as Ann Bibby another of his Witnesses, swore, That she saw him by the
said Fire near Twelve of the Clock, and that he did not go to Bed till about
Twelve. Such Contradictions had they amongst themselves, by reason they had not
compared Notes to the purpose, in so Villainous and base a Vindication. The
Maid of the House where he lodged, being sworn, was asked by the Court, What
time she made the Prisoners Bed? Who differing from the rest, answered about 9,
and that he then went to Bed, being positive as she said of it, till William
Richmond, who was in the Chamber with her, recollected her Memory by several
Tokens, that it was about one of the Clock: A long time she denied that he was
there, and that she saw him not to her knowledge all that Night, standing
obstinate in the same* till by a Love Intreague that passed between them, her
Equivocation left her, and she acknowledged what has been before recited. Next
Walter Powel, the Sword-Cutlers Apprentice, was called to Attest what was said
by Giles in his Masters Shop; who upon Oath Attested that Giles was in the
Shop, and that his Master did ask him, Whether he had been fighting with the
Devil or not? To which he replied, No, no, with the Devil Arnold: which
Equivocation was looked upon as an Evasion which the Youth had been taught in
the behalf of the Prisoner.

Anne Bibby and several others were Examined, but their Testimonies were so
inconsiderate, that they rather injured the Prisoner than furthered his Cause
one Point. Further material for Mr. Arnold was it, that Giles had reported,
that Mr. Arnold, or some of his Acquaintance or Friends, had done the Cruelty,
on purpose to cast it upon the Catholics, thereby to revive the Plot and
raise a Persecution upon them: This he said he believed, because Mr. Arnold was
according to his, the Duty of his Office, very zealous for putting the Laws in
Execution against Recusants, etc.

After all the Witnesses were Examined by the Court, and the Jury their
Charges, repeating over, for the better refreshment of their Memories, the
brief or sum of what had been Sworn on both sides; and laying open to them the
Heinousness of the Fact, how it concerned not only Mr. Arnold in private, but
the whole Magistracy of the Nation; and that although it was only an Indictment
of Trespass, yet it was of so high a Nature, that it deserved the severest
Punishment the Law could inflict: upon which the Jury going out, brought him
in, after about half an hours Debate, guilty of the said Trespass. Upon which
the Court thought fit to defer Judgment till the Saturday following, on which
day the Court being set, Giles was brought to the Bar, and received this
Sentence, That he should stand in the Pillory, and pay to the King Five hundred
Pounds Fine, and afterward give Security for Warrant of his good Behavior,
during his Life time. etc.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed M.DC.LXXX.


