I Do appoint Thomas Simmons to Print the Trial of Nathaniel Thompson, William
Pain, and John Farewell, and that no others presume to Print the same.

July the 8th. 1682. FR. PEMBERTON.

THE TRIAL OF Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, AND John Farewell.

Upon an Information exhibited by the Kings Attorney General against them, for
Writing, Printing and Publishing Libels, by way of Letters and other Prints,
reflecting upon the Justice of the Nation, in the Proceedings against the
Murderers OF Sir EDMOND-BVRY GODFREY.

At Guild-hal on Tuesday June the 20th. 1682. Where after a full hearing they
were Convicted.

Together with an account of several AFFIDAVITS read in His Majesty's Court of
KINGS BENCH and other matters at the time of their receiving SENTENCE.

To which is added by way of Appendix, Several other Affidavits which further
confirm the Testimony of Mr. Prance, given upon the Trial of Green, Berry and
Hill about that Murder, with some Observations touching the said Thompson,
Farewell and Pain.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street, 1682.

THE TRIAL OF Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, AND John Farewell.
Trinity Term, XXXIV. Caroli Secundi Regis.
On Tuesday the 20th. of June 1682, before the Right Honorable Sir Francis
Pemberton, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, by Nisi
prius in the Guild Hall of the City of London, came on the Trials of Nathaniel
Thompson, William Pain, and John Farwell, upon an Information brought against
them for several Trespasses and Misdemeanors in Writing, Printing, and
Publishing Letters Importing that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey murdered himself, as
also for several Falsities relating to the said matter Printed in several
Papers, called the Loyal Protestant Intelligence.

And the Jurors Names, were as follow, Jur.
Peter Houblon. John Ellis. William Barret. Joshua Brooks. Gervas Byfield.
Jonathan Lee. George Widows. William Sambrooke. William Jacomb. John Delmee.
Samuel Bailey. Samuel Howard.


The INFORMATION was in the Attorney General's name.
FOR that in Hillery Term, in the 30th. and 31th. years of this Kings Reign, in
the Court of Kings Bench at Westminster, by a Jury of the County of Middlesex
were indicted, Robert Green, (...) Gerald, Clerk, Henry Berry, Lawrence Hill,
Dominick Kelly and Philbert Vernatt; for that they by the Instigation of the
Devil, etc. The 12th of October in the 30th year of this Kings Reign, at the
Parish of St. Mary le Strand in the County of Middlesex aforesaid; with Force
and Arms, in and upon Sir Edmondbury Godfrey Knight, in the Peace of God and
the King, then and there being, feloniously, wilfully, and of their malice
aforethought, did make an Assault, and kill and murder him in this manner,
viz. Green did fold and fasten a Linen Handkercheif about his Neck, and
therewith choked and strangled him, of which choking and strangling he
instantly died: And the others, viz. Gerald, Berry, Hill, Kelley and Vernatt
were present, aiding, abetting, comforting, assisting and maintaining the said
Green to kill and murder the said Sir Edmondbury Godfrey in form aforesaid;
and so they the said Green, Gerald, Berry, Hill, Kelly, and Vernatt in manner
and form aforesaid, him the said Sir Edmonbury Godfrey feloniously, wilfully,
and of their malice aforethought, did kill and murder, against the Peace of
our said Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity: To which Indictment afterward,
the said Term, the said Robert Green, Henry Berry and Lawrence Hill severally
pleaded, Not Guilty, and put themselves upon the Country; and after in the said
Term of St. Hillary, in the said Court of Kings Bench at Westminster, for the
Felony and Murder aforesaid, by a Jury of their Country, in due manner were
tried, and thereof lawfully convicted and attainted, as by the Record thereof
in the said Court of Kings Bench at Westminster remaining more fully appears;
which said Robert Green, Henry Berry and Lawrence Hill were afterward executed
and suffered Death according to the form and effect of the Judgment and
Attainder aforesaid: And whereas one Miles Prance upon the Trial of the
Indictment aforesaid, was produced a Witness and sworn for the King, and gave
material Evidence against the said Green, Berry and Hill to prove them guilty
of the Felony and Murder aforesaid: And one William Bedloe, John Brown,
Elizabeth Curtis, Zachary Skillarne and Nicholas Cambridge upon the Trial
aforesaid, were Witnesses in like manner produced and sworn for the King, and
gave diverse material evidences against the said Green, Berry and Hill to prove
them guilty of the said Felony and Murder: And whereas also the said (...)
Gerald, Robert Green, Lawrence Hill, Dominick Kelly and Philbert Vernat at the
time of the Felony and Murder aforesaid were Papists, and Maintainers of the
Romish Superstitions; And the said (...) Gerald, Dominick Kelly and Philbert
Vernatt have fled and not yet appeared to the said Indictment; And whereas also
by the Coroners Inquest taken upon the view of the Body of the said Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey lying dead, before John Cooper Gent. one of the Coroners of
the said County of Middlesex by the Oaths of honest and lawful men of the the
same County above the number of twelve persons, it was found that certain
Malefactors unknown, Feloniously and of their malice prepense him the said Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey did strangle and choke, of which he dyed: The said Nathaniel
Thomson, William Pain and John Farwell, well knowing the premises, and being
persons Devillishly affected, devising, practicing, and with all their strength
intending the peace and common Tranquillity of their Kingdom of England to
disturb, and as much as in them lay the due course of the Law to destroy, and
subvert and elude, and the Justice of this Kingdom of England to defame and
scandalize, and as well the said Miles Prance, William Bedloe, John Brown,
Elizabeth Curtis, Zachary Skillarne, Nicholas Cambridge, as the said John
Cooper, and the honest and lawful men Sworn upon Enquest aforesaid, upon view
of the body aforesaid, to bring into the greatest hatred, contempt and vile
esteem with all the Kings Subjects, and to deter the Kings Subjects from
finding detecting and proving the designs of Papists against our Lord the King
and the true Religion now by Law established, and impiously and wickedly
devising, and intending them the said (...) Gerald, Dominick Kelly, and
Philbert Vernat, from undergoing the pains and sentence; by Law upon them to be
inflicted, for the murder aforesaid, and to aid and assist them (although they
be Guilty) to be found Not Guilty thereof; And to deceive and beguile the
King's Subjects in the premises with their false Affirmations and Arguments,
and cause and procure that it should be believed and esteemed, that the said
Green, Berry, and Hill, the persons for the Murder of the said Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey as aforesaid, convicted, and executed, had been convicted and executed
unjustly, and that the said Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was felo de se, and himself
had feloniously murdered. They the said Thompson, Pain, and Farwell, their most
impious wicked and diabolical intentions to fulfill and perfect afterward, to
wit the 23th. of February, in the four and Thirtieth year of the Reign of our
now Sovereign Lord the King, at the parish of Saint Mary le Bow, London, with
force and arms, etc. falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, wickedly, and diabolically,
made, composed, and caused to be printed, a certain false scandalous and
defamatory Libel, Entitled a Letter to Mr. Miles Prance in relation to the
Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey: In which said Libel amongst other things, it
is contained, as follows, And hearing that the Coroners Jury or Inquest were
first of Opinion, and accordingly declared, he was felo de se, and that there
was much Art and Skill used to procure their Verdict to the contrary, more
particularly the refusing of the body at their instance and request to be
opened: And in another place of the same Libel, it is further contained, as
follows, They say, that if a Man or any other Creature, be strangled or hanged,
and his body cold, and the blood settled in the Veins (as he must needs be if
your Evidence be true) (meaning the Evidence of the said Miles Prance) run
twenty Swords through such a body, not one drop of blood will come out, but on
the contrary, his body when found was full of blood in so much that (over and
above the Cakes or great Gobbets of congealed putrified blood found afterward
in his Cloths) the Constable when he pulled the sword out of his body, it
crashed against his back bone, and gobbets of blood and water gushed or gubled
out of that wound in abundance, not only in that very place where the sword was
pulled out, but in all his passage to the White house: especially, there where
his body was lifted over two high s^umps, and also when he was laid upon the
Table, the blood and water so issued out of that wound, that it ran from off
the Table upon the Floor, and from thence into the Cellar; so that they do
averr, that that wound that he received by that Sword must of necessity be the
Cause of his Death: And in another part of the same Libel it is further
contained as follows, They observe that Bedloe's before the Committee of Lords,
and your Evidence in relation to this Gentleman's Death, are as different as
the East is from the West; for you dog him out of St. Clements, the other
decoys him from Charing Cross; you swear he was strangled with an Handkercheif
near the Stables going to the Waterside, Bedloe that he was smothered with a
Pillow in a Room in the great Court in Somerset house; you say that he took
Horse at Sohoe, Bedloe says he took Coach at Clarendon-house, with many more
such like contradictions; and considering the old Proverb, forewarned
forearmed; a further and fuller account of the whole matter expect. And that
the said Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain and John Farewell, their most
impious, wicked and diabolical intentions to fulfill and perfect, afterward, to
wit the third day of March in the said four and thirtieth year of the Reign of
the said late Lord the King, at the said Parish of St. Mary le Bow London
aforesaid, with Force and Arms, etc. falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, evilly,
maliciously, scandalously and diabolically, made, composed and caused to be
printed, another false, scandalous and defaming Libel, entitled a second
Letter to Miles Prance, in reply to the Ghost of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey. In
which last mentioned Libel amonst other things, it is further contained as
follows, Next whereas my Letter says (and that truly) that the Coroners Jury
were first of opinion, and accordingly declared he was felo de se, and that
much Art and Skill was used to procure their Verdict to the contrary. And in
another place of the same last mentioned Libel amongst other things it is
further contained as follows; And it would be very material, if the Coroner
would declare what he received for that Job, and of whom; and what Evidence he
had to induce the Jury to find (as the Inquisition imports) that he was
strangled with a Linen cloth, a matter of fact never so much as spoken of
until you came in with your Evidence, which was not in some weeks after; And I
do again averr, that the Body was required by the Jury to be opened, and was
refused; and if the Body was in their and the Coroner's power (as the Ghost
insinuates) such power was concealed from and denied the Jury. And in another
place of the same last mentioned Libel, it is amongst other things contained as
follows: He is to understand, that Mr. Brown, the two Chirurgions, (meaning the
said Zachary Skillarne and Nicholas Cambridge) and Mrs. Curtis are no competent
(nor can be material) Witnesses in this Case. And in another place of the same
last mentioned Libel, it is further contained as follows; But Mr. Prance, it
will be fully proved that the Body was full of Blood, and that there was Cakes
or Gobbets of dry Blood found in his Clothes, which with his Body stunk
extremely: And it will be also fully and effectually proved that his Eyes,
Nostrils and Corners of his Mouth were Fly-blown. And in another place of the
same last mentioned Libel amongst other things it is contained as follows: And
as to the seventh and last Paragraph, which relates only to the difference
betwixt you and Mr. Bedloe's Evidence, I must take notice that what you and and
he swears is very contradictory.: And in another place of the same last
mentioned Libel, amongst other things it is further contained as follows, But I
cannot omit to take further notice of Mr. Curtis's Affidavit, in relation to
the Wax found upon the Cloths, in which I cannot say, but she may swear true;
but this I do averr, that if it be so, those drops were put upon the Cloths
long after he was found. And after the Jury had set on the body; for there was
no such thing then on the Cloths. And, I suppose, this was some artifice used
by those, who either out of interest or design, were desirous to comfirm his
being murdered at Somerset house. And the said Attorney General for the same
Lord the King, gives the Court here to understand and be informed: That the
said Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and John Farewell, in their further
prosecution aforesaid, falsely, wickedly, and maliciously, their contrivances
and intentions aforesaid, afterward to with the 7th. day of March, in the four
and Thirtieth year of our said Lord the King, at the Parish of Saint Mary le
Bow, London, with force and arms, etc. falsely, unlawfully, unjusty, wickedly,
maliciously, scandalously, and devillishly, composed, made, and caused to be
printed, a certain other false, scandalous, and defamatory Libel, Entitled,
The Loyal Protestant and True Domestic Intelligence, or News both from City
and Country. In which last mentioned Libel it is contained, as follows, that
there is not in the said Letter, (meaning the said false, scandalous, and
defaming Libel,) Entitled, a Letter to Mr. Miles Prance, in relation to the
Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, before first mentioned, the least item or
circumstance, but what will be by undeniable Evidence made out to be the truth:
So the said Mr. Prance, having not as yet vouchsafed an Answer to that Letter,
he will speedily receive a further Letter relating to that Murder, wherein the
further truth will not only be fully set forth, and other Circumstances set
out: And further, that the said Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and John
Farewell, in their further prosecuting, falsely, wickedly, and maliciously, their
contrivances and intentions aforesaid, with force and arms, etc. falsely,
unlawfully, wickedly, maliciously, and devillishly, composed, and caused to be
Printed, a certain other false, scandalous, and defamatory Libel, Entitled,
The Loyal Protestant Intelligence, etc. In which last mentioned Libel amongst
other things, it is contained, as follows, Whereas Dick Janeway in this days
Mercury, promises an Answer to the late Letter to Mr. Prance, etc. This is to
give him, and all the world notice, That such an Answer is impatiently expected
by the Author of that Letter, who questions not but to prove every Tittle of
that Letter, to the satisfaction of all mankind; And besides, he is very
desirous that the Courantier (according to his last Packet of Advice to Rome)
would go on, and use his Interest, to procure the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen
and Common Council of London, to inspect the Truth of that Letter; whereby it
will appear inevitably, that there is not one Papist or Popishly affected
person concerned in that Letter, or in the proof of the particulars thereof;
but the same (with diverse other material circumstances relating to the Murder
of Sir E B Godfrey, and the Fraud and Blind put upon the world in relation
thereto) will be more fully, plainly and manifestly proved, without giving ill
Words, or scurrilous Language or Reflections to any persons that really are, or
supposed to be therein concerned in any circumstance whatsoever. And that the
said Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain, and John Farewell, in their further
prosecution aforesaid, falsely, wickedly, and maliciously, their contrivances
and intentions, after, to wit: The first day of April, in the four and
thirtieth year of the Reign of our said Lord the King, with force and arms,
etc. at the Parish of Saint Mary le Bow, London, aforesaid, falsely, unlawfully,
unjustly, wickedly, maliciously, scandalously, and devillishly, made, composed,
and caused to be Printed, a certain other false, scandalous, and defamatory
Libel, Entitled, the Loyal Protestant Intelligence, etc. In which last
mentioned Libel amongst other things it is contained as follows; Last
Wednesday, Nathaniel Thompson upon Summons appeared before the Lords of his
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, about the Letters to Mr. Miles Prance
concerning the Death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, where he justified the matter,
and produced the Authors, who are ready to prove (by undeniable and substantial
Witnesses, not in the least accused or suspected of Popery, as the malicious
Party do suggest) that every Tittle and Iota of those Letters are true. And
that in another part of the last mentioned Libel, amongst other things it is
contained as follows; Mr. Thompson and the Gentlemen his Friends are to attend
the next Wednesday at Council, where they do not doubt, but that Honorable
Board will put them into a Method to prove the whole, or any particular which
their Honors in their great Wisdom shall think convenient to be brought to the
Test or Examination. And further that the said Nathaniel Thompson etc. the
Twenty-third day of February in the abovesaid Thirty-fourth year of our said
Lord the King; and diverse other days and times betwixt the said Twenty-third of
February and the aforesaid Thirty-fourth year, and the day of the exhibiting of
the said Information at the Parish of St Mary le Bow, London aforesaid,
knowingly, and every of them knowing the said several Libels to be false,
malicious, scandalous and seditious, with Force and Arms, etc. falsely,
unlawfully, unjustly, wickedly, maliciously, scandalously, seditiously and
devillishly the said false, malicious, scandalous and seditious Libels uttered
and published, and each of them uttered and published in manifest contempt of
the Laws of this Kingdom of England, and the Scandal and Defamation of the
public Justice of the same, to the evil Example of all others in like Case
offending; and against the Kings Peace, his Crown and Dignity, etc.

Then Proclamation for Information being made, Mr. Thompson acquainted my Lord
and the Jury with the effect of the Information as follows:
Mr. Thompson. My Lord and you Gentlemen of the Jury, This is an Information
against Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain and John Farewell, and it is for
writing and printing several Scandalous Libels about the the Death of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey: In which we set forth, that Green Berry and Hill were
indicted for the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and thereof convicted and
attained, and that the said Green, Berry and Hill were executed for it; that
upon their Trial for that Matter several Witnesses were examined, namely Mr.
Prance, Bedloe, Curtis and several others to prove Sir Edmondbury Godfrey
murdered at Somerset House; and before the Trial there was an Inquest taken by
the Coroner of Middlesex, by which it does appear, that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey
was murdered by several Persons unknown, and that the Defendants to reflect
upon the Justice of the Nation, and scandalize the Witnesses produced at that
Trial, and to make it believed that these Persons died Wrongfully, did write
and print several scandalous Libels and Letters, one of them entitled a Letter
to Miles Prance concerning the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and in these
Letters did suggest as if he had been felo de se, and do reflect upon every one
of the Witnesses, as if they had contradicted themselves, and also do reflect
upon the Coroner as though he had bribed the Jury, and do undertake by these
Arguments and several others (that you will hear) to prove that Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey murdered himself; And that in another Libel that Thompson printed
called his Loyal, Protestant Intelligence, he says he will make it out by a
Cloud of Witnesses: This we say is against the Peace of the King, and defaming
of the Justice of the Nation: If we prove this matter upon them, you are to
find them Guilty.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lord, The matter which you have now before you, is as
impudent a thing as ever was done. Gentlemen, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was
murdered, and Green and the Contrivers of it have been executed for it; the
matter has passed the Examination of the Parliament, and the King and Council
and all; Now this Thompson is a Printer, I may as well say a Printer of Libels,
for he does constantly print Libels against the Religion established, and the
Justice of the Nation; The Jury that were impannelled upon the Coroners
Inquest, he says of them that they at first did agree that he murdered
himself, and afterward did return and find that he was murdered by others:
Gentlemen it is plain that he was murdered by others, and the particular
persons have been tried for it and found guilty. Now this person after all
this, what does he do? He takes upon him to write a Letter to Prance; (Prance
was one of the Witnesses in that Case) he writes it by the name of a Letter,
but it is a foul and wicked Libel; and therein ('it is too long for me to mention
the particulars) he scandalizes the public Justice of the Nation, he
undertakes to vindicate the Murderers, and to accuse the proceedings of the
Nation. But Gentlemen, we will prove these Men guilty of framing and publishing
of these wicked Libels, and that is all that is needful to be done upon the
point of Evidence. We will call our Witnesses.


Then Mr. Clare was sworn, and produced a Copy of the Record of the conviction
and attainder of Green, Berry, and Hill, for the Murder of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey. As also a Copy of the Inquisition, taken by the Coroner of Middlesex
upon the view of the Body of the said Sir Edmonbury Godfrey, whereby it is
found that he was Murdered by them, Strangled with a Cord by persons unknown.
Both which (Mr. Clare having sworn to be true Copies) were read.

L. Chief Just. This matter of his being thus strangled, was found before it
was discovered who did the Murder. It was upon the sight of the body, and they
supposed it to be done by a Cord, but afterward it came to light that it was
done with an Handkerchief.


Mr. Thomps. (To the Counsel of the Defendants) If you will put us to prove
all, we must prove that these men were executed.


Then Captain Richardson was sworn.

L. Chief Just. Were these men Executed for this Murder?


Capt. Rich. Yes, I saw them Executed.


Then Mr. Prance was sworn.

Mr. Thomps. Did you give Evidence upon the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill,
for the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey?


Mr. Prance. Yes.


Mr. Thomps. Do you remember that Brown was a Witness too?


Mr. Prance. Yes, Brown was.


Mr. Thomps. Was Curtis a Witness, and Mr. Bedloe?


Mr. Prance. That Curtis was, I don't remember, Mr. Bedloe was.


Then Curtis was sworn.

Mr. Thomps. Were you a Witness at the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill?


Mrs. Curtis. Yes, I was.


Then Sir John Nicholas and Sir Philip Lloyd, and William Bridgman, Esquire were
sworn, and the two Letters in the Information were showed to them

L. Chief. Just. Were these showed to the Defendants, Thompson, and Pain, and
Farewell, at the Council?


Sir Phil. Lloyd. These were the same, I know because they are endorsed by my
hand; Thompson owned the Printing of both, and one other of the Defendants
owned the writing of one of them, and the other of the other.


L. Chief Just. But Thompson owned the Printing of both?


Sir Phil. Lloyd. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did Pain and Farewell own the bringing of both to Thompson to
Print?


Sir Phil. Lloyd. One owned the one, and the other the other.


Then Sir John Nicholas and Mr. Bridgman testified the same.

Mr. Saunders of Council with Pain, said to Sir Ph. Lloyd. Did Pain or Farwell
own that they brought both, or one the one, and the other the other?


Sir. Ph. Lloyd. One the one, and the other the other.


Mr. Saunders. Then pray Sir, which was that Farwell did own?


Sir Ph. Lloyd. My Lord my own memory does not tell me which, but here are
Notes say that Farwell owned the first, and that Pain owned the second.


L. Chief Just. Do you believe them to be true?


Jo. Nicholas. Yes Sir I took the Notes.


Mr. Yalding. Did he readily discover his Authors?


Sir Ph. Lloyd. Yes he did.


Associat. The Title is thus a Letter to Mr. Miles Prance in relation to the
Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. Shall I read it all?


L. Chief Just. All of it.


Associat. Read it in these words. Mr. Prance.


A LETTER TO Mr. MILES PRANCE, in Relation to the Murder of Sir EDMOND-BVRY
GODFREY.
Mr. Prance,
PErceiving by some late Pamphlets several Rumors raised, as if there were
endeavors used to asperse your Evidence in Relation to the Death of Sir E. B.
G. and to lay that Murder upon Himself. And remembering the Consternation which
then was in all peoples minds by the discovery at that time of a Dreadful and
most Horrid Popish Plot, which occasioned diverse to report, and most to believe
(even several days before the dead Body was found) That he was Murdered by the
Papists at Somerset House. And hearing that the Coroners Jury or Inquest were
first of Opinion, and accordinly declared he was Felo de Se; And that there was
much Art and Skill used to procure their Verdict to the contrary; More
particularly, the refusing of the Body (at their Instance and request) to be
opened; and opposing the Assistance of the Coroner of Westminster, (who is
taken notice of to be a Knowing and Impartial Man in the Execution of his
Office;) who was desired to, and did attend for that purpose, but was dismissed
with a Guiney; telling him, they had no need of his Service. I made it my
business, partly for Yours, but chiefly for the Truths sake, to make a strict
Enquiry into the farther Causes of the aforesaid Rumors, and do find these
particulars very much urged, and discoursed of, (viz.)

I. In oppsition to the Evidence of his being dogged up and down, and lodged in
a great House at St. Clements on Saturday the 12. of October 1678. (being the
day he was first missing.) It is affirmed he went out of his House that very
Saturday morning about nine a Clock; (which is the last time he ever returned
thither;) And about 10 that Forenoon was in the Fields walking toward
Marybone, (in which Parish his dead Corpse was afterward found,) And was there
met by a Brewer in St. Giles's, who discoursed with him; And about a 11 of the
same day he was seen passing by the Lady Cooks Lodgings near the Cockpit;
After which, he was seen in St. Martins-lane, went by the Church, and down
Church-lane into the Strand; About 1 passed by the door of one Mr. Ratcliff an
Oyl-man in the Strand, And soon after was met in the back Court of
Lincolns-Inne by two Gentlemen, who observed him to make a sudden turn, and to
go out at the back door; They went out at that door also, and did see him turn
the corner Wall; between which place and Turn Style, he was met by a Barrister
at Law; And that a person living near Primrose-Hill, declared before diverse
persons, that he saw him about 3 that Saturday in the Afternoon walking in
those Fields, his usual Walk being that way.

II. They say, the place where, and the posture wherein he was found, are very
remarkable. As to the place; It was in a Ditch on the South side of
Primrose-Hill, surrounded with diverse Closes, Fenced with high Mounds and
Ditches, no Road near, only some deep dirty Lanes made only for the convenience
for driving Cows and such like Cattle in and out of the Grounds; And those very
Lanes not coming near 500 yards of the place, and impossible for any Man on
Horseback with a Dead Corpse before him at Midnight to approach, unless Gaps
were made in the Mounds, as the Constable and his Assistants found by Experience
when they came on Horseback thither. As to the posture, his Breast was
Unbuttoned, his Wastcoat and Shirt put by, his Sword run in under his left Pap
next his Skin, the Point coming out at his right Shoulder about six Inches, his
left Arm doubled under him, (on which his Head seemed to lean,) and his right
Arm stiff, stretched out upon the Bank, his Belly and Breast being supported by
the side of the Bank, his Knees knit together, and with his Hips a little
bending or doubling under him.

And they infer from thence, that he being a tall raw bon'd Man, (after he had
been several days dead,) could never be crooked so as to be crammed into a
Sedan, (which are very low built, and difficult to be carried with proper
Braces, much more as You Evidenced with Cords) then straightned, and his Legs
opened, and mounted on Horseback, and then put into the posture he was found
in, and stiffened again.

III. Now although the Matters aforesaid may be said to be only circumstantial,
Yet they produce undeniable Arguments against your Evidence, (viz.) They say,
that if a Man, or any other Creature be Strangled, or Hanged, and his Body
cold, and the Blood settled in the Veins, (as he must needs be if Your Evidence
be true,) run 20 Swords through such a Body, not one drop of blood will come
out: But on the contrary, his Body when found, was full of Blood, insomuch,
that (over and above the Cakes or great Goblets of congealed putrified Blood
found afterward in his Clothes) the Constable when he pulled the Sword out of
his Body, it crashed against his Backbone, and Gobbets of Blood and Water
gushed or gubbled out of that Wound in abundance, not only in that very place
where the Sword was pulled out, but in all his passage to the White-house,
especially there where his Body was lifted over two high Stumps; and also when
he was laid upon the Table, the Blood and Water so issued out of that wound,
that it ran from off the Table upon the Floor, and from thence into the Cellar;
So that they do aver that that wound that he received by that Sword must of
necessity be the cause of his Death. And they take notice, that so much of the
Sword as was in his Body, was discolored and blackish; and that part that came
out at his back was of a dullish color, and the Point thereof was rusty; Also,
that the Clothes, Belt and cabbard were weather-beaten to rags; his body stunk
extremely; his Eyes, Nostrils, and corners of his Mouth were Fly-blown; all
which must naturally be by his being so long in the Air.

IV. They say, That when a Man is Strangled or Hanged, his Eyes will be
extorted, his Face will be swelled and black; Whereas his Eyes were shut, his
Face was pale, only the left part of his Chin, with his breast and belly being
next the Earth, were putrified, and looked of a blue and greenish color, more
especially about the wound; For that the blood, when hot, running to the wound,
caused the greater putrefaction in that place; whenas, if the wound had been
made after he was Dead, and Cold, the rest of his body would have putrified as
soon, and as much as there.

V. They say, That the cleanness of his Shoes makes against Your Evidence; For
his Shoes were cleaned or rather glazed on the very bottoms of the Soles,
occasioned by his walking in the Grass, and Grass-seeds were observed to stick
in the Seams of his Shoes; And besides, there was not one speck of Dirt on his
Clothes, or Legs, not so much as a Horse-hair sticking thereon; Whereas, the
Constable, and those that went with him, were dirty'd and moil'd up to the very
Saddle-skirts, and not easily to be cleaned; And Mr. Prance, you know that a
tall Dead Man on Horseback, cannot lift up his Legs to save them from the Dirt.

VI. As to the looseness of his Neck, and the Rim or green Circle about it,
they say they are Ridiculous and Impertinent Arguments against so many
Demonstrative ones; especially, when there is not a Nurse, or any Woman of Age,
that has buried any Relations, but will tell you it is very common for people
to die with Necks as loose as his was. And the Rim about his Neck was so far
from being like one made with a Cravat or Handkerchief, that it seems to be
occasioned by the great height and stifness of his Collar, which was fast
Buttoned about his Neck, and on which his Head rested, and was unbuttoned about
10 of the Clock the next day, before the Coroner or Jury came. But if that Rim,
or those Bruises, that Your Evidence seems to make the cause of his Death, were
really so; Then they allege, that in such case, the whole Mass of Blood would
have settled there, and his Neck and bruises would have swelled, and have been
perfect black, which was not in His Case.

VII. They also say, That all these Matters are Notorious, and will be proved
by diverse credible and undeniable Eye and Ear Witnesses; And besides, They
observe, that Bedlow's (before the Committee of Lords,) and Your Evidence in
Relation to this Gentleman's Death, are as different as the East is from the
West; For you Dog him out of St. Clements; the other decoys him from
Charing Cross: You Swear he was Strangled with a Handkerchief near the Stables
going to the Waterside; Bedlow, that he was Smothered with a Pillow in a Room
in the great Court in Somerset House. You say he took Horse at So-ho; Bedlow
says he took Coach at Clarenden-House, with many more such like Contradictions;
And considering the Old Proverb, fore-warned, fore-arm'd. A further and fuller
account of the whole matter expect, I being loath at present to exceed the
bounds of a Letter, I am,

Sir, Your very Loving Friend, TRVMAN.
Cambridge, Feb. 23. 1681.
London, Printed for M. G. at the sign of Sir E. B. G's. Head near Fleet-bridge.

Sir. Francis Win. Now read the other Letter.


Associat. This is entitled a second Letter to Mr. Miles Prance in reply to the
Ghost of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.


Mr. Prance,
SInce my last to you of the Twenty-third past, I have seen a prolix, railing,
and impertinent Phamphlet, entitled, Sir E. B. G's Ghost, and pretended to be
an Answer to my said Letter. And conceiving You are better acquainted with
Ghosts than my self, I thought fit to direct my Answer to that Ghost to You,
and thereby show the ridiculousness thereof, as also vindicate the Truths
contained in my said former Letter, and show You and the World further
circumstances to justify the same, and therefore, according to the method of
my former Letter, I shall proceed by these Heads.

And first, not understanding what the Ghost means, by arraigning the Justice
of the Nation, unless he would assert that all that are legally, (are likewise
justly hanged;) and so consequently, that the Mother and her two Sons were
justly hanged in Glocestershire, for the Murder of the Lady Viscountess
Campden's Steward, though he afterward appeared alive; And I do not find that
ever his appearance arraigned the Justice of the Nation. And remitting the
consideration of Mr. Browns, the Chyrurgions, and Mrs. Curtis's Evidence in
relation to the Blood, to its proper place; and affirming, (as the truth is,)
that Mrs. celliers, Mrs. Mary Gibbon, the Newgate Priests, James Magragh, and
all other Irish men, or Irish Evidences, or other Papist or Papists, or
Popishly affected persons whatsoever; as also those concerned in the late Sham
of his having hanged himself, are strangers to, and had not the least knowledge
or intimation of the Contents of my said former Letter, nor any way concerned
therein, or in or with any part thereof; (as the said Ghost most falsely and
maliciously insinuates.) I take notice that the said Ghost seems to admit so
much of the Truth of the said Letter, as that it was reported diverse days
before the dead Body was found, that he was murdered in Somerset House by the
Papists, and which report was made even the next morning after he was missing,
(being Sunday 13 October. 1678.) Now I would fain have this Ghost to inform the
World who first raised that Report: But as to Mr. Dugdale's Letter of it, I
cannot give it any better Answer, than that as his Evidence has since been
disbelieved in matters of greater consequence, so he not producing any such
Letter, you must give me leave also to suspect him in this. But as to the other
Evidences of Mr. Birch and the rest. Theirs I believe to be very true; for it is
no miracle that a Report so cunningly raised, (without any ground) might as
industriously be promulged to most parts of the Kingdom before the respective
days they speak of, especially when the Plot had filled all men's heads with
Fears and Jealousies, without which it had not been in the power or art of the
Ghost, or any of his Tribe, to have suggested the least Surmise to contradict
his being Felo de se.

Next, whereas my Letter says, (and that truly) that the Coroner's Jury were
first of opinion, and accordingly declared, he was Felo de se, and that much
Art and Skill was used to procure their Verdict to the contrary. This Ghost,
instead of contradicting that Truth, would insinuate, as if that Letter
reflected upon the Reputation of the Jurors, when as there was no such thing
employed or intended, they being known to be honest men, of good Reputation,
and free from Fraud or Guile, and consequently the easier to be overreached, by
the Cunning of those and that Party, whose interest it was to deceive them, and
who never leave any stone unturned to attain their designs. And I cannot but
observe how skilful and industrious these People still are, to hide and prevent
the truth of that man's Death from clearly appearing and shining forth, as
without doubt it would, and must do, was not the matter now (as formerly)
puzzled with Legends, and long Stories, nothing to the purpose. And as to the
Coroner's Warrant for burying the Body, and recited in the Ghost, it is
Notorious they are common Tricks, used by men of his Profession, who (if any
money is like to come) will usually adjourn the Jury, and then make such
Warrants, (they knowing, that if the Verdict be Felo de se, it is then out of
their power to give leave to bury the Corpse.) And it would be very material, if
the Coroner would declare what he received for that Jobb, and of whom, and what
Evidence he had to induce the Jury to find (as the Inquisition imports) that he
was strangled with a Linen Cloth, a matter of Fact never so much as spoken of,
until You came in with your Evidence, which was not in some weeks after. And I
do again aver, That the Body was required by the Jurors to be opened, and was
refused; and if the Body was in their and the Coroner's power, (as the Ghost
insinuates) such power was concealed from, and denied the Jury. And it is very
probable the Coroner of Westminster's assistance was refused, for some such
indirect doings, for that there was not the least difference betwixt the
Coroners in relation to their Jurisdictions; and the Westminster Coroner came
not Voluntarily of himself, but was importuned to be there by Mr. Wigg, and
diverse others of the chief Inhabitants of St. Martyn's Parish. And
particularly, the Reverend Dr. Lloyd (who Preached the Funeral Sermon) spoken
to the Coroner of Westminster before he went, so that it had been proper to
have given the matters mentioned in that Sermon in evidence before the Jury.
And it is observable, the Person mentioned to give the Information to the Doctor
of the two wounds in the Body, and that two hours before it was found, was
never produced; For if he had, and that Sir E. B. G. had been murdered, such
person might have been secured, and thereby the Murderers detected. But I
suppose the Ghost will not pretend either that Sermon, or the Pamphlet printed
by Not. Thompson to be legal, or (indeed) any Evidence at all.

And now Mr. Prance, being come to the several Paragraphs of my Letter, I shall
take them in order as they are placed, and give the Ghost particular Answers
accordingly.

I. As to Sir E. B. G.'s Perambulations therein mentioned to be on the Saturday
he was first missing, they are true in every particular; and will be proved by
diverse able, credible and undeniable Witnesses. And how vain it is for the
Ghost to ask, Why these Witnesses did not come in sooner at the Trial of Green,
Berry, and Hill, do you judge, when all the World remembers the great Torrent
that carried all before it in favor of the Plot, and the murder of Sir E. B.
G. by the Papists, without which (as T. O. was heard to say) his Plot had
failed; And when it is duly considered, that the two persons that first found
the Body, (for no other cause) suffered much in their Persons and Estates, by a
long and chargeable Imprisonment. And all others that then seemed to doubt of
the truth of that man's being murdered by the Papists, were stigmatized with the
odious Names of Papists, and Discouragers (if not promoters) of the Plot; It
will appear no wonder, if people were unwilling to discover their knowledges,
or to come voluntarily (without process) to give their Evidence. And how can it
be imagined those three unfortunate men, being kept close Prisoners, could make
enquiry after proper Evidences, or (against the common Vogue) draw into
suspicion the assertion of his being murdered by the Papists.

II. The Ghost has so much ingenuity to grant the 2d. Paragraph of my Letter,
as to the place and posture he was found in, but would avoid the
inaccessableness of the place, pretending a Lane near, when as that Lane is, in
effect, unpassable, with two on a Horse, and comes not within 500 yards of the
place, and the Mounds thither very high, and the Constable and his Assistants,
(though they lived in the Parish, and well knew the way) were forced to break a
Gap in the Mounds, though they were singly Horsed. And whereas the Ghost
alleges, That you do not depose he was carried to the place wholly on
Horseback, he has run himself into a worse Dilemma, having made no provision
of men (either as to strength or number) to carry so great and weighty a Corpse,
in the dead of the Night, over such Mounds and Fences; but let all inquisitive
People, desirous of Truth, take the pains but to go to the Place (and that
without any burden on their backs) they will soon be convinced of the
Assertion of the difficulty (if not impossibility) of the bringing a Dead Corpse
thither, either on Foot or on Horseback. And the Pretensions of the Ghost's, as
to the limberness of the Body and Joints, does not answer that part of my
Letter which relates to the impossibility of his being put into a Sedan. For
his Body, when found, was stiff; so that what limberness happened or appeared
afterward, has no relation to the Question. For it is a certain Maxim, a dead
limber Body cannot be stiff'ned. And pray Mr. Prance, give us an account what
became of the Sedan, and the Cords? and how you could carry it with Cords; for
the meanest Sedan-man in Town will tell you it is impracticable, or rather
impossible; And you may, if you please, make an experiment with a Cord.

III. As to the Body being full of Blood, when found; the Ghost endeavors to
disprove that Assertion, by the Evidence of Mr. Brown the Constable, the two
Chyrurgeons and Mrs. Curtiss, and produces the Evidence given at the Trial of
Green, Berry and Hill, and an extrajudicial Affidavit since made by Mr. Brown,
and another by Mrs. Curtiss, to countenance such his denial. But, Mr. Prance,
(when you see the Ghost) tell him the matter of the Blood will (and I assure
you and all the World it will) be proved by diverse credible and undeniable
Evidence; And that I may pacify the Ghost in the mean time, he is to
understand that Mr. Brown, the two Chyrurgions, and Mrs. Curtiss, are no
competent (nor can be material) Witnesses in this case. For Mr. Brown; as he
did a rash and unaccountable act (to give it no worse name) in removing the
Body before the Coroner and Jury saw it, (which has occasioned all this
despute); so he must not think to help himself by Affidavits, or to justify one
Ill Act by another; And besides, as he unadvisedly (and contrary to all Law and
Practice) removed the Body before the Coroner and Jury came; so he did the same
in the dark, (about Eight a clock at night) when the Candle was blown out;
whereby it was impossible for him to look for any Blood, so as to find it; And
neither he or the Chyrurgeons (by any daylight) saw the Place where the Body
was found, or where the Sword was pulled out, until after 10 a Clock the next
day, before which time much of the Blood was taken up, and the rest trampled
out of sight by the great concourse of the People which came thither. And as
for Mrs. Curtiss, she only saw the Body after it was brought home, when as the
Body was stripped at the White-House, and a Blanket borrowed there to wrap the
Body in. So the World may judge of the Truth of her Affidavit. (But Mr. Prance)
it will be fully proved, that the Body was full of Blood; and that there were
Cakes or Gobbets of dry Blood found in his Clothes, which (with his Body) stunk
extremely. And it will be also fully and effectually proved, that his Eyes,
Nostrills, and Corners of his Mouth, were Fly-blown; tho the Ghost (without the
least color of reason) pretends it to be contrary to Nature and Reason; when
as common experience daily evinces the contrary. And I do observe, that the
Ghost omits to take notice of Two material Circumstances in this 3 d.
Paragraph. (viz.) The first as to the Swords crashing against the Backbone:
The second, as to that part of the Sword which was in his Body being
discolored. And pray, Mr. Prance, do You (or the Ghost) give the Reasons
thereof, and of its point being rusty; As also, what was, or could be the cause
of the Spots in the Shirt, Wastcoat and Drawers, of Greenish Color, mentioned
in Mrs. Curtisses Affidavit.

IV. As to the 4th. Paragraph of my Letter, I perceive the Ghost admits, that
when a man is Strangled or Hanged, his Eyes will be extorted; and admits that
Sir. E. B. Godfrey's Eyes (when found) were shut; only he seems to quarrel with
the color of his Face; And, seeing he admits his Face not black (as all Hanged
men's are, when cold) I care not to contest, whether his Face was Pale or Ruddy,
or a little Swelled, or not, those being very inconsiderable Circumstances. But
his denying the putrefaction charged in that Paragraph, and the consequences
deduced from thence, is not only a great untruth, but is directly opposite to
the evidence given by Mr. Skillard, at the Trial before mentioned. Page 37. 38.

V. As to the 5th. Paragraph; the Ghost is so far from answering the Assertions
therein, as that he only quibbles at words; and begging the Question; deduces
thence impertinent and ridiculous Arguments. For it will be proved, that his
Shoes were glazed at the bottom of the Soles, and which must of necessity be
occasioned by his walking on the Grass. And (Mr. Prance) if you and the Ghost
will walk thither, you will easily experience it, and so may any body else
satisfy himself in this speculation; As also, as to the grass-seeds that stuck
in the seams of his Shoes; which is so far from being impossible at that time
of the year, (as the Ghost would argue) as that it will be proved by undeniable
Evidence. But (Mr. Prance,) pray ask the Ghost how he came there without a
speck of Dirt; and who picked the Horse-hairs off his clothes; and let him
contrive (if he can) a probable or rational way for a Dead man on Horseback,
to hold up his Legs, or to save them or his clothes from the dirt: For though a
man may walk thither very clean, yet it is impossible at that time of the year
to ride, either without being dirtied, and some Horse hairs sticking on his
Clothes: But perhaps the next account from the Ghost will be, that he either
rid with Gambadoes, or else a pair of Fisher-mens Boots.

VI. As to the 6th. Paragraph, Pray Mr. Prance tell the Ghost, his railing
against Popish Nurses, and Popish Midwives, is no answer to the Assertions in
that Paragraph: for all the women in the Town are competent Judges thereof, and
I hope the Ghost will not say they are all Papists. But pray tell the Ghost he
takes no notice of the height of the Collar, and its being fast buttoned about
his Neck when found. Nor the conclusion of that Paragraph; and therefore I
suppose he admits it to be all true.

VII. And as to the 7th. and last Paragraph, which relates only to the
difference betwixt Yours, and Mr. Bedlow's Evidence; I must take notice, that
what you and he swear, are very contradictory, and much more than I hinted in
my said Letter: And though part of it be as He and you were informed, yet you
and he swear the Informations were received from the Persons actually concerned
in the Murder, and who had confidence enough in Mr. Bedlow (though he refused
4000l. to help to kill him, and 2000l. to help carry him away,) as to show him
the Dead Body, and so were under no temptation of mis-informing either him or
your self. And pray Mr. Prance, will you let the World know what reward you
were to have for that Job: For certainly you deserved as much as Mr. Bedlow,
and needed more, you having a Wife and Children, and he a Bachelor.

Thus, Mr. Prance having gone through each Paragraph of my Letter, and answered
the Ghost to your satisfaction; I should leave here, fearing I have been too
tedious already: But I cannot omit to take further notice of Mrs. Curtis's
Affidavit, in relation to the drops of Wax found upon the Clothes, in which I
cannot say but she may swear true; but this I do aver, that if it be so, those
drops were put upon the Clothes long after he was found, and after the Jury had
sat on the Body; for there was no such thing then on the Clothes: And I suppose
this was some Artifice used by those, who, either out of Interest or Design,
were desirous to confirm his being murdered at Somerset House, and to carry on
the great lie, and impertinent story then invented, and given out (amongst
others) that he was laid under the High-Altar there; And if my Information fail
not, there were other such like tricks used, which I shall make bold to
acquaint those more nearly concerned therein, than your self; and shall give
them to understand, that it is no wonder a Man in Sir E. B. G's circumstances,
should kill himself, such accidents being no News to that Family, wherein
Melancholy and Distraction (that often produces such effects) has been
predominant, and might occasion the words he spoke to Sir. Tho. Robinson, as to
his being the first Martyr.

And now, Mr. Prance, for a Conclusion, If you were guilty of the murder of
Sir. E. B. G. how durst you (as you did) on the Friday after he was found, go
to Primrose-Hill to see the Body, and not be afraid it should at your approach
have bled afresh? And how came you (after Green, Bury, and Hill were hanged,)
to declare in answer to a solemn question, that you knew nothing of the death
of Sir. E. B. G. Pray remember me to your old Friend and Lodger Mr. Renn, my
respects also to your Wife, not forgetting your little Daughter, who gave you
so good advice before you took your Journey into Nottinghamshire, and helped to
take Beddingfield, who was buried 14. Months.

I am Your Loving Friend, Trueman.
Cambridge, March 13. 1681.
LONDON, Printed for N. Thompson. 1682.

Then the Associate Read out of a Paper, Entitled, The Loyal Protestant
Intelligence, etc. Number 125. Tuesday, March 7. 1681. the following Paragraph.

March 4. 1682.
WHereas the Mayor of Gotham, in his pretended True Protestant Mercury of
Saturday last, seems mightily offended with a Letter therein mentioned to be
sent to Mr. Prance, concerning the Murder of Sir E. B. Godfrey; and endeavors
to avoid the examination of the truth of the matter of Fact contained in that
Letter, by his old way of railing, and stigmatizing all honest Church of
England Men, with the Name of Papist, or Popishly affected: He, and his
Whiggish Tribe, are hereby desired to take notice, that there is not in the
said Letter the least Item or Circumstance, but what will be by undeniable
Evidence made out to be the Truth. So, the said Mr. Prance having not as yet
vouchsafed an Answer to that Letter, he will speedily receive a further Letter
relating to that Murder; wherein the further Truth will not only be fully set
forth, and other Circumstances set out; but also it will thereby plainly
appear, that the Reputation of that Dead Knight is so far from being therein
Murdered, or the Justice of the Nation from being Questioned; as that it will
concern Mr. Prance, Mr. M. G. and all Parties on that side, to lay their Heads
together more effectually than they did on Wednesday Morning last: For Truth
seeks no Corners; and, were it not for a Vicious and Unsanctified Generation of
Vipers, need to require an Advocate. For, though a Lie may prevail for a time,
and eclipse the Truth, yet at length Truth will shine forth, with the
assistance of that God, who is the Author of Truth it self.

Then a Paragraph out of another of the like Intelligences, was Read. The
Intelligence was Number 127. Saturday, March 11. 1681.

March 9. 1682.
WHereas Dick Janeway, in this days Mercury, promises an Answer to the late
Letter to Mr. Prance, etc. This is to give him, and all the World, Notice, That
such an Answer is impatiently expected by the Author of that Letter, who
questions not, but to prove every Tittle of that Letter, to the satisfaction of
all Mankind; And besides, he is very desirous that the Courantier (according to
his last Packet of Advice from Rome) would go on, and use his Interest, to
procure the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Common Council of London, to
inspect the Truth of that Letter; whereby it will appear inevitably, that there
is not one Papist, or Popishly affected person concerned in that Letter, or in
the proof of the particulars thereof; but the same (with diverse other material
Circumstances relating to the Murder of Sir E. B. Godfrey, and the Fraud and
Blind put upon the world in relation thereto) will be more fully, plainly, and
manifestly proved, without giving ill Words, or scurrilous Language or
Reflections to any persons that really are, or supposed to be therein
concerned, in any circumstance whatsoever.

Mr. Serj. Maynord. You see what they have done, They say, what was Testified
against the Murderers of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey, they say was a Lie. They go
over all the Evidence given against these Fellows, and undertake, by undeniable
Witnesses, to prove the contrary.


L. Chapter Just. To the Defendants Council, What say you to it?


Mr. Saunders. I am of Council for Pain, My Lord, The Charge against Pain is,
That he should own, that he did bring one of these Letters to be Printed; I
have forgot whether Sir Philip Lloyd said the First or the Second.


L. Chapter Just. The Second he says.


Mr. Saunders. If Pain did own it, I think he did more ingenuously, than when
he did make it, or bring it to the Press: But My Lord, it was a rash unadvised
Act; but not out of any Malice: My Lord, we will prove that Pain was not a
Papist, nor any of his Family. My Lord, this cannot justify or excuse them, it
will only extenuate their Fault. We will call some Witnesses.


L. Chapter Just. I will hear any thing in this Case, be as large as you will, you
shall not say you are stinted; for it is a Business of Mighty Concern.


Mr. Gooding. I am of Council, My Lord, for Pain: My Lord, We have made
Application to Persons to Intercede for us; we are sorry for what we have done,
and have offered to give any Satisfaction.


L. Chapter Just. To me he said, he would make it out by Five Hundred Witnesses:
They would make it as plain as the day.


Mr. Thompson. Since the last time that was appointed for the Trial, they have
Printed, That they would prove it by Threescore Witnesses: and was very sorry
it did not come on.


Mr. Yalden. I am of Council, My Lord, for Thompson, who, I think, was
unfortunately drawn into the business; and that by Pain and Farewell, though
they turn all upon him now. It was a great piece of Ingenuity for him to
discover his Authors; and it had been very Mischevious if they had not been
discovered.


L. Chapter Just. What say you to the two Protestant Intelligences?


Mr. Yalden. They are as much the Author of them, as of the other. Thompson
says, the Authors would be able to prove it by undeniable Witnesses: Thompsons
Intelligence is open to any Man that will put any thing into it, and he is paid
for his Pains.


Mr. Osborne. I am of Council for Farewell, My Lord: It was a Foolish thing to
do as we have done: But that is no Satisfaction, my Client says, he has
several Witnesses.


L. C. J. Call them they shall be heard.


Mr. Farewell. I begin with Hazard my Lord, he and I went to the place.


Then Hazard was sworn.

Mr. Hazard. I went along with Mr. Farewell. He was at the Rainbow
Coffee-house, it was in the Morning, and he desired me to go to the place where
Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey was found.


L. C. J. What day was it.


Mr. Hazard. I cannot tell I went along with him, and stayed as long as he did.
I saw Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey lying upon the Table his Shoos were clean as if
he had been on an Hay-mow, and his Eyes were closed.


L. C. J. Where was he?


Mr. Hazard. Upon a Table in the White-House* There was Gobbets of Blood (that
I will aver my Lord) by the Ditch-side, and likewise at a place where there
were two or three things to go over, there was more Blood, I cannot tell how he
was carried, or how he came there, but I saw him at the White-house.


Mr. Williams. Who went along with you, besides Mr. Farewell?


Mr. Hazard. No body.


Mr. Williams. Did he bring you to the place where the Body lay?


Mr. Hazard. Yes.


Mr. Ser. Maynard. What did Farewell tell you when he desired you to go with
him?


Mr. Hazard. Why, word was brought by one Hancock a Wood-Monger, to the
Coffee-honse, some would not believe him, but sent a Porter to Sir Edmond-Bury
Godfrey's House, and then when the Porter came and said the Body was found and
carried to a White-house on Primrose-Hill, he spoke to me to go and see the
Body, and I fetched my Coat and was there quickly.


Mr. Williams. When you came near the Ditch did Farewell show you the place.


Mr. Hazard. He and others that were there.


Mr. Williams. I ask you this, did any Body show you the place where the Body
lay besides Farewell?


Mr. Hazard. No,


Mr. Osborne Did he go to the place directly, or about over Ditches?


Mr. Hazard. Truly, I know the way to Primrose-hill as well as he. We went as
direct a way as we could.


Lord Chief Justice. The straitest way to the places.


Mr. Hazard. Yes. We went over several Ditches.


Sir F. Win. As you were going over several Ditches, there was no body with
you, but Farewell was there?


Mr. Hazard. No.


Mr. Williams. Did you enquire of any body as you went along?


Mr. Hazard. I cannot remember such a small circumstance.


Then William Batson was sworn.

Mr. Osborne. What do you know about the blood that wasin the Ditch* where Sir
Edmond-Bury Godfrey was found?


Mr. Batson. The morning after the Murder was discovered, and that Sir
Edmond-bury Godfrey was found in the Fields, I went with two or three
Neighbors, and went to the White-house, and saw him lie upon the Table in the
White-house, and coming back again, they showed me in a Ditch, where they said
he lay, some blood, I cannot say it was his blood, and going a little farther,
I saw some more whitish blood, and this is all I can swear.


Lord Chief Justice. Was it Frosty weather?


Mr. Batson. My Lord, I cannot tell whether it was, but I Will assure you the
blood looked to me like blood that was laid there, then any thing else.


One Fisher sworn.

Mr. Farewell. Was you there when Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey was stripped?


Mr. Fisher. Yes, I stripped him of his Clothes, pulled off his Hose and Shoes,
I was Carpenter to my Lord Wooton, and I was sent for in October a day or two
before, and I came to get the house covered up, and to take Order with my
Partner: and as I went, there was a Report, that Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey was
found and laid up in the White-house, and when I came, the Coroner and the Jury
were there, and I got into the Room where Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey lay upon the
Table and took his Hatt off; and I saw two Wounds within an Inch and an half
one of another, one went no further then his Bone, and the other went through
his back. And my Lord, immediately there was an Order come down from the
Coroner, to get him stripped. They asked me if I would give an hand, and I told
them yes. I pulled off his Shoes and they were clean, and I pulled off three
pair of Stockings and a pair of Socks, his black Breeches and his Dravvers, and
they came off very well. There was a man in the Company, that desired to help,
so I got upon the Table, and set him upright with his breach upon the Table and
his Feet hanging down, we unbuttoned his Coat, and pulled it off, I came to his
Flannel-Shirt, and when I come to his Back there was blood. But I did not see
any Blood till I came to his back-part. About his Throat there was something
that had girt him.


Lord Chief Justice. He looked as if he were strangled, did he?


Mr. Fisher. Yes, and his Neck was so vveak that you might turn it any where.


Lord Chief Justice. To the Defendant Farewell.

How do you pretend he murdered himself? that he ran himself through?


Mr. Farewell. I make no inference my Lord. But I would only prove that what I
write true. is I writ only the first Letter, and there are three Heads I am
charged with, upon that Letter, and that about the Blood is one. My Lord, I was
concerned they should pretend there was no blood at all, When I came there,
there was near my Hat full of blood.


Lord Chief Justice. Can you tell who laid it there?


Mr. Farewell. My Lord, if you will hear two witnesses more, I will satisfy
your Lordship who laid it there. My Lord, this man was one of them that helped
to remove the Body out of the Ditch.


Another Witness, John Rawson called by Mr. Farewell and sworn.

Rawson. My Lord, I was there taking him up we fetched the Constable, and
pulled him out of the Ditch, and when we had done we pulled the Sword out and
removed him to the House, and there was blood upon some Posts (explaining
himself to me, on a couple of stumps to go over upon) and going into the Door,
his Back did sweep a little against the side, and there was some water and
blood lighteD there, and likewise lay upon the Table where he lay, and upon
the Floor.


Mr. Farewell. Did the blood of his body fall upon the Floor, and go through
the Floor, into the Cellar?


Mr. Rawson. Some drops were there, I vvon't svvear whether it were blood or
no my Lord.


Mr. Farewell. My Lord I desire the same question may be put to Mrs. Rawson.


Mrs. Rawson svvorn.

Mrs. Rawson. My Lord if you please I have not a word to say, but there was
blood and water, ran through the Table, that is all I can say.


Mr. Farewell My Lord as to the difference betvveen Mr. Prances Evidence and
Mr, Bedloes, I desire I may prove the difference betvveen them.


L. C. Justice. You shall make any proof you will.


John Stanley, called by Mr. Farewell and svvorn.

Mr. Farwell. I call him to prove the Copies of the Journals of the House of
Lords.


L. C. Justice. What would you infer from the Journals?


Mr. Farewell. My Lord they charge me that I should say there is a great deal
of difference between the Evidence Mr. Bedloe gave in the House of Lords and
the Evidence that Prance gave at the Trial of Green, Berry and Hill.


L. C. Justice. Would you prove any Evidence, given by Bedloe out of the
Journals?


Mr. Farewell. I can prove he gave that Evidence before the House of Lords.


But Mr. Farewell afterward went off from that Proof, and called Mr. Hobbs,
Mr. White, Mr. Chase the Father, and Mr. Chase the Son, and Mr. Lazingby who
were sworn.

Mr. Farewell. I ask Mr. Chase, what he observed about Sir. Edmoud-Bury Godfrey.


Mr. Chase the Son. My Lord, on Friday Morning the day after the body was
found, I went to Primrose-Hill, in company with my father, to see the body
which they said was found, I came into the Field where the company in the Field
said, the body had been laid, the body had been then carried into the house, I
looked into the Ditch where they said the body was laid, I could not see blood
in the Ditch, but four or five Yards aside off the Ditch, there seemed some
blood to me, which the Constable said, followed thesword when it was pulled out
of the body I saw the body in the House and saw the two wounds, he had a great
Contusion on the left Ear, and his whole Face was very much bruised.


L. C. Justice. Do you believe there was anyi Volence offered to him?


Mr. Chase. My Lord, I believe he was Strangled, for I don't believe those
Injuries that were offered about him, could be after he was dead.


L. C. Justice. What say you Mr. Hobbs?


Farewell. I desire he may be asked, whether he did not propose to Mr. Godfrey.
that the body might be opened, that any doubt may be laid aside, concerning his
being Murdered, in that Place?


Mr. Hobbs. My Lord?


L. C. Justice. Had you any doubt, whether he was Murdered or not?


Mr. Hobs. Indeed my Lord I thought he was Strangled, that was my Opinion, I
cant tell whether I was mistaken. I said to Dr. Goodall it would be very well
if Mr. Godfrey would send for a Surgeon and a Physician from the Court and
others from the City to satisfy all persons.


Mr. Farewell. What Color was his face?


Mr. Hobbs. My Lord it was bloted.


L. C. Justice. Did it look as if Violence had been used to him?


Mr. Hobbs Ay my Lord and the bloody Vessels of his Eyes were so full as if he
had been troubled with sore Eyes.


Mr. Farewell. Did you observe any Fly-Blows in his face?


Mr. Hobbs. No my Lord, not that I know of.


L. C. Justice. What say you Mr. Chase?


Mr. Chase. My Lord on Friday when I came to see the body at the White House I
found a great Contusion, and two wounds one yielded toward the right. The
other went into the body. I troubled my self no more at that time, but the nex
day I was desired by Dr. Lloyd that I would go to his House and see the body
again, and there I found a selling upon the left Ear as if a knot had been
tied, there I found him beaten from this place to this (pointing to the Neck
and Stomach) I never saw any man beaten so in my life. Before this business was
broached Mr. Farewell did take me aside at Man's Coffe-House, and did tell me
what proof he could make of this business, I told him Mr. Farewell I love you
well, don't meddle with the business, for I know it is impossible any thing can
be said against it that has the face of truth, I did so a second time (my
Lord) when the book came out I found one before I went to New Market, and the
other at New Market I was very much troubled to see them. The Night before
Easter, the Eve of Easterday, I meet with Mr. Farewell at an House where I had
been with a good friend of his and mine, and Farewell came and asked for me,
and he came up to the Room as they called for another Bottle of Wine, I told
them it was needless, only since Mr. Farewell is come up said I, I will drink
one glass with you And he told me then that 6 Months before I had given him
good Council if he had taken it.


Mr. Farrwell. My Lord, I desire M. Smith to be called.


L. C. Justice. Let him. But he came not then.

Mr. Brown is called by Mr. Farewell and sworn.


Mr. Farewell. I desire Mr. Brown may be asked whether his Eyes were not fly
blown?


L. C. Justice. It Is proposed to you by Mr. Farewell, whether the Eyes of Sir.
Edmond-Bury Godfrey were not fly-blown.


Mr. Brown. No my Lord, I did not see any fly-blows.


Mr. Farewell. Whether there were any specks, that one might call fly-blows?


M. Brown. My Lord, I did not see any specks that one might call fly-blows?


Mr. Farewell. I desire that I might call two Witnesses to prove that he said
so.


L. C. Justice. What will you get by that, Mr. Farewell, to disparage your
Witness.


Mr. Brown. My Lord, Mr. Farewell would have had me said so, but I never said
so.


Then Smith came.

L. C. Justice. What do you ask Smith?


Mr. Farewell. Only about the blood.


Mr. Brown, My Lord he came to me another time, and told me I was wrong in my
Affidavit, as if he knew what I could make Affidavit of better then my self.


Mr. Farewell. My Lord I was not the party that told him so.


Mr. Brown. He was at my house twice, at Mary-bone at the sign of the Sun.


L. C. Justice. Was Pain with him there?


Mr. Brown. My Lord, there was a man with Plate buttons with him there. I don't
know Pain.


Mr. Smith Svvorn.

L. C. Justice. Well what say you Mr. Smith it is required of you by Mr.
Farewell, here to dcelare whether you took up any of Sir* Edmond-bury Godfreys
blood, and brought it home in your handkerchief.


Mr. Smith. No my Lord I know nothing of that.


Mr. Farewell. I desire Rawson and his wife may be called again.


Rawson appears.

L. C. Justice. What say you, it is required by Mr. Farewell whether you savv any
fly-blovvs in Sir. Edmond-bury Godfrey's Eyes.


Mr. Rawson There was some thing like fly-blows, but I cant say they were
fly-blovvs.


L. C. Justice. Did you observe the flys were busy at that time of the Year?


Mr. Rawson. My Lord I did not see them. (Then the people laughed)


Mr. Farewell I desire Rawsons wife may come.


Mr. Rawson I must fetch her then.


Rawsons Wife appears.

L. C. Justice. Look you, Mr. Farewell requires of you to tell us whether there
was any fly-blows in the Eyes of Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey.


Mrs. Rawson. If it please you my Lord, there was a great many people said
there were fly-blows, I took no great notice of them,


L. C. Justice. He asks you what you say to his Mouth, and his Nostrels, were
there fly-blows?


Mrs. Rawson. If it please you my Lord, I cant say nothing to it, for I did not
much mind it, but they seemed fly-blows.


L. C. Justice. Have you any more Witnesses Mr. Farewell?


Mr. Farewell. I pray Mr. Lazingby (my Lord) may be asked whether men that kill
themselves look as Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey did.


L. C. Justice. Mr. Lazingby, Mr. Farewill requires of you, whether you have
seen men that have killed themselves, look in such a manner about the Neck and
Face.


Mr. Lazingby. My Lord, he appeared to me to be strangled, and that which
strangled him was kept about his Neck till he was cold. My Lord, People that
are hanged and let down while warm, the blood draines away by the Vessels that
are broaken, and their Faces are rather less, and their Faces become very pale;
but the thing Wherewith he was strangled remaining about his Neck, the blood
could not draine away, but it made his Face look bloody. The two Mr. Chases,
the Kings Apothecary was there when I was there, and the blood that was some
four Yards from the Ditch, I put my finger in it, and smelt to it and it smelt
like that which comes from a body after a sortnights time dead, rather then a
weeks; my Lord, it was blood and water. The water will separate from the blood.


Sir Frances Winn. But you believe he was strangled?


Mr. Lazingby. Yes his Neck from this place hither, (pointing to the upper part
of his Neck, and then to his Stomach and Breast) was very much discolored and
black, and his mouth was discolored. Now when ever a man is bruised whilst he
is alive or whilst he is warm that part after the person is dead will soonest
corrupt.


L. C. Justice. It stands to reason that the bruised part will first corrupt.


Mr. Lazingby. My Lord after Mr. Chase the Apothecary and I had seen him at the
White house, I went up to drink a Glass of Beer, and Mr. Chases son unbuttoned
Sir Edmond-bury Godfreys Collar which was more then I saw, when I was come in,
and unbuttoning the Collar there were 2 great creases both a bove and below,
so they sent for me down to come and see it, so I put the Collar together and
I percieved the Collar, made the mark like a straight Ring upon a finger, the
Neck being svvelled above the Collar and below, by the strangling with a Cord
or Cloth.


Sir Frances Winn. Do you think he killed himself now Mr. Farewell?


Mr. Lazingby. There was something in the Cover of his Eyes like matter, but I
cannot say it was fly-blovvs. His Eyes were open, my Lord, and his Eyes were
Bloodshed, as Mr. Hobbs has given you an account, as if he had an
extraordinary great cold, or a man that had a blovv upon the Temples or
Forehead.


Mr. Farewell. Whether were his Eyelids closed?


Mr. Lazingby. My Lord, his Eyes were open when I savv him.


Mr. Farewell. When I savv him about 6 a Clock in the morning his Eyes were
shut.


Mr. Lazingby. I felt upon his Clothes. I admired that his Clothes were not
wet, there having been so great a storm the afternoon before?


L. C. Justice. And his Clothes were not wet?


Mr.. Lazingby His Clothes were as dry as mine.


Mr. Farewell. My Lord they made a great fire there and dried his Clotahs.


L. C. Justice. Come Mr. Farewell. there is no man so blind as he that vvon't
see. Will you call any more Witnesses?


Mr. Farewell. I will call no more Witnesses; but I suppose they will Offer
against me that I am a Papist.


Mr. Sergeant Maynard No, no.


L. C. Justice. Truly your Religion is not vvorth the enquireing into, It Is not
much to the purpose what Religion you are of.


Mr. Sergeant Maynard. Gentlemen you hear he has been able to make no defense
for himself, but for the satisfaction of the World, my Lord, has taken great
pains in hearing him. I shall speak but very fevv words, and call a Witness or
two, of some new matter; that if it be possible to covince him we will do
it. We need not do it because his own Witnesses tell you of the several
bruises and Wounds he had, that there was no fly-blovvs, no putrified matter.
How can a man that Stabbs him sef, bruise and beat himself in the manner that
you have heard. There is never a Witness that has spoken on his side, but has
spoken against him, to prove himself as malicious a fellovv as can be. What had
he to do with this? Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey was murdered, Was found, inquiry
made after it, and prosecution thereupon, now comes this fellow and permits
several Arguments against it, every one of them from matter of fact, that is
false and yet publishes it to the World, that he will prove it by 500
undeniable Witnesses. We will now call some Witnesses to prove him as Wicked a
liar as lives. I say what had he to do with it, only mere malice. He would have
me ask him what Religion he is of. I shall not ask him, for I don't think he is
of any, none of any Religion can be so Wicked to own such a thing. We shall
desire the favor to call a Witness or two, to prove something more then has
yet been proved in this Murder though there was Evidence enough upon the Trial to
prove it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Gentlemen. Mr. Farewell does pretend that he has only told so
many Lies, and has left the World to make use of it. And has brought
Witnesses to Color this matter over, and in hopes to make you believe the
matter is true. But Mr. Farewell has forgot himself, his Paper is quite
otherwise, for he has argued upon it, and made Inferences, that therefore Sir
Edmond-bury Godfrey murdered himself, therefore he is guilty of the highest
malice in the World. He tells a great many falsities, and from those falsities,
has inferred others. The Paper is full of Arguments.


L. C. Justice. Gentlemen, I did give him leave to go into what Evidence he
would in this Case, not hat I thought it material for if he could have proved
never so much, yet his malice had never been the less to have gone and aspersed
the Government. What had he to do to meddle with it? To what purpose should he
Write Books, concerning the matters of Government to Traduce the Justice of the
Nation? The people had suffered as Malefactors, and what had he to do with it?
If they had suffered Innocently, he ought to have done no such thing as this is.


Mr. Sergeant Maynard., My Lord but one Witness.


L. C. Justice. Pray call whom you will.


Mr. Sergeant Maynard. John Okely, We will prove that he was way-layed that
very day he was strangled.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We have no need to call any Witnesses now, to over do a thing.
We may leave it here.


Jury-Man. Pray my Lord if they have any more Witnesses let us hear them.


L. C. Justice. It Is nothing to this purpose to call any for the King, nor has
Farewells Evidence signified any thing to this. He did design and would (no
doubt of it) have been very much satisfied if he could have made but some
probable Evidence that Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey killed himself, and I was
desirous to hear what they would say for themselves. But you hear what a kind
of Evidence it is, not a Witness he has called, but is as much against him as
can be, and does evince it plainly that the man was killed, and that he was
killed by strangling, and so the Evidence was upon the Trial of Green, Berry,
and Hill. If he could have raised a doubt about it, yet his Offense had not
been mitigated by it, for a private person is not to arraign the Justice of the
Nation, but I was vvilling to hear what could be said in the Case, whether a
doubt could be made in the World, that Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey was not
murdered. And you see how his very Evidence has in all things confirmed the
Evidence Prance has given, that he was killed, and that


he was killed by strangling. I must leave it with you Gentlemen, they are all
3 in this mischief, it is a Combination of them to affront the public Justice of
the Nation, and what is the end of it, the end of it is to make people believe
there is no Popish Plot, but it is plain he was killed by the Popish party; as
Prance, upon his Evidence against Green, and the others attested. But if they
could have made it out that he killed himself, all of them would have cried out
the Popish Plot was a sham, nothing but a thing raised by the Protestants
against the Papists, and all the Plot must have gone for nothing. Gentlemen, I
do leave it to you, whether upon this Evidence you do not believe them all to
be Guilty of this design, of Traducing the Justice of the the Nation.


The Jury thereupon, without going from the Bar sound them all three Guilty,
of the Information.

And the people gave a great Hum.

Monday July 3. 1682.
NAthaniel Thompson, William Pain and John Farewell, were brought up by Rule, to
the Bar of the Court of the Kings Bench to receive their Judgment: Mr. Thompson
the Counselor moved for Judgment, and particularly prayed they might have some
corporal punishment, acquainting the Court that since their Trial (tho they had
as much time and liberty given them by the Lord Chief Justice to call their
witnesses, and examine whom the would as they could desire,) the very next News
Book Thompson put out, he took upon him to give an Account as though Justice had
not been done him; and further said, if there was any doubt of the Fact with
Mr. Thompson, or Mr. Farewell, or Mr. Pain, there were Affidavits to satisfy
the world about it.

Then Mr. Spences Affidavit was read.
Richard Spence Citizen and Upholder of London, living in Arundel Street in the
Strand in the Parish of St. Clements Daen, in the County of Middlesex, having
been twice subpaena'd to give Evidence for the King, upon an Information,
exhibited in the Crown-office against Nathaniel Thompson, William Pain and John
Farewell, and not being called at their Trial to give Evidence in open Court,
makes Oath that upon Thursday the Tenth day of October 1678. it being the
Thursday before Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was missing from his own House in
Hartshorne Lane in the Strand, as he this Deponent was coming from St. James's
Market to go to his own House, about Seven of the clock at night, there were
then at the Water Gate of Somerset House, five or six men standing together,
who laid hold on this Deponent as he was passing by them, and they taking hold
of both this Deponents Arms, dragged him down about a yard within the Water
Gate of Somerset House, it being dark; but one of the said Men, which this
Deponent believes to have been Hill, (for that this Deponent knew Hill very
well, as also his Master Doctor Godwyn,) cried out and said this is not he,
upon which they immediately let this Deponent go.

RICHARD SPENCE.
Jurat. the 10th. July, 1682. Coram me, W. Dolbin.

Whereupon the Clerk of the Crown said, that it was one Captain Spence, whom he
knew very well, and that he was a Tall black Man and like Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey.

Then John Oakely's Affidavit was read.
John Oakely, of the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields in the County of
Middlesex, Servant to Mr. Robert Breedon of Hartshorne Lane in the said Parish
and County Brewer, makes Oath that on Saturday the 12th. day of October, in
the year of our Lord 1678, about eight or nine of the clock in the Evening, he
was in the City of London, in the Company of his Father Robert Oakely of
Bissiter in the County of Oxon Maulster, and his Father came with him so far as
Ludgate, where they parted. And this Deponent going homewards to his Master
Breedns House, coming by Somerset House in the Strand, when he came near the
Gate of that House which leads down to the Waterside, commonly called the
Water Gate, which was about Nine of the clock at night, he there saw Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, and past close by him and put off his Hat to him; and Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey put off his Hat again to him, and after that this Deponent
had passed beyond Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, he this Deponent turned about and
looked upon him again, and Sir Edmondbury Godfrey stood still, and there was a
Man or two near Sir Edmond. And this Deponent further says that he knew Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey very well, for that he saw him almost daily pass by his
Master Breedons House in Hartshorne Lane, going or coming from his own dwelling
House, which was also in Hartshorne Lane. And this Deponent further says that
about two or three days after when the Rumor was that Sir Edmondbury Godfrey
was missing, he acquainted his fellow Servant Elizabeth Dekin, that he saw Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey near the Water Gate at Somerset House in the Strand, that
very Saturday night that he was reported to have been missing from his House in
Hartshorne Lane. And this Deponent further says that he told the same thing to
his Uncle Ralph Oakely of the Parish of little Saint Bartholomew, about a week
after the time that Sir Edmondbury Godfreys body was found, and also that he
told the same thing to his Father the aforesaid Robert Oakely, and to several
others in a short time after.

JOHN OAKELY.
Jurat. 22 die Junij 1682. Coram me, John Moore Major.
Sworn to again the 1st. July, 1682. Before Judge Dolbin, Examinat.
and is left filed up in the Crown-office. Vide Green, Berry and Hills Trial,
folio 16, as to the time of Sir Edmondbury Godfreys being at Somerset House.
After which the Court consulted together, and Mr. Justice Jones having first
set out the greatness of their Crime, gave the Judgment of the Court, which
was, that Thompson and Farwell, should stand upon the Pillory, in the Palace
yard, the last day of the Term, between the hours of Ten and One of the clock,
for the space of an hour, and each of them to pay an Hundred pound Fine, and to
be Imprisoned till they had paid it. And as for Pain, he told him because the
Court did not conceive him altogether so guilty, they would inflict no corporal
punishment on him, but did adjudge him to pay an Hundred pound Fine, and to be
Imprisoned till he paid it.

Afterward the Court was moved to explane their Judgment, it being apprehended
that it was pronounced upon the Pillory; and the Court did declare that their
intention was (and so the expression upon the Pillory was to be understood)
that they should stand in the Pillory.

Accordingly Wednesday the 5th. July, 1682. Thompson, and Farewell stood in the
Pillory in the Old Palace-yard at Westminster, with this Writing over their
Heads,

For Libelling the Justice of the Nation, by making the World believe that Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey Murdered himself.

The End of the Trial.
AN APPENDIX Containing Several other Affidavits, Which further confirm the
Testimony of Mr. Miles Prance; Given upon the Trial of Green, Bury, and Hill,
For the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey:

WITH Some Observations touching Thompson, Pain, and Farewell.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, 1682.

AN APPENDIX Containing Several other Affidavits, Which further confirm the
Testimony of Mr. Miles Prance, etc.
AS it has been of late by many Learned Pens, made appear, That the Papists do
justify and countenance, nay, esteem Meritorious, Rebellions, Murders, and
Massacres, against any Protestant Prince or People (whom they reckon Heretics)
for the Advancement of their Religion; so it is as well known, that if those
Rebellions, Murders, and Massacres, be Discovered, they can (if they shall
think them needful) have Dispensations to Forswear, Lie, Equivocate, do any
thing to make the world believe that they are Innocent, or make Protestants
themselves appear Guilty of them. That there has been a Popish Plot, (and a
desperate one too) in England, for the Subversion of the Protestant Religion,
and Established Government, I think no man doubts, only some persons whose
Interest it is, may deny. And amongst the several concurring Evidences of this
Popish Conspiracy, the Murder of that worthy Gentleman and Magistrate by that
Party, has not been the least. That which induced the Papists to this Murder,
(as well as can be guessed by those who are Strangers to that Wicked Action)
was one or both of these Considerations; namely, the hopes of finding and
seizing the Examination of Dr. Oats about the damnable Popish Plot which he had
taken, and used to carry about with him, by which they thought to stifle the
Plot: Or else they thought, by this Murder, to affrighten all active
Magistrates from being Vigorous in the future Examination, and further
prosecution of their Horrid Conspiracy, though (through God's providence) they
have been very much Disappointed in both these Ends.

And the Papists are so sensible how much this Murder pinches them, that after
the Conviction and Execution of the persons for that Murder, no discouragements
or dangers they incur (by affronting and arraigning the public Justice of the
Kingdom) has been able to Deter them from impudent Attempts (impudent I may
say, the rather, because done under a Protestant-Government) to sham off that
Murder from themselves, and making the whole Prosecution to be only a Design
and Contrivance of the Protestants against them. Witness first, that notorious
Sham of James Magrath an Irishman, who (being assisted by the Popish Priests
in Newgate, Mrs. Cellier, and Mrs. Gibbon, and others) pretended there were
those that could make it appear, and prove, That Sir Edmond-Bury-Godfrey Hanged
himself, and that one Moor, who was Clerk to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey Cut him
down, finding him Hanging. Which matter being Examined at the Council Board,
and appearing to their Honors to be a false and malicious Contrivance, the
said Magrath was dismissed with Security for his Appearance, and that Project
fell to the ground. But for the further Satisfaction of the world (though I
think no body did believe that Idle Story) I shall here insert Mr. Moors
Affidavit.

The Affidavit of Henry Moore.
HEnry Moore, late Servant and Clerk to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, Deceased,
makes Oath, That upon Saturday the 12th. of October, 1678. his said Master
having Persons come before him about Justice-business, till about Nine of the
Clock in the Forenoon: when the Company were gone, he bade me help him on with
his Coat, which I did; and immediately he made me pull it off again, and give
him another Coat, which I did; and then he girt his Sword about him, and went
out from his House, which was the last time I saw him, till after he was found
Dead in the Fields, which was the Thursday following. The Constable of St.
Giles in the Fields, and several others with him, came to my Master's House,
and told us, that Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey was found Dead, and laid in a Ditch
at Primrose-Hill, and a Sword thrust through him; and said, he had caused him
to be carried to the White-House: This being late at Night, the next Day my
Masters two Brothers, and Sisters, and my self, went thither; and then I saw
him lie upon a Table in the House where the Constable had laid him, which was
the first time that I saw him, after he went out of his own House, on Saturday
the 12th of October, 1678. And then we brought him Home to his own House; And
as I am Informed that there are several Scandalous Papers, and Words given out,
That Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey Hanged himself; and that they do Affirm, That I,
the said Henry Moore, should say that I Cut him down; I do hereby Depose, That
the said Report is utterly false; and that I did not Cut him down, nor ever
said any such words to any Person whatsoever; or ever said that Sir
Edmund-Bury-Godfrey made away himself, or words to that Effect: Which said
Scandals are all False and Notorious Lies,

Henry Moore.
June the 28th. 1681. HEnry Moore of Littleport in the Isle of Ely, and County
of Cambridge, made Oath before me William Balam, one of His Majesty's Justices
for the said Isle; that this, which is contained in the above written Affidavit
is true, and nothing but Truth. In Witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand
and Seal, the Day and Year above Written, William Balam.

Yet, though this Matter had proved so unsuccessful, they could not be quiet,
but must make one Experiment more, and that is contrary to the former: For now
they Declare, that he made away himself (so far they agree with Magrath) but it
was by running his Sword through his own Body. And Thompson, Farewell, and
Pain, are the Men that are to Manage this New Invention; and they Write and
Print the Scandalous Letters and Libels you find in their Trial: And lest any
one should dare to Question the Truth of them, they boast, they can prove their
Assertions by Five Hundred Witnesses. Every Body thought the Murder
sufficiently proved upon the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill, and were amazed
to hear such a Declaration, thinking it hardly possible for Men to be so
Impudent, publicly to declare, they had Five Hundred Witnesses to Prove a
Matter, when they had not one, as may be seen by their Trial; for every Witness
made against them; and further proved, that he was Murdered, and that by
Strangling. But for these Scandalous Libels, they were brought before His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, who (upon their owning those Libels)
committed them to Newgate, and ordered the Attorney General to Prosecute them;
and accordingly you find by the Trial he did; and they were Convicted, and
have since received Judgment, and that Judgment has been Executed. But though
the Murder was clearly proved at the Trial of Green, Berry, and Hill; and
though after all these Brags, that Thompson, Farewell, and Pain, made, That
they could prove so much at their Trial, they could make out nothing; and so it
was not necessary to call any more Witnesses for the King then; yet for the
further Satisfaction of the World, it has been thought fit to Print (besides
what is Printed with the Trial, upon giving Judgment) the following Five
Affidavits all agreeing with Mr. Prance's Testimony upon the Trial of Green,
Berry, and Hill; and as to the first Four of them, see John Oakly's Affidavit,
Printed in the Trial, at page 35.

The Affidavit of Elizabeth Dekin.
ELizabeth Dekin, Servant to Mr. Robert Breedan, of Harts-horn-Lane, in the
Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Brewer, makes
Oath, That about two or three Days after the Rumor was Published, That Sir
Edmund-Bury was missing, her fellow servant, John Oakely, told her, this
Deponent, That he saw Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, near the Watergate at
Sommerset-House in the Strand, about Nine of the Clock that very Saturday Night
that he was first Missing, from his House in Harts-horn-Lane; and that there
was then a Man or two near the said Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey: And this Deponent
further says, That her said Master, Robert Breedan, asking her (before the
Body of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey was found) what News there was about Sir
Edmund-Bury-Godfrey? She, this Deponent, told him, That she heard no News of
him, but that her Fellow Servant, John Oakely, had told her, That he met Sir
Edmund-Bury-Godfrey near the Watergate at Sommerset-House, the very Saturday
Night he was first Missing from his House in Harts-horn-Lane. And this Deponent
further says, That she then asked the said John Oakely, If he was sure it was
Sir Edmund? And he replied, he was very sure it was he, for he put off his Hat
to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, as he passed by. him; and Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey
put off his Hat to him again: And he also told her, That when he had past Sir
Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, he, the said John Oakely looking back again, saw Sir
Edmund-Bury-Godfrey stand still, and a Man or two hard by him,

Elizabeth Dekin.
Jurat 22 Die Junij. 1682. coram me. John Moore, Mayor.

The Affidavit of Robert Breedon.
RObert Breedon of Harts-horn-Lane in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields,
in the County of Middlesex, Brewer, makes Oath, That one Night, betwixt
Saturday the 12th Day of October, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six
Hundred and Seventy Eight, and before the Body of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey was
found, he coming Home to his House about Nine of the Clock at Night, asked his
Servant Maid, Elizabeth Dekin, If there were yet any News of Sir
Edmund-Bury-Godfrey's being found? or words to that purpose: who replied, That
she heard nothing of his being found; But told him, That her Fellow Servant,
John Oakely, did positively Affirm, That he met Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey near
the Watergate at Sommerset-House in the Strand, that very Saturday Night about
Nine of the Clock, being the same Saturday that he was first Missed from his
House in Harts-horn-Lane; to which this Deponent replied, Sure John is
mistaken: To which Elizabeth Dekin answered, John Oakely said, he was sure it
was he; for when he met him, he put off his Hat to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, and
Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey put off his Hat to him again.

Robert Breedon.
Jurat. 22. Die Junij. 1682. coram me. John Moore, Mayor.

The Affidavit of Ralph Oakeley.
RAlph Oakeley, Citizen and Skinner, makes Oath, That he was an Inhabitant in
the Parish of Little St. Bartholomews, London, in the Month of October 1678.
and that John Oakely his Nephew, was then and is now a Servant to Mr. Robert
Breed^n, of Harts-horn-Lane in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, in the
County of Middlesex, Brewer. And this Deponent farther says, that soon after
that the dead Body of Sir Edmond-B^ry Godfrey was found his said Nephew, John
Oakely, came to this Deponents House in a Visit, being as this Deponent
believes, about the Sunday after that Sir Edmond-Bury Godfreys Body was found.
And they falling into discourse of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey's being found
murdered, his said Nephew John Oakely then told him this Deponent, That as he
was going home to his Mr. Breedons in Harts-horn-Lane, after that he had parted
with his Father Robert Oakely, about Lud^at^, he met Sir Edmond-BuryGodfrey
about nine of the Clock at night, near the Watergate of Somerset House; that
Saturday night that he was first missing from his House in Harts-horn-Lane, and
that he then, passed close by Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, or words to that
purpose. Whereupon this Deponent asked his said Nephew, are you sure that it
was Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey that you then met near Somerset House? how did you
come to know him? to which his said Nephew made Answer, I know him very well,
for I saw him almost daily pass by Mr. Breed^ns house, and he lived in
Harts-horn-lane a little below my Masters Brew House, or words to that purpose.

Ralph Oakeley.
Jur: 4. die Julij 1682. Coram W. Dolbin.

The Affidavit of Robert Oakeley.
RObert Oakely of Bisseter, in the County of Oxon Maulster, makes Oath, that
he being in London, on Saturday the 12th of October 1678 with his Son John
Oakely, servant to Mr. Robert Breeden of the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields, in the County of Middlesex Brewer, that this Deponent did then
accompany his said Son John Oakely without Ludgate, and there parted with him
about Nine a Clock at Night, and this Deponent went out of Town on the Thursday
following; before the Body of Sir Edmond-BuryGodfrey was found. And this
Deponent further says, that some short time after, he coming to Town again,
the said John Oakely his Son, then told this Deponent that upon Saturday the
12th day of October, 1678. After he had parted from this Deponent upon
Ludgate Hill, as he went home to his said Masters House in Hartshorn-Lane, he
saw Sir Edmond-BuryGodfrey; near Sumerset-House in the Strand, and then put off
his Hat to him, and the said Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey thereupon put of his Hat
to the said John Oakeley again, all which this Deponent has declared to
several persons since that time.

Robert Oakley.
Jurat 22. die Junij 1682. Coram me, John Moore Mayor.

The Affidavit of John Brown and William Lock.
JOhn Brown and William Lock, both of the Parish of Maribone in the County of
Middlesex, having been since subpaened to give Evidence for the King upon an
Information in the Crown-Office, exhibited against Nathaniel Thomson, William
Pain, and John Farewell, and not being called at their Trial to give Evidence
for the King, in open Court, each of them severally for themselves makes Oath,
that upon Thursday the 17th of October, 1678. The said John Brown, being then
Constable of Maribone aforesaid, word was brought to him, that there was a man
found dead in a Ditch near Primrose-Hill, whereupon this Deponent John Brown,
charged this other Deponent William Lock, and several others to go along with
him thither; and when they came to the place where the Body lay, the said
Deponents John Brown and William Lock, went into the said Ditch, as also some
other persons, which were then with them, some of which are since deceased. And
the said Deponents viewing the Body in what Posture it lay, and finding a Sword
thrust through the Body, they each of them, the said Deponents, did feel under
the Body, and found that the Pummel of the Sword-Hilt did not touch the Ground
by a handful; but not knowing whose Body it was, they the said Deponents and
others that were then with them, pulled the Body out of the Ditch, and found
that it was the Body of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey, with whom they were very well
acquainted in his Life time.

The mark of William W. L. Lock. John Brown.
Jurat 30 die Junij 1682. Coram me John Moore Mayor.

The Affidavit of Benj. Man.
Benjamin man of London, Gent. having been twice subpaened to give Evidence for
the King upon an Information Exhibited in the Crown-Office against Nathaniel
Thompson, William Pain and John Farewell: And not being called at their Trial
to give Evidence in open Court, makes Oath, That about the time Green was
Charged with the Murder of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey, This Deponent coming to
the Gate House in the Morning, found the said Green about to be put in Irons,
and Asking the Turn-Keys What was the matter? They told him that Green was
Charged with the Murder of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey. And then the said Deponent
called to see his Warrant, and this Deponent reading of it, turned to Mr. Green
and said I did not think to have found you such a man, whereupon Green replied,
I am a Dead Man, or Words to that purpose.

Benj. Man.
Jur. 3. die Julii, 1682. Coram me W. Dolben.

The Affidavit of Robert Forset.
Robert Forset of Maribone, in the County of middlesex Esquire having been twice
Subpaened to give Evidence for the King, upon an Information exhibited in the
Crown-Office against Nathaniel Thomson, William Pain and John Farewell: And
being not Called to give Evidence in open Court, makes Oath, That Tuesday the
fifteenth of October, 1678. being the Tuesday after that Sir Edmond-berry
Godfrey was missing, he this Deponent was a hunting with his Pack of Hounds at
the very place where the Body of Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey was afterward found,
and beat that very place with his hounds, and the Body was not then there, nor
any Gloves nor Cane thereabout. The said Deponent further says, That the same
day Mr. Henry Harwood, requested him this Deponent that he would let him have
his Hounds the next day after being Wednesday, and he would find that Hare
which they could not find on Tuesday, or words to that purpose. And this
Deponent further says, That he the said Harwood, has several times since
affirmed, That he did accordingly hunt in the same place and beat the same
Ditch, and said that the Body was not there that Wednesday at Noon, which said
Henry Harwood is now newly dead.

W. Dolben.
Jur. 1. die Julii, 1682. coram me Robert Forset.

Vid. Green, Berry, and Hills Trials, fol. 19. 20. As to the time of removing
the Body and the Gloves, and other things upon the Bank.

But because it may be thought strange that Protestants should Espouse the
Cause of the Papists, it may be fit to give some Account what these Persons
are, who have so zealously appeared in this matter; It is to be supposed (not
without some ground) that Thompson (notwithstanding his pretense that he was
drawn in) knew those things he Printed in the Letters or several of them to be
falsities, for Mr. George Larkin does swear as follows:

The Affidavit of George Larkin.
George Larkin of London Printer, makes Oath, That having heard the Body of
Sir Edmond-berry Godfrey was found, this Deponent on the Eighteenth of October,
1678. went to see the said Body, which then lay at the White House near
Primrose-Hill, and there met with Nathaniel Thompson, of London also Printer,
who then proposed to this Deponent the writing of a Narrative thereof to Print,
wherein he desired this Deponents Assistance, and therefore wished this
Deponent to take good notice of the Body and Circumstances, and promised to do
the like himself, and this Deponent staid there with the said Thompson till the
Coroners Jury sat on the said Body, and did see the said Body stripped. And
this Deponent having conferred with the said Thompson, and agreeing with him in
the circumstances; the said Narrative, the same day was written in part in the
said Thompson's house, and being finished, was read over by this Deponent and
the said Thompson, who agreed with this Depononent in the truth thereof*

George Larkin.
Jur. 22. die Martii, 1681. coram me J. Moore, Mayor.

And upon this sight of the Body, and comparing of Notes with Mr. Larkin, he
puts out a little Pamphlet entitled, A True and Perfect Narrative, etc. in
which there is a Paragraph or two quite contrary to what he Prints in the
Letters, pray take it in the words of it.

A True and Perfect Narrative of the late Terrible and Bloody Murder of Sir
Edmond-berry Godfrey, etc. (with Allowance.) Printed by N. T. 1678.
ON Friday the Eighteenth of this Instant, Mr. Cooper the Coroner of Middlesex
impannell'd a Jury at the White-House to Enquire about the occasion of the
Death of the said Sir Edmond-berry: and two Chirurgions (having been first
Sworn) removed the Body in the presence of the Coroner and Jury, and found the
Wounds about it, which one of the Chirurgions searched with his Probe, and
found one of them not above an Inch deep, the Probe going against one of his
Ribs, but the other being a little below the left Pap, went quite through the
Body, his Face was of a fresh color, though in his Life time very pale, somewhat
swelled, and a green Circle about his Neck, as if he had been strangled, his
blood being settled about his Throat, and the upper part of his Breast, the
Chirurgions having reviewed the Body, delivered their Judgments, That the
Wounds they found about him were not the Cause of his Death; but that he was
Suffocated before the Wounds were made. And that which may fully persuade any
person of the Truth hereof is, That there was not one drop of Blood to be found
in the place where he lay, nor the least appearance of any such thing, though the
Ditch was dry, and it might have been easily seen if there had been any.
Another thing was, that the very bottom of the soles of his Shoes were as clean
as if he had but just come out of his own Chamber, which was an evident sign
that he was carried thither.

A third thing very remarkable is, That one of the Jury Affirmed that a Servant
of his Mothers (who is owner of the ground were the Body lay) with a Butcher
and two Boys made a very strict and narrow search in all parts of that ground
for a Calf that was missing upon Monday and Tuesday last, and at that time
there lay no dead Body, Belt, Gloves, Stick, or other thing there.

And notwithstanding he gives himself the Name of the Loyal Protestant Printer,
this is not the first time he has been charged wlth Printing Popish. Books, (I
take still these Letters and Libels to be a Limb of Popery) for Wednesday the
thirtieth of October, 1678. he was Committed to the Gatehouse at Westminster,
by the House of Lords for that very matter. As for Mr. Farewell, he was
mightily afraid he should be taken for a Papist, Mr. Sergeant Maynard declared
he thought he was of no Religion: but if he be, I know which is most like to
justify such Practices. But though I cannot say any thing as to his Religion,
yet I have reason to think the Papists had a great kindness for him, for (not
to mention other things) he was Trustee for Fenwick the Jesuit that was
Executed, and that I think will appear by the following Affidavit, and also a
kind of Will made by the said Fenwick.

The Affidavit of John Richardson.
John Richardson of the Parish of St. Clement Danes in the County of Middlesex,
formerly Clark to Richard Langhorn Esquire executed (aged 36 years or thereabouts)
Deposes, that in or about the year 1670. Mr. John Farwell lately deputy Bailiff
of Westminster, was employed by the said Mr. Langhorn, in the cause between the
Jesuits, Whitebread Poulten, and others, and one Mr. John Savage in a sutie in
Chancery; Concerning Newenham Abbey in Bedfordshier. And that in the year 1678.
About Michaelmas day, there having for some time before been another suite in
Chancery depending between one Mr. Goodlad, and the Jesuits executed and
others, all the papers in the said cause being removed by the said Mr.
Langhorns order, (before his Imprisonment) out of his Chamber. Mr. Farewell met
this Deponent, and said to him, where are the papers in the Cause between the
Jesuits and Mrs. Goodlad. The Deponent told him in the Temple, Mr. Farewell said
he must have them brought to him, (to follow the suite that Mr. Langhorn had
begun, So the Deponent carried them to him the next day, and within some short
time afterward, the said cause was finally ended, as the deponent has been
since informed, Mr. Farewell was also Concerned for the Jesuits, as a Trustee
for five hundred pounds of Fenwick's money, in Benjamin Hintons hands, found by
a Jury and given as the Deponent is informed to the Sheriffs of London,
Notwithstanding which he being Summoned on a Commission of Enquiry to Guildhal,
about May last, and there examined if he had never been a Trustee for any of
them, he said on his Oath No, yet after being charged with his being proved a
Trustee for this Five Hundred Pound, (before the Jury) he then confessed he had
forgot it: And owned he was a Trustee for the Five Hundred Pound before
mentioned.

John Richardson.
Jur. 3. die Aprilis, 1682. Coram me John Moore, Mayor.
Fenwick the Jesuit that was Executed, his Will.
I had taken from me when I was Apprehended and brought to Prison, two
Goldsmiths Notes, one of 400 l. another of 100 l. the Money is in Benjamin
Hinton's hands at Birchin-Lane End in Lumbard-street. There were also two
Bonds, each of 126 l. due to me from Mr. Samuel Tyrril, but the Bonds are made
payable to Mr. John Farewell, and Mr. William Brewe.

There was also a Bill of 50 l. due from Mrs. Olympia Wray.

Of this I owe to Mr. Hamerton of Mark-road 100 l. which I had received from
him with Order to pay it to another Gent. but had not paid it: also 40 l. to
Mr. Edward Stockton, which I Received for him and had not paid it: also 10 or
15 l. (truly I rather believe 15 l.) which I received for Mr. Tho. Pordage,
(who lives now beyond Seas, and had an Estate in Kent of 1000 l. a Year since
the Kings Restoration, and is now reduced to that Poverty that this 20 l. is
all he has to live on) from Mr. Tho. Lushington in Kent, by five or ten pound
at a time, it being in part of an Annuity of 20 l. a year to be paid Quarterly.

Also 15 or 20 l. to Alice Kettlewell, who lives with the Lady Petre, for which
she has my Note.

There are also several Deeds and Bonds betwixt the late Lord Widdrington, and
George Collingwood of Eshington in Northumberland, Esquire which the said George
Collingwood Ordered me to deliver to Capt. Ralph Widdrington, upon the payment
of 100 l. but the money not being paid, I desire the Writings may be restored
to the said Mr. Collingwood, or his Heirs.

These several Sums being paid, the rest of the money belongs to the House of
St. Omers, for which I was employed.

I desire what money is paid in satisfaction of the Sums abovesaid, may be paid
into the hands of Mr. John Farewell, Attorney at Law of Covent Garden, who will
take care to pay it to the persons to whom it belongs.

I hope care will be taken to pay my Landlady my Chamber-Rent since my
Imprisonment, also half a Year or three quarters of a Years Rent, which I was
owing at the time of my Apprehension, since all is taken from me and I cannot
do it my self, she will tell you exactly the time, for I cannot.

As for Mr. Pain, I shall only say this, that he is brother to Nevill alias
Pain, a man famous for making the Traitor Coleman's Elegy, and for being an
Agent and Scribler for Mrs. Cellier and the Papists, yet that I may do him
right, I must tell the World since the prosecution of him for this matter, he
has declared himself sorry for what he has done, and not carried it so
impudently as the others.

Thus I hope by Printing these Affidavits, the Murder of Sir Edmond-berry
Godfrey by the Papists, does appear so clear and unquestionable, that no
Persons (for the future) can assume the impudence to attempt any further Shams
upon it, but at the same time must proclaim their Folly in so vain an
Undertaking.

THE END.

