THE TRIAL OF Sir Henry Vane, Knight. AT The KINGS BENCH, Westminster, June the 2d.
and 6th. 1662. Together With what he intended to have Spoken the Day of his
Sentence, ( June 11.) for Arrest of Judgment, (had he not been interrupted and
overruled by the Court) and his Bill of Exceptions. With other Occasional
SPEECHES, etc. Also his SPEECH and PRAYER, etc. on the Scaffold.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

The TRIAL of Sir Henry Vane Knight, at the Kings Bench, Westminster, June the
2d. and 6th. 1662.
READER,
THou shall not be detained with any flourishing Preface. It Is true; whether we
consider the Person or Cause, so much might pertinently be said, as (were the
Pen of some ready Writer employed therein) a large Preamble might seem to need
but a very short Apol^gy, if any at all. Yet, by that time we have well weighed
what this Sufferer has said for himself, and left behind him in writing, it
will appear, that there needed not any tongue of the Learned, to form up an
Introduction thereunto, but merely the hand of a faithful Transcriber of his
own Observations* in defense of himself and his Cause. Rest assured of this,
thou have them here fully and clearly represented.

The necessity of this course for thy information, as to the truth of his Case,
be pleased to consider on these following accounts. He was much overruled,
diverted, interrupted, and cut short in his Plea (as to a free and full
delivery of his mind upon the whole matter at the Bar) by the Judges of the
King's Bench, and by the Kings Counsel. He was also denied the benefit of any
Counsel to speak on his behalf.

And what he did speak at the Bar and on the Scaffold, was so disgustful to
some, that the Books of those that took Notes of what passed all along in both
places, were carefully called in and suppressed. It is therefore altogether
unpossible to give thee a full Narrative of all he said, or was said to him,
either in Westminster Hall, or on Tower Hill.

The Defendant foreseeing this, did most carefully set down in writing the
substance of what he intended to enlarge upon, the three days of his
appearance at the King's Bench Bar, and the day of his Execution. Monday June 2.
1662, was the day of his Arraignment. Friday June 6. was the day of his Trial,
and the Jurors Verdict. Wednesday June 11. was the day of his Sentence.
Saturday June 14. was the day of his Execution on Tower Hill, where limitations
were put upon him, and the interruptions of him by many hard speeches and
disturbing carriages of some that compassed him about upon the Scaffold, as
also by the sounding of Trumpets in his face to prevent his being heard, had
many eye and ear witnesses.

Upon these considerations, I doubt not, it will appear undispensably
necessary, to have given this faithful Transcript of such Papers of his, as do
contain the most substantial and pleadable grounds of his public actings* any
time this twenty years and more, as the only means left of giving any tolerable
account of the whole matter, to thy satisfaction. Yet such Information as could
be picked up from those that did preserve any Notes, taken in Court or at the
Scaffold, are here also recorded for thy use, and that, faithfully, word for
word.

Chancellor Fortescue does right worthily commend the Laws of England, as the
best now extant and in force, in any Nation of the world, affording (if duly
administered) just outward liberty to the People, and securing the meanest from
any oppressive and injurious practices of Superiors against them. They give
also that just Prerogative to Princes, that is convenient or truly useful and
advantageous for them to have; that is to say, such as does not enterfere with
the Peoples just Rights, the entire and most wary preservation of which, as it
is the Covenant-duty of the Prince, so is it his best security and greatest
honor. It Is safer and better for him to be loved and rightly feared by free
Subjects, than to be feared and hated by injured slaves.

The main fundamental Liberties of the free People of England, are summed up
and comprehended in the 29th Chapter of Magna Charta. These be the words;

No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseized of his Freehold, or
Liberties, or free-customs, or be outlawed or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed. Nor will we pass upon him, or condemn him, but by lawful Judgment
of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. We will sell to no man, we will not
deny or defer to any man, either Justice or Right.

Lord Chief Justice Cook observes here nine famous branches of the Law of
England, couched in this short Chapter, and discourses upon them to good
purpose. He says also, that from this Chapter, as out of a root, many fruitful
branches of the Law of England have sprung.

As for the very leading injury to other wrongings of the Subject, (to wit, the
restraint or imprisonment of his person) so curious and tender is the Law in
this point, that (says Cook) no man is to be attached, arrested, taken, or
restrained of his liberty, by petition or suggestion to the King or to his
Council, unless it be by Indictment or Presentment of good and lawful men (of
the neighborhood) where such deeds be done.

This great Charter of Englands Liberties, made 9 Hen. 3. and set in the front
of all succeeding Statute-Laws or Acts of Parliament, (as the Standard,
Touchstone or Jury for them to be tried by) has been ratified by about two
and thirty Parliaments, and the Petition of Right, 3. Caroli.

The two most famous Ratifications hereof, entitled, Confirmationes Chartarum,
and Articuli super Chartas, were made 25 and 28 of Edw. 1.

All this stir about the great Charter, some conceive very needless, seeing
that therein are contained those fundamental Laws or Liberties of the Nation,
which are so undeniably consonant to the Law of Nature, or Light of Reason,
that Parliaments themselves ought not to abrogate, but preserve them. Even
Parliaments may seem to be bounded in their Legislative Power and Jurisdiction,
by divine Equity and Reason, which is an eternal and therefore unalterable Law.
Hence is it, that an Act of Parliament that is evidently against common Right
or Reason, is null and void in it self, without more ado. Suppose a Parliament
by their Act should constitute a man Judge in his own cause, give him a mere
Arbitrary power; such Act would be in it self void.

This is declared to be the ground of that exemplary Justice done upon Empson
and Dudley, (as acting contrary to the Peoples Liberties in Magna Charta) whose
Case is very memorable in this point. For, though they gratified Hen. 7th in
what they did, and had an Act of Parliament for their Warrant, made the 11th of
his Reign, yet met they with their due reward from the hands of Justice, that
Act being against Equity and common Reason, and so, no justifiable ground or
apology for those infinite Abuses and Oppressions of the People, they were found
guilty of.

The Statute, under color whereof they acted, ran to this effect. Be it
enacted, that the Justices of the Assizes, and Justices of the Peace upon
Information for the King, before them to be made, have full power and authority
by their discretion, to hear and determine all offenses and contempts. Having
this ground, they proceeded against the People, upon mere Information, in the
execution of Penal Laws, without any Indictment or Presentment by good and
lawful men, but only by their own Promoters or Informers, contrary to the 29th
of Magna Charta, which requires, That no freeman be proceeded against, but by
lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

Secondly, This Act allowed them to hear and determine arbitrarily, by their
own discretion, which is not according to the Law and Custom of England. And
Cook says, it is the worst (and most aggravated) oppression of all, that is
done under the color of Law, or disguise of Justice.

Such a Statute or Act of Parliament, is, not only against the light of Reason,
but against the express letter of unrepealed Statute Law; 42. Edw. 3. 1. It is
assented and accorded, That the great Charter, and the Charter of Forest be
holden and kept in all points, and if any Statute be made to the contrary, that
shall be holden for none.

This also is consonant to the first chapter of the great Charter it self, made
9. Hen. 3. We have granted to all the freemen of our Realm, these Liberties
underwritten, to have and to hold to them and their heirs, of Us and our
Heirs, for ever.

But what if this great Charter it self had never been made? had England been
to seek for righteous Laws and just Liberties? nothing less. The same
Liberties and Laws were ratified before that, in the great Charter made the
seventeenth year of King John, and mentioned (among others) by Matthew Paris.

And to what yet amounted the matter of all these Grants, but what the Kings
themselves were bound before to observe, by their Coronation Oaths, as the
ancient fundamental Laws or Customs of this Land? This we may find in Mr.
Lambard's Translation of the Saxon Laws, from the time of King Ina, who began
anno 712; to Hen. 1. who began 1100. Amongst the Saxons, King Alfred is reputed
the most famous and learned Compiler of our Laws, which were still handed along
from one King to another, as the unalterable Customs of the Kingdom. In the
17th chapter of Edward the Confessor's Laws, The mention of the duty of a King
(which, if not performed, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit) is remarkable. And
Mr. Lambard tells us, that even William the Conqueror, did ratify and observe
the same Laws that his kinsman Edward the Confessor did, as obliged by his
Coronation Oath.

So then, neither the great Charter in King John's time, nor that of 9. Hen. 3.
were properly a new Body of Law, but a Declaration of the ancient fundamental
Laws, Rights and Liberties of this Nation, in British, Saxon, Danish and
Norman times, before. This, Cook in his Proem to the second part of his
Institutes, observes; where he notes also, that this Charter is not called
great, for quantity of words, (a sheet of Paper will contain it) but for the
great importance and weight of its matter.

Through the advice of Hubert de Burgo Chief Justice of England, Edward the
first, in the eleventh year of his Reign, did, in a Council held at Oxford,
unjustly cancel this great Charter, and that of Forest: Hubert therefore was
justly sentenced according to Law, by his Peers, in open Parliament. Then, 25
Ed. 1. The Statute, called, Confirmationes Charrarum was made, in the first
chapter whereof, the Mag. Charta is peculiarly called the Common Law. 25. Ed.
1. cap. 2. Any Judgment given contrary to the said Charter, is to be undone and
holden for naught And cap. 4. Any that by word, deed, or counsel, go contrary
to the said Charter, are to be excommunicated by the Bishops; and the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York are bound to compel the other Bishops to
denounce sentence accordingly, in case of their remisness or neglect.

The next famous sticklers to Hubert de Burgo, for Arbitrary Domination, were
the two Spencers, father and son, by whose rash and evil counsel (says Cook)
Edward the second was seduced to break the Great Charter, and they were
banished for their pains.

By these passages we may observe, how the People would still be struggling (in
and by their Representatives) for their Legal Rights and Just Liberties; to
obviate the Encroachers whereof, they procured several new Ratifications of
their old Laws, which were indeed in themselves unrepealable, even by
Parliaments, if they will act as men, and not contradict the Law of their own
Reason, and of the common Reason of all mankind.

By 25 Ed. 1. cap. 1. Justices, Sheriffs, Majors, and other Ministers, that
have the Laws of the Land to guide them, are required to allow the said Charter
to be pleaded in all its points, and in all causes that shall come before them
in Judgment.

This is a clause (says Cook) worthy to be written in letters of gold; That
the Laws to be the Judges guides, (and therefore not the Judges, the guides of
the Laws, by their arbitrary glosses) which never yet misguided any that
certainly knew and truly followed them. In consonancy herewith, the Spaniard
says, Of all the three learned Professions, The Lawyer is the only lettered
man, his business and duty being to follow the plain literal construction of
the Law, as his guide, in giving Judgment. Pretense of mystery here, carries in
the bowels of it, intents, or at least a deep suspicion of arbitrary
domination. The mind of the Law is not subject to be clouded, disturbed or
perverted by passion or interest. It Is far otherwise with Judges; therefore
it is fitter and safer the Law should guide them, than they the Law. Cook on the
last mentioned Statute affirms, That this great Charter, and the Charter of
Forest, are properly the Common Law of this Land, or the Law that is common to
all the People thereof.

2 Ed. 3. cap. 8. Exact care is taken, that no Commands by the Great or Little
Seal, shall come to disturb or delay Common Right. Or, if such Commands come,
the Justices are not thereby to leave to do Right, in any point. So 14 Ed. 3.
14. 11 Ric. 2. 10. The Judges Oath, 18 Ed. 3. 7, runs thus:

If any force come to disturb the execution of the Common Law, ye shall cause
their bodies to be arrested and put into Prison. Ye shall deny no man Right by
the King's Letters, nor counsel the King any thing that may turn to his damage
or disherison.

The late King in his Declaration at Newmarket, 1641, acknowledged the Law to
be the Rule of his Power. And his Majesty that now is, in his Speech to both
Houses, the 19th of May last, said excellently, The good old Rules of Law are
our best security.

The Common Law then, or Liberties of England, comprised in the Magna Charta
and the Charter of Forest, are rendered as secure, as authentic words can set
them, from all Judgments or Precedents to the contrary in any Courts, all
corrupting advice or evil counsel of any Judges, all Letters or Countermands
from the Kings Person, under the Great or Privy Seals; yea, and from any Acts
of Parliament it self, that are contrary thereunto. As to the Judges, no
question, they well know the story of the 44 corrupt Judges, executed by King
Alfred, as also of Tresillian, Belknap, and many others since.

By 11 Hen. 7. cap. 1. They that serve the King in his Wars, according to their
duty of Allegiance, for defense of the King and the Land, are indempnified; If
against the Land, and so not according to their Allegiance, the last clause of
that chapter seems to exclude them from the benefit of this Act.

6 Hen. 8. 16. Knights and Burgess of Parliament are required not to depart
from the Parliament, till it be fully finished, ended or prorogued.

28 Ed. 3. cap. 3. No man is to be imprisoned, disherited, or put to death,
without being heard what he can say for himself.

4 Ed. 3. 14. and 36. Ed. 3. 10. A Parliament is to be holden every year* or
oftener if need be.

1 Ric. 3. cap. 2. The subjects of this Realm are not to be charged with any
new imposition, called a Benevolence.

37 Ed. 3. c. 18. All those that make suggestions against any man to the King,
are to be sent with their suggestions before the Chancellor, Treasurer, and his
grand Council, and there to find surety that they will pursue their
suggestions; and are to incur the same pain, the party by them accused should
have had, if attained, in case the suggestion be found evil, or false.

21 Jacobi, cap. 3. All Monopolies and Dispensations, with Penal Laws, are made
void, as contrary to the great Charters.

These quotations of several Statutes, as Ratifications and Restorers of the
Laws of the Land, are prefixed to the following Discourses and Pleas of this
Sufferer, as certain steady, unmovable Landmarks, to which he often relates. The
rouling Seas have other Laws, peculiar to themselves, as Cook observes (on that
expression, Law of the Land) in his Comment on the 29th Chapter of Magna
Charta. Offenses done upon the High Sea, the Admiral takes conusance of, and
proceeds by the Marine Law.

But have those steady Landmarks, though exactly observed and never so
pertinently quoted and urged by this Sufferer, failed him, as to the securing
of his Life? It Is because we have had Land-floods of late; Tumults of the
People, that are compared to the raging Seas, Psalm. 65. 7.

The first Paper of this deceased Sufferer, toward the defense of his Cause
and Life, preparatory to the Trial, (as the foundation of all that follows)
before he could know how the Indictment was laid, (and which also a glance back
to any crime of Treason since the beginning of the late War, that the Attorney
General reckoned him chargeable with, shows to be very requist) take as
follows.
Memorandums touching my Defense.
THe Offense objected against me, is levying War, within the Statute 25 Ed. 3.
and by consequence, a most high and great failer in the duty which the Subject,
according to the Laws of England, stands obliged to perform, in relation to the
Imperial Crown and Sovereign Power of England.

The crime, if it prove any, must needs be very great, considering the
circumstances with which it has been accompaned: For it relates to, and takes
in a series of public action, of above twenty years continuance. It took its
rise and had its root in the Being, Authority Judgment, Resolutions, Votes and
Orders of a Parliament, and that, a Parliament not only authorized and
commissionated in the ordinary and customary way, by his Majesty's Writ of
Summons, and the Peoples Election and Deputation, subject to Adjournment,
Discontinuance, and Dissolution, at the King's will; but which by express Act
of Parliamen^, was constituted in its continuance and exercise of its Power
free from that subjection, and made therein wholly to depend upon their own
will, to be declared in an Act of Parliament, to be passed for that purpose,
when they should see cause. To speak plainly and clearly in this matter; That
which is endeavored to be made a Crime and an Offense of such an high nature
in my person, is no other than the necessary and unavoidable Actings of the
Representative Body of the Kingdom, for the preservation of the good People
thereof, in their allegiance and duty to God and his Law, as also from the
imminent dangers and destruction threatened them, from God's and their own
Enemies.

This made both Houses in their Remonstrance (May 26. 1642.) protest; If the
Malignant spirits about the King, should ever force or necessitate them to
defend their Religion, the Kingdom, the Privileges of Parliament, and the
Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, with their Swords; The Blood and
Destruction that should ensue thereupon, must be wholly cast upon their account,
God and their own consciences telling them, that they were clear; and would not
doubt, but that God and the whole world would clear them therein.

In his Majesty's Answer to the Declaration of the two Houses, ( May 19. 1642.)
he acknowledges his going into the House of Commons to demand the five
Members, was an error: And that was it, which gave the Parliament the first
cause to put themselves in a posture of defense, by their own Power and
Authority, in commanding the Trained-Bands of the City of London, to guard and
secure them from Violence, in the discharge of their Trust and Duty, as the two
Houses of Parliament, appointed by Act, to continue, as abovementioned.

The next cause was, his Majesty's raising Forces at York, (under pretense of a
Guard) expressed in the humble Petition of the Lords and Commons, ( May 23.
1642.) wherein they beseech his Majesty to disband all such Forces, and desist
from any further designs of that nature, otherwise they should hold themselves
bound in duty toward God, and the Trust reposed in them by the People, and the
Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom, to employ their care and
utmost power, to secure the Parliament, and preserve the peace and quiet of the
Kingdom.

May 20. 1642, The two Houses of Parliament gave their Judgment, in these Votes.

First, That it appears, that the King (seduced by wicked Counsel) intends to
make War against the Parliament, who in all their Consultations and Actions
have proposed no other end to themselves, but the Care of his Kingdoms, and the
performance of all Duty and Loyalty to his Person.

Secondly, That whenever the King makes War upon the Parliament, it is a
breach of Trust reposed in him by his People, contrary to his Oath, and tending
to the dissolution of this Government.

Thirdly, That whosoever shall serve or assist him in such Wars, are Traitors
by the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been so adjudged by two Acts
of Parliament, and ought to suffer as Traitors.

Die Jovis, October. 8. 1642., In the Instructions agreed upon by the Lords and
Commons about the Militia, They declare, That the King (seduced by wicked
Counsel) has raised War against the Parliament, and other his good Subjects.

And by the Judgment and Resolution of both Houses, bearing date Aug. 13. 1642,
upon occasion of his Majesty's Proclamation for suppressing the present
Rebellion under the Command of Robert Earl of Essex, They do unanimously
publish and declare, That all they who have advised, declared, abetted, or
countenanced, or hereafter shall abet and countenance the said Proclamation,
are Traitors and Enemies to God, the King and Kingdom, and guilty of the
highest degree of Treason that can be committed against the King and Kingdom,
as that which invites his Majesty's Subjects to destroy his Parliament, and
good People, by a Civil War; and by that means, to bring ruin, confusion and
perpetual slavery upon the surviving part of a then wretched Kingdom.

The Law is acknowledged by the King, to be the only Rule, by which the People
can be justly governed; and that as it is his duty, so it shall be his
perpetual, vigilant care, to see to it: Therefore he will not suffer either or
both Houses by their Vo^es, without or against his Consent, to enjoin any thing
that is forbidden by the Law, or to forbid any thing that is enjoined by the
Law.

The King does assert in his Answer to the Houses Petition, (May 23. 1642.)
That He is a part of the Parliament, which they take upon them to defend and
secure; and that his Prerogative is a part of, and a defense to the Laws of the
Land.

In the Remonstrance of both Houses, (May 26. 1642.) They do assert; That if
they have made any Precedents this Parliament, they have made them for
posterity, upon the same or better grounds of Reason and Law, than those were,
upon which their Predecessors made any for them; and do say, That as some
Precedents ought not to be Rules for them to follow, so none can be limits to
bound their Proceedings, which may and must vary, according to the different
condition of times.

And for the particular, with which they were charged, of setting forth
Declarations to the People who have chosen and entrusted them with all that is
dearest to them, if there be no example for it in former times; They say, it is
because there never were such Monsters before, that attempted to disaffect the
People toward a Parliament.

They further say; His Majesty's Towns are no more his care than his Kingdom,
nor his Kingdom than his People, who are not so his own, that he has absolute
power over them, or in them, as in his proper Goods and Estate; but fiduciary,
for the Kingdom, and in the paramount right of the Kingdom. They also
acknowledge the Law, to be the safeguard and custody of all public and private
Interests. They also hold it fit, to declare unto the Kingdom, (whose Honor
and Interest is so much concerned in it) what is the Privilege of the great
Council of Parliament, herein; and what is the Obligation that lies upon the
Kings of this Realm, as to the passing such Bills as are offered to them by
both Houses, in the name, and for the good of the whole Kingdom, whereunto they
stand engaged, both in Conscience and Justice, to give their Royal Assent.

First, In Conscience; in respect of the Oath that is, or ought to be taken by
them, at their Coronation, as well to confirm by their Royal Assent, all such
good Laws as the People shall choose, (whereby to remedy such inconveniences as
the Kingdom may suffer) as to keep and protect the Laws already in being.

The form of the Oath is upon Record, and asserted by Books of good authority,
Unto it relation is had, 25 Ed. 3. entitiled, The Statute of Provisors of
Benefices.

Hereupon, The said Commons prayed our said Lord the King, (since the Right of
the Crown of England, and the Law of the said Realm, is such, that upon the
mischiefs and damages which happen to this Realm, he ought and is bound by his
Oath, with the accord of his People in Parliament, to make Remedy and Law, for
the removing thereof) That it may please him to ordain Remedy.

This Right, thus claimed by the Lords and Commons, the King does not deny, in
his Answer thereunto.

Secondly, In Justice the Kings are obliged as well as in Conscience, in
respect of the Trust reposed in them, to preserve the Kingdom by the making of
new Laws, where there shall be need, as well as by observing of Laws already
made; a Kingdom being many times as much exposed to ruin for want of a new
Law, as by the violation of those that are in being.

This is a most clear Right, not to be denied, but to be as due from his
Majesty to his People, as his Protection. In all Laws framed by both Houses, as
Petitions of Right, they have taken themselves to be so far Judges of the
Rights claimed by them, That when the King's Answer has not been in every
point, fully according to their desire, they have still insisted upon their
Claim, and never given it over, till the Answer has been according to their
demand, as was done in the late Petition of Right, 3. Caroli.

This shows, the two Houses of Parliament are Judge between the King and the
People in question of Right, as in the Case also of Ship Money and other
illegal Taxes; and if so, why should they not also be Judge in the Cases of the
Common Good and Necessity of the Kingdom, wherein the Kingdom has as clear a
Right to have the benefit and remedy of the Law, as in any other matter, saying
Pardon and Grants of Favor?

The Malignant Party are they, that not only neglect and despise, but labor to
undermine the Law, under color of maintaining it. They endeavor to destroy
the Fountain and Conservators of the Law, the Parliament. They make other
Judges of the Law, than what the Law has appointed. They set up other Rules
for themselves to walk by, than such as are according to Law; and dispense with
the Subjects obedience, to that which the Law calls Authority, and to their
Determinations and Resolutions, to whom the Judgment does appertain by Law:
Yea, though but private persons, they make the Law to be their Rule, according
to their own understanding only, contrary to the Judgment of those that are the
competent Judges thereof.

The King asserts, That the Act of Sir John Hotham was levying War against the
King, by the letter of the Statute, 25 Ed. 3. cap. 2.

The Houses state the Case, and deny it to be within that Statute; saying, If
the letter of that Statute be thought to import this; That no War can be levied
against the King, but what is directed and intended against his Person; Or,
that every levying of Forces for the defense of the King's Authority, and of
his Kingdom, against the personal Commands of the King, opposed thereunto,
(though accompanied with his presence) is Treason, or levying War against the
King; Such Interpretation is very far from the sense of that Statute, and so
much the Statute it self speaks, beside the authority of Book-cases. For if the
clause of levying War had been meant only against the King's Person, what need
had there been thereof, after the other branch in the same Statute, of
compassing the King's death, which would necessarily have implied this? And
because the former does imply this, it seems not at all to be intended, at
least not chiefly, in the latter branch, but the levying War against his Laws
and Authority; and such a levying War, though not against his Person, is a
levying War against the King; whereas the levying of Force against his personal
Commands, though accompanied with his Presence, and not against his Laws and
Authority, but in the maintenance thereof, is no levying of War against the
King, but for him, especially in a time of so many successive plots and designs
of Force against the Parliament and Kingdom, of probable Invasion from abroad,
and of so great distance and alienation of his Majesty's affections from his
Parliament and People, and of the particular danger of the Place and Magazine
of Hull, of which the two Houses sitting, are the most proper Judges.

In proclaiming Sir John Hotham Traitor, they say, The breach of the Privilege
of Parliament was very clear, and the subversion of the Subjects common Right.
For though the Privileges of Parliament extend not to these cases, mentioned
in the Declaration of Treason, Felony, and breach of the Peace. so as to exempt
the Members of Parliament from Punishment, or from all manner of Process and
Trial, yet it does privilege them in the way and method of their Trial and
Punishment, and that the Parliament should first have the Cause brought before
them, that they may judge of the Fact, and of the grounds of their Accusation,
and how far forth the manner of their Trial may or may not concern the
Privilege of Parliament: Otherwise, under this pretext, the Privilege of
Parliament in this matter, may be so essentially broken, as thereby the very
Being of Parliaments may be destroyed. Neither does the sitting of a Parliament
suspend all or any Law, in maintaining that Law, which upholds the Privilege
of Parliament, which upholds the Parliament, which upholds the Kingdom.

They further assert; That in some sense, they acknowledge the King to be the
only person, against whom Treason can be committed, that is, as he is King, and
that Treason which is against the Kingdom, is more against the King, than that
which is against his Person; because he is King: For Treason is not Treason, as
it is against him as a man, but as a man that is a King, and as he has, and
stands in that relation to the Kingdom, entrusted with the Kingdom, and
discharging that Trust.

They also a vow, That there can be no competent Judge of this or any the like
case, but a Parliament; and do say, that if the wicked Counsel about the King
could master this Parliament by force, they would hold up the same power to
deprive us of all Parliaments, which are the ground and pillar of the Subjects
Liberty, and that which only makes England a free Monarchy.

The Orders of the two Houses carry in them Law for their limits, and the
Safety of the Land for their end. This makes them not doubt but all his
Majesty's good Subjects will yield obedience to his Majesty's Authority,
signified therein by both Houses of Parliament: for whose encouragement, and
that they may know their Duty in matters of that nature, and upon how sure a
ground they go, that follow the Judgment of Parliament for their guide; They
allege the true meaning and ground of that Statute, 11. Hen. 7. cap. 1.
printed at large in his Majesty's Message, May 4; This Statute provides, that
none that shall attend upon the King and do him true service, shall be
attainted, or forfeit any thing.

What was the scope of this Statute?

Answ. To provide, that men should not suffer as Traitors for serving the King
in his Wars, according to the duty of their Allegiance. But if this had been
all, it had been a very needless and ridiculous Statute. Was it then intended
(as they seem to make it, that print it with his Majesty's Message) that those
should be free from all crime and penalty, that should follow the King and
serve him in War, in any case whatsoever, whether it were for or against the
Kingdom or the Laws thereof? That cannot be: for that could not stand with the
duty of their Allegiance, which, in the beginning of this Statute, is expressed
to be, to serve the King for the time being in his Wars, for the defense of him
and the Land. If therefore it be against the Land, (as it must be, if it be
against the Parliament, the Representative Body of the Kingdom) it is a
declining from the duty of Allegiance, which this Statute supposes may be done,
though men should follow the Kings Person in the War. Otherwise, there had been
no need of such a Proviso in the end of the Statute, that none should take
benefit thereby, that should decline from their Allegiance.

That therefore which is the Principal Verb in this, is the serving of the King
for the time being, which cannot be meant of a Perkin Warbeck, or any that
should call himself King, but such a one, as (whatever his Title might prove,
either in himself or in his Ancestors) should be received and acknowledged for
such, by the Kingdom, the Consent whereof cannot be discerned but by
Parliament; the Act whereof, is the Act of the whole Kingdom, by the personal
Suffrage of the Peers, and the Delegate Consent of the Commons of England.
Henry 7th therefore, a wise Prince, to clear this matter of contest, happening
between Kings de facto and Kings de jure, procured this Statute to be made,
That none shall be accounted a Traitor for serving in his Wars, the King for
the time being; that is, him that is for the present allowed and received by
the Parliament in behalf of the Kingdom. And as it is truly suggested in the
Preamble of the Statute; It is not agreeable to reason or conscience, that it
should be otherwise, seeing men should be put upon an impossibility of knowing
their duty, if the Judgment of the highest Court should not be a Rule to guide
them. And if the Judgment thereof is to be followed, when the question is, who
is King? much more, when the question is, what is the best service of the King
and Kingdom? Those therefore that shall guide themselves by the Judgment of
Parliament, ought (what ever happen) to be secure and free from all account and
penalties, upon the ground and equity of this Statute.

To make the Parliament countenancers of Treason, they say, is enough to have
dissolved all the bands of service and confidence between his Majesty and his
Parliament, of whom the Law says, a dishonorable thing ought not to be
imagined.

This Conclusion then is a clear Result from what has been argued; That in all
Cases of such difficulty and unusualness, happening by the overruling
Providence of God, as render it impossible for the Subject to know his duty, by
any known Law or certain Rule extant, his relying then, upon the Judgment and
Reason of the whole Realm, declared by their Representative Body in Parliament,
then sitting, and adhering thereto, and pursuing thereof, (though the same
afterward be by succeeding Parliaments, judged erroneous, factious and unjust)
is most agreeable to right Reason and good Conscience; and in so doing, all
persons are to be free and secure from all Account and Penalties, not only upon
the ground and equity of that Statute, 11 Hen. 7. but according to all Rules of
Justice, natural or moral.

The day of Arraignment, being Monday June 2. 1662.
Reader, The best account thou can yet be furnished with, as to this days
proceedings in Court, is, as follows.

SIR Henry Vane was the last Term, indicted of High Treason, before the
Middlesex Grand Jury, and the Bill being found by them, he was upon Monday the
second of June this Term, arraigned, to this effect.

That you as a false Traitor against his most excellent Majesty King Charles
the second, your supreme and natural Lord, not having the fear of God before
your eyes, and withdrawing that your duty and allegiance, which a true Subject
ought to have and bear to our said Liege and sovereign Lord, thirteenth of May,
in the eleventh year of our said sovereign Lord the King, at the Parish of St.
Martins in the fields in the Country of Middlesex, did compass and imagine the
Death of our said sovereign Lord the King, and the ancient frame of Government
of this Realm, totally to subvert and keep out our said sovereign Lord from the
exercise of his Regal Government; and the same the better to effect, the said
Sir Henry Vane the said thirteenth day of May, in the said eleventh your, etc.
at St. Martins aforesaid, together with other false Traitors, to the Jurors
unknown, did traitorously and maliciously assemble and sit together, and then
and there consulted to bring the King unto destruction, and to hold him out
from the exercise of his Regal Authority, and then and there usurped the
Government, and appointed Officers, to wit, Colonels and Captains of a certain
Army, raised against the King, against the Peace of our sovereign Lord the King
his Crown and Dignity, and contrary to the form of the Statute in that case
made and provided.

And the better to effect this, the twentieth of December, in the said eleventh
year, with a multitude, to the number of a thousand persons, to the Jurors
unknown, in warlike manner assembled, and arrayed with Guns, Trumpets, Drums,
etc. did levy War against the Peace, etc. and contrary to the form of a Statute.

Which being read, he prayed to have it read a second time, which was granted
him. He then prayed to have it read in Latin, which all the Court denied, and
Keeling the King's Sergeant said, That though all Pleas and Entries are set
down on Record in Latin, yet the agitations of Causes in Court, ought to be in
English.

The Prisoner moved several Exceptions to the Indictment, as that the 25. Ed.
3. is not pursued; that he had levied no such force as amounted to a levying of
War; Also, the place in which, persons with whom, are both uncertain; and the
particular acts of levying War, being not set forth, he thought therefore the
Indictment was insufficient. Also, he said, here is a long time of Action for
which I am charged, and I may be concerned for what I acted as a Member in that
sovereign Court of Parliament, and if any thing concerns the Jurisdiction of
that Court, I ought not to be judged here; at which the Court and King's
Counsel took great offense.

He said also; There has been an Act of General Pardon, since that time,
whereby all Treasons are put in utter oblivion, and though Sir Henry Vane were
excepted, yet none consent that he was that Sir Henry Vane. But the King's
Counsel said, If he would plead that Plea, they would join that Issue with him,
if he pleased, which if it should be found against him, it would be too late to
plead, not guilty.

But the Court said, in favor of life, a man may plead a double Plea, and give
in his Exception, and plead over to the Felony or Treason, not guilty.

But as to the Exceptions taken to the Indictment, they gave little heed to
them, but pressed him to plead or confess.

Whereupon he pleaded, Not guilty; and had four days, to wit, till Friday
next, for his Trial.

From another hand, take, as follows.

The Prisoner did much press for Counsel to be allowed him, to advise with
about any further Exceptions to the Indictment, besides those by him exhibited,
and to put all into form, according to the customary proceedings and language
of the Law, as also to speak to them at the Bar, on his behalf, he not being
versed in the punctilio's of Law-writings and Pleas. He further said. That the
Indictment, which so nearly concerned his Life, being long, and his memory
short, it could not well be imagined that he should upon the bare hearing it
read, be able in an instant to find out every material Exception against it, in
form or matter. He pleaded a good while on this account, but Counsel was
finally denied him till he should plead guilty or not guilty, unto which, being
a third time urged, he pleaded Not guilty; The Court having assured him
beforehand, that after pleading, Counsel should be assigned him, which yet
never was performed.

Here follows a Transcript of the Prisoners own Papers, containing certain
Memorandums pleadable upon his Arraignment.

Memorandums for, and toward my Defense.
Upon hearing the Indictment read, and before pleading.

FIrst, To lay before the Court the impossibility that he humbly conceives, is
already in view, as to the having any such indifferent and equal Trial, as the
Law intends him, and does require and command on the behalf of all the
free-People of England. The Rise for this Conception he takes from what has
been already done in relation to the Prisoner himself, unheard, unexamined, and
yet kept close Prisoner for near two whole years. This he shall leave to the
Judgment of the Court, after he has made known the particulars thereof unto
them, as necessary to precede the thing demanded of him, in pleading guilty, or
not guilty.

Secondly, What is the indifferency which the Law requires and appoints
throughout, as well in matters that go before the Trial, as in the proceedings
at the Trial if it self?

Before the Trial, and in the first step to it, which is the keeping and
securing his person, Magna Charta is clear, and gives this Rule, cap 29. Nullus
liber homo capiatur, etc.

No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold or
liberties, or free-customs, or be outlawed or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed; Nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land: We will sell to no man, we
will not deny or defer to any man either Justice or Right.

Out of this Chapter, as out of a root (says Sir Edward Cook) do many fruitful
branches of the Law of England spring. It contains nine branches; some whereof
I shall insist upon in my Case.

First, That no man be taken or imprisoned but per Legem Terrae, that is, by
the Common Law or Custom of England; which words, per Legem Terrae, though put
last, refer to all the precedent branches.

Secondly, The Goods of any Offender cannot regularly be taken and seized to
the King's use before Conviction, nor be Inventoried, nor the Town charged
therewith, before the owner be indicted of Record.

Thirdly, No man shall be exiled or banished out of his Country, not be in any
sort destroyed but by the verdict of his Peers.

This appears by Bracton and other ancient Writers, quoted by Cook, in the
third part of his Institutes, fol. 228.

Upon the whole matter says Cook, these two Conclusions are manifestly proved.

First, That before Indictment, the Goods or other things of any Offender
cannot be searched, inventoried or in any sort seized, nor after Indictment,
seized, removed, or taken away, before Conviction or Attainder.

Secondly, That the begging of the Goods or Estate of any Delinquent, accused
or indicted of any Treason, Felony, or other offense, before he be convicted
and attainted, is utterly unlawful; Stat. Ri. 1. cap. 3.

And besides, it makes the prosecution against the Delinquent, more
precipitant, violent and undue, than the quiet and equal proceedings of the Law
and Justice would permit: Or else, by some underhand Agreement, stops or
hinders the due course of Justice, and discourageth both Judge, Juror and
Witness to do their duty.

Thirdly, The Judges are not to give so much as their Opinion beforehand,
concerning the Offense, whether it prove that Offense in that Case.

Cook in the chap. of Petty Treason, fol. 29. expressly says; And to the end
the Trial may be the more indifferent, seeing the safety of the Prisoner
consists in the indifferency of the Court, the Judges ought not to deliver
their Opinions beforehand, of any Criminal Case, that may come before them
judicially. And he there cites Humphrey Staffords Case that Arch Traitor, in
which Hussy Chief Justice, besought Hen. 7. not to demand of them their
Opinions beforehand. And in the 4th of his Institutes, in the chap. of the
High Court of Parliament, fol. 37, he fully shows the evil of asking the Judges
Opinions beforehand.

But instead of this, The Judges being assistant in the Lords house, when all
Acts of Parliament pass, and whose Advice is taken in them, have (as appears
by what is declared in the said Acts) prejudged by their Opinions and the
Opinions of the Parliament beforehand, the merit of the Cause that now appears
to be put upon the Issue in my Trial. Hereby the Judges are rendered ex part,
and the indifferency the Law requires, impossible to be afforded.

Nor is this all; but by the Rules declared in the Act of Indemnity; all are
disenabled to plead, or make use of the Ordinances, Orders and Votes of both,
or either Houses of Parliament, that may have occasion thereof; and then by
excepting the Prisoner and his fellow out of the said Act, and all benefit
thereby, a door is left open to Arraign, bring to Trial and Sentence the whole
Cause from the beginning to the ending, in the person of the Prisoner, and at
the same time, deprive him of all means and possibility of Justification and
Defense.

Fourthly, It is observable how early hard measure appeared in the way wherein
the Prisoner became excepted out of the Act of Indemnity, when the Commons,
his proper Judges, declared him in their thoughts, not fit to be endangered in
the point of Life; yet unto the Judgment of the Lords, (that ought not to judge
Commoners, unbrought before them by the Commons, much less, in opposite
Judgment to the Commons) The Commons were necessitated to yield, lest
otherwise the Act of Indemnity to the whole Nation should stop upon this
dispute and essential difference between the two Houses; A Competition, easily
overruled; although (as it proves by the sequel) That Act of Indemnity is
like to become felo de se, or a destroyer of it self, if your Lordships shall
conceive your selves at liberty, (notwithstanding that Act) not only to bring
anew into memory upon the stage, the state of all the passed differences, from
first to last, but to try and judge the merit of them in my person, and therein
call in question the validity of that whole Act, and make void the benefit
intended by it, in case the War undertaken and managed by both or either of the
Houses of Parliament, be judged unlawful, and within the Statute of 25. Ed. 3.
For this adjudges all the People of England morally guilty of the evil of a sin
and offense against the Law of Nature, which once done, what ever promised
Indemnity be granted for the present, the Evil of the Action remaining upon
Record; not only to the Infamy of the whole People of England, but their future
danger, upon pretense they have forfeited the very Indemnity granted.

Fifthly, The length of time taken to search out matter against the Prisoner,
and the undue practices and courses to find out Witnesses, do further evidence
how unlike the Prisoner is to have an equal and indifferent Trial. He doubts
not, this will appear in his two years close Imprisonement, (six months whereof
was Banishment) during which time, he was never so much as once examined, or
had any question put to him, whereby he might conjecture wherefore he was
committed to Prison, any further than was expressed in the Warrants of
Commitments.

Now these were so general, that nothing certain or particular could be
gathered out of them. But upon the received opinion, that he was excepted out
of the Act of Indemnity, and in the sense of both Houses, a great Delinquent,
his Estate was attempted to be inventoried, his Rentals demanded, his Rents
were actually seized in the Tenants hands, and they forbidden to pay them. His
very Courts were prohibited by Officers of great Personages, claiming the Grant
of the Estate, and threatening his Officers from doing their duty. By these kind
of undue proceedings, the Prisoner had not wherewithal to maintain himself in
Prison, and his Debts, to the value of above ten thousand pounds, were
undischarged, either Principal or Interest. The hopes of private lucre and
profit hereby, was such, in the Tenants and other persons, sought out for far
and near, to be Witnesses, that it is no wonder at last, something by way of
Charge comes to be exhibited.

And as this is the Case of the Person before his appearance at this Bar, with
respect to the foresaid unequal proceedings toward him, and the great
disadvantages put upon him, and all these, as it were, in a continued series of
Design; so, the matters and things themselves with which it now appears he is
charged in the Indictment, make his Case still very extraordinary and unusual,
involving him in difficulties that are insuperable, unless God's own immediate
Power do show it self in working his deliverance.

The things done, are for many years past, in a time of Differences between
King and Parliament, and Wars ensuing thereupon. Many extraordinary Changes and
Revolutions in the State and Government were necessitated in the course of
God's Providence, for wise and holy ends of his, above the reach of humane
wisdom.

The Authority by which they are done, is prejudged. The Orders, Votes and
Resolutions of Parliament are made useless, and forbidden to be produced.
Hereby, all manner of defense is taken away from the Prisoner; and that which
was done according to Law, as the Laws of those times were, is endeavored to
be made unlawful, and so the persons, acting according to such Laws, are
brought to punishment.

The Judges (as has been showed) are forestalled in their Judgments, by the
declared sense of Parliaments, given ex post facto. The Jurors are put upon
difficulties never known before, for twelve Commoners to judge the Actions of
all the Commons of England, in whom they are included, as to whose Judgment is
the right, the one or the others; and whether their Representatives be trusty.

The Party indicted is under an incapacity to bring Witnesses, as well from the
nature of the place wherein the things were done, within the Walls of the
House, as from the shortness of time, having heard nothing of his Charge, and
being kept a close Prisoner to the last day. His Solicitors and persons
employed in his Law-businesses, were also restrained from him.

It is also most evident, that the matters for which he is questioned, being
the Product of so many years Agitations of Parliamantary Counsels and Arms,
cannot be of a single concern, nor be reputed as the actions of a private man,
done of his own head, nor therefore come within any of the six Classes of
Treason, contained in 25. Ed. 3.

It is a Case most unusual, and never happening before in this Kingdom; yet it
is alleged in the Indictment to be a levying War within that Statute, and so
comes to have the name of High Treason put upon it, thereby (if possible) to
deprive him of the use and benefit of Counsel, as also of competent time to
prepare for his Defense, and all fitting and requisite means for the clearing of
his Innocence. Unto this, unless some remedy be afforded by the justice, candor
and favor of this Court, it may be better for the Prisoner (for ought he yet
knows) to be immediately destroyed by special Command (if nothing else will
satisfy) without any form of Law, as one to whom Quarter, after at least two
years cool blood, is thought fit to be denied in relation to the late Wars.
This may seem better, than under a color and form of Justice, to pretend to
give him the benefit of the Law and the King's Courts, whose part it is, to set
free the Innocent, upon an Equal and Indifferent Trial had before them, if
their Cause will bear it: but it is very visible beforehand, that all possible
means of Defense are taken and withheld from him, and Laws are made ex post
facto, to forejudge the merit of the Cause, the Party being unheard.

And when he has said all this, that as a rational man, does occur to him, and
is fit for him to represent in all humility to the Court, he craves leave
further to add; That he stands at this Bar not only as a man, and a man
clothed with the Privileges of the most Sovereign Court, but as a Christian,
that has Faith and reliance in God, through whose gracious and wise
appointment, he is brought into these circumstances, and unto this place at
this time, whose Will he desires to be found resigned up into, as well in what
He now calls him to suffer, as in what He has called him formerly to act, for
the good of his Country, and of the People of God in it. Upon this bottom (he
blesses the Name of his God) he is fearless, and knows the issue will be good
what ever it prove. God's strength may appear in the Prisoner's weakness; and
the more all things carry the face of certain ruin and destruction unto all
that is near and dear to him in this world, the more will divine deliverance
and salvation appear; to the making good of that Scripture, That he that is
content to lose his life in God's Cause and Way, shall save it, and he that
instead thereof goes about to save his life upon undue terms, shall lose it.

Far be it therefore from me, to have knowingly, maliciously or wittingly
offended the Law, rightly understood and asserted; much less, to have done any
thing that is malum per se, or that is morally evil. This is that I allow not
as I am a Man, and what I desire with stedfastness to resist, as I am a
Christian. If I can judge any thing of my own Case, The true reason of the
present difficulties and straits I am in, is because I have desired to walk by
a just and righteous Rule in all my Actions, and not to serve the lusts and
passions of men, but had rather die, than wittingly and deliberately sin
against God and transgress his holy Laws, or prefer my own private Interest
before the Good of the whole Community I relate unto, in the Kingdom where the
lot of my residence is cast.

Here follow the chief Observables (as to matter of new Argument) on the day of
his Trial, being Friday June 6. 1662.
ON this day, the Sheriff returned forty eight Freeholders of the Country of
Middlesex. After thirty two were challenged by the Prisoner, he had a Jury of
Twelve men sworn, to wit, Sir William Roberts, junior. Sir Christopher Abdy.
John Stone. Henry Carter. John Leech. Daniel Cole. Daniel Brown. Thomas
Chelsam. Thomas Pitts. Thomas Vpman. Andrew Bent, and William Smith.

The Attorney-General's Speech to the Jury.
The Indictment is, for traitorously imagining and intending, etc. the Death of
the King. This very imagination and compassing, etc. is Treason. Yet, forasmuch
as the intentions of the heart are secret; the Law cannot take notice of them,
till they are declared by Overt Act. Therefore we shall give in Evidence, That
for the accomplishing of these Intentions, the Prisoner sat with others in
several Councils, or rather Confederacies, incroached the Government, levied
Forces, appointed Officers, and at last, levied open and actual War, in the
head of a Regiment. If any of these crimes be proved, it is sufficient to make
him guilty within this Indictment. And the open levying of War, and appearing
in the head of a Regiment, is not only a Treason of it self, but an evidence of
all those other Treasons he stands charged with in the Indictment.

These things happening before the Act of Oblivion, you will take notice of
that Act,
and that the Prisoner being excepted by name from the benefit of that Pardon,
though he be chargeable for any crime of Treason since the beginning of the
late War, yet we shall confine the Facts for which we charge him, to the Reign
of his now Majesty.

After the House had voted the late King's Concessions in the Isle of Wight to
be a good ground for Peace, many of the Members were kept out by force, others
turned out; the Peers laid aside, and at last, the King murdered. The first
thing then that we shall lay to the charge of the Prisoner, is, That that very
day, wherein that horried Act was committed, we find his hand and seal to a
Warrant to the Officers of the Navy, to issue out Stores for a Summers Guard
of the Narrow Seas. This was the first day of the Reign of his now Majesty; and
so he enumerated all the Particulars which he intended to charge him with, and
proved them, as follows.

1. The Warrant of the 30th of Jan. 48, was proved to be the hand of Sir Henry
Vane, by Thomas Lewis and Thomas Turner, as they believe, neither of them
affirming that they saw him write it, but knowing his hand, believed it to be
so.

2. Ralph Darnel, an Under-Clerk of the House of Commons, proved the Journal
Book of the House, and said, though he will not take upon him to say, when Sir
Henry Vane was there, and when he was absent, yet he said positively, that at
what time soever he is set down in the Journal, to have acted or reported any
thing, he was there. In which Book, Febr. 7. 1648. fol. 653, was the Order to
set up a Council of State.

Fol. 684. 13th Feb. were the Instructions presented to the House, upon which
the Council of State was to act.

1. The first was, That you, or any four or more, are to suppress all and every
person and persons pretending Title to the Kingly Government of this Nation,
from or by the late King; Charles Steward, his son; or any claiming from or by
them or either of them, or any other Single Person whatsoever.

This the Attorney said, was in the first part of that Instruction, to destroy
the King's Person, and in the second part, the Kingly Government.

2. That you, etc. are appointed to direct the Forces of this Commonwealth, for
the preventing and suppressing of Tumults and Insurrections at home, or
Invasions from abroad; and for these ends, to raise Forces, etc.

3. That Febr. 14. 1648. fol. 695; Sir Henry Vane was chosen a Member of the
Council of State, and acted upon these Instructions, which they proved thus; To
wit,

First, That Sir Henry Vane, as (fol. 893) 23d of March 1648, Reported from the
Council of State, an Estimate of the number of Ships for the Summers Guard of
the Narrow Seas.

Secondly, March 30. 1649, Sir Henry Vane reports from the Council of State,
That ten thousand pounds, parcel of the twenty thousand pounds, assessed upon
South Wales for their Delinquency, be allowed toward the setting out of this
Fleet, for the service of the Parliament; which was Ordered accordingly, and to
be paid to Sir Henry Vane, as Treasurer of the Navy.

Thirdly, That Sir Hen. Vane usually sat in Council, but this Deponent, being
never admitted to go in, after the Council was sat, proves, that he often saw
him go in at the fore-door and backdoor, and often continue there all the time
the Council was sitting.

William Dobbins and Matthew Lock say, That they several times saw Sir Henry
Vane sit in a Committee of the Council, in the years 1651 and 1652, which
consisted only of Members of the Council, and particularly at the Committee for
Scottish and Irish Affairs, where Sir Henry Vane was often in the Chair, and
produced several ^^ders of that Committee.

Fourthly, Febr. 12. 1649, A new Council of State was chosen, of which Sir
Henry Vane was one, fol. 720.

Feb. 13. 1649, All the Instructions of the former year were read and assented
to.

Feb. 22. 1649. fol. 760, Sir Henry Vane reported the form of an Oath of
Secrecy to be administered to every of the Members of the Council, which was,
to keep all things which should be transacted in Council, secret, and to be
true and faithful to their Instructions; which the Attorney said, (since their
first Instruction was, to suppress all persons pretending Title from the King)
was in effect, an Oath of Abjuration.

Fifthly, Anno 1652, Sir Henry Vane was President of the Council of State, and
several Warrants were produced, to wit, May 20. 1652, and 22d of May - 52; to
deliver to Major Wigan, two hundred Firelocks, and ten Drums. The other, for
the delivery of five hundred Foot-Arms, for Recruit of Col. Ingoldsbyes
Regiment; and these were subscribed by Order of the Council, H. Vane, President.

April 2. 1653. A Warrant of that date was produced by the Commissioners of the
Navy, of which he was one, for furnishing out the Hampshire Frigate, with
Provisions and Ammunition for the use of the State.

From this time to 1659, they charge him with nothing, and then the
Journal Book was produced and attested by Ralph Darnel, wherein, May 7. 1659,
an Order was made for appointing a Committee of Safety (whereof Sir Henry Vane
was one) That they, or any four or more of them, should take care of the Safety
of this Commonwealth, and they to sit for eight days and no longer, fol. 36.

Die Ven. May 13. 1659, Sir Henry Vane reported, That they had conferred with
all the Foreign Ambassadors. That the Commonwealth is in Amity with all
Foreign Princes, but Spain.

Resolved, That Chapter Fleetwood, J. Lambert, J. Disbrough, Jam. Berry, Arthur
Haslerigg, Edmund Ludlow, and Sir Henry Vane be Commissioners to nominate
Commission-Officers for the Army of this Commonwealth. By virtue hereof they
proceeded, June 17. 1659, to nominate Commission-Officers, appointed Robert
Moss a Colonel, presenting a List of his Commission-Officiers; and John Mason
to be Governor of Jersey.

Die Ven. May 31. fol. 158. Sir Henry Vane reports, concerning affairs between
the two Northern Kings, in the Zound, wherein the affairs of this Commonwealth
are concerned.

Die Ven. Sept. 2. 1659. At the Committee of State at White Hall, An Order was
produced for the redelivery of the City-horses to their respective owners,
Signed, H. Vane, President.

A Warrant was produced under the hand of Sir Henry Vane, proved by Thomas
Lewis and one Falconer, for so many Hangers to Col. Tompson, as he shall
require for his Regiment.

Three several Letters, to deliver 1200 Arms for the use of my Regiment; to
wit, To Sam. Linn my Capt. Leiutenant, 30 Arms for my Company; To Maj. Tho.
Shurman, Major of my Regiment, four or five barrels of Powder.

Then one Marsh was produced a Witness, who proves, That Sir Henry Vane
proposed the new Model of Government, Whitlock being in the Chair, in these
particulars;

1. That the Supreme Power, delegated by the People to their Trustees, ought to
be in some Fundamentals not dispensed with.

2. That it is destructive to the Peoples Liberties (to which by God's blessing
they are restored) to admit any earthly King or single person, to the
Legislative or Executive Power over this Nation.

3. That the Supreme Power delegated, is not on trusted to the Peoples
Trustees, to erect matters of Faith or Worship, so as to exercise compulsion
therein.

Tho. Pury proves, That he was at the debating of the two last of these
Propositions, and believes they were proposed to the Chairman Whitlock, by Sir
Henry Vane; but affirms confidently, that Sir Hen. Vane gave Reasons to
maintain them.

Tho. Wallis produced, proves Sir Henry Vane and Col. Rich in the head of a
Company, in Winchester Park in Southwark, and that the Capt. Leiutenant Linn
said to the Soldiers, that Sir Henry Vane had given them five pounds to drink;
that the said Linn sent home a key to his wife, to send him four pounds out of
his trunk, to give the Soldiers.

John Cook deposes, That he was sent to the Horseshoe-stairs, to meet Sir
Henry Vane and Col. Rich, and that Sir H. Vane delivered five pound to Capt.
Linn, to reward the Soldiers. This was all the Evidence given by the King's
Counsel; To which, Sir Henry Vane was required to make his Defense; and to go
through with his Case all at once, and not to reply again upon the King's
Counsel, who resolved to have the last word to the Jury.

Sir HENRY VANE.
Cook in his Pleas of the Crown, fol. 6. says, King is to be understood of a
King regnant and in actual possession of the Crown, and not of a King when he
is only Rex de jure, and out of possession. Now an interregnum is confessed by
the Indictment. All ensigns of Authority and badges of Government, were visibly
in another name and style; the King's best friends suing, and being sued, in
another name.

The Court told him, He should first make his Case out in point of Suit, and it
would be then seasonable to stand upon matter of Law; for (said they) it is a
good Rule, in facto jus Oritur, and enjoined him to call his Witnesses, if he
had any.

To which Sir Henry Vane desired Process of Court, to summon them; and a
further time, to answer the Charge. But it was told him, The Jury were to be
kept without meat, drink, fire or candle, till their Verdict was delivered in;
and therefore that could not be granted.

He then cited the 4th part of Cook's Institutes, concerning the Privilege of
Parliament, and that many of these things, being transacted there --

The Court here interrupted him, and said; If the things charged, were done;
justify them: if not, excuse them. So he went to give answer to the Fact.

And as to the first Warrant, Jan. 30. 1648; He said, that his hand had been
oftentimes counterseited, and amongst other occasions, for two great sums, to
the value of ten thousand pounds; and that he had great reason to believe, that
this Warrant was forged, and produced two Witnesses to prove it.

Then said Windham, Justice; It may be your hand may have been forged for
receiving of Money, but it is not to be conjectured that it should be forged to
set Ships to Sea; and directed to the Jury to consider of the circumstances.

Sir H. Vane. Neither of the Witnesses ever saw me set my hand to either of
these Warrants or Orders, nor does one Witness prove that he ever saw me sit in
the Council of State: He further said, That he absented from the House from
December. 3. 1648, till Febr. 7. That he (...) ^^osen a Member of the Council of
State without his consent and knowledge; and being demanded to take an Oath of
Approbation of what had been done to the late King, he refused, and caused it
to be expunged. That these Actings in Council, (if any were) were by Authority
of Parliament, of a Parliament constituted in an extraordinary manner, made
indissolvable but by Act of Parliament. He insisted much on the Preamble of
that Act, so as that Parliament being coordinate with the King, (for the
Government was in the King and the two Houses) whatever he acted by Them or
their Authority, cannot be Treason within the Statute of 25 Ed. 3.

He cited an Ordinance of Parliament in 1642, and said, That he hoped these
things had been laid asleep by the Act of Oblivion, and if they should now rise
in Judgment against him, he feared they would shake that Security which the
People promised themselves under that Act. But if he should be now called in
question for those things which were transacted in that Parliament, of which he
was a Member, he shall have the comfort and peace of those Actions to support
him in his greatest sufferings. He added, That if he were excepted, then must
he be judged for the crime of the whole Nation, and that crime must be ravelled
into through him. That the Case is such, as never yet fell out, to wit, that
the Government being entrusted to three Estates, they should so fall out among
themselves, as the People cannot tell which to obey; That where these great
Changes fall out, it is not possible for any man to proceed according to all
formalities of Law. That there was a Political Power by this Act of 17. Caroli
coordinate with the King; and where these Powers are not in conjunction, but
enmity to each other, no Court inferior to the Parliament, by whose Authority
these things were acted, ought to be Judges of this Case, which certainly never
happened before.

He farther says, he was not the first mover in these actions, and that he
should be called in question for these matters, by a King that was out of
possession at the time when these things were acted, would be inconvenient, to
say no more; That when the three Estates were disjoined, he thought it the best
policy, to preserve the Government in its root, to wit, the Commons: by whom it
was preserved and at last restored to its former course. That as to the
Regiment that passed under his name, he disowned it. That Reports of Messages
are not the fault of the Reporter, for his judgment does not always go along
with them, but he is bound to deliver his Message. That he always loved the
Government, as it is set forth in our ancient Law Books; and that that
Parliament (so much decried) at last restored affairs to the ^^sture in which
they now are.

As to the Warrants signed by him, he said, they appear to be signed in the
Name and by Order of the Council, and his hand that subscribes, is not so much
active as passive, to the Commands of the Council. If the Council, who
commanded the signing, were unwarrantable, The Parliament who appointed the
Council, must be much more unwarrantable.

And here he offered these points to be considered, and prayed earnestly to
have Counsel assigned him, to speak to them.

1. Whether the collective body of the Parliament can be impeached of High
Treason.

2. Whether any person acting by Authority of Parliament, can (so long as he
acts by that Authority) commit Treason?

3. Whether matters acted by that Authority, can be called in question in an
inferior Court?

4. Whether a King de jure, and out of possession, can have Treason committed
against him, he not being King de facto, and in actual possession? and prayed
it might be argued by Counsel.

5. Whether matters done in Southwark, in another County, may be given in
evidence to a Middlesex Jury?

As to the last Exception, the Court said,

That he was indicted for compassing and imagining the King's Death in
Middlesex, and any overt act, to prove this Imagination, may be given in
evidence wheresoever it be acted. To which Sir Hen. Vane prayed the benefit of
a Bill of Exception, upon the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 31. and prayed
that the Justices might seal it, which they all refused, and held, it lay not
in any case of the Crown.

The King's Counsel desired he might call his Witnesses, (if any he had) for if
they once came to reply to him, he must then be silent, and consented, that (if
it would aid him) they would allow his Actings to be in the Name and by the
Authority of the Council of State, and the Actings of the Council of State to
be by Authority of what he called a Parliament.

Sir Hen. Vane replied; Then what I acted in the Council of State, and
Committee of Safety, constituted by the Parliament to endure for eight days,
you will allow me. Then you must prove that I ever acted in the other Council
of State, after the Parliament was turned out.

Then the King's Counsel produced a Warrant, dated November. 3. 1659, which was
sent in pursuance of an Order of the Committee of Safety, by Sir Hen. Vane, as
Treasurer of the Navy. This Warrant was, for the sending of diverse Arms
Northwards, after Mr. Lambert, who was gone down to oppose the now Duke of
Albemarle.

Sir Hen. Vane produced Will, Angel, Brisco, Middleton, etc. Officers of that
Regiment which went under his name, who having recourse unto him for Orders,
about October. 1659, he bad them desist, and declared his dis-satisfaction in
their proceedings; and this, after their several importunities to have Orders
from him. And thus he closed his Defense.

FYNCH, Solicitor.
As to pretense of the power of Parliament, It is to be known, that it was not
the eighth part of the House of Commons, such as were let in to do all that
has been complained, and the acting under Authority of such an End of a
Parliament, under such a Violation, was no Excuse, but an Aggravation; but that
the Parliament was in Law, ended, by the death of the late King,
notwithstanding that Act of 17. Caroli primi, appears thus;

First, The King's Writ for a Parliament is ad tractandum nobiscum; which is
intended as well of the natural capacity of the King, as of his politic.

Secondly, It Is absurd to say, that the Acts of Parliament of King Charles the
first, should be his Acts, in the time of King Charles the second.

Thirdly, A Commission of Sewers, enacted to be on foot for ten years, expires
by the death of the King, and the authority of the Commissioners is at an end.

Fourthly, It is not possible for one King to impose a Parliament upon a
successor. So much for his acting by color of authority of Parliament.

And as to the Question, Whether an House of Parliament can commit Treason? If
they depart from that Allegiance which they have sworn, at their first meeting,
they are impeachable for it.

As to a Co-ordination in the Parliament, he denied it.

As to the Question, Whether the King being out of actual possession, can have
Treason committed against him? he affirmed it: And said, otherwise, if
Rebellion should be so prosperous, as to depose or oppress the King in Battle,
the Offenders are not to be called in question, because they prevailed. He
said, it was the Plea of Watson the Jesuit, who, being Indicted for compassing
the death of King James, in Scotland, after he was declared King of England,
and before his actual entering into this Realm, made this Defense; That the King
was never in possession of the Crown.

Windam Justice. As to the Act of 17. Caroli, and the Preamble of that Act, so
much insisted upon by the Prisoner. 1. He held that the Parliament had not
greater Authority by it, but were only made more durable than other
Parliaments have been; but he held, that the Parliament was absolutely
dissolved by the death of the King; and put this case: If it should be enacted
that such a Marriage should continue, till it was dissolved by Act of
Parliament, If one dies, it is a determination of it in Fact, so as no man can
say, but it is absolutely dissolved. 2. It must continue in the degree and
dignity of a Parliament. If the House be under a force, and some kept out, some
let in, to serve a Turn, whatever they act is a Nullity in Law. For Freedom is
the principal essence and honor of a Parliament; yet though the House be under
a Force, the House is not dissolved by such Force, but the proceedings are to
be suspended, till it require its former Liberty; and this as well by the
Common Law, as by the Civil and Canon Laws of all other Countries. 3. The
Parliament is the King's great Council, The Peers are Consiliarii nati; If they
be forced away, or laid aside, as here they were, all the rest is but Magni
Nominis Umbra.

Twisden held the same opinion, That it is not the sitting of a few Members
within those Walls, that will continue it a Parliament.

And though another Parliament, a great many years after the Kings death,
declared it to be at an end, yet that Act was but Declaration, it was at an end
before.

Whether a Parliament may commit Treason, is not the Question* but, Whether a
few of the House, shutting out their Fellows, and usurping the Government, were
not Traitors?

Foster held the same opinion, and said, The distinction between the Politic
and Natural capacity of the King, was the Treason of the two Spencers; That
Privilege of the Parliament is no shelter for breach of the Peace, much less
for Treason.

Twisden added, That to compass the Death of the King as a natural person, was
Treason; to compass his Death in his Politic capacity, as to depose him, was
Treason, and both provided for by the Act of 25. Ed. 3. That in the same
instant the late King expired, in the very same his now Majesty was King de
facto, and affirmed the cases of Watson and Cleark 1. Jac. If an Army be raised
against the King, and the King is slain in the battle, This Treason is
questionable by the Successor, as Stonies Case is in Dyer.

Thus ended the questions of Law, proposed.

The Solicitor spoke after to the Jury, concerning the Fact, which after, they
withdrew to consider, and being withdrawn about half an hour, returned with
their Verdict, which being delivered by the Foreman in the name of his fellows,
with their consent, found the Prisoner guilty of High Treason from Januar. 30.
1648.

They not only found him guilty according to the Indictment, which was laid for
what the Prisoner did, 1659; but for a long series of High Treason (as they
reckon) from Jan. 30. 1648. By which it may appear, they were a well-prepared
Jury for their work. The Judges often, if not always, pretend, that the Jury is
to pass Verdict only as to matter of Fact, according to the Evidence given by
the Witnesses thereof. But a general Verdict evidently involves both, that he
is guilty of such fact, and that the fact is Treason, as they in this Verdict
openly undertake to determine, taking in the full sense of the Indictment, and
much more. Unless a Jury distinguish themselves out of this usually imposed
snare, by giving a special Verdict concerning the Fact only, they undeniably
have a share with their Tutors and Instructors in the shedding of innocent
blood, in case matter of Law be wrongfully stated.

For a Jury to resolve a Case of Law, that so eminent a Subjects life was
concerned in, and that in less than half an hour, which never yet came before
any Bench of Judicature in England, may seem a very strange and bold adventure.

But Reader, How far this falls short of a full Account of all that was spoken
by the Prisoner (though much interrupted by the King's Bench and Counsel) in
those ten hours, which on this day of his Trial he stood at the Bar, (pleading
and answering for his Life, and the Cause he had with many thousands been
engaged in) I leave to thee to imagine, till a fuller and compleater Account
thereof can be obtained, than is yet come to hand.

This was remarkable; That never being indulged the liberty of any repose to
his body, all that while, (which indeed, he asked not) nor receiving any
creature-refreshings, though sent him, for his support; yea, and though after
all his most rational Plea, in his Defense, the Jury gave their Verdict against
his Life, he came cheerfully and pleasantly from the Bar, as thought worthy to
suffer for the Name of Christ; and was so raised and full of rejoicing that
evening, at the place of his confinement in the Tower, that he was a wonder to
any that were about him. This spiritual rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and his
heavenly raisedness of spirit, increased more and more, to the very moment of
his death; insomuch, that mere strangers to his person, yea, very foreigners,
wondered at his triumphant dissolution.

The true Copy of the Prisoner's own Papers, containing the substance of what
he pleaded on the said day of his Trial, June 6.
Memorandums as to my main Defense, in relation to matter of Fact, and as a
Narrative thereof.
THat without any seeking of mine, I was chosen by Writ under the Great Seal,
to serve as Burgess for the Town of Kingston upon Hull, in the Parliament that
sat down on the third of November. 1640. and having in pursuance thereof, taken
my seat in the said Parliament, I was obliged by Law, to give my attendance
upon the said Trust, as well as upon grounds of Duty and Conscience.

The said Parliament was not only called and assembled after the usual manner,
and had the Power and Privileges incident to that high Court, but was by
express Statute and Consent of the three Estates, so constituted, as to its
Continuance, Adjournment, Prorogation and Dissolution, that in none of these
particulars they were subject to alteration, but by their own common Assent,
declared by Act of Parliament, to be passed by themselves for that purpose,
with the Royal Assent.

In the Preamble to the Act for continuance of the said Parliament, these words
are contained: Whereas great sums of Money must of necessity be speedily
advanced and provided, for the relief of his Majesty's Army and People in the
Northern parts of this Realm, and for preventing the imminent danger this
Kingdom is in, and for supply of his Majesty's present and urgent occasions,
which cannot be so timely effected as is requisite, without Credit for raising
the said Moneys; which Credit cannot be obtained until such obstacles be first
removed, as are occasioned by fears, jealousies and apprehensions of diverse his
Majesty's loyal Subjects, That this present Parliament may be Adjourned,
Prorogued or Dissolved, before Justice shall be duly executed upon
Delinquents, Public Grievances redressed, a firm Peace between the two Nations
of England and Scotland concluded, and before sufficient Provision be made for
the repayment of the said Moneys so to be raised, etc. By all which, the very
work that was between the three Estates agreed to be done for the Good and
Safety of the Kingdom, was in sundry particulars declared and expressed; and
not only so, but as is acknowledged by the late King himself in his Answer to
the nineteen Propositions; The Power which thereby was legally placed in both
Houses, was more than sufficient to prevent and restrain Tyranny.

So that, by what has been showed, the Law it self is with me, and for me,
enjoining my continued attendance on the Trust which by this means was
committed to me, and authorized me in particular to effect the things contained
in the said Preamble; and to act in all matters belonging to the high Court of
Parliament, for the Good and Safety of the Kingdom in time of imminent danger,
I had been liable to great punishment by the Law, for dis-attendance and
deserting my station therein, till lawfully or by force dismissed therefrom:
and this, whatever occasions others might have, by a voluntary or forced
departure from attendance upon that Trust.

The actions therefore done by me in this capacity, and according to the Law,
Privileges, Customs and Power of Parliament, and that, such a one as was thus
extraordinarily constituted, neither are nor can be brought within the Statute
of 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. nor are to be questioned, tried, much less judged and
sentenced in any inferior Court. Nay, so far is it from this, that by a
Declaration and Resolution of Parliament, Aug. 13. 1642, it is adjudged to be
committing Treason in the highest degree, to bring both or either Houses of
Parliament under that or such like Imputations.

Nor, till of late, have I ever heard but that those who took the Judgment of
Parliament for their rule and guide, (however tortuous or erroneous it might
afterward be accounted in succeeding times) and they that acted by and under
the countenance of their declared Judgments, Orders or Ordinances, (ever
acknowledged binding during the sitting of the Parliament) were safe and
indempnified from all punishment. And for Government-sake it self, it is
requisite it should be so; because none are Judges of the Power and Privileges
of Parliament, but themselves. For admit once, that their Judgment may be
called in question, and disputed by private persons, or by inferior Courts,
(whose Votes are included in theirs) the Fundamentals of Government are plucked
up by the roots. Par in pares non habet Imperium, multo minus in eos qui majus
Imperium habent; An Equal has no command over his Equal, much less over those
that have a greater command or authority.

His late Majesty, in his Answer to the nineteen Propositions, does very
briefly and exactly state the nature and kind of Government, that is exercised
in this Kingdom, saying, The Laws in this Kingdom are made by a King, a House
of Peers, and a House of Commons, chosen by the People, all having free Votes,
and particular Privileges. These three Estates, making one incorporate body,
are they, in whom the Sovereignty and Supreme Power is placed, as to the making
and repealing of Laws. And the Government, according to these Laws, is trusted
to the King, who in the Interval of Parliaments, is sole in the exercise of
Government, which (the Parliament sitting) he is to exercise in conjunction
with the two Houses.

And his said Majesty asserting three sorts of Government, Absolute Monarchy,
Aristocracy, and Democracy, does most rightly distinguish the Monarchy of
England from all those three, and commends the Constitution of this Kingdom, as
it is a mixture of all three, having the conveniences of them all, without the
inconveniences of any one, as long as the balance hangs even between the
three Estates, that they run jointly on in their proper channels, and that the
overflowing of either on either side, raise no deluge nor inundation.

By the passing of the foresaid Act, for the continuance of the forementioned
Parliament, the Intervals of Parliament were no longer, as before, at the will
and pleasure of the King, but the Power to continue the said Parliament,
without Adjournment, Prorogation, or Dissolution, resided in the two Houses
with the King, jointly, and in none of them severally; so that in effect, the
Government of the Kingdom, during the continuance of that Parliament, was in
conjunction of the three Estates, and in their common consents and agreements
among themselves, given in Parliament, the assembling and meeting whereof was
appointed and fixed to a place certain, by Law.

By reason hereof, it is not the attendance of any of the Members in Parliament
(for discharge of the Trust reposed in them, confirmed and enlarged by the said
Act) that is faulty or censurable by the Law, but those that unwarrantably
depart and desert that their Trust and station, are to be blamed; 6. Hen. 8. 16.

The King in conjunction with the Parliament, is maxim Rex, and is supported
in the Throne and exercise of his Regal Power, by the joint concurrence of both
Houses. And because (as his late Majesty well observed) the happiness and good
of the Constitution of this Government, lies in keeping the balance even
between the three Estates, containing themselves within the bounds of their
proper channels, therefore in attempts of either to overflow those bounds,
(they being coordinate) the Office of a Parliament is by the very fundamental
constitution of the Government, to keep this balance well poised. And to that
end (as was before mentioned) his Majesty's own words are in his said Answer to
the nineteen Propositions; That there was legally placed in both Houses, a
Power more than sufficient to prevent and restrain the Power of Tyranny. If so,
then are they the legal Judges, when there is danger of Tyranny; and have legal
power to require their Judgment and Resolves to be obeyed, not only when Arms
are actually raised against them, but when they discern and accordingly declare
a preparation toward it: else, they may find it too late to prevent the power
of Tyranny. There is no greater attempt of Tyranny, than to arm against the
Parliament; and there is no visible way for the restraining such Tyranny, but
by raising Arms in their own and the Kingdoms defense. Less than this is not
sufficient, and therefore far from more than sufficient, for the punishment of
Delinquents and restraint of Tyranny.

Unto the King in conjunction with his two Houses, according as is provided by
the Law, in this capacity of his as maxim Rex, was the duty of Allegiance to
be yielded by his Subjects, during the indissolved state of that Parliament.
For they were the King's great Council, and supreme Court, exercising the known
Power and Privileges, that time out of mind have appertained to them, and been
put forth by them, as the Exigents of the Kingdom have required, when
differences have happened about the very title of the Crown, in declaring the
duty of the Subject, by yielding their Allegiance to Kings de facto, when Kings
de jure have been kept out of possession. This our Chronicles, and the
Histories of former times, do plentifully inform.

The causes that did happen, to move his late Majesty to depart from his
Parliament, and continue for many years, not only at a distance and in a
disjunction from them, but at last, in a declared posture of Enmity and War
against them, are so well known and fully stated in print (not to say, written
in characters of blood) on both parts, that I shall only mention it, and refer
to it.

This matter was not done in a corner. The Appeals were solemn, and the
decision by the Sword, was given by that God, who being the Judge of the whole
World, does Right, and cannot do otherwise.

By occasion of these unhappy differences, thus happening most great and
unusual Changes and Revolutions, like an irresistible Torrent, did break in
upon us, not only to the disjoynting that Parliamentary Assembly among
themselves, (the head from the members, the co-ordinates from each other, and
the houses within themselves) but to the creating such formed divisions among
the people, and to the producing such a general state of Confusion and
Disorder, that hardly any were able to know their duty, and with certainly to
discern who were to command and who to obey. All things seemed to be reduced,
and in a manner resolved into their first elements and principles.

Nevertheless, as dark as such a state might be, the Law of England leaves not
the Subjects thereof (as I humbly conceive) without some glimpses of direction
what to do, in the cleaving to, and pursuing of which, I hope I shall not be
accounted nor judged an offender; or if I am, I shall have the comfort and
peace of my Actions to support me in and under my greatest sufferings.

The Resolutions of all the Judges in Calvin's Case, entitled, Postnati, in
the 7th Book of Cook's Reports, and the learned Arguments thereupon, afforded
me instruction even in this matter. It may be it is truly thence affirmed, that
Allegiance is due only to the King, and how due, is also showed.

The King is acknowledged to have two capacities in him; one a natural, as he
is descended of the Blood Royal of the Realm; and the Body natural he has in
this capacity, is of the creation of Almighty God and mortal: The other is a
politic capacity, in respect of which he is a Body politic or mystical,
framed by the policy of man, which is immortal and invisible. To the King, in
both these capacities conjoined, Allegiance is due; that is to say, to the
natural person of the King, accompanied with his politic capacity, or the
politic appropriated to the natural.

The politic capacity of the King has properly no body nor soul: for it is
framed by the policy of man.

In all Indictments of Treason, when any one does intend the death and
destruction of the King, it must needs be understood of his natural body, the
other being immortal. The Indictment therefore concludes contra Legiantiae suae
debitum, against the duty of his Allegiance, so that Allegiance is due to the
natural body.

Admitting then that thus by Law, Allegiance is due to the King (as before
recited) yet it is always to be presumed, that it is to the King in
conjunction with the Parliament, the Law, and the Kingdom, and not in
disjunction from, or opposition to them; and that, while a Parliament is in
being and cannot be dissolved, but by the Consent of the three Estates.

This is therefore that, which makes the matter in question, a new Case, that
never before happened in the Kingdom, nor was possible to happen, unless there
had been a Parliament constituted, as this was, unsubjected to Adjournment,
Prorogation or Dissolution, by the King's will. Where such a power is granted,
and the co-ordinates thereupon disagree and fall out, such effects and
consequents as these that have happened, will but too probably follow. And, if
either the Law of Nature, or England, inform not in such case, it will be
impossible for the Subjects to know their duty, when that Power and Command
which ought to flow from three in conjunction, comes to be exercised by all or
either of them, singly and apart, or by two of them against one.

When new and never-heard-of Changes do fall out in the Kingdom, it is not like
that the known and written Laws of the Land should be the exact Rule, but the
Grounds and Rules of Justice, contained and declared in the Law of Nature, are
and ought to be a Sanctuary in such cases, even by the very Common Law of
England: For, thence originally spring the unerring Rules, that are set by the
Divine and Eternal Law, for Rule and Subjection in all States and Kingdoms.

In contemplation hereof, as the Resolve of all the Judges, it was agreed,

1. That Allegiance is due to Sovereignty by the Law of Nature, to wit, that
Law which God at the creation of Man, infused into his heart, for his
preservation and direction, the Law eternal. Yet, is it not this Law, as it is
in the heart of every individual man, that is binding over many, or
legislative, but as it is the Act of a Community, or an Associated People, by
the right dictates and persuasions of the work of this Law in their hearts.
This appears in the Case of the Israelites, Judge. 20, and 21 chapters, cited in
the 4th part of Cook's Institutes, where mention is made of a Parliament
without a King, that made War, and that with their Brethren. They met as one
man to do it, in vindication of that Justice unto which they were obliged even
by the Law of Nature. This is that which Chancellor Fortescue calls Political
Power, here in England; by which, as by the Ordinance of man, in pursuance of
the Ordinance of God, the Regal Office constituted, or the King's Politic
Capacity, and becomes appropriated to his natural person.

Thus Politic Power is the immediate Efflux and Offspring of the Law of
Nature, and may be called a part of it. To this, Hooker in his Ecclesiastical
Polity agrees, and Seldom on that subject.

The Law of Nature thus considered, is part of the Law of England, as is
evident by all the best received Law Books, Bracton, Fleta, Lambard upon the
Saxon Laws, and Fortescue in the praise of the Laws of England. This is the Law
that is before any judicial or municipal Law, as the root and fountain whence
these and all Government under God and his Law do flow.

This Politic Power, as it is exercised in conjunction with, and conformity to
the Eternal Law, partakes of its moral and immutable nature, and cannot be
changed by Act of Parliament. Of this Law it is that Magna Charta and the
Charter of Forest, with other Statutes, rehearsed in the Petition of Right, are
for the most part declaratory. For they are not introductive of any new Law,
but confirmations of what was good in all Laws of England, before. This agrees
with that Maxim, Salus Populi suprema Lex; that being made due and binding by
this Law, which in the Judgment of the Community, declaring their mind by their
own free chosen Delegates and Trustees, in harmony with the Eternal Law,
appears profitable and necessary for the preservation and good of the whole
Society.

This is the Law, which is put forth by the common consent of the whole Realm,
in their Representative; and (according to the fundamental Constitutions of
this Kingdom) is that, with which the Kings of this Land, by the joint
cooperation of the three Estates, do make and repeal Laws.

But through the disorders and divisions of the times, these two Powers, the
Regal and Political, (which, according to the Law of England, make up but one
and the same supreme Authority) fell assunder, and found themselves in
disjunction from, and opposition to one another. I do not say, The question is
now, which of these is most rightly, (according to the principles of the Law of
Nature and the Law of England) to be adhered unto and obeyed, but unto whether
Power adherence is a crime, in such an Exigent of State? Which, since it is
such a new and extraordinary Case, evidently above the Track of the ordinary
Rules, contained in the positive and municipal Laws of England, there can be no
color to bring it within the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. forasmuch as all
Statutes presuppose these two Powers, Regal and Political, in conjunction,
perfect unity and subserviency, which this Case does not, cannot admit. So
exceeding new and extraordinary a Case is it, that it may be doubted whether,
and questioned how far, any other Parliament, but that Parliament it self that
was privy to all its own Actings and Intentions, can be an indifferent and
competent Judge. But however, the point is of so abstruse and high
consideration, as no inferior Court can, or ought to judge of it, as by
Law Books is most undeniable; to wit, Bracton and others.

This then being the true state of the Case, and the spring of that Contest
that ensued, and received its decision by the late War; The next Consideration
is, how far I have had my share and part therein, that by the Laws is not
warrantable, or by what appears in way of proof, to the Jury.

For the first, I shall crave leave to give you this account of my self, who
have best known my own mind and intentions throughout, and would not now, to
save my life, renounce the principles of that Righteous Cause, which my
conscience tells me, was my duty to be faithful unto.

I do therefore humbly affirm, That in the aforementioned great Changes and
Revolutions, from first to last, I was never a first mover, but always a
follower, choosing rather to adhere to things than persons; and (where Authority
was dark or dubious) to do things justifiable by the Light and Law of Nature,
as that Law is acknowledged part of the Law of the Land; things, that are in se
bona, and such, as according to the grounds and principles of the Common Law,
as well as the Statutes of this Land, would warrant and indempnifie me, in
doing them. For I have observed by Precedents of former times, when there have
arisen disputes about Titles to the Crown, between Kings de facto and Kings de
jure, the People of this Realm wanted not directions for their safety, and how
to behave themselves within the duty and limits of Allegiance to the King and
Kingdom, in such difficult and dangerous seasons.

My Lord Cook is very clear in this point, in his Chap. of Treason, fol. 7. And
if it were otherwise, it were the hardest case that could be, for the people of
England: For then they would be certainly exposed to punishment, from those
that are in possession of the supreme power, as Traitors, if they do any thing
against them, or do not obey them; and they would be punishable as Traitors, by
him that has right, and is King de jure, in case they do obey the Kings de
facto, and so all the people of England are necessarily involved in Treasons,
either against the Powers de facto, or de jure, and may by the same reason be
questioned for it, as well as the Prisoner, if the Act of Indemnity and the
King's Pardon did not free them from it. The security then and safety of all
the People of England, is by this means, made to depend upon a Pardon, (which
might have been granted or denied) and not upon the sure foundations of Common
Law; an opinion sure, which (duly weighed and considered) is very strange, to
say no more.

For I would gladly know that person in England of estate and fortune, and of
age, that has not counseled, aided or abetted, either by his person or
estate, and submitted to the Laws and Government of the Powers that then were;
and if so, then by your Judgments upon me, you condemn (in effigies, and by
necessary consequence) the whole Kingdom.

And if that be the Law, and be now known to be so, it is worth consideration,
whether, if it had been generally known and understood before, it might not
have hindered his Majesty's Restoration.

Besides, although, until this Judgment be passed upon me, the people have
apprehended themselves, as free from question, and out of danger, by reason of
the Act of Indemnity and General Pardon; yet when it shall appear to them,
that such their safety is not grounded on the Common Law, nor upon the Law of
Nature, but that against both these in their actions, they are found faulty,
and tainted with a moral guilt, and that as principals; also, (since in Treason
there are no Accessories) what terrifying Reflections must this needs stir up in
the mind of every man, that will be apt to believe his Turn will come next, at
least once in two years, as has befallen me in my person, who (however I have
been misjudged and misunderstood) can truly affirm, that in the whole series of
my Actions, that which I have had in my eye, has been to preserve the ancient,
well-constituted Government of England on its own basis and primitive righteous
foundations, most learnedly stated by Fortescue in his Book, made in praise of
the English Laws. And I did account it the most likely means for the effecting
of this, to preserve it, at least in its root, whatever changes and alterations
it might be exposed unto in its branches, through the blustrous and stormy
times that have passed over us.

This is no new doctrine, in a Kingdom acquainted with Political Power, as
Fortescue shows ours is, describing it to be in effect, the Common Assent of
the Realm, the Will of the People or whole Body of the Kingdom, represented in
Parliament. Nay, though this Representation (as has fallen out) be restrained
for a season, to the Commons House, in their single actings, into which (as we
have seen) when by the inordinate fire of the times, two of the three Estates
have for a season been melted down, they did but retire into their Root, and
were not hereby in their Right, destroyed, but rather preserved, though as to
their exercise, laid for a while asleep, till the season came of their Revival
and Restoration.

And whatever were the intents and designs of others, (who are to give an
account of their own actions) It is sufficient for me, that at a time critical
and decisive, (though to my own hazard and ill usage) I did declare my Refusal
of the Oath of Abjuration, which was intended to be taken by all the Members of
Parliament, in reference to Kingly Government, and the Line of his now Majesty
in particular. This I not only positively refused to take, but was an occasion
of the second thoughts which the Parliament reassumed thereof, till in a
manner, they came wholly at last to decline it; a proof undeniable of the
remoteness of any intentions or designs of mine, as to the endeavoring any
alteration or change in the Government, and was that which gave such jealousy
to many in the House, that they were willing to take the first occasion to show
their dislike of me, and to discharge me from sitting among them.

But to return to what I have before affirmed, as to my being no leading or
first Actor in any Change, it is very apparent by my deportment at the time
when that great Violation of Privileges happened to the Parliament, so as by
force of Arms several Members thereof were debarred coming into the House and
keeping their seats there. This made me forbear to come to the Parliament for
the space of ten weeks, (to wit, from the third of December. 1648, till toward
the middle of February following) or to meddle in any public transactions. And
during that time, the matter most obvious to exception, in way of alteration of
the Government, did happen. I can therefore truly say, that as I had neither
consent nor vote, at first, in the Resolutions of the Houses, concerning the
Non-Addresses to his late Majesty, so neither had I, in the least, any consent
in, or approbation to, his Death. But on the contrary, when required by the
Parliament, to take an Oath, to give my approbation ex post facto to what was
done, I utterly refused, and would not accept of sitting in the Council of
State upon those terms, but occasioned a new Oath to be drawn, wherein that was
omitted. Hereupon, many of the Council of State sat, that would not take the
other.

In like manner, The Resolutions and Votes for changing the Government into a
Commonwealth or Free State were passed, some weeks before my return to
Parliament. Yet afterward (so far as I judged the same consonant to the
principles and grounds, declared in the Laws of England, for upholding that
Political Power, which has given the rise and introduction in this Nation, to
Monarchy it self, by the account of ancient Writers) I conceived it my duty, as
the state of things did then appear to me, (notwithstanding the said Alteration
made) to keep my station in Parliament, and to perform my Allegiance therein,
to King and Kingdom, under the Powers then regnant, (upon my principles before
declared) yielding obedience to their Authority and Commands. And having
received Trust, in reference to the safety and preservation of the Kingdom, in
those times of imminent danger, (both within and without) I did conscientiously
hold my self obliged, to be true and faithful therein. This I did upon a
public account, not daring to quit my station in Parliament, by virtue of my
first Writ. Nor was it for any private or gainful ends, to profit my self or
enrich my Relations. This may appear as well by the great Debt I have
contracted, as by the destitute condition my many Children are in, as to any
provision made for them. And I do publicly challenge all persons whatsoever,
that can give information of any Bribes or covert ways, used by me, during the
whole time of my public acting. Therefore I hope it will be evident to the
Consciences of the Jury, that what I have done, has been upon principles of
Integrity, Honor, Justice, Reason and Conscience, and not as is suggested in
the Indictment, by instigation of the Devil, or want of the fear of God.

A second great Change that happened upon the Constitution of the Parliament,
and in them, of the very Kingdom it self and the Laws thereof (to the plucking
up the Liberties of it by the very roots, and the introducing of an Arbitrary
Regal Power, under the name of Protector, by force, and the Law of the Sword)
was the Usurpation of Cromwell, which I opposed from the beginning to the end,
to that degree of suffering, and with that constancy, that well near had cost
me not only the loss of my Estate, but of my very Life, if he might have had
his will, which a higher than he hindered. Yet I did remain a Prisoner, under
great hardship, four months, in an Island, by his Orders.

Hereby, That which I have asserted, is most undeniably evident, as to the true
grounds and ends of my actions all along, that were against Usurpation on the
one hand, or such extraordinary Actings on the other, as I doubted the Laws
might not warrant or indempnifie, unless I were enforced thereunto, by an
overruling and inevitable necessity.

The third considerable Change, was the total disappointing and removing of the
said Usurpation, and the returning again of the Members of Parliament to the
exercise of their primitive and original Trust, for the good and safety of the
Kingdom, so far as the state of the times would then permit them, being so much
as they were, under the power of an Army, that for so long a time had
influenced the Government. Toward the recovery therefore of things again into
their own channel, and upon the legal Root of the Peoples Liberties, to wit,
their Common Consent in Parliament, given by their own Deputies and Trustees, I
held it my duty to be again acting in public Affairs, in the capacity of a
Member of the said Parliament, then re-entred upon the actual Exercise of their
former Power, or at least struggling for it. In this season I had the
opportunity of declaring my true intentions, as to the Government, upon
occasion of refusing the Oath of Abjuration before mentioned.

And whereas I am charged with keeping out his Majesty that now is, from
exercising his Regal Power or Royal Authority in this his Kingdom; through the
ill will born me by that part of the Parliament then sitting, I was discharged
from being a Member thereof, about Jan. 9. 1659, and by many of them was
charged, or at least strongly suspected to be a Royalist: Yea, I was not only
discharged from my attendance in Parliament, but confined as a prisoner at mine
own house, some time before there was any visible power in the Nation that
thought it seasonable to own the King's Interest. And I hope my sitting still,
will not be imputed as a failer of duty, in the condition of a prisoner, and
those circumstances I then was in. This I can say, that from the time I saw his
Majesty's Declarations from Breda, declaring his Intentions and Resolutions as
to his Return to take upon him the actual Exercise of his Regal Office in
England, and to indempnifie all those that had been Actors in the late
Differences and Wars, (as in the said Declaration does appear) I resolved, not
to avoid any public question, (if called thereto) as relying on mine own
Innocence and his Majesty's declared Favor, as beforesaid. And for the future
I determined to demean my self with that inoffensiveness and agreeableness to
my duty, as to give no just matter of new provocation to his Majesty in his
Government. All this on my part, has been punctually observed, whatever my
sufferings have been. Nor am I willing, in the least, to harbor any
discouraging thoughts in my mind, as to his Majesty's Generosity and Favor
toward me, who have been faithful to the Trust I was engaged in, without any
malicious intentions against his Majesty, his Crown or Dignity, as before has
been showed. And I am desirous for the future, to walk peaceably and blamelesly.

Whatever therefore my personal sufferings have been, since his Majesty's
Restoration, I rather impute them to the false reports and calumnies of mine
enemies and misjudgers of my actions, than reckon them as any thing that has
proceeded from his Majesty's proper inclination, whose favor and clemency I
have had just reason with all humility to acknowledge.

First, with regard to his Majesty's Speech made the 27th of July, 1660, in the
House of Peers, wherein his Majesty expressly declared it to be no intention of
his, that a person under my circumstances should be excepted out of the Act of
Indemnity, either for Life or Estate.

And, secondly, however it was the Parliaments pleasure (my self unheard,
though then in the Tower, and ready to have been brought before them) to except
me out of the common Indemnity, and subject me to question for my actions, yet
they themselves, of their own accord (admitting the possibility that in such
questioning of me, I might be attainted) made it their humble desire to his
Majesty, that in such case, Execution, as to my Life, might be remitted. Unto
this his Majesty readily gave his Grant and Assent. And I do firmly believe, if
the Houses had pleased to give me the opportunity and leave of being heard,
they would never have denied me the Indemnity granted to the rest of the
Nation.

That which remains of further Charge yet to me, is the business of a Regiment,
an employment, which I can in truth affirm, mine own inclinations, nature and
breeding little fitted me for, and which was intended only as honorary and
titular, with relation to Volunteers, who, by their application to the Council
of State, in a time of great Commotions, did propound their own Officers, and
(without any seeking of mine, or my considering any farther of it, than as the
use of my Name) did (among others) nominate me for a Colonel, which the Council
of State approved, granting Commissions to my self and all other Officers
relating thereunto. And the Parliament confirmed my said Commission, upon
report thereof made to them.

This will appear by several Witnesses I have to produce in this matter, that
will be able to affirm, how little I took upon me, or at all, to give any
Orders, or make use of such my Commission, any otherwise than in name only.

It Is true indeed, that at a certain time, when I was summoned to appear at the
Committee of the Militia in Southwark, whereof I was a Member; That which was
called my own Company of Foot (from the respect which they and their Officers
pretended to me) were desirous to be in a posture, fit for me to see them, and
as I passed by, I took the opportunity at their desire to show my self to them,
and only (as taking notice of their respect) in some few words, expressing the
reason I had to receive it in good part, I told them I would no longer detain
them from their other occasions. After I was gone from them, I appointed my
Capt. Lieutenant to give them from me something to drink, as might be fitting
on such an occasion, which, to my best remembrance was five pounds, and he laid
it out of his own money.

More than this (as I remember) was not done by me, so much as to the seeing
any more, the Companies of that Regiment gathered together, or giving Orders to
them, which I publicly and avowedly declined, persuading the Officers to lay
down their Charges, in mine own example, so soon as I discerned the intentions
of the sitting down of the Committee of Safety, and the exorbitant power
committed to them to exercise, and the way of proceedings by the Army, in
interesting themselves in the Civil Government of the Nation, which I utterly
disliked.

And although I forbore not to keep my station, in reference to the Council of
State while they sat, or as a Commissioner of the Admiralty, during the time
by them appointed to act by Parliamentary Authority; and so, had occasion to be
daily conversant with the Members of the Committee of Safety, (whereof my self,
with others that would not accept, were named) yet I perfectly kept my self
dis-interested from all those Actings of the Army, as to any Consent or
Approbation of mine, (however in many things by way of discourse, I did not
decline converse with them) holding it my duty, to penetrate as far as I could
into their true Intentions and Actions, but resolving within my self to hold
true to my Parliamentary Trust, in all things wherein the Parliament appeared
to me to act for the safety and good of the Kingdom, however I was
mis-interpreted and judged by them, as one that rather favored some of the
Army and their power.

Upon the whole matter, There is not any precedent, that ever both or either of
the Houses of Parliament did commit Treason. For though Privilege of
Parliament does not so hold in Treason, but that particular Members may be
punished for it, yet it is unprecedented, That both or either Houses of
Parliament, as a collective Body, ever did or could commit Treason.

All the Acts done in Parliaments, have been reversed indeed, and repealed, as
what was done 11. Ric. 2. was repealed, 21. Ric. 2; and what was done 21. Ric.
2. was repealed 1 Hen. 4. 3; as appears by the printed Statutes. Yet I do not
find, that both or either House of Parliament were declared Traitors for what
they did in those Parliaments; Or that any which acted under them, suffered for
the same in any inferior Courts. And surely, the reason is obvious: For they
had a co-ordinacy in the Supreme or Legislative Power, for the making, altering
and repealing Laws. And if so, Par in parem non habet imperium; and by
authorities out of Bracton, Fleta, and others, it may appear what Superiors
the King himself has, (who yet has no Peer in his Kingdom, nisi Curium
Baronum) God, Law, and Parliament.

And if either or both Houses cannot commit Treason. Then those that act by
their Authority, cannot: For, plus peccat Author quam Actor, the Author offends
more than the Actor. If those that command, do not, not can commit Treason, how
can those that act by their Authority, be guilty of it?

Further, I must crave leave to assert, by reason of what I see opened upon the
Evidence; That what is done in Parliament, or by their Authority, ought not to
be questioned in any other Court. For every offense committed in any Court,
must be punished in the same, or in some higher, and not any inferior Court.
Now, the Court of Parliament has no superior Court, as is said in Cook's
Jurisdiction of Courts. And the reason there given, that Judges ought not to
give any opinion in a matter of Parliament, is, because it is not to be decided
by the Common Laws, but secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Parliamenti. This, the
Judges in diverse Parliaments have confessed. And that reason is not to be
waved, which the Lord Cook gives: That a man can make no defense; for what is
said and acted there, is done in Council, and none ought to reveal the secrets
of the House: Every Member has a Judicial Voice, and can be no Witness.

The main substance of these Papers was read and enlarged upon by the Prisoner,
this day of his Trial. He was often interrupted, but his memory was still
relieved by his Papers, so as after whatever diversions caused by the Court or
Counsel, he could recover himself again, and proceed. Yet the edge and force of
his Plea, as to the influencing of the Jurors Consciences, may appear to have
been much abated by such interruptions, as doubtless was intended, and will
more at large appear, when it shall please God to afford us a full Narrative of
the Proceedings of the King's Judges, Counsel and Jurors about him, and of all
that he occasionally said, upon the digressions by them caused.

Wednesday June 11. being the Sentence-day.
AFter some little skirmishings with the Prisoner, to dash all the humane
weapons of Law and Reason out of his hands, by force or noise, for half an hour
or more they finally refused to hear his following Plea and Reasons for an
Arrest of Judgment, or forbearing their sudden and rash proceeding to Sentence.
They had promised him before Verdict, they would hear any thing in that kind he
had to offer, as they had also before his pleading not guilty, promised him
Counsel, which never was granted, neither. They drew him on, step by step,
first, to plead, on his Arraignment-day, then to admit the Juries Verdict on
his Tryal-day (so called, for he never owned it for a Legal Trial to his last
breath) and after that, out comes the Judgment or Sentence of Death against
him, (pronounced by the Lord Chief Justice Forster) and that, of the worst
complexion and most infamous famous circumstances, to wit, that he should be
hanged, drawn and quartered, at Tyburn, the common Execution-place for Thieves
and Robbers.

But in the Order for his Execution, (for reasons best known to them that made
it) the manner of his death was altered, into a beheading only, on Tower Hill;
to which place they carried him on a Sled, drawn with horses, a circumstance
very singular, and never used for those that die there, and which he was kept
ignorant of till the very time; one of the Sheriffs men having that morning, a
little before, told him, there was to be no Sled, but that he was to walk on
foot.

Some farther Remarques of this last days Proceedings of the Court with him,
besides what is already mentioned, (received from one that was present, and did
hear and see all, being what he could best remember) take as follows.
After the customary formalities of the Court,

The Clerk demanded of Sir Henry Vane, what he had to say, why Sentence of
Death should not be passed upon him?

Sir Henry Vane first alleged, that he had not yet heard the Indictment read
in Latin. The debate upon this, took up some time. At length some of the
King's Counsel desired that the Prisoner might be satisfied in that point. Sir
Henry desired that Counsel then might also be assigned him, to make Exceptions
thereto, if they found cause, otherwise he valued not the hearing of it read in
Latin: This was overruled by the Court; he soon therefore desisted from any
further urging it.

The next thing Sir Henry offered in his own defense, was the Bill of
Exceptions, which he brought with him ready drawn, and offered it to the
Judges, desiring them according to the Statute of Westminst. 2. 31. made 13.
Ed. 1. to sign it. This he urged so home, that the Statute was consulted and
read in open Court, running in favor of the Prisoner, to this effect, That if
any man find himself aggrieved by the proceedings against him before any
Justices, let him write his Exception, and desire the Justices to set their
seals to it. This Act was made (says Cook) that the party wronged might have a
Foundation for a legal Process against the Justices, by a Writ of Error, having
his Exception entered upon Record in the Court where the injury is done, which
through the Justices overruling it, they could not before procure; so the
party grieved was without remedy, for whose relief this Statute was made: The
Justices refusing to set to their seals, the party grieved may have a Writ
grounded on this Statute, commanding them to set their seals to his Exception.
This Exception extends not only to all Pleas, dilatory and peremptory etc. but
to all Challenges of any Jurors, and any material Evidence, given to any Jury,
which by the Court is overruled: As in this Prisoners Case, the Testimony
about falsifying of his hand to writings, etc. was, by what was offered to the
Jury by Justice Windham.

Further, says Cook on this Statute, If the Justice (or Justices) die, their
Executors or Administrators may be proceeded against, for the injury done. And
if the Judge (or Judges) deny to seal the Exception, the party wronged, may in
the Writ of Error take Issue thereupon, if he can prove by Witnesses, the Judge
or Judges denied to seal it.

Notwithstanding all this, the Judges overruled this Plea also, by such
interpretation as themselves put upon that Statute, to wit, that it was not
allowable in Criminal Cases for Life. This makes the Law less careful for the
preservation of a man's Life, than any particulars of his Estate, in
controversies about which, this Statute is affirmed by them to hold; whereas
Life is the greater, and innocent Blood when spilt is irreversible, as to the
matter, it cannot be gathered up again; the Estate is the lesser, and if an
erroneous Judgment pass about it, it is reversible upon Traverse, Writ of Error,
or otherwise.

The Reason they alleged for their pretended Opinion, was this; That if it be
held in Criminal Cases for Life, every Felon in Newgate might plead the same,
and so there would be no Jail-delivery.

Sir Henry answered, his Case was not the Case of common Felons, alleging the
Grant of his Majesty to the Petition of both Houses for his Life, in case he
should be attainted; There is no need therefore sure (said he) of fearing the
consequence of spinning out the time a little with a person in his
circumstances. Besides (he said) he had been a Prisoner two years, and never
called on to give any account of himself and his actions, (so is it not with
Felons) which with other considerations, may sufficiently evince, that there is
no need of such hasting his Death. He told them withal, that he desired not
this, for his own sake only, but for theirs, and for posterity, that they might
on a more leisurely and unprejudiced hearing of what may be said on all hands,
prevent the bringing of innocent Blood upon themselves and the Land.

But being in this also overruled by the Court, (say what he could) He only
desired, he might understand whether they would all give it as their Common
Judgment they would stand to, That what he desired was not his due by the Law?
By this means they were all put upon it, one by one, to declare themselves in
that point, unanimously denying him the benefit of that Act. To the bystanders
their chief Reason seemed to be, that it had not been practiced this hundred or
two of years.

The third thing Sir Henry desired, was, That the Petition of both Houses, with
his Majesty's Answer thereunto, might be read in the Court, which, after some
dispute, was concluded to be a thing they were not bound to take notice of, not
being an Act of Parliament. Yet what is any Act of Parliament, but a Bill
presented with the Petition of both Houses to his Majesty, with his Royal
Assent thereto, upon Public Record? At length they condescended to read it,
and that was all.

The fourth and last thing Sir Henry offered to the consideration of of the
Bench, was this; That in regard there were questions touching matter of Law, in
his Case, which must receive their determination in Parliament, he desired he
might have Counsel assigned him, to argue them before their Lordships. Some of
these points he instanced in, to wit,

1. Whether a Parliament were accountable to any inferior Court?

2. Whether the King, being out of possession, and the Power Regent in others
--

Here they stopped him, not suffering him to proceed, nor admitting that the King
was ever out of possession. To which Sir Henry replied, The words of his
Indictment ran thus, that he endeavored to keep out his Majesty; and how could
he keep him out of the Realm, if he were not out?

But when he saw they would overruled him in all, and were bent upon his
Condemnation, he put up his Papers, appealing to the Righteous Judgment of God,
who (he told them) must judge them as well as him, often expressing his
satisfaction to die upon this Testimony; which Keeling, one of the King's
Counsel, insultingly answered, So you may, Sir, in good time, by the grace of
God. The same person had often before showed a very snappish property toward
the Prisoner; and Sir Henry sometimes answered him according to his folly: For
when he would have had the Book out of the Prisoner's hand, wherein was the
Statute of Westminster 2d. 31.

Sir Henry told him, he had a very officious Memory, and when he was of Counsel
for him, he would find him Books. (Whereby was verified what was said to be
spoken by him, at first, in answer to one of his Brethren, on the Arraignment
day, Though we know not what to say to him, we know what to do with him)

After Sentence given, Chief Justice Forster endeavored to take off the King
from any Obligation by that Grant to the Petition of both Houses, saying, That
God, though full of mercy, yet intended his mercy only to the penitent.

Reasons for an Arrest of Judgment: writ by the Prisoner, but refused to be
heard by the Court.
I. I Have been denied so much as to hear the Indictment read in Latin, as it
is the Original Record of the Court; yea, so much as a Copy of it in English
has been denied me, during the whole time of my Trial, by the fight whereof I
might be able to assign the defects of Law that may be in it.

Counsel also has been denied, not only before I pleaded, but after; and all
points by me offered in Law, to the Judges of the Court, have been overruled,
without admitting me Counsel to argue the same, and better inform the Judgment
of the Court. I have demanded, that I might put in a Bill of Exceptions, upon
the Statute of Westminst. 2d. cap. 31. This likewise is denied me, overruled
and judged, as out of that Statute. Neither will Counsel be allowed me in this,
to show cause, why it ought to be admitted as of Right. And as no Counsel was
allowed, so neither were the Judges Counsel to me, as they said themselves,
they would, and ought to be, but rather suffered me to wrong and prejudice my
self, some of them saying, Let him go on, the worst will be his own at last.
And they neither checked nor restrained the King's Counsel, in their high and
irritating expressions to the Jury, to find me guilty, One of whom were seen to
speak privately with the Foreman of the Jury, immediately before the Jurors
went from the Bar, after he had spoken openly, That the Prisoner was to be made
a public Sacrifice, in reference to the Actions done against his Majesty that
now is.

All this is very far from that Indifferency in Trial, and from that Equality
which the Law requires, and they are bound by their Oath to afford me; besides
the undue proceedings in the business of the Petty Jury. A List of forty eight
persons was presented to me, who being to me unknown, and no time allowed me to
gain any knowledge of them, though I was permitted to challenge and refuse
three Juries, without showing cause, yet could not that refusal be upon such
rational grounds as the Law supposes, which doubtless intends substantial
relief to the Prisoner, in allowing him the liberty of such refusal: whereas,
through my ignorance of the persons, I might refuse the best, and choose the
worst, as to my safety. And then, whereas the Law further allows me the refusal
of any other beyond the thirty five, on just and exceptionable cause shown;
what just exception was I capable to allege in a sudden hurry, against persons
to me altogether unknown, unless it would be taken for a just one, that they
were unknown to me?

All these things, being so contrary to the Right which the Judges stand
obliged to do to every one, as they are for that purpose entrusted by God and
the King, is just cause for an Arrest of Judgment; and a good Reason why they
should yet at length allow me a Copy of the Indictment, and assign Counsel to
argue for the Prisoner, against the defects in Law that may be found therein.
Without this, Law is denied me, which is my Birthright and Inheritance; the
best Birthright the Subject has, says Cook on Mag. Charta, for thereby (says
he) his Goods, Lands, Wife, Children, his Body, Life, Honor and Estimation are
protected from injury. The Life, Birthright or Inheritance we have from our
parents, may soon be gone, if this Fence thereof be broken down. How great a
wrong then it is for the Court to withhold it from me, is manifest. Are they
not therefore in effect, chargeable with my Blood, by such unequal Proceedings
as I have had in my Trial?

II. My second Reason for an Arrest of Judgment, is drawn from the Issue that
is joined in my Case, which seems to depend chiefly upon matter of Law, and
that in such tender and high points, as are only determinable in the high Court
of Parliament.

For it is become the question, Whether I am guilty, or not guilty, according
as these Propositions following, are truly or erroneously resolved?

1. Whether the Parliament, that began November. 3. 1640, were dissolved by the
King's Death? and whether this Court may judge things done in Parliament?

2. Whether the Powers regnant, and de facto, that successively were in being,
from Jan. 30. 1648, to December. 20, 1659, were such Powers de facto, as are the
King, or Seigneur le Roy, within the purview of the Stat. 25. Ed. 3. having the
exercise of Regal Power in all the particulars of it, though not the name?

3. Whether during that time forementioned, his Majesty that now is, were
properly King de facto? or whether he were not out of possession, and without
all exercise of his Regal Authority within the Realm?

4. Whether the Case now in question, be a Treason literally within the words
of the Statute, 25. Ed. 3. or at most, any other, than an interpretative and
new Treason, not declared before the very time of my Trial; and that only by
the Judgment of the Court, or opinion of my Judges, eleven years after some of
the things charged on me, are alleged to have been committed?

As to the first of these; The Act for Continuance of the Long Parliament, is
express; That all and every thing or things whatsoever, done or to be done, for
the Adjournment, Proroguing or Dissolving of that Parliament, contrary to that
Act, shall be utterly void and of none effect. I then thus argue;

The Judges do upon occasion of this Trial, resolve, That the King's Death
dissolved that Parliament. No Act of Parliament has yet declared it to be so;
and the Judges ought to have some Law for their guide, as Cook well says. To
be sure, if in process of time, the Parliament shall expressly declare, That not
the King's Death, but the Act for the Dissolution of that Parliament, did
dissolve it; In such case, these Judges Resolution by virtue of such Act, is
absolutely void. But innocent Blood in the mean time may be shed, and an Estate
wrongfully taken away. And in case what the Judges assert herein, were Law,
it is Law not known or declared till many years after the Fact committed. At
this rate, who is secure of Estate or Life?

As to the second and third Queries or Propositions; It does appear out of the
third part of Cook's Institutes, fol. 7. and the Statute, 11. Hen. 7. cap. 1.
That Actings for the King in Fact, are not to be questioned by the King in
Right. If it be said, That there was no King in this case; it may be replied,
That they who had the Power and Exercise of the Royal Jurisdiction, as to Peace
and War, Coynage of Money, power of Life and Death, etc. which are the highest
Ensigns of Regal Authority, must needs be the Powers regnant, though not under
the name of King, and are within the Statute, 25. Edw. 3. cap. 2. as a Queen
also is adjudged, and any sovereign Prince, though under the title only of
Lord, as was the case of Ireland, before it was a Kingdom. And if so, why not
in more such persons as well as one, that de facto exercise the Royal Power and
Sovereign Authority, under what name or title soever? If upon this Nicety,
Judgment be given against me, because the Powers regnant wanted the name and
formality of a King, I shall doubtless have very hard measure. For the reason
and equity is the same, if the Powers regnant had the thing, though not the
Title. And where there is the same Reason, there is the same Law, as is a known
Rule. Now there is the same Reason the Subject should be equally indempnified,
that acts under any Sovereign Authority that has not the name of a King, as
if it had. If there had been many Kings, as a Heptarchy has been in England
heretofore, those would have been understood to be within the Statute; and the
reason and equity of the Statute is the same in all cases. For the Law is made
for the benefit and security of the Subject, whom the Law requires not to
examine the right of Sovereignty. Nor is the danger less under one Government
than another.

The Statute is, for securing the Subject from all dormant Titles, that they
may safely pay their Allegiance when they receive Protection, and that they may
not be in danger of being destroyed by two Powers at the same time. For that
Power which is supreme and de facto, will be obeyed, and make it Treason to do
otherwise, be it right or wrong. And if the Subject be at the same time in
danger of committing Treason against the Power de jure, then is he in a
miserable condition and state of unavoidable necessity, which is provided
against by the Laws of the Land. Otherwise, if he be loyal to the King de jure,
he shall be hanged by the King de facto; and if he be faithful to the King de
facto, he shall die by the King de jure, when he recovers possession.

Against this it was, that the Statute of 11. Hen. 7. was provided, in the
difference betwixt the two houses of York and Lancaster. My Case is either the
same with that, and then I desire the benefit of that Statute; or else, it is
new, and then I desire, as is provided, 25. Ed. 3. that it be referred to the
Parliament. So that it is either within the Equity of the Statute, 11. Hen. 7.
or else it is a new Case, and not to be judged by this Court.

If the Judges in the Resolves by them delivered, upon any of the particulars
before-alledged, have not declared that Law that ought to guide them, but their
particular Judgments or Opinions, as undertaking to guide the Law, and that in
points of so grand concern as touch the Subjects Life, in case their Judgments
after should prove erroneous, the Verdict given upon such Errors, must needs be
illegal and void. Judgment therefore ought to be suspended till such time as
the truth and certainty of the Law may be fully argued and cleared, and that,
in the proper Court for the hearing and judging of this Case. If this be not
done, but I be forthwith proceeded against (notwithstanding any thing however
rationally or legally alleged to the contrary) by such undue precipitation and
giving Sentence, I am (contrary to Magna Charta, or Law of the Land) run upon
and destroyed, without due form and course of Law. And I am like to be deprived
of Estate and Life upon no Law or certain Rule, which was declared before the
Fact; no, nor before the Trial.

Upon these Considerations, I desire an Arrest of Judgment, and that Counsel
may be assigned me, and competent time allowed to make good my Averrements.

As an Argument to press this, I desire leave of the Court, That the Petition
of the two Houses, and the King's Assent to it, may be read in open Court,
attested by one that is present, who examined and compared it with the Book of
Record in the Lords House, by which it evidently appears, that as well the King
as both Houses of Parliament, were agreed, that admitting I were attainted, yet
Execution, as to my Life, should be remitted. And if so, there is no cause to
precipitate the passing Sentence; especially, when also such weighty points in
the Law are yet to be argued and cleared, unless the Judges will evidently
charge themselves with my innocent Blood.

III. My third Reason for an Arrest of Judgment, is the manifest newness of
this Case, being such as never happened before in the Kingdom: which withal, is
of so vast a consequence to people of all sorts and conditions within this
Realm, as nothing more. And being so, (as I doubt not with your Lordships
patience I shall make it appear) It is the known Law, witnessed by Bracton and
ancient approved Law Books; That in such Cases, the Judges in the inferior
Courts ought not to proceed, but bring it before the high Court of Parliament.

To prove therefore the newness of this Case, (besides what I have already
alleged in my Defense, before the Verdict) give me leave to add that, which
yet further shows the newness and extraordinariness thereof. And I beseech your
Lordships to let me go on without interruption, in my endeavoring to make it
out as clearly, as God shall enable me, and as briefly also, not to spend too
much of your time.

In general, I do affirm of this Case; That it is so comprehensive, as to take
in the very Interests of Heaven and Earth: First, Of God the Universal
Sovereign and King of Kings; Secondly, That of earthly Sovereigns, who are
God's Vicegerents; as also the Interests of all Mankind, that stand in the
relation of Subjects to the one or both those sorts of Sovereigns.

This is general. More particularly; within the bowels of this Case is that
Cause of God, that has stated it self in the late Differnces and Wars, that
have happened and arisen within these three Nations, and have been of more than
twenty years continuance: which for the greater certainty and solemnity, has
been recorded in the form of a National Covenant, in which the generality of
the three Nations have been either implicitly involved, or expressly concerned,
by the signing of their Names.

The principal things contained in that Covenant, were the known and commonly
received Duties, which either as Men or as Christians, we owed and stood
obliged to perform either to God, the highest and universal King in Church and
State, or to our natural Lord and Sovereign, the Kings of this Realm, in
subordination to God and his Laws.

Again, It contains as well the Duties which we owe to every particular and
individual person, in their several stations and callings, as to the King in
general, and our Representative Body in Parliament assembled. These Duties we
are thereby obliged to yield and perform, in consistency with, and in a just
subordination and manifest agreeableness to, the Laws of God, as is therein
expressed: And this also, in no disagreement to the Laws of the Land, as they
then were.

By this solemn Covenant and Agreement of the three Nations, giving up
themselves in subjection to God and to his Laws, in the first place, as the
Allegiance they owe to their highest Sovereign, (as the Creator, Redeemer,
Owner and Ruler of all Mankind) they have so far interested the Son of God in
the the Supreme Rule and Government of these Nations, that nothing therein
ought to be brought into practice, contrary to his revealed Will in the holy
Scriptures, and his known and most righteous Laws.

This Duty which we owe to God, the universal King, Nature and Christianity do
so clearly teach and assert, that it needs no more than to be named. For this
subjection and allegiance to God and his Laws, by a Right so indisputable, all
are accountable before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

It is true indeed, men may de facto become open Rebels to God and to his Laws,
and prove such as forfeit his Protection, and engage him to proceed against
them as his professed Enemies. But (with your Lordships favor) give me leave
to say, that that which you have made a Rule for your proceedings in my Case,
will indeed hold, and that very strongly, in this; that is to say, in the sense
wherein Christ the Son of God is King de jure, not only in general, over the
whole World, but in particular, in relation to these three Kingdoms. He ought
not to be kept out of his Throne, nor his visible Government, (that consists in
the Authority of his Word and Laws) suppressed and trampled under foot, under
any pretense whatsoever.

And in the asserting and adhering unto the Right of this highest Sovereign,
(as stated in the Covenant, before mentioned) The Lords and Commons jointly,
before the year 1648, and the Commons alone afterward, to the very times
charged in the Indictment, did manage the War and late Differences within these
Kingdoms. And whatever defections did happen by Apostates, Hypocrites, and
Time-serving worldlings, there was a party amongst them, that continued firm,
sincere and chaste unto the last, and loved it better than their very lives; of
which number I am not ashamed to profess my self to be; not so much admiring
the form and words of the Covenant, as the righteous and holy ends therein
expressed, and the true sense and meaning thereof, which I have reason to know.

Nor will I deny, but that, as to the manner of the prosecution of the Covenant
to other ends than it self warrants, and with a rigid oppressive spirit, (to
bring all dissenting minds and tender Consciences under one Uniformity of
Church Discipline and government) it was utterly against my Judgment. For I
always esteemed it more agreeable to the Word of God, that the Ends and Work
declared in the Covenant, should be promoted in a spirit of love and
forbearance to differing Judgments and Consciences, that thereby we might be
approving our selves in doing that to others, which we desire they would do to
us; and so, (though upon different principles) be found joint and faithful
advancers of the Reformation contained in the Covenant, both public and
personal.

This happy Union and Conjunction of all Interests in the respective duties of
all relations, agreed and consented to by the common suffrage of the three
Nations (as well in their public Parliamentary capacity, as private stations)
appeared to me a Rule and measure approved of, and commanded by Parliament, for
my action and deportment, though it met with great opposition, in a tedious,
sad and long War; and this, under the name and pretext of Royal Authority. Yet,
as this Case appeared to me in my conscience, under all its circumstances of
Times, of Persons, and of Revolutions inevitably happening, by the hand of God
and the course of his wise Providence, I held it safest and best to keep my
station in Parliament to the last, under the guidance and protection of their
Authority, and in pursuance of the Ends before declared, in my just Defense.

This general and public Case of the Kingdoms, is so well known by the
Declarations and Actions that have passed on both sides, that I need but name
it, since this matter was not done in a corner, but frequently contended for in
the high places of the Field, and written even with characters of Blood. And
out of the bowels of these Public Differences and Disputes, does my particular
Case arise, for which I am called into question. But admitting it come to my
lot to stand single, in the witness I am to give to this Glorious Cause, and to
be left alone, (as in a sort I am) yet being upheld with the Authority before
asserted, and keeping my self in union and conjunction therewith, I am not
afraid to bear my Witness to it in this great Presence, nor to seal it with my
Blood, if called thereunto. And I am so far satisfied in my conscience and
understanding, that it neither is nor can be Treason, either against the Law of
Nature, or the Law of the Land, either malum per se, or malum prohibitum; that
on the contrary, it is the duty I owed to God the universal King, and to his
Majesty that now is, and to the Church and People of God in these Nations, and
to the innocent Blood of all that have been slain in this Quarrel. Nothing it
seems will now serve, unless by the Condemnation passed upon my person, they be
rendered to posterity Murderers and Rebels, and that upon Record in a Court of
Justice in Westminster Hall. And this would inevitably have followed, if I had
voluntarily given up this Cause, without asserting their and my Innocence, by
which I should have pulled that Blood upon my own head, which now I am sure
must lie at the door of others, and in particular, of those that knowingly and
precipitately shall embrew their hands in my innocent Blood, under whatever
form or pretext of Justice.

My Case is evidently new and unusual, that which never happened before;
wherein there is, not only much of God and of his Glory, but all that is dear
and of true value to all the good People in these three Nations. And (as I have
said) it cannot be Treason against the Law of Nature, since the duties of the
Subjects in relation to their Sovereigns and Superiors, from highest to
lowest, are owned and conscientiously practiced and yielded by those that are
the Assertors of this Cause.

Nor can it be Treason within the Statute of 25. Ed. 3; since, besides what
has been said of no King in possession, and of being under Powers regnant and
Kings de facto, as also of the Fact in its own nature, and the Evidence as to
Overt Acts pretended, it is very plain it cannot possibly fall within the
purview of that Statute. For this Case, thus circumstantiated, (as before
declared) is no Act of any private person, of his own head, as that Statute
intends; nor in relation to the King there meant, that is presumed to be in the
exercise of his Royal Authority in conjunction with the Law and the two Houses
of Parliament, if they be sitting, as the fundamental Constitutions of the
Government do require.

My Lords, If I have been free and plain with you in this matter, I beg your
Pardon: For it concerns me to be so, and something more than ordinarily urgent,
where both my Estate and Life are in such eminent peril; nay, more than my
Life, the Concerns of thousands of Lives are in it, not only of those that are
in their graves already, but of all posterity in time to come. Had nothing been
in it, but the care to preserve my own Life, I needed not have stayed in
England, but might have taken my opportunity to have withdrawn my self into
foreign parts, to provide for my own safety. Nor needed I to have been put
upon pleading, as now I am, for an Arrest of Judgment, but might have watched
upon advantages that were visible enough to me, in the managing of my Trial, if
I had consulted only the preservation of my Life or Estate.

No, my Lords, I have otherwise learned Christ, than to fear them that can but
kill the Body, and have no more that they can do. I have also taken notice, in
the little reading that I have had of History, how glorious the very Heathens
have rendered their names to posterity, in the contempt they have showed of
Death, (when the laying down of their Life has appeared to be their Duty) from
the love which they have owed to their Country.

Two remarkable examples of this, give me leave to mention to you upon this
occasion. The one is, of Socrates the divine Philosopher, who was brought into
question before a Judgment Seat, as now I am, for maintaining, that there was
but one only true God, against the multiplicity of the superstitious Heathen
gods; and he was so little in love with his own Life upon this account,
(wherein he knew the Right was on his side) that he could not be persuaded by
his friends, to make any defense, but would choose rather to put it upon the
conscience and determination of his Judges, to decide that wherein he knew not
how to make any choice of his own, as to what would be best for him, whether to
live or to die; he ingenuously professing, that for ought he knew, it might be
much to his prejudice and loss, to endeavor longer continuance in this bodily
Life.

The other example, is that of a chief Governor, that (to my best remembrance)
had the Command of a City in Greece, which was besieged by a potent Enemy, and
brought into unimaginable straits. Hereupon the said Governor makes his address
to the Oracle, to know the event of that danger. The answer was; That the City
should be safely preserved, if the chief Governor were slain by the Enemy. He,
understanding this, immediately disguised himself and went into the Enemies
Camp, amongst whom he did so comport himself, that they unwittingly put him to
death; by which means, immediately safety and deliverance arose to the City, as
the Oracle had declared. So little was his Life in esteem with him, when the
Good and Safety of his Country required the laying of it down.

The BILL of EXCEPTIONS, translated out of the best Latin form the Prisoner
could procure, No Counsel learned in the Law daring to assist him in those
Circumstances, without Assignment from the Court, which was denied.
First, Concerning my Imprisonment.
(1.) I Shall here mention my entrance into this new Scene of Sufferings, under
the present Power, (after my having been handled at will and pleasure, under
the six years Usurpation of Cromwell) which I conceive not to have been at all
according to the Law of the Land, as may appear by the 29th chap. of Magna
Charta, and Cook upon it, with many other Statutes and Law Books: In all which
it appears, that the Law of England is so tender, not to say curious, in
providing for the Subjects Liberty, that he is not to suffer the least
restraint, confinement of imprisonment, but by the lawful Judgment of his
Peers, or by the Law of the Land: Contrary to all which, I was committed at
mere Will and Pleasure, and have been detained close Prisoner these two years,
without any cause specified, or any particular crime laid to my charge.

Secondly, Concerning Transactions at the Grand Jury.
(2.) The Grand. Jury of Middlesex, without my privity, knowledge or presence,
(after I had been kept a close Prisoner two full years) did meet, take the
Depositions of Witnesses, and find the Bill against me, which inevitably
exposed me to a Trial at the Kings Bench Bar, for I knew not what; whereas
Major Rolph and others have had the Right of Englishmen granted them, to be
present at the Grand Juries proceedings; yea, and to have Counsel also present,
to plead any thing in a way of Reason or Law, for invalidating the Testimony or
disabling the Witnesses, whereby the Indictment has been immediately quashed,
and so, the party accused, delivered from any shadow of Infamy, by so much as
appearing in the circumstances of a Male-factor at any public Bar of Justice.

That this Prisoner had great need of that Privilege, of being present
himself, or having Counsel and other Friends present at the Grand Jury, will
appear hereafter, by the subdolous and injurious handling of matters there.

Thirdly, Concerning the Jurisdiction of the Court.
(3.) The Offenses supposed to be committed by me, are things done not of my
own head, but as a Member of the Long Parliament. or in pursuance of their
Authority. The matters done by me, in the one respect or the other, if they be
deemed Offenses, are punishable only in Parliament, and I ought not to be
questioned for them in any inferior Court; As Cook shows in the 4th part of
his Institutes, chap. 1. concerning the high Court of Parliament. For the
Parliament is not confined in their Actings, by the Law which inferior Courts
are tied up to, but in diverse cases are privileged to act extraordinarily and
unaccountably to any but themselves, or succeeding Parliaments. Moreover, That
Parliament was extraordinarily commissioned, qualified and authorized by
express Act of Parliament, beyond all preceding Parliaments, for the Causes and
Ends declared in the Preamble of the Act for their Establishment, accorded and
passed by the joint Consent of King, Lords and Commons, whereby they became
unsubjected to Adjournment, Prorogation or Dissolution, but by their own
respective voluntary Consents, to be by them expressed and passed for that
purpose, with the Royal Assent; which occasioned his late Majesty in his Answer
to the nineteen Propositions, to say, That the Power hereby legally placed in
both Houses, was more than sufficient to prevent and restrain the Power of
Tyranny.

And further, The bringing of this Case under the Jurisdiction of this Court,
or of any other, but a Parliament, may prove of very dangerous consequence, in
point of Precedent, and most disagreeing to all Rules of Justice. For,

First, By the same reason that I am questioned in this Court, not only every
Member of Parliament, but the very Houses themselves, with all their Debates,
Votes and Orders, may not only be questioned, but referred to a Petty Jury, and
so come to be judged and sentenced by a Court inferior to themselves, which
Judges in all times have disclaimed and acknowledged to be out of their power,
according to the known Rule, Par in pares non habet imperium, multo minus in
eos, qui majus imperium habent.

Secondly, In such case, the Parties accused, will be debarred of Evidence or
Witness for their Justification and Defense. For no Members, etc. present at
Debates in Parliament, (who are the only eye and ear-witnesses of what is said
and done there) ought to discover the Counsels of the House.

Fourthly, Concerning the Indictment.
1. I have not been permitted to have a copy or sight of the Indictment, nor so
much as to hear it read in Latin, which is the original Record of the Court,
and ought to be the foundation of their whole proceeding with me. I often
desired these things of the Court; yea, or at least, to have but the
Transcripts of some particular clauses in the Indictment, to enable me to show
the deficiencies thereof in Law, (all which, others in such cases have often
obtained) but nothing would be granted herein.

This then was my hard lot and usage; I was put (after two years close
Imprisonment) to answer for my Life, to a long Indictment, read in English,
which whether it were rightly translated how should I know, that might not hear
the Original Record in Latin? Counsel also learned in the Law, were denied me,
though pressed for by me, again and again, before I pleaded. And had they been
granted, what could they have said as to defects of Law in the Indictment,
unless they might have a Copy of it? What can any Counsel say to any petty
business concerning any part of a man's Estate that is in controversy, unless
they may have a leisurely view and perusal of the Writings thereabouts? much
more sure will it appear requisite, to the reason of all mankind, when a man's
whole Estate, Life and all are at stake. It Is true, before I pleaded, this
Court promised I should have Counsel assigned me after pleading, ( God forfend
else, said the Lord Chief Justice) but it is as true, I never could yet see that
promise made good. All things tending to a fair Trial, were promised me in
general before pleading, but every material particular for the just defense of
my Life, has been denied me ever since. And my Trial for Life was hudled up
the next day of my appearing before you; The Jury as was told me) must not eat
or drink, till they had done their work; (so the more than forty Jewry-men that
resolved to kill Paul, Act. 23. 21.) But why such haste and precipitancy for a
man's Life, that is more than Meat or Estate, when you can let Civil Causes
about men's Estates depend many years? and if an erroneous Judgment be passed in
such matters, it is reversible; But if innocent Blood be spilt, it cannot be
gathered up again, as the wise woman of Tekoah said, 2 Samuel 14.

2. But secondly then, As to defects in the Indictment, which I was in some
measure enabled to observe from that broken hearing thereof, that was afforded
me here in the Court; I say, there are many, and those very considerable; and
by the Law of England I ought not to have been urged to plead or make answer to
such an illegal and defective Indictment.

1. There is no sufficient Overt Act therein alleged, of the Prisoner's
imagining the King's Death, or that he had any the least intention that way.

2. The Levying of a War, is alleged in Southwark, and cannot therefore be
tried by a Jury of Middlesex; Dyer, fol. 234. and the 3d part of Cook's
Institutes, fol. 34.

3. There is uncertainty and obscurity in the main thing alleged against me in
the Indictment; to wit, That I, together with a multitude of persons, to the
number of a thousand, unknown to the Jury, etc. whereas no Criminal Act can be
tried that is not certain; Certa res debet esse quae deducitur in Judicium.

4. The Treason laid to my charge, is alleged to have been committed with a
multitude of other false Traitors, which were pardoned by the Act of
Indemnity; such supposed crimes therefore of theirs cannot be remembered or
alleged, without a manifest breach of the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion.

The Indictment is, or ought to be founded on some clause or branch of 25. Ed.
3. chap. 2. But no such Overt Act is alleged in the Indictment, or proved by
Witnesses, as does discover that I had any intention to kill, depose or hold
out the King from the possession and exercise of his Regal Power.

Whereas I am accused of compassing or imagining the Death of the King; this
must be understood of his natural or personal, not politic capacity; for in
this latter sense, the Law says, the King cannot die.

First then, to compass only the Deposition of the King, is not within the
words of that Statute, (several Kings have been deposed by Parliaments since
the Conquest) and as to my compassing or designing the natural death of the
King's Person, with what color can I be accused of such intentions, in the
circumstances the King at that time was in beyond the Seas?

Secondly, The assembling of men together, without any hostility or injury
offered to any person, but for a man's own security and defense, in a time of
confusion and distraction, is not Levying War, or Treason at the Common Law, or
by that Statute. Yea, in this Case, and at the season wherein such an Act as
this is alleged, it might be supposed to be done for the King's Restoration as
well as in opposition thereunto; and the most favorable and advantageous
construction ought to be made and put upon the Prisoner's actings or words,
where there is ambiguity, so that they may be taken or interpreted diverse
ways. For the Law always presumes actions to be innocent, till the contrary
be manifestly proved. However, in a time of vacancy or an Interregnum, when the
Foundations of Government are out of course, by the Law of Reason, Nature, and
Common Prudence, every man may stand upon his own guard, endeavoring his own
security and protection from injury and violence.

Thirdly, To be adherent to the King's Enemies within his Realm, etc. cannot,
ought not to be understood of any adhaesion to a Parliament, wherein the King
by Law is supposed always present, as a part thereof. Nor can the Long
Parliament be called the King's Enemies, without overthrowing the Act of
Indemnity, which the King has declared to be the Foundation of the Nations
present Peace and Security.

Lastly, The Treasons alleged in the Indictment, are said to have been
committed when the King was out of possession; So the Indictments runs, to keep
out the King, etc. Now my Lord Cook in the third part of his Institutes, fol.
7. says, A King de jure, and not de facto, is not within this Statute; Against
such a one no Treason can be committed. For if there be a King regnant in
possession, though he be Rex de facto, and not de jure, yet is he Seignior le
Roy, within the purview of this Statute; and the other that has Right, and is
out of possession, is not within this Act. Nay, if Treason be committed against
a King de facto, and non de jure, and after the King de jure comes to the
Crown, he shall punish the Treason done to the King de facto.

And after, in the same place he says, That by Law there is always a King, in
whose Name the Laws are to be maintained and executed; otherwise Justice would
fail. The Act also of 11. Hen. 7. was made for security of the Subject on this
behalf. The word King also may and ought to be taken largely for any Sovereign
Power, in a King or Queen, as Cook in the place fore-quoted, shows; and why not
by the same reason, in a Protector, though a Usurper, or any other persons, one
or more, in whom Sovereignty is lodged, or that have all the badges of
Sovereignty, as the calling of Parliaments, enacting of Laws, coining of Money,
receiving Foreign Ambassadors, etc.? His Majesty that now is, is granted by
the very Indictment to have been then out of possession: If so, then was there
either some other King, or what was equivolent, some Sovereign Power in actual
possession and exercise, or none. If the former, then was there a King de
facto, so no Treason could be committed against him that was King de jure only:
If the latter, then the Government was dissolved, no allegiance was due to any
persons, and so no offense could be properly Treason, within the Statute.

But had the late Protector had the name and style of a King, no Treason could
have been committed against the King de jure only. Now God forbid that you
should give away my Life upon such niceties, because a usurping Protector was
not clothed with the Title as well as Power of a King. The Protector or any
Usurper's taking or not taking the Title of a King, in case he have the Power,
cannot alter the state of my supposed crime. You ought not to be biased by
popular Reports concerning me. It Is easier to be innocent, than so reported.
The one is in our own power, not the other.

Fifthly, Concerning the Evidence.
1. No allegation was directly proved by two positive lawful Witnesses, as in
this case it ought to be.

2. One of the Witnesses for the King, confessed in open Court, that to his
knowledge my hand had been counterfeited, to my prejudice and damage, in great
Sums of Money; yet Orders pretended to be signed by me, (wherein my hand may as
well be counterfeited) are taken as Evidence against me.

3. The Issue of the whole Cause depended on the solution of some difficult
Questions, of so high a nature and great importance, as could not safely be
determined but in the high Court of Parliament; As,

1. Whether the Long Parliament, called in November. 1640, were dissolved by the
late King's Death?

2. Whether the successive remaining Powers, that exercised the Royal or
Supreme Authority from 1648, to the Restoration of his now Majesty, were not
within the true sense and meaning of 25. Edw. 3. and 11. Hen. 7?

As to other pertinent Queries, thou may see them, Reader, in other parts of
this Trial.

That which remains, as an Appendix to this Bill of Exceptions, is to lay
before thee the Grounds which plainly show that there was a downright
Conspiracy in Sir Henry Vane's Tenants and others, to prosecute him for Life
and Estate, under color and pretense of Justice.

1. Presently after I was committed to the Tower for High Treason, and made a
Close-Prisoner, Mr. Oneale, Sir William Darcy and Dr. Cradock obtained an Order
from the King, to seize and take into their possession, all the Estates of such
persons, that were already or should be forfeited to his Majesty.

Hereupon the said Mr. Oneale and Sir Will. Darcy appointed some under them in
the Bishopric of Durham, (by name, Thomas Bows Esque now deceased, and Capt.
William Darcy) to join with the said Dr. Cradock, to put in execution the said
Warrant, as their Deputies, who thereupon went to Raby Castle, and demanded the
Rent-Books of Thomas Mowbray my Steward, offering him his place under them,
which he refused.

Contrary to this proceeding, Sir Edward Cook expressly declares, That before
Indictment, the Goods or other things of any Offender, cannot be searched,
inventoried, or in any sort seized; nor after Indictment, seized, removed, or
taken away, before Conviction or Attainder. Institut. 3d part, chap. 133.
concerning the Seizure of Goods, etc. for Offenses, etc. before Conviction.

2. At the Instance and Prosecution of my Tenants and others, an Order was made
by the House of Commons (not of the Lords) requiring the Tenants of such
persons as were excepted out of the General Pardon, to detain their Rents in
their own hands. By pretense of this Order, (though that Parliament that made
it, were dissolved) The Tenants refused to pay their respective Rents, as they
grew due, contrary to all Law and Equity; and joined together in open defiance
and conspiracy against their Landlord.

3. The said Tenants, (when legally prosecuted in his Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, for the recovery of the said Rents out of their hands) did
petition the late House of Commons to put a stop to such legal Prosecution and
Suits; which Motion of theirs, put the House into a great heat and violence
against me, insomuch that they had no most passed a Vote to sequester all my
Estate, though unheard or unconvicted.

4. William Watson of Cock-field, and other of the said Tenants, have continued
in London to carry on this Conspiracy against me, by whose means, with others,
the King has been importuned to send for men from the Isle of Silly, in order
to this Trial.

5. By common fame (which, at least, affords a strong presumption) my Goods and
Estate have been long begged by several persons, and granted: whereas the
begging of the Goods and Estate of any Delinquent, accused or indicted of
Treason, before he be Convicted and Attainted, is utterly unlawful; because
till then, nothing is forfeited to the King, and so, not his to dispose of; as
Sir Edward Cook shows, in the forementioned Chapter about the Seizure of
Goods, etc.

6. I am credibly informed, that about December last, a certain Captain came
from the Duke of Albemarle, to Capt. Linn, with threatening language, that if he
would not confess things against Sir Henry Vane, he should be fetched up before
the Council and made to do it. Linn answered, he knew nothing against Sir Henry
Vane, nor had any Orders from him, but from the Parliament and Council.

The same Captain came again, about a fortnight after, from the Duke of
Albemarle, with a parcel of fine words, that if he the said Linn would
testify, that Sir Henry Vane was in the head of his Regiment, and that he
received Orders from him, the Duke of Albemarle would gratify him with any
civility he should desire. Linn replied, he knew no Regiment Sir Henry Vane
had, but that it was the Parliaments and Council of States Regiment. The same
Captain came again to him, from the Duke of Albemarle, and told him, The Duke
desired him to testify Sir Henry Vane's being in the head of his Regiment, and
that he received Orders from him, to fight Sir George Booth; Linn replied, he
knew no such things. The Captain told him, as from the Duke, he should have any
Place or Office in the Court. Be not afraid to speak, said he, I warrant you,
we shall hang Sir Henry Vane, for he is a Rogue.

7. I am credibly informed, that one of the Grand Jury declared, that after the
Bill of Indictment against me, was brought in, some from the King's Counsel
came to desire them, they would please to come into the inward Court of Wards;
Upon which, one of the Jury said, they were there to judge of matters brought
before them, and ought not to go in thither; but if the Counsel had any thing
to say, they ought to come to them. This was seconded by some; others said,
They were the King's Counsel, and it was but matter of civility to grant them
their Request: whereupon they went into the inward Court of Wards, where the
King's Counsel were, to wit, Attorney General Palmer, Sollicitor-General Fynch,
Sergeant Glyn and Sergeant Keeling. After a while, they caused all to withdraw
but the Jury. Then the Clerk read the Indictment in the usual form for Levying
War from 1659. After it was read, one of the Counsel told them, It was a Bill
of High Treason against his Majesty, and they were to consider of it according
to their Evidence. Then they proceeded to examine their Witnesses.

Jefford said, Sir Henry Vane offered him a Commission to go against Sir George
Booth; which, said Sergeant Keeling, was to go against the King.

Wright, being examined whether he saw Sir Henry Vane in the Council, said,
Yes. The Attorney General replied, that if he was amongst them, they might find
the Bill upon that.

Upon this, the Jury withdrew, and were by themselves. Then Sir John Croply,
the Foreman, said, We must pass this Bill; at which all the Jury were silent.
At last, one stood up and said; This Bill contains matter of Fact, and matter
of Law. Some of this Jury, to my knowledge, were never of any Jury before, as
well as I, therefore ignorant of the Law, (in so difficult and unusual a point
as this is) and consequently could not give in their Verdict, as to Law, but
only Fact. Several others of the Jury seconded him in this, and protested
against giving in their Verdict, as to matter of Law; notwithstanding all
which, the Bill was carried up to the King's Bench.

8. On the day of my Arraignment, an eminent person was heard to say, I had
forfeited my head, by what I said that day, before ever I came to my Defense:
what that should be, I know not, except my saying in open Court, Sovereign
Power of Parliament, which the Attorney General writ down, after he had
promised at my request, no exception should be taken at words. And whole
Volumns of Lawyers Books pass up and down the Nation with that Title, Sovereign
Power of Parliaments.

9. Six moderate men, that were like to consider what they did, before they
would throw away my Life, were summoned to be of my Petty Jury, which the
King's Counsel hearing, writ a Letter to one of the Sheriffs, to unsummon them;
and a new List was made, the night immediately before the day of Verdict, on
purpose that the Prisoner might not have any knowledge of them, till presented
to his view and choice in Westminster Hall. Yet one of the forty eight of this
List, (who said he would have starved himself before he would have found Sir
Hen. Vane guilty of Treason) was never called, though he walked in the Hall all
the while. And in that Hurry of those that compassed him about, he being alone,
stripped of all assistance, Sir William Roberts Foreman, and Sir Christopher
Abdy, were sworn by the Court, before I was aware; so my challenging them,
might seem a personal disobliging and exasperation of them against me, after
they were sworn and fixed.

The Solicitor also had a long whisper with the Foreman of the Jury, in the
Court, before they went to Verdict, telling him, The Prisoner must be a
Sacrifice for the Nation, etc.

Suddenly after which I am here called to receive my Sentence.

10. After the day of my Trial, the Judges went to Hampton Court.

11. None were more forward to absolve the King from his Grant about my Life,
than they that had appeared most forward in promoting the Bill by way of
Petition to the King, for it. This Grant, being upon Record, may seem to have
the same validity that other Acts of Parliament have, which are still but the
two Houses Petition to the King for his Assent to the Bills by them drawn up
and passed. They used this, as a means to induce the King to exempt me from all
benefit of the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, and then at last persuade and
absolve him from making good this Grant also, thereby depriving me of all
visible relief for my Life. I conceived my Life as secure by that Grant, as
others Lives or Estates are by the Act of Indemnity it self; for what is that
but the Bill of both Houses, with the King's Assent to it, upon their Petition?

The PETITION of both Houses of Parliament to the King's most excellent
Majesty, on the behalf of Sir Henry Vane, and Col. John Lambert, after they
left them incapable of having any benefit of the Act of Indemnity.
To the King's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of the Lords and
Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Shows,
THat Your Majesty having declared your gracious pleasure to proceed only
against the immediate Murderers of your Royal Father: We your Majesty's most
humble Subjects, the Lords and Commons assembled, not finding Sir Henry Vane
nor Col. Lambert to be of that number,

Are humble Suitors to Your Majesty, that if they shall be Attainted, that
Execution, as to their Lives, may be remitted;

And as in duty bound, etc.

The said Petition being read, it was agreed to, and ordered to be presented to
his Majesty by the Lord Chancellor.

The Lord Chancellor reported, That he had presented the Petition of both
Houses, to the King's Majesty, concerning Sir Henry Vane and Col. Lambert, and
his Majesty grants the Desires in the said Petition.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Concerning the Proceedings of the Court.
1. THe Judges denied Counsel to the Prisoner, on this pretext, that they (as
they were to be) would be his Counsel. They are the King's Commissary Judges,
preferred and paid for their work by the King, who (in this case) was, through
evil and false suggestions, rendered the Prisoners chief or only Adversary,
whose Death he stood accused of imagining and compassing. What Counsel or
Assistance the Prisoner was like to have from them, let the World judge.

2. His Jury consisted of persons that had been engaged against him, in that
very Controversy and Cause for which he was tried. A Forreigner, in any
Criminal Case amongst us, may require six of his Jurors to be of his own
Countrymen; a Frenchman, six Frenchmen; a Dutchman, six Dutchmen; etc.
There was but one here (that was suspected only to have something of an English
man in him) sworn of the Jury; and the Lord Chief Justice sharply rebuked the
Clerk of the Court, alleging, that he knew not but he might have brought bread
and cheese in his pocket, and would keep them all night, with other words to
like purpose.

3. The Prisoner was not suffered to speak a word to the Jury, after the King's
Counsel had spoken, to take off the aggravating glosses they had put upon his
pretended crime; and the Judges, (that said they would be the Prisoner's
Counsel) dismissed the Jury, possessed with the last exasperating charge, given
by those, who were both the Accusers and professed Counsel against him.

4. The Prisoner, on his Sentence-day, challenged the Solicitor before the
Court, as to the injury done him on the day of his Trial, by his large and
bitter Invective, which he had not liberty to reply to, (for the vindicating of
his own Innocence, and unpejudicing the Juries understanding) in the fittest
season.

The Judges that had promised him (before pleading) they would be his Counsel
(instead of relieving him herein, as in all reason they ought) afforded him no
other answer, but a sharp Rebuke, for criminating and scandalizing the Court,
together with some threatening expressions. But what need had he to regard their
threatenings, that he saw resolved to pass a Sentence of Death upon him, say
what he would?

The main thing he charged the Solicitor with, was his saying openly in Court,
that he must be made a public Sacrifice, (showing no reason why) and of
whispering to the Foreman of the Jury, in the Court, before they went to
Verdict; a thing notoriously against all Law and Reason. Amongst other things,
he had also said, What Counsel did the Prisoner think would (or durst) speak
for him, in such a manifest Case of Treason, unless he could call down the
heads of those his fellow-Traitors (Bradshaw or Cook) from the top of
Westminster Hall? (or to that effect) when as there were able heads in the
bottom of Westminster Hall, ready to have spoken to his Case, if they might
have been assigned by the Court. But what may not be said, when nothing may be
replied? For a person, that is designing his own Interest, Honors, Advantages
and Preferments, to have the last word to the Jury, against a Prisoner that
stands at the Bar in danger of his Life, (and that, a person of so generally
acknowledged worth and public concern) and to perform it with impertinent
flashes of Wit, and declamatory flourishes of Rhetoric, (sending away the Jury
with the fresh and last impressions of all that noise and buzze of his glosses
upon the whole matter, and having with irritating expressions misrepresented
and aggravated the supposed crimes) is a thing to be hissed often the stage of
this earth, by the common Reason of all mankind.

What worse circumstances can a Prisoner be in, than to stand at a Bar of
Justice to be tried, and there hear his professed Accuser and Adversary,
misrepresenting, miscalling, and aggravating the actions he is questioned for,
pressing all upon the Jurors consciences with the greatest edge and flourish of
all the Art, Wit and Eloquence he is furnished with (as Tertullus served Paul)
and then be deprived of all possible defense against his slanderous and
injurious suggestions? Paul was not so served; he had the last word to his
Jury, when Tertullus had done, Acts 24. But the children of this world are wise
in their generation; they knew well they had to deal with one, that had been
experienced for twenty years together, to be a person of a very happy and
unparalled dexterity in taking off the paint and false appearances that
others (by premeditated Speeches) could put upon ill matters, with an
extemporary breath.

If it be said, he had fair warning beforehand, to say all that he had to mind
the Jury of, and that he was not to speak after the King's Counsel. It is
answered; Though this were hard at best, and indeed, not at all suitable to the
true and lawful Liberties of Englishmen, yet were it more tolerable, in case
the King's Counsel had started no new thing against the Prisoner, used no
provoking and unworthy expressions, or made no new and unforeseen glosses upon
the matter he stood charged with. For then the Prisoner might be presumed to
have sufficiently obviated beforehand, any thing that would be said by the
Counsel, (had they only recapitulated) and so (probably) might have rendered his
Jury somewhat incapable of being prejudiced thereby against him, unless they
were as willing to abuse him as the Counsel. But here were many things said at
random, against all Sense, Law and Reason, (as if Tully had been charactering a
treacherous Catil^ne) and the innocent Prisoner must be mute, and suffer the
Jury to be dismissed, and sent to pass their Verdict on his Life, without the
least possibility of Remedy.

Put this and all the rest together, (to wit, that the Jury themselves were of
the opposite party to him in the late Wars and whole Cause in question,
depending before them) and it had been far better for the Prisoner, to have
cast lots on a Drum-head for his Life, as a Prisoner of War, than to be so
tried in a time of Peace, unless it can be reasonably presumed, that they that
would have killed him any time this twenty year in the field, should now be
like to spare his Life at the Bar.

Occasional Speeches before his Trial.
HE said, there was something in this Cause, that could never be conquered, and
that he blessed the Lord, it had never been betrayed by him, or conquered in
him. And before this, in a Letter from Silly to a Friend, he said, God's Arm is
not shortened; doubtless great and precious Promises are yet in store to be
accomplished, in and upon Believers here on Earth, to the making of Christ
admired in them. And if we cannot live in the power and actual fruition of
them, yet if we die in the certain foresight and embracing of them by Faith, it
will be our great blessing. This dark night and black shade, which God has
drawn over his work in the midst of us, may be (for ought we know) the
ground-colour to some beautiful Piece, that he is now exposing to the light.

When he came from his Trial, he told a Friend, he was as much overjoyed, as a
chaste Virgin that had escaped a Rape: for, said he, neither flatteries before,
nor threatenings now, could prevail upon me; and I bless God that enabled me to
make a stand for this Cause; for I saw the Court resolved to run it down, and
(through the assistance of God) I resolved they should run over my Life and
blood first.

June 13. being Friday, the day before his Execution.
On this day, liberty being given to Friends to visit him in the Tower, he
received them with very great cheerfulness, and with a composed frame of
spirit, having wholly given up himself to the will of God. He did occasionally
let fall many gracious expressions, to the very great refreshing, and
strengthening of the hearts of the hearers. To wit, That he had for any time
these two years made Death familiar to him, and being shut up from the World,
he said, he had been shut up with God, and that he did know what was the mind
of God to him in this great matter; but, that he had not the least recoyl in
his heart, as to matter or manner of what was done by him; And though he might
have had an opportunity of escaping, or by policy might have avoided his
Charge, yet he did not make use of it, nor could decline that which was come
upon him.

It being told him by a Friend, that his Death would be a loss to the People of
God: He answered, that God would raise up other Instruments to serve him and
his People. And being desired to say something, to take off that charge of
Jesuitism, that was cast upon him; He said, That he thought it not worth the
taking notice of; for if it were so, he should never have been brought to this.
A Friend said, Sir, the Lord has said, Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will
give thee a Crown of Life. The Lord enable you to be faithful. He replied, I
bless the Lord, I have not had any discomposure of spirit these two years, but
I do wait upon the Lord, till he be pleased to put an end to these days of
mine, knowing that I shall change for the better: For in Heaven there is an
innumerable company of Angels, the Spirits of Just men made perfect, and JESUS
the blessed Mediator of the New Covenant. There are holy and just Laws, a pure
Government, blessed and good Company, every one doing their duty; herr we want
all these. This is that City spoken of, Psalm. 48. 1, 2. That strong City, that
cannot be moved, Isa. 26. Why therefore should we be unwilling to leave this
estate to go that? And although I be taken from hence, yet know assuredly, God
will raise up unto you Instruments out of the dust. Another said to him; Sir,
There is nothing will stand you in stead, but justifying Faith in the Blood of
Jesus. To which he said, There are some, that through Faith in the Blood of
Christ, do escape the pollutions of the world, yet afterward are entangled
therein again; others there be, that are carried through the greatest
sufferings, by a more excellent, spiritual sort of Faith in the Blood of Jesus,
and endure them with the greatest joy.

He further said, We were lately preaching a Funeral Sermon to our selves, out
of Heb. 11. 13, 16. where those blessed Witnesses do declare themselves to be
pilgrims and strangers on the Earth, and do desire a better Country, that is, a
heavenly; Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has
prepared for them a City. And if God (said he) be not ashamed to be called my
God, I hope I shall not be ashamed to endure his Cross, and to bear his
Reproach, even whatsoever it be that man can impose upon me, for his sake. Yea,
he will enable me not to be ashamed. I have not the least reluctance or
struggling in my spirit against Death. I desire not to live; but my will is
resigned up to God in all. Why are you troubled? I am not. You have need of
Faith and Patience to follow the Lord's Call. This ought chiefly to be in our
eye, the bringing Glory to our heavenly Father. Surely God has a glorious
Design to carry on in the world, even the building up of David's Throne to all
Generations. For he is completing all his precious Stones, making them
Heavenproof, and then laying them together in the Heavenly Mansions, with the
Spirits of the Just, till it be a complete City. When the Topstone thereof is
laid, then will he come in all his Glory.

This day, is a day wherein Christ appears in the Clouds. Oh, that every one of
our eyes may see him, and consider how we-have pierced him in his Members, that
we may mourn! Our Lord Jesus said, Father, I have finished the work that thou
gave me to do, and now (Father) glorify me with the same Glory I had with
thee before the world was. Our Lord was capable of his Glory beforehand; and
although we be not so capable as he, yet this we know, he wills the same to us,
that where he is, we may be also, that we may behold his Glory. And he is our
Head, in whom we are made capable, being chosen in him before the foundation of
the world; and he has set us in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. The hope of
this Glory sweetens all our Sufferings.

I know, a day of deliverance for Sion will come. Some may think the manner of
it may be, as before, with confused noise of the Warrior, and garments rolled
in Blood; but I rathe think it will be with burning, and fuel of fire. The
Lord will send a fire, that shall burn in the Consciences of his Enemies, a
worm that shall not die, and a fire that shall not go out. Men, they may fight
against; but this they cannot fight against.

It being told him by a Friend, that he had delivered him up unto God as a
Sacrifice, though (said he) I have day and night prayed that this cup might
pass from you. He replied, That he blessed God, he had offered himself up first
to God, and it was a rejoicing to him that others had given him up also. And
why, said he (speaking before all the company) should we be frighted with
Death? I bless the Lord, I am so far from being affrighted with Death, that I
find it rather shrink from me, than I from it.

His Children being then present, to take their leave of him, he said, I bless
God, by the eye of Faith I can see through all my Relations to Mount Sion, and
there I shall need none of them. I have better Acquaintance in Heaven. These
Relations are nothing to those I shall meet with there. Then kissing his
Children, he said, The Lord bless you, he will be a better Father to you: I
must now forget that ever I knew you. I can willingly leave this place and
outward enjoyments, for those I shall meet with hereafter, in a better Country.
I have made it my business, to acquaint my self with the society of Heaven. Be
not you troubled, for I am going home to my Father.

I die in the certain faith and forefight, That this Cause shall have its
Resurrection in my Death. My Blood will be the Seed sown, by which this
glorious Cause will spring up which God will speedily raise.

The laying down this earthly tabernacle is no more, but throwing down the
mantle, by which a double portion of the Spirit will fall on the rest of Gods
People. And if by my being offered up, the Faith of many be confirmed, and
others convinced and brought to the knowledge of the Truth, how can I desire
greater honor and matter of rejoicing?

As for that glorious Cause, which God has owned in these Nations, and will
own, in which so many Righteous souls have lost their lives, and so many have
been engaged by my countenance and encouragement, shall I now give it up, and
so declare them all Rebels and Murderers? No, I will never do it: That precious
Blood shall never lie at my door. As a Testimony and Seal to the Justness of
that Quarrel, I leave now my Life upon it, as a Legacy to all the honest
Interest in these three Nations. Ten thousand Deaths, rather than defile my
Conscience, the chastity and purity of which I value beyond all this world; and
God is not a little concerned on my behalf. He will certainly judge my Case,
wherein is the bowels of this good Cause, and in the bowels of that, the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, which will speedily be set on foot in these Nations. I
would not for ten thousand Lives, part-with this Peace and Satisfaction I have
in my own heart, (both in holding to the Purity of my Principle, and to the
Righteousness of this good Cause) and the assurance I have that God is now
fulfilling all these great and precious Promises, in order to what he is
bringing forth. Although I see it not, yet I die in the faith and assured
expectation of it, Hebr. 11. 13. And the eternal blessedness God has prepared
for me, and is ready now to receive me into, will abundantly make up all other
things. Through the power and goodness of God, I have had in this Trial of
mine, such a proof of the integrity of my own heart, as has been no small joy
to me.

The expressions of grief from his Friends, he said, were but so many lets and
hindrances to him, in the view he had of that Glory he was going to possess,
that heavenly City and Commonwealth, where he should behold the face of God and
of his Son, in a society of Angels, and the Spirits of Just men made perfect.

Some few days before his Suffering, his thoughts were much fixed upon Psalm.
118. 27. where are these words; God is the Lord, which has showed us light;
bind the Sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the Altar. From this, he
said, that God gives light, and is light to his People, under their darkest
circumstances and sufferings; and when he calls them forth to suffer, he binds
them as Sacrifices with cords, in three respects: First, by the Cord of his
Love to us, for he loved us first. Secondly, by the Cruelty of our Enemies.
Thirdly, by our Resignation-duty and love to him. These three Cords have bound
me so fast, I cannot stir.

Upon Friends persuading him, to make some submission to the King, and to
endeavor the obtaining of his Life; he said, If the King did not think himself
more concerned for his Honor and word, than he did for his Life, he was very
willing they should take it. Nay, I declare ( said he) that I value my Life
less in a good Cause, than the King can do his Promise. And when some others
were speaking to him, of giving some thousands of pounds for his Life; he said,
If a thousand farthings would gain it, he would not give it: And if any should
attempt to make such a bargain, he would spoil their market: For I think the
King himself is so sufficiently obliged to spare my Life, that it is fitter for
him to do it, than my self to seek it.

He rejoiced exceedingly, that God assisted him so eminently in bearing his
Testimony with faithfulness even unto Death; and that he as willingly laid down
his Life, and with as much satisfaction, as ever he went to bed. For in a
natural sickness, Death seized on the body, without any consent of the mind;
but this was a free action of his mind, without any constraint upon his body.

Mention being made to him of the cruel proceedings against him; Alas ( said
he) what ado they keep to make a poor creature like his Savior! In discourse
he said, If the shedding of my Blood, may prove an occasion of gathering
together in one, the dispersed Interests and Remnant of the Adherers to this
Cause (of whatever differing persuasions) I should think ten thousand Lives (if
I had them) well spent in such a service.

He was much pleased in this consideration, That he was hastening to a place
where God nor none of his, would be ashamed to own and receive him. Here is
nothing in this world ( says he) but reproaching and despising God's precious
Saints; but in Heaven there is a good reception for them, where are Mansions
prepared from the beginning of the world.

He said, You will shortly see God coming forth with Vengeance upon the whole
Earth, Vengeance upon the outward-man of his Saints, and Vengeance upon the
inward-man of his and their Enemies; and that shall perform greater execution,
than was heretofore.

After his Sentence, he said to some Friends, God brought him upon on three
stages, (to wit, before the Court) and was now leading him to the fourth (his
Execution-place) which was far easier and pleasanter to him than any of the
other three.

Saturday June 14. 1662, being the day of his Execution, on Tower Hill.
He told a Friend, god bid Moses go to the top of Mount Pisgah, and die; so he
bid him now, go to the top of Tower Hill, and die.

Some passages of his Prayer with his Lady, Children, and other Friends in his
Chamber.

MOst holy and gracious Father, look down from the habitation of thy Holiness;
visit, relieve and comfort us thy poor Servants, here gathered together in the
Name of Christ. Thou art rending this Veil, and bringing us to a Mountain that
abides firm. We are exceeding interrupters of our own joy, peace and good, by
the workings and reasonings of our own hearts. Thou have promised, that thou will be a Mouth to thy People in the hour of Trial: for thou have required us,
to forbear the preparatory agitations of our own minds, because it is not we
that are to speak, but the Spirit of our heavenly Father that speaks in us,
in such seasons. In what seasons more, (Lord) than when thou call for the
Testimony of thy Servants to be writ in Characters of Blood? Show thy self in a
poor weak Worm, by enabling him to stand against all the power of thy Enemies.
There has been a battle fought with garments rouled in blood, in which (upon
solemn Appeals on both sides) thou did own thy Servants, though through the
spirit of Hypocrisy and Apostasy, that has sprung up amongst us, these
Nations have been thought unworthy any longer to enjoy the fruits of that
Deliverance. Thou have therefore another day of decision, to come, which shall
be wrought by fire. Such a battle is to begin, and be carried on by the Faith
of thy People, yea, is in some sort, begun by the Faith of thy poor Servant,
that is now going to seal thy Cause with his Blood. Oh that this decision of
thine may remarkably show it self in thy Servant at this time, by his bold
Testimony and sealing it with his Blood. We know not what interruptions may
attend thy Servant, but Lord, let thy Power carry him in a holy Triumph over
all difficulties.

Thou art the great Judge and Lawgiver; for the sake of thy Servants
therefore, O Lord, return on high, and cause a righteous Sentence to come forth
from thy presence, for the relief of thy despised People. This, thy Servants
with Faith and Patience wait for. The working of this Faith in us, causes the
Enemy to give ground already. If Death be not able to terrify us from keeping
a good Conscience, and giving a good Testimony against them, what can they do
but stumble and fall backwards? The day approaches in which thou will decide
this Controversy, not by Might nor by Power, but by the Spirit of the living
God. This Spirit will make its own way, and run through the whole Earth. Then
shall it be said, Where is the fury of the Oppressor? Who is he that dares or
can stand before the Spirit of the Lord, in the mouth of his Witnesses? Arise,
O Lord, and let thine Enemies be scattered. Thy poor Servant knows not how he
shall be carried forth by thee this day, but, blessed be thy great Name, that
he has whereof to speak in this great Cause. When I shall be gathered to thee
this day, then come thou in the Ministry of thy holy Angels that excel in
strength. We have seen enough of this World, and thou see, we have enough of
it. Let these my Friends, that are round about me, commit me to the Lord, and
let them be gathered into the Family of Abraham the Father of the Faithful, and
become faithful Witnesses of those principles and Truths that have been
discovered to them, that it may be known, that a poor weak Prophet has been
amongst them, not by the words of his mouth only, but by the voice of his
Blood and Death, which will speak when he is gone. Good Lord, put words into
his mouth that may daunt his Enemies, so that they may be forced to say, God is
in him of a Truth, and that the Son of God is in his heart, and in his mouth.
My hourglass is now turned up, the sand runs out apace, and it is my happiness
that Death does not surprise me. It is Grace and Love thou do show thy poor
Servant, that thou hastenest out his time, and let him see it runs out with
Joy and Peace. Little do my Enemies know (as eager as they are to have me gone)
how soon their breaths may be drawn in.

But let thy Servant see Death shrink under him. What a glorious sight will
this be in the presence of many Witnesses, to have Death shrink under him,
which he acknowledges to be only by the power of the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, whom the bands of Death could not hold down? Let that Spirit enter into
us that will set us again upon our feet, and let us be led into that way, that
the Enemies may not know how to deal with us.

Oh! what abjuring of Light, what Treachery, what meanness of spirit has
appeared in this day? What is the matter? Oh! Death is the matter. Lord,
strengthen the Faith and Heart of thy poor Servant, to undergo this days work
with Joy and Gladness, and bear it on the Heart and Consciences of his Friends
that have known and seen him, that they also may say, the Lord is in him of a
truth.

Oh that thy Servant could speak any blessing to these three Nations. Let thy
Remnant be gathered to thee. Prosper and relieve that poor handful that are in
Prisons and Bonds, that they may be raised up and trample Death under foot. Let
my poor Family that is left desolate, let my dear Wife and Children be taken
into thy Care, be thou a Husband, Father and Master to them. Let the Spirits of
those that love me, be drawn out toward them. Let a Blessing be upon these
Friends that are here at this time, strengthen them, let them find Love and
Grace in thine Eyes, and be increased with the Increasings of God. Show thy
self a loving Father to us all, and do for us abundantly, above and beyond all
that we can ask or think, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Several Friends being with him in his Chamber this morning, he often encouraged
them to cheerfulness, as well by his example as expression. In all his
deportment, he showed himself marvellously fitted to meet the King of Terrors,
without the least affrightment. But to show where his strength lay, he said, he
was a poor unworthy wretch, and had nothing but the Grace and Goodness of God
to depend upon. He said, moreover, Death shrunk from him, rather than he from
it. Upon the occasion of parting with his Relations, he said, There is some
flesh remaining yet, but I must cast it behind me, and press forward to my
Father.

Then one of the Sheriffs men came in and told him, There was no Sled to come,
but he was to walk on foot.

He told his Friends, the Sheriffs Chaplain came to him at twelve of the clock
that night, with an Order for his Execution, telling him, he was come to bring
him that fatal Message of Death. I think (Friends) that in this Message was no
dismalness at all; After the receipt of which, I slept four hours so soundly,
that the Lord has made it sufficient for me, and now I am going to sleep my
last, after which I shall need sleep no more.

Then Mr. Sheriff coming into the Room, was friendly saluted by him, and after
a little pause, communicated a Prohibition that he said he had received, which
was, That he must not speak any thing against his Majesty, or the Government.
His Answer to this he himself relates on the Scaffold. He further told Mr.
Sheriff, he was ready but the Sheriff said, he was not, nor could be this half
hour yet; Then Sir, it rests on you, not on me (said Sir Henry) for I have been
ready this half hour. Then the Shriff, at his request, promised him his
servants should attend him on the Scaffold and be civilly dealt with, neither
of which were performed, for (notwithstanding this promise) they were beaten
and kept off the Scaffold, till he said, What? have I never a servant here?

After this, one of the Sheriffs men came and told him, there must be a Sled;
to which Sir Henry replied, Any way, how they please, for I long to be at home,
to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all. He went very
cheerfully and readily down the stairs from his Chamber, and seated himself on
the Sled, (Friends and Servants standing about him) then he was forthwith drawn
away toward the Scaffold. As he went, some in the Tower (Prisoners as well as
others) spoke to him, praying the Lord to go with him. And after he was out of
the Tower, from the tops of houses and out of windows, the people used such
means and gestures as might best discover at a distance, their respects and
love to him, crying aloud, The Lord go with you, The great God of Heaven and
Earth appear in you, and for you; whereof he took what notice he was capable in
those circumstances, in a cheerful manner accepting their respect, putting off
his Hat and bowing to them. Being asked several times, how he did, by some
about him, he answered, Never better in all my life. Another replied, How
should he do ill that suffers for so glorious a Cause? To which a tall black
man said. Many suffered for a better Cause; and may for a worse, said Sir
Henry, wishing, That when they come to seal their better Cause ( as he called
it) with their Blood (as he was now going to seal his) they might not find
themselves deceived; And as to this Cause, said he, it has given Life in
Death, to all the Owners of it, and Sufferers for it.

Being passed within the Rails on Tower Hill, there were many loud acclamations
of the people, crying out, The Lord Jesus go with your dear Soul, etc. One told
him, that was the most glorious Seat he ever sat on; he answered, It is so
indeed, and rejoiced exceedingly.

Being come to the Scaffold, he cheerfully ascends, and being up, after the
crowd on the Scaffold was broken in two pieces, to make way for him, he showed
himself to the People on the front of the Scaffold, with that Noble and
Christian-like deportment, that he rather seemed a looker-on, than the person
concerned in the Execution, Insomuch that it was difficult to persuade many of
the People, that he was the Prisoner. But when they knew that the Gentleman in
the black Suit and Cloak (with a Scarlet silk Wastcoat (the victorious color)
showing it self at the breast) was the Prisoner, they generally admired that
Noble and great Presence he appeared with. How cheerful he is! said some; he
does not look like a dying-man! said others; with many like speeches, as
astonished with that strange appearance he shined forth in.

Then (silence being commanded by the Sheriff) lifting up his hands and eyes
toward Heaven, and then resting his hands on the Rails, and taking a very
serious, composed and majestic view of the great multitude about him, he spoke
as follows.

His SPEECH on the SCAFFOLD.
Gentlemen, fellow-Countrymen, and Christians,
When Mr. Sheriff came to me this morning, and told me he had received a
Command from the King, that I should say nothing reflecting upon his Majesty or
the Government; I answered, I should confine and order my Speech, as near as I
could, so as to be least offensive, saving my faithfulness to the Trust reposed
in me, which I must ever discharge with a good Conscience unto Death; for I
ever valued a man, according to his faithfulness to the Trust reposed in him,
even on his Majesty's behalf, in the late Controversy. And if you dare trust
my discretion, Mr. Sheriff, I shall do nothing but what becomes a good
Christian and an Englishman; and so I hope I shall be civilly dealt with.

When Mr. Sheriffs Chaplain came to me last night about twelve of the clock, to
bring me, as he called it, the fatal Message of Death, it pleased the Lord to
bring that Scripture to my mind, in the third of Zechary, to intimate to me,
that he was now taking away my filthy garments, causing mine iniquities to pass
from me, with intention to give me change of raiment, and that my mortal should
put on Immortality.

I suppose you may wonder when I shall tell you that I am not brought hither
according to any known Law of the Land. It is true, I have been before a Court
of Justice, (and am now going to appear before a greater Tribunal, where I am
to give an account of all my actions) under their Sentence I stand here at this
time. When I was before them, I could not have the liberty and privilege of an
Englishman, the grounds, reasons, and causes of the Actings I was charged with,
duly considered: I therefore desired the Judges, that they would set their
Seals to my Bill of Exceptions; I pressed hard for it again and again, as the
Right of my self, and every freeborn Englishman, by the Law of the Land; but
was finally denied it. --

Here Sir John Robinson (Lieutenant of the Tower) interrupted him, saying, Sir,
you must not go on thus, and (in a furious manner, generally observed, even to
the dis-satisfaction of some of their own attendants) said, that he railed
against the Judges, and that it was a lie, and I am here (says he) to testify
that it is false.

Sir Henry Vane replied, God will judge between me and you in this matter. I
speak but matter of Fact, and cannot you bear that? It Is evident, the Judges
have refused to sign my Bill of Exceptions -- Then the Trumpets were ordered to
sound or murre in his face, with a contemptible noise, to hinder his being
heard. At which Sir Henry (lifting up his hand, and then laying it on his
breast) said, What mean you Gentlemen? is this your usage of me? did you use
all the rest so? I had even done (as to that) could you have been patient, but
seeing you cannot bear it, I shall only say this, That whereas the Judges have
refused to seal that with their hands, that they have done; I am come to seal
that with my Blood, that I have done. Therefore leaving this matter, which I
perceive will not be born, I judge it meet to give you some account of my Life.

I might tell you, I was born a Gentleman, had the education, temper and spirit
of a Gentleman, as well as others, being (in my youthful days) inclined to
the vanities of this world, and to that which they call Good-fellowship,
judging it to be the only means of accomplishing a Gentleman. But about the
fourteenth or fifteenth year of my age, (which is about thirty four or five
years since) God was pleased to lay the foundation or groundwork of Repentance
in me, for the bringing me home to himself, by his wonderful rich and free
Grace, revealing his Son in me, that by the knowledge of the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, I might (even whilst here in the body) be
made partaker of Eternal Life, in the first fruits of it.

When my Conscience was thus awakened, I found my former course to be
disloyalty to God, profaneness, and a way of sin and death, which I did with
tears and bitterness bewail, as I had cause to do. Since that foundation of
Repentance laid in me, through Grace I have been kept steadfast, desiring to
walk in all good Conscience toward God and toward men, according to the best
light and understanding God gave me. For this, I was willing to turn by back
upon my Estate, expose my self to hazards in Foreign parts; yea, nothing
seemed difficult to me, so I might preserve Faith and a good Conscience, which
I prefer before all things; and do earnestly persuade all people rather to
suffer the highest contradictions from men, than disobey God, by contradicting
the light of their own Conscience. In this, it is, I stand with so much comfort
and boldness before you all this day, and upon this occasion; being assured,
that I shall at last sit down in Glory with Christ, at his right hand. I stand
here this day, to resign up my Spirit into the hands of that God that gave it
me. Death is but a little word, but it is a great work to die, it is to be but
once done, and after this comes the Judgment, even the Judgment of the great
God, which it concerns us all to prepare for. And by this Act, I do receive a
discharge, once for all, out of Prison, even the Prison of the mortal body
also, which to a true Christian is a burdensome weight.

In all respects, wherein I have been concerned and engaged as to the Public,
my design has been to accomplish Good things for these Nations. Then (lifting
up his eyes, and spreading his hands) he said, I do here appeal to the great
God of Heaven, and all this Assembly, or any other persons, to show wherein I
have defiled my hands with any man's Blood or Estate, or that I have sought my
self in any public capacity or place I have been in.

The Cause was three times stated.

1. In the Remonstrance of the House of Commons.

2. In the Covenant, the Solemn League and Covenant -- Upon this the Trumpets
sounded, the Sheriff catched at the Paper in his hand, and Sir John Robinson,
who at first had acknowledged that he had nothing to do there, wishing the
Sheriff to see to it, yet found himself something to do now, furiously calling
for the Writers-Books, and saying, he treats of Rebellion, and you write it.
Hereupon six Note-Books were delivered up. The Prisoner was very patient and
composed under all these injuries and soundings of the Trumpets several times
in his face, only saying, 'Twas hard he might not be suffered to speak; but
says he, my usage from man is no harder than was my Lord and Masters; And all
that will live his life this day, must expect hard dealing from the worldly
spirit -- The Trumpets sounded again, to hinder his being heard. Then again
Robinson and two or three others, endeavored to snatch the Paper out of Sir
Henry's hand, but he kept it for a while, now and then reading part of it;
afterward, tearing it in pieces, he delivered it to a Friend behind him, who
was presently forced to deliver it to the Sheriff. Then they put their hands
into his pockets for Papers (as was pretended) which bred great confusion and
dissatisfaction to the Spectators, seeing a Prisoner so strangely handled in
his dying words. This was exceeding remarkable, in the midst of all this
disorder, the Prisoner himself was observed to be of the most constant,
composed spirit and countenance, which he throughout so excellently manifested,
that a Royallist swore, he dyed like a Prince.

The Prisoner, suspecting beforehand the disorder aforementioned, writ the
main Substance of what he intended to speak on the Scaffold, in that Paper they
catched at, and which he tore in pieces, delivering it to a Friend, from whom
the Sheriff had it as abovesaid; the true Copy whereof, was by the Prisoner
carefully committed to a safe hand before he came to the Scaffold, which take
as follows.

THe Work which I am at this time called unto, in this place, (as upon a
Public Theater) is, to Die, and receive a Discharge, once for all, out of
Prison; to do that, which is but once to be done; the doing or not doing of
which well, and as becomes a Christian, does much depend upon the life we have
been taught of God to lead, before we come to this: They that live in the
Faith, do also die in it: Faith is so far from leaving Christians in this hour,
that the work of it breaks forth then into its greatest power; as if till then,
it were not enough at freedom to do its office, that is, to look into the
things that are unseen, with most steadfastness, certainty, and delight; which
is the great Sweetner of Death, and Remover of its Sting.

Give me leave therefore in a very few words, to give you an account of my
Life, and of the wonderful great Grace and Mercy of God, in bringing me home to
himself, and revealing his Son in me; that by the knowledge of the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, I might (even whilst here in the body)
be made partaker of Eternal Life, in the first fruits of it; and at last sit
down with Christ in Glory, at his right hand.

Here I shall mention some remarkable passages and changes of my Life; In
particular, how unsought for by my self, I was called to be a Member of the
Long Parliament; what little advantage I had by it; and by what steps I became
satisfied with the Cause I was engaged in, and did pursue the same.

What the Cause was, did first show it self, in the first Remonstrance of the
House of Commons.

Secondly, in the Solemn League and Covenant.

Thirdly, in the more refined pursuit of it by the Commons House, in their
Actings single: with what Result they were growing up into, which was in the
breast of the House, and unknown; or what the three Proposals, mentioned in my
Charge, would have come to at last, I shall not need now to say; but only, from
all put together, to assert, That this Cause which was owned by the Parliament,
was the CAUSE of GOD, and for the Promoting of the Kingdom of his dear Son,
JESUS CHRIST; wherein are comprehended our Liberties and Duties, both as Men
and as Christians.

And since it has pleased God, who separated me from the womb to the knowledge
and service of the Gospel of his Son, to separate me also to this hard and
difficult service at this time, and to single me out to the defense and
justification of this his Cause, I could not consent by any words or actions of
mine, that the innocent Blood that has been shed in the defense of it,
throughout the whole War, ( the Guilt and moral evil of which, must and does
certainly lie somewhere) did lie at my door, or at theirs that have been the
faithful Adherers to this Cause. This is with such evidence upon my heart, that
I am most freely and cheerfully willing, to put the greatest Seal to it I am
capable, which is, the pouring out of my very Blood in witness to it; which is
all I shall need to say in this place, and at this time, having spoken at large
to it in my Defense at my Trial, intending to have said more the last day, as
what I thought was reasonable for Arrest of the Judgment, but I was not
permitted then to speak it; Both which may with time and God's providence, come
to public view.

And I must still assert, That I remain wholly unsatisfied, that the course of
proceedings against me at my Trial were according to Law, but that I was run
upon and destroyed, contrary to Right, and the Liberties of Magna Charta, under
the form only of Justice: which I leave to God to decide, who is the Judge of
the whole World, and to clear my Innocence; Whilst in the mean time, I beseech
him to forgive them, and all that have had a hand in my Death; and that the
Lord in his great mercy will not lay it unto their charge.

And I do account this Lot of mine no other, than what is to be expected by
those that are not of the World, but whom Christ has chosen out of it; for the
Servant is not greater than his Lord; And if they have done this to the green
tree, they will do it much more to the dry.

However, I shall not altogether excuse my self. I know, that by many
weaknesses and failers, I have given occasion enough of the ill usage I have
met with from men, though, in the main, the Lord knows the sincerity and
integrity of my heart, whatever Aspersions and Reproaches I have or do lie
under. I know also that God is just, in bringing this Sentence and Condemnation
upon me, for my sins; there is a body of sin and death in me, deserves this
Sentence; and there is a similitude and likeness also, that, as a Christian,
God thinks me worthy to bear with my Lord and head, in many circumstances in
reference to these dealings I have met with, in the good I have been
endeavoring for many years to be doing in these Nations, and especially now at
last, in being numbered amongst transgressors and made a public Sacrifice,
through the wrath and contradictions of men, and in having finished my course,
and fought the good fight of Faith, and resisted in a way of suffering (as you
see) even unto blood.

This is but the needful preparation the Lord has been working in me, to the
receiving of the Crown of Immortality, which he has prepared for them that
love him, The prospect whereof is so chearing, that through the Joy (in it)
that is set before the eyes of my Faith, I can, through mercy, endure this
Cross, despise this Shame, and am become more than Conqueror, through Christ
that has loved me.

For my Life, Estate and all, is not so dear to me as my Service to God, to his
Cause, to the Kingdom of Christ, and the future welfare of my Country; and I am
taught according to the Example, as well as that most Christian saying of a
Noble Person that lately died after this public manner in Scotland; How much
better is it to choose Affliction and the Cross, than to sin or draw back from
the Service of the Living God, into the ways of Apostasy and Perdition.

That Noble Person, whose Memory I honor, was with my self at the beginning
and making of the Solemn League and Covenant, the Matter of which, and the holy
Ends therein contained, I fully assent unto, and have been as desirous to
observe; but the rigid way of prosecuting it, and the oppressing Uniformity
that has bin endeavored by it. I never approved.

This were sufficient to vindicate me from the false Aspersions and Calumnies
which have been laid upon me, of Jesuitism and Popery, and almost what not, to
make my Name of ill savor with good men; which dark mists do now dispel of
themselves, or at least ought, and need no pains of mine in making an Apology.

For if any man seek a proof of Christ in me, let him read it in his action of
my Death, which will not cease to speak when I am gone; And henceforth let no
man trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.

I shall not desire in this place to take up much time, but only, as my last
words, leave this with you: That as the present storm we now lie under, and the
dark Clouds that yet hang over the Reformed Churches of Christ, (which are
coming thicker and thicker for a season) were not un-fore-seen by me for many
years passed, (as some Writings of mine declare:) So the coming of Christ in
these Clouds, in order to a speedy and sudden Revival of his Cause, and
spreading his Kingdom over the face of the whole Earth, is most clear to the
eye of my Faith, even that Faith in which I dye, whereby the Kingdoms of this
world shall become the Kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ. Amen. Even so,
come, Lord Jesus.

Some Passages of his PRAYER on the Scaffold.
THe Heaven is thy Throne, O Lord, and the Earth is thy footstool, but to this
man will thou look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at thy Word. Thou, O Lord, art the great God of Heaven and Earth,
thou fillest all places with thy presence, art the Judge of the whole World,
and do Righteousness. We are poor unworthy sinful creatures, by nature
children of wrath as well as others: We are wise to do evil, but to do good we
have no knowledge. If to will be present with us, yet how to perform and go
through with that which is good, and not be weary of well-doing, we find not.

Bring us, O Lord, into the true mystical Sabbath-state, that we may cease from
our own works, rest from our labors, not think our own thoughts, find our own
desire, or walk in the way of our own hearts, but become a meet habitation of
thy Spirit by the everlasting Covenant, the place of thy Rest. Let the Spirit
of God and of Glory, that is greater than he that is in the world, rest upon
us, work in and by us mightily, to the pulling down of flesh and blood, the
strong holds of Sin and Satan in our selves and others, causing us so to suffer
under the Fire-Baptism thereof, as that we may cease from sin for ever, or from
that fleshly, mutable, and temporary state of life and righteousness, which at
best is liable to roll back into sin again, to be entangled, overcome, and
finally triumphed over by the pollutions of this world. Deliver us, O Lord,
from the Evil One, deliver us from our selves, take us out of our own dispose,
our own liberty and power, the freedom, the mutable holiness and righteousness
of the sons of men, at its best, and bring us into the most glorious Liberty,
the most holy immutable and righteous state of the sons of God, a freedom to
Good only, and non at all to evil, attended and accompanied with a power in us,
through thy Spirit, of doing all things for the Truth, and a disability brought
upon us as to the doing of any thing against the Truth, in the single power and
freedom of our own spirit. Then the prince of this world coming to us, will
find nothing in us; at least, no prevailing activity of self, nature or flesh,
which at best, is capable to be made by him an ergin of opposition to the
Kingdom of Christ, and our own true blessedness. Thou have laid on thy Son the
iniquities of us all; by his st^ipes we are healed. We must all stand before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, to give an account of what we have done in the
body whether it be good or whether it be evil. He will bring every secret
counsel to light; things that are wrought in darkness, he makes plain and
evident. Thine eyes, O Lord, run to and fro through the whole earth. Thine eyes
do behold, thine eyelids try the children of men. The wicked and him that
loves violence, thy soul hates. But thou upholdest the poor and needy, him
that is of a broken heart and of a contrite spirit. The humble and lowly thou will teach, the meek thou will guide in Judgment; thou will beautify the meek
with Salvation. Thou art the supreme disposer of all the Kingdoms of men,
giving them to whomsoever thou will. Whatever cross-blows thou suffer to be
given thy People for a season, thou orderest all, to thy own glory, and their
true advantage. But thou have a set time for Sions deliverance, in which the
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given unto the best
and choicest of men, the people of the Saints of the most high, whose Kingdom
is an everlasting Kingdom. Let the exceeding near approach of this, bear up the
spirits of thy poor despised ones, in this day of extremity and suffering, from
sinking and despondency. Carry them through their suffering part, with a holy
triumph, in thy Chariots of Salvation. How long, O Lord, holy and true? make
have to help the Remnant of thy People. Break the Heavens and come down, touch
the Mountains of prey, the Kingdoms of this evil world, and let them smoke. Let
the mouth of all Iniquity be stopped. Silence every one that stands up against
thee. Rebuke the debauched profane spirits of men, that set themselves to work
wickedness, running with greediness into all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness. They eat thy People as they eat bread. They are profound to make
slaughter, skilful to destroy, though thou have been the rebuker of them all.
But, Lord, be this dispensation of what continuance it will, for the serving of
thy most gracious and wise designs, let the spirit and resolution of thy
Servants be steady and unchangeable, that whether they live, they may live to
the Lord, that died for them; or whether they die, they may die to the Lord,
who lives for ever to make intercession for them, that they may glorify thee
with their bodies and spirits, whether by life or by death.

Thou know O Lord, that in the Faith of Jesus, and for the Truth as it is in
Jesus, thy Servant desires to die, walking in the steps of our father Abraham,
and for Righteousness and Judgment, following the Lord in all his ways
whithersoever he goes, worshipping the God of his believing fathers, Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, in that way which men call Heresy. In this Faith, dear Lord,
I have lived, and in this Faith and Profession I die, as one that has herein
stood up for the Testimony of JESUS against all Idolatry, Superstition,
Profaneness and Popery, or whatever is unsound or unfit to be brought before the
Throne of so great and glorious a Majesty. It Is in this Faith that thy Servant
dies. Now set thy Seal to it, and remove the reproaches and calumnies with
which thy Servant is reproached, for thou know his innocence. Dear Father,
thou sentest us into this world, but this world is not our home, we are
strangers and pilgrims in it, as all our fathers were. We have no abode here,
but there is a house, not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, that when
this tabernacle is dissolved, we may enter into. In our Fathers house are many
mansions; Oh! whatever the curses and condemnations of the Law are, be thou
near to us, and spread the Righteousness of Christ over us, and we shall be
safe. Blessed is he, whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered. Who will speak, who will take on him to say any thing, or to plead with
Thee, upon any other terms but in the Name and Merits of the mighty Redeemer,
on whom our help is laid. We desire to lie low, to be abased and take shame and
confusion of face to our selves, as that which properly belongs to us, that
Thou alone may be exalted and advanced. It Is of mere Grace, O Lord, that thy
Servant has now some sign of thy special Salvation, even thy Free Grace, O
God, whereby thou do accept him in thy Son. Lay him low and humble and abase
his soul for his sins, and all his unworthinesses before thee. Men cannot speak
evil enough of our sins. In this persuasion, this abasement and humiliation,
thy Servant desires to die. And, dear Lord, thou see and know all things,
and art able to witness to the truth and integrity of thy Servant. When his
blood is shed upon the Block, let it have a voice afterward, that may speak his
Innocence, and strengthen the Faith of thy Servants in the Truth. Let it also
serve for conviction to the worst of thy Enemies, that they may say, Surely the
Lord knows, and the Lord owns his Servant, as one that belongs to him. The
desire of our soul is to hasten to thee, O God, to be dissolved, that we may be
with Christ. Blessed be thy Name, that this great strait that we were before
in, is now determined; that there is no longer abode for me in this mortal
body. Our great Captain, the great General of our souls, did go in a way of
affliction before us, to Heaven. Come, Lord, declare thy Will, that thy poor
Servant may manifest a readiness to come to Thee; Prepare his heart, that in
his access to Thee may, he be brought down at thy feet, in shame and confusion
for all the evil is so of hul; but Thou art his salvation. Let thy Servant
speak something on the behalf of the Nation wherein he has lived; Lord, did we
not exceed other Nations in our day? Great things have been done by thee in the
midst of us. Oh, that thou would look down in pity and compassion, and pardon
the sins of this whole Nation, and lay them not to their charge; show them what
is thy good and acceptable Will, and bring them into subjection thereunto. We
humbly pray thee, O Lord, look down with compassion upon this great and
populous City, cleanse away the impurity, sinfulness and defilements thereof;
cause their souls to delight in thy Word, that they may live. Let a spirit of
Reformation and Purity spring up in and amongst them with power; make them
willing to lay down all that is dear to them for thee, that Thou may give
them a Crown of Life; that they may always desire and choose affliction, and to
be exposed to the worst condition and hardest circumstances, that can be
brought upon them in this world, rather than sin against him that has loved
them and bought them with a price, that they might live to him in their bodies
and in their spirits.

We are assured Thou know our suffering case and condition, how it is with
us. We desire to give no just occasion of offense, nor to provoke any, but in
meekness to forgive our Enemies. Thy Servant that is now falling asleep, does
heartily desire of thee, that thou would forgive them, and not lay this sin
to their charge.

Before the stroke, he spoke to this effect; I bless the Lord who has
accounted me worthy to suffer for his Name. Blessed be the Lord that I have
kept a conscience void of offense to this day. I bless the Lord I have not
disserted the Righteous Cause, for which I suffer.

But his very last words of all at the Block, were as follows; Father,
glorify thy Servant in the sight of men, that he may glorify thee in the
discharge of his Duty to Thee and to his Country.

It was observed, that no signs of inward fear appeared by any trembling or
shaking of his hands, or any other parts of his body, all along on the
Scaffold. Yea, an ancient Traveller and curious observer of the demeanor of
persons in such public Executions, did narrowly eye his Countenance to the
last breath, and his Head immediately after the separation; he observed that his
Countenance did not in the least change: and whereas the Heads of all he had
before seen, did some way or other move after severing, which argued some
reluctance and unwillingness to that parting-blow; the Head of this Sufferer
lay perfectly still, immediately upon the separation: on which he said to this
purpose, That his Death was by the free consent and act of his mind; which
Animadversion notably accords with what the Sufferer himself had before
expressed, in differencing a death by rational choice, from that by sickness,
which is with constraint upon the body. He desired to be dissolved and to be
with Christ.

The Names of the Grand Jury, in the Case of Sir Henry Vane.
SIr John Cropley of Clarkenwel, London, Knight and Baronet. Thomas Tailor of
St. Martins in the Fields, London, Esquire Francis Swift of St. Gyles in the
Fields, Esquire. Jonas Morley of Hammersmith, Gent. George Cooper of Covent Garden,
Gent. Thomas Constable of Covent Garden, Gent. Edward Burrows of
East-Smithfield, Gent. Michael Dibbs of the same, Gent. Edward Gregory of St.
Gyles in the Fields, Gent. Richard Freeman of Istington, Gent. Thomas Pitcock
of the same, Gent. Richard Towers of Clarkenwel, Gent. Robert Vauce of
Paddington, Gent. Thomas Benning of Wilsdon, Gent. Francis Child of Acton,
Gent. Isaac Cotton of Bow, Gent. Peter Towers of Mile-end, Gent. Thomas Vffman
of Hammersmith, Gent. Matthew Child of Kensington, Gent. Bryan Bonnaby of
Westminster, Gent. George Rouse of St. Gyles in the Fields, Gent. Twenty one in
all.

The Names of the Petty Jury.
Sir William Roberts. Sir Christopher Abdy. John Leech. Daniel Cole. John
Stone. Daniel Brown. Henry Carter. Thomas Chelsam. Thomas Pitts. Thomas Upman.
Andrew Brent. William Smith.

Judges of the King's Bench.
Chief Justice Foster. Justice Mallet. Justice Twisden. Justice Windham.

The Kings Counsel against the Prisoner; (no Counsel being permited to speak
one word in his behalf, to the matter or form of the Indictment, or any thing
else.)
Sir Geoffry Palmer, the King's Attorney General. Sir Henneage Fynch, the
King's Solicitor General. Sir John Glyn. Sir John Maynard. Sir William Wild.
Sergeant Keeling.

Witnesses against Sir Henry Vane.
Marsh, a Papist, it is said; who witnessed what was accounted most dangerous
against the Prisoner, as to change of Government.

William Dobbins. Matthew Lock. Thomas Pury. Thomas Wallis. John Coot.

The Peoples Cause Stated.
HE in whom is the Right of Sovereign, and to give Law, is either so of
himself, or in the Right of another, that may derive the same unto him; which
shows that there are two sorts of Soveraings.

A Sovereign in the first sense, none is nor can be, but God, who is of himself
most absolute. And he that is first of all others in the second sense, is the
Man Christ Jesus, to whom the Power of Sovereign, in the Right of the Father is
committed, over all the Works of Gods hands. Christ exercised the same in the
capacity of David's Root from before the beginning of the World. He own;
himself thus to be, long before he became David's Seed; This his being in
Spirit, or hidden being, even as a Creature, the first of all Creatures in
personal Union with the Word, David saw and acknowledged, Psalm. 110. 1. Thus
Christ may be called God's Lieutenant Sovereign, or General Vicegerent of his
Supremacy over all in Heaven and in Earth. He therefore is the true Universal
King and Root of all Sovereign and just Governing Power, whether in Heaven or
on Earth.

His Sovereignty is unquestionable and unaccountable, because of the Perfection
of his Person, carrying in it an aptitude and sufficiency to Govern, without
possibility of Error or Defect of any kind. Sovereign and Governing Power does
necessarily relate to Subjects, that are to be the Ruled, and Subjects capable
of such Government. Therefore when God himself purposes within himself, to be
Supreme Legislator and Governor, he does withal purpose the Being and Creation
of both Worlds, as the Subject matter of his Kingdom. He propounds to Govern
his Subjects by and with their own consent and good liking; or, without and
against it, in the way of his revenging Justice; Governing by Laws, clearly
stating and ascertaining the Duty or the Offense, as also the Rewards and
Penalties.

Herein Just Government consists, or the Justice of Government; for he that
Rules over others, must be Just; and indeed should be seen to be so in all his
Commands: so seen, as to render the Consciences of the Ruled, and those whose
duty it is to Obey, inexcusable before God and before Men, if they Dissent or
Resist.

Inexcusable they are before God, because the matter Commanded is the matter of
God's Law, and therefore just to be obeyed. They are also Inexcusable before
Men, that which is required of them being generally acknowledged and affirmed
(by those in whom the common consent of the Subjects is entrusted to that end)
to be Just, and Reasonable, and therefore to be Obeyed. For the end of all
Government, being for the Good and Welfare, and not for the Destruction of the
Ruled; God who is the Institutor of Government, as he is pleased to Ordain the
Office of Governors, intrusting them with Power to command the Just and
Reasonable Things, which his own Law Commands, that carry their own evidence to
common Reason and Sense, at least, that do not evidently contradict it, so he
grants a Liberty to the Subjects, or those that by him are put under the Rule,
to refuse all such Commands as are contrary to his Law, or to the judgment of
common Reason and Sense, whose trial he allows, by way of assent or dissent,
before the Commands of the Ruler shall be Binding or put in Execution; and this
in a Co-ordinacy of Power with Just Government, and as the due Balance
thereof. The Original Impressions of Just Laws are in Man's Nature and very
Constitution of Being. Man has the Law in his Mind, (or the Superior and
Intellectual part of him) convincing and bringing that into obedience and
subjection to the Law of God, in Christ himself. He has also that which is a
Law in his Members that are on the Earth, (or his earthly and sensual part)
whose Power is Coordinate with the other, but such, that if it be not gained
into a Harmony and Conjunction with its Head, the Spirit or Mind of man, has
ability to let and hinder his Mind or Ruling part, from performing and putting
in execution, that which is good, just, fit, and to be acknowledged as the
righteous dictates of the Mind, which ought to be the Ruling Power, or Law to
the Man. So in the outward Government over Man, the secondary or coordinate
Power, concurring with that which is the chief ruling Power, is essential to
Just Government; and is acknowledged to be so, by the Fundamental Constitution
of the Government of England, as well as in the Legal Being and Constitution of
Parliaments, whether that which has been usual and ordinary, according to the
Common Law; or that which of late has been Extraordinary, by express Statute,
for the continuance of the Parliament, 17. Car. until dissolved by Act of
Parliament.

For together with the Legal Being which is given to Regal Power and the
Prerogative of the Crown, there is the Legal Power and Being reserved also unto
that Body, which is the Peoples or Kingdoms Representative, who are the Hands
wherein that which is called Power Politic is seated, and are entrusted with
giving or with holding the common Consent of the whole Nation, according to the
best of their Understandings, in all matters coming before them, and are to
keep this Liberty Inviolate and Entire, against all Invasions or Encroachments
upon it, whatsoever.

This second Power in the very Writ of Summons for calling a Parliament, is
declared to be of that Nature, that what the first does without obtaining the
Consent and Approbation of the second, in Parliament, is not binding but
ineffectual. And when the Representative Body of the Kingdom, (in and with
whom, this Power is entrusted, as the Due and Legal Balance and Boundary to
the Regal Power, set and fixed by the Fundamental Constitution) is made a
standing Court, and of that Continuance, as not to be dissolvable but by its
own consent; during such its continuance, it has right to preserve it self
from all violent and undue Dissolution, and to maintain and defend its own Just
Privileges, a chief of which is, to bind or loose the People, in all matters
good or hurtful to them, according to their best Judgment and discretion.

In the exercise of this their Trust, they are Indemnified by Law, and no hurt
ought to come unto them; that Governing Power, which is originally in God, and
slowes at first from him, as the sole and proper Fountain thereof, is brought
into exercise amongst men, upon a differing and distinct account.

First, As it is a Trust and Right derived conditionally from God to his
Officers and Ministers, (which therefore may be lost) who being called by him,
and in the course of his Providence, to the exercise of it, are to hold it of
him the Universal King, and to own themselves in the exercise thereof, as his
Vicegerents, to cut off by the Sword of Justice evildoers; and to be a
Protection and encouragement to them that do well. But because it is part of
God's Call of any person to this high Trust, to bring him into the possession
and free Exercise thereof, by the common consent of the Body of the People,
where such Sovereign Power is set up, unless they have forfeited this Liberty.
Therefore,

Secondly, God does allow and confer by the very Law of Nature, upon the
Community or Body of the People (that are related to, and concerned in the
right of Government, placed over them) the Liberty by their common Vote or
Suffrage duly given, to be Assenters or Dissenters thereunto, and to Affirm
and make Stable, or Disallow and render Ineffectual, what shall apparently be
found by them to be for the good or hurt of that Society, whose welfare next
under the justice of God's Commands and his Glory, is the Supreme Law, and very
end of all Subordinate governing Power.

Sovereign Power then comes from God, as its proper Root, but the restraint or
enlargement of it, in its Execution over such or such a Body, is sounded in the
common consent of that Body.

The Office of chief Ruler, or Head over any State, Commonwealth, or Kingdom,
has the Right of due Obedience from the People inseparably annexed to it. It
is an Office, not only of Divine Institution, but for the Safety and
Protection of the whole Body or Community, and therefore justly and necessarily
draws to it, and engages their Subjection.

This Office of the Sovereign, according to the Laws, and Fundamental
Constitutions of the Government of England, is ministered by the King in a
twofold Capacity, as his Will and personal Command is in Conjunction and
Agreement with his People in Parliament, (during the Session thereof) or as it
is in Conjunction and Agreement with the Law, the Parliament not Sitting. But
his Will and Personal Command single, in dis-junction and disagree* from the
Parliament or the Laws, has not the force of a Law, says Fortescue, and gives
the Reason of it, Because this is a limited Monarchy, where the King's Power
(as to the exercise of it) is only a Power Politic.

The Obedience then which from the Subject is due to the King, and which they
are sworn to perform by the Oath of Allegiance, is to him, in the ministry of
the Royal Office, according to the reason and intent of the Fundamental Compact
and Constitution, and according to his own Oath, which is to Govern by Law;
that is, to Exercise his Rule or Royal commanding Power, in Conjunction and
Agreement with the Parliament when sitting, and in Conjunction, and Agreement
with the Laws of the Land, they not sitting. To exercise his Power otherwise,
is and has been always judged a grievance to the People, and a going against
that which is the original Right and just Liberty of the Community, who are not
to be bound to such personal Commands at will and pleasure, nor compelled to
yield Obedience thereunto.

The contrary hereunto was the Principle at bottom of the Kings Cause, which he
endeavored to uphold and maintain, in order to decline and lay aside the Legal
Restraints as aforesaid, which the Government of England by the Fundamental
Constitution, is subjected unto, as to the exercise and ministry of the Royal
Office.

From the Observation and Experience which the Pople of England had, and made
many years together, by their Representatives in Parliament, of a desire in the
King to shake off these Legal Restraints in the Exercise of the Regal Power,
and on their having tried the best ways and means that occurred to their
Understandings, to prevent the same, and to secure to themselves the enjoyment
of their Just Rights and Liberty, they at last pitched upon the desiring from
the King, the continuance of the sitting of the Parliament called, November 3d
1640, in such sort as is expressed in that Act, 17. Car. wherein it is
provided, That it shall not be Discontinued or Dissolved, but by Act of
Parliament.

This was judged by them, the greatest Security imaginable, for keeping the
ministry of the Royal Office within its due Bounds; and for quieting the People
in the enjoyment of their Rights. But experience has showed, that this yet
could not be done without a War, the worst and last of Remedies. For although
their Continuance as the Representative Body of the Kingdom, with the Right to
exercise the Power and Privileges inherent in, and inseparable from that
Supreme Court and Chief Senate (whereof the King is Head, both making but one
Person or Politic Body in Law) yet they themselves, as well as the King, were
bound by the Fundamental Constitution or Compact, upon which the Government was
at first built; containing the Condition upon which the King accepted of the
Royal Office, and on which the People granted to him the Tribute of their
Obedience and due Allegiance. This Condition, (as the Laws and Experience
declare) is, that the King shall exercise his Office of Rule over them
according to the Laws, as has been showed, and as he and his People shall from
time to time agree in Common Council in Parliament, for that end assembled. In
respect hereof, the Laws so made, are called the Concords or Agreements passed
between the King and the Subject, in the 3d part of Cooks Institutes.

These Agreements then are the Standard unto the Kings Rule and the Peoples
Obedience, signifying the justice of his Commands, and the dueness of their
Allegiance.

But the case so happening, that this Conjunction and Agreement which ought to
be found between the personal Will of the King, and Representative Will of the
Kingdom, failing, and these two Wills declaring themselves in Contrariety and
Opposition, both of them becoming standing Powers, Coordinate and distinct
parts of the Supremacy, as the two Channels wherein the Supremacy is placed and
appointed to run, as to its exercise, by the Fundamental Constitution; hence
sprang the War, each asserting and endeavoring to defend and maintain their
own part and right, which ought not to be kept up in dis-junction and
contrariety, but in Unity and Agreement each with other. These two Parties with
their Adherents, in this Case, may be according to the Law, Contrarients one
toward another, as the Law affords an Example, in the Preamble to Cook's 4th
Part of his Institutes (not properly Traitors) being coordinate Powers, parts
of the Supremacy, that are the Heads to each Party; and by consequence have a
right of making a War, as their last Appeal, if they cannot otherwise agree.

Being once entered thus into a state of War and actual Enmity, they do as it
were become two Nations, and cease to be under the Obligations they were in
before, for during this state of War and Enmity, the standing Laws (in a sort)
cease, and a new way of Rule each Party Forms to himself and his Adherents, as
may best consist for each of their Safeties and Preservations.

Upon this Dis-junction of the two Wills, in the Harmony and Agreement whereof,
the Supremacy is placed, these following Queries do naturally arise;

First.

To which, or Whether of these by Law is the Allegiance required as due? Is it
to be yielded to the Personal Will of the King single, in disjunction from the
Will of the Representative Body of the Kingdom, or to the Will of the People,
in dis-junction from the Will of the King? Or is it to the Personal Will of the
King, in conjunction with the Laws, though in opposition and contrariety to the
Will of the Kingdoms Representative in Parliament Assembled? Or is it to the
Will of the Kingdoms Representative, in conjunction with the Laws, though in
opposition to the Personal Will of the King?

The Second Querie is,

In whose Judgment in this case are the People by Law to acquiesce, as to the
declaring with whom the Laws are? Whether the Personal Judgment of the King
single, or the Vote of the Senate, that is, the Kingdoms Representative Body?

The Third Querie is,

With whom will the Laws be found to go in this Case, so rare, unusual, and
never happening before, and who is the Proper and Competent Judge? Also,
whether the Laws be not perfectly silent, as never supposing such a Case
possible to happen, by reason that the Power used by the one for Dissolving the
other, never before suffered the Opposition to rise so high?

The Fourth Querie is,

Whether he, in this Case, that keeps his Station and place of Trust, wherein
God and the Law did set him, with care to demean himself according to the best
of his Understanding, agreeably to the Law and Customs of Parliament, and
pursuant to their Votes and Directions, (so long as they sit and affirm
themselves to be a Parliament) and uses his best endeavors in the exercise of
that public Trust, that no Detriment in the general come unto the
Commonwealth by the failer of Justice, and the necessary Protection due from
Government, without any designing or intending the Subversion of the
Constitution, but only the securing more fully the Peoples Liberties and just
Rights, from all future Invasions and Oppressions, be not so far from deserving
to be judged Criminal in respect of any Law of God or Man, that he ought rather
to be affirmed One that has done his Duty, even the next best that was left to
him, or possible for him to do, in such a dark stormy season, and such
difficult Circumstances?

As to the Right of the Cause it self, it arises out of the matter of Fact
that has happened, and by the Just and Wise Providence of God, has been
suffered to state it self, in the Contest between the Personal Will and
declared Pleasure of the King, on the one Hand, and the public Will or Vote of
the People in Parliament, on the other, declaring it self either in Orders or
Ordinances of both Houses, or in the single Act of the House of Commons,
asserting it self a Parliament, upon the Grounds of the Act, 17 Car. providing
against its dissolution.

This will appear with the more evidence and certainty, by considering wherein
either part had a wrong Cause, or did or might do that which was not their
Duty; taking the measure of their Duty from what as well the King as the
Peoples Representative are obliged unto, by the Fundamental Constitution of the
Government, which binds them in each of their Capacities and distinct Exercises
of their Trust, to intend and pursue the true good and welfare of the whole
Body or Community as their End. This (in effect) is to detain the People in
Obedience and Subjection to the Law of God, and to guide them in the ways of
Righteousness unto God's well-pleasing: and to avoid falling out or disagreeing
about the Way or Means leading to that End.

Hence that party which in his or their actings was at the greatest distance
from, or opposition unto this end, and wilfully and unnecessarily disagreed and
divided from the other, in the Ways and Means that were most likely to attain
this End; they were assuredly in the Fault, and had a Wrong Cause to manage,
under what ever Name of Face of Authority it was Headed and Upheld. And such a
Wrong Cause was capable of being espoused and managed under the face of
Authority, as might be pretended unto by either part. For as the King
(insisting upon his Prerogative, and the binding force which his personal Will
and Pleasure ought to have, though in distinction from, and opposition to his
Parliament) might depart from the end of Government, answerable to his Trust,
and yet urge his Right to be obeyed; So the public Will of the People,
exercised in and by the Vote of their Representative in Parliament, asserting
it self to be of a binding force also, and to have the place of a Law, though
in distinction from the King and Laws also, (as says the King) whatever
otherwise by them is pretended, might also depart from the true end of
Government, answerable to their Trust, and yet insist upon their Right to be
Obeyed and submitted unto; and having Power in their hands, might unduely go
about also to compel Obedience. It is not lawful either for King or Parliament
to urge Authority and compel Obedience as of Right in any such Cases, where
(according to the Law of Nature) the People are at Liberty, and ought to have a
Freedom from yielding Obedience, as they are and ought to have when ever any
would compel them to disobey God, or to do things that evidently in the eye of
Reason and common sense, are to their hurt and destruction. Such things Nature
forbids the doing of, having for that very purpose, armed Man with the
defensive Weapon of refusing to consent and obey, as that Privilege, whereby
Man is distinguished from a Beast; which, when he is deprived of, he is made a
Beast, and brought into a state of perfect Servitude and Bondage.

Such a state of Servitude and Bondage may by God's just Judgment, be
inflicted upon man for sin and the abuse of his Liberty, when by God restored.
The Liberty which man was at first created in, is that Privilege and Right
which is allowed to him by the Law of Nature, of not being compelled under any
pretense whatsoever to sin against God, or to go against the true good and
welfare of his own Being; that is to say, of his inward or outward man, but in
both these cases, to have and to use his just Liberty, to Dissent and refuse to
Obey.

For this every man has that in himself, which by God is made a proper and
competent Judge. For, as to all sin against God, and the righteousness of his
Law, the Light of Conscience, that is to say the Work of the Law, in and upon
the Mind or inward Sense, and in conjunction with it, does lighten every one
that comes into the World, accusing or excusing, if it be but hearkened unto,
and kept awake. And for all such actings, as tend to the ruin and destruction
of man, in his outward and bodily concerns, and as he is the Object of
Magistratical Power and Jurisdiction, every man has a Judgment of common
Sense, or a way of discerning and being sensible thereof, common to bruit
Beasts, that take in their Knowledge by the door of their Senses, but is much
heightened and enobled in man, by the personal union it is taken into, with his
intellectual part, and intuitive way of discerning things, through the inward
reflectings of the mind, compared with the Law of God. This inferior Judgment
in man, when it is conjoined with, and confirmed by the Judgment of his
Superior part, is that which we call Rational, or the dictates of right
Reason, that man has a natural right to adhere unto, as the ordinary certain
Rule, which is given him by God to walk by, and against which he ought not to
be compelled, or be forced to depart from it, by the mere Will and Power of
another, without better Evidence; that is, a higher, a greater, or more certain
way of discerning. This therefore in Scripture is called, Man's Judgment, or
Man's Day, in distinction from the Lord's Judgment, and the Lord's Day. And
this is that, in every individual man, which in the collective Body of the
People, and meeting of Head and Members in Parliament, is called, The Supreme
Authority, and is the public reason and will of the whole Kingdon; the going
against which, is, in Nature as well as by the Law of Nations, an offense of
the highest rank, amongst men. For it must be presumed, that there is more of
the Wisdom and Will of God in that public Suffrage of the whole Nation, than
of any private Person or lesser collective Body, whatsoever, not better
quallified and principled. For Man is made in God's Image, or in a likeness, in
Judgment and Will, unto God himself, according to the measure that in his
nature he is proportioned and made capable to be the receiver and bearer
thereof. Therefore it is, that the resisting and opposing either of that
Judgment of Will, which is in it self Supreme, and the Law to all others, (or
which bears so much proportion and likeness to the Supreme Will, as is possible
for a Society and community of Men agreeing together for that end, to contrive
and set up for an administration thereof unto them) is against the duty of any
member of that Society, as well as it is against the duty of the Body of the
whole Society, to oppose its Judgment and Will to that of the Supreme
Lawgiver, their highest Sovereign, God himself.

The highest Judgment and Will, set up by God, for Angels and Men in their
particular beings, to hold proportion with, and bear conformity unto, (in the
capacity of Ruled, in relation to their chief Ruler) sins forth in the person
of Christ, the engrafted Word. And when by the Agreement or common Consent of a
Nation or State, there is such a Constitution and Form of Administration
pitched upon, as in a standing and ordinary way, may derive and conveigh the
nearest and greatest likeness in humane Laws, or Acts of such a Constitution,
unto the Judgment and Will of the Supreme Legislator, as the Rule and declared
Duty for every one in that Society to observe; It is thereby, that Government,
or Supreme Power comes to receive Being in a Nation or State, and is brought
into exercise according to God's Ordinance, and Divine Institution. So then, it
is not so much the Form of the Administration, as the thing Administered,
wherein the good or evil of Government does consist; that is to say, a greater
likeness or unlikeness unto Judgment and Will of the highest Being, in all the
Acts or Laws, flowing from the Fundamental Constitution of the Government.

Hence it is, that common Consent, lawfully and rightfully given by the Body of
a Nation, and entrusted with Delegates of their own free choice, to be
exercised by them, as their Representatives, (as well for the Welfare and good
of the Body that trusts them, as to the Honor and Well-pleasing of God the
Supreme Legislator) is the Principle and Means, warranted by the Law of Nature
and Nations, to give Constitution and Admission to the exercise of Government,
and Supreme Authority, over them and amongst them: Agreeable hereunto, we are
to suppose, that our Ancestors in this Kingdom did proceed, when they
constituted the Government thereof, in that form of Administration, which has
been derived to us, in the course and channel of our Customs and Laws; amongst
which, the Law and Customs in and of the Parliaments, are to be accounted as
chief. For,

Hereby First, The Directive or Legislative Power (having the Right to State
and Give the Rule for the Governors Duty, and the Subjects Obedience) is
continued in our Laws, which as well the King as People are under the
Observation of; witness the Coronation Oath, and the Oath of Allegiance.

Secondly, The Coercive or Executive Power is placed in one Person, under the
Name and Style of a King, to be put forth not by his own, single, personal
Command, but by the signification of his Will and Pleasure, as the Will of the
whole State, in and by his Courts of Justice, and stated public Counsels and
Judicatures, agreed on for that purpose, between him and his People, in their
Parliamentary Assemblies.

The Will of the whole State, thus signified, the Law it self prefers before
the personal Will of the King, in distinction from the Law, and makes the one
binding, the other not. So that the public Will of the State, (signified and
declared by the public Suffrage and Vote of the People or Kingdom in
Parliament Assembled) is a Legal and Warrantable ground for the Subjects
Obedience, in the things commanded by it, for the good and welfare of the whole
Body, according to the best Understanding of such their Representative Body, by
it put forth, during the time of its sitting.

The Body with whom the Delegated Vote and public Suffrage of the whole Nation
is Entrusted, being once Assembled, with Power not to be Dissolved but by their
own consent, in that capacity the highest Vote and Trust (that can be) is
exercised, and this by Authority of Parliament, unto ex Officio, or by way of
Office are the Keepers of the Liberties of England, or of the People, by the
said Authority, for which they are accountable if they do not faithfully
discharge that their duty. This Office of keeping the Liberty, which by the Law
of God and Nature is due to the Community or whole Body of the People, is, by
way of Trust, committed by themselves to their own Delegates, and in effect
amounts unto this.

1. That they may of right keep out and refuse any to exercise Rule and Command
over them, except God himself, who is the Supreme and Universal King and
Governor; or, such as shall agree in their Actings, to bear his Image, (which
is, to be Just) and show for the Warrant of their Exercise of Sovereignty, both
a likeness in Judgment and Will, unto him, who is Wisdom and Righteousness it
self; and the Approbation and common Consent of the whole Body, rationally
reposing that Trust in them, from what is with visible and apparent Characters
manifest to them, of an aptness and sufficiency in them, to give forth such
public Acts of Government, that may bear the Stamp of God's Impression upon
them in the Judgments they do and execute; especially, being therein helped
with a National Counsel of the Peoples own choosing from time to time.

2. They may of right, keep, hold, and restrain him or them, with whom the
Coercive or Executive Power is entrusted, unto a punctual performance of Duty,
according to the Fundamental Constitution, the Oath of the Ruler, and the Laws
of the Land. And if they shall refuse to be so held and restrained by the
humble Desires, Advice and common Consent in Parliament, and the Peoples
Delegates be invaded and attempted upon by force, to deter them from the
faithful discharge of this their Duty; they may, in asserting their Right, and
in a way of their own just Defense, raise Arms, put the issue upon Battle, and
Appeal unto God.

3. Such Appeal answered, and the issue decided by Battle, the Peoples
Delegates still sitting, and keeping together in their Collective Body, may of
right, and according to reason refuse the readmission or new-admission of the
Exercise of the former Rulers, or any new Rulers again over the whole Body,
till there be received Satisfaction for the former Wrongs done, the expense and
hazard of the War, and Security for the time to come, that the like be not
committed again. Until this be obtained, they are bound in duty, in such manner
as they judge most fit, to provide for the present Government of the whole
Body, that the Commonweal receive no detriment.

4. In this which is the proper Office of the Peoples Delegates, and concerns
the keeping and defending the Liberty and Right of the whole People and Nation,
they may and ought, (during their sitting) to Exercise their own proper Power
and Authority (the Exigents of the Kingdom requiring it) although the other two
Estates jointly instructed with them, (in the exercise of the Legislative
Authority) should desert their station, or otherwise sail in the Execution of
their Trusts; yea, or though many or most of their own Members (so long as a
lawful Quorum remains) shall either voluntarily withdraw from them, or, for
just cause become excluded. In this discharge of their trust, for the common
welfare and safety of the whole, their Actings (though extraordinary and
contrarient to the right of the other two) cannot be treasonable or criminal,
(though they may be tortious, and erroneous) seeing they are equals and
coordinate, in the exercise of the Legislative Power, and have the Right of
their own proper Trust and Office to discharge and defend, though their fellow
Trustees should fail in theirs. Nor can, nor ought the People, as Adherents to
their own Delegates and Representatives, to be reputed criminal, or blame*
worthy, by the Law.

In the exercise of one and the same Legislative power (according to the
Fundamental Constitution of the Government of England) there are three distinct
public Votes, allowed for Assent or Descent, in all matters coming before
them; the Agreement of which is essential and necessary to the passing of a
Law: the personal Vote of the King; the personal Votes of the Lords in a House
or distinct Body; and the Delegated Vote and Suffrage of the whole People, in
their Representative Body, or the House of Commons. Unto each of these,
appertains a distinct Office and Privilege, proper to them.

1. The Regal Office, and the Prerogative thereof to the King.

2. The Judicial Office, to the Lords, as the highest Judicature and Court of
Justice under the King, for the exercising Coercive Power, and punishing of
Malefactors.

3. The Office of the Keepers of the Liberties and Rights of the People, as
they are the whole Nation, incorporated under one Head, by their own free and
common Consent.

The Regal Office is the Fountain of all Coercive and Executive Power, pursuant
to the Rule, set to the same by Law, or, the Agreement of the three Estates in
Parliament.

The Rule which is set, is that of Immutable Just and Right, according to
which, penalties are applicable, and become due, and is first stated and
ascertained, in the declared Law of God, which is the signification or making
known by some sign, the Will of the Supreme Legislator, proceeding from a
perfect Judgment and Understanding, that is without all Error or Defect.

The Will that flows from such a Judgment, is in its nature Legislative, and
binding, and of right to be obeyed for its own sake, and the perfection it
carries in it, and with it, in all its actings. This Will is declared by Word,
or Works, or both. By Word we are to understand, either the immediate Breath
and Spirit of Gods mouth or mind, or the Inspiration of the Almighty, ministered
by the holy Ghost, in and by some creature, as his vessel and instrument,
through which the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament were composed.
By works that declare God's Will, we are to understand the whole Book of the
Creature, but more eminently and especially, the particular Beings and Natures
of Angels and Men, who bear the name and likeness of God in and upon their
Judgments and their Wills; their directing Power, and their executive Power of
mind, which are essential to their Being, Life, and Motion.

When these direct and execute, in conjunction and harmony with God's Judgment
and Will, made known in his Law, they do that which is right; and by adhering
and conforming themselves unto this their certain and unerring Guide, do become
Guides and Rulers unto others, and are the Objects of right choice, where
Rulers are wanting in Church or State.

The Rule then to all action of Angels or Men, is that of moral or immutable
Just and Right, which is stated and declared in the Will and Law of God. The
first and highest imitation of this Rule, is the Creature-being in the person
of Christ. The next is the Bride the Lambs Wife. The next is the innumerable
Society of the holy Angels. The next is the Company of Just Men, fixed in their
natural Obedience and Duty, through Faith, manifesting it self not only in
their Spirits, but in their outward Man, redeemed even in this World, from the
body of corruption, as far as is here attainable. The Power which is directive,
and states and ascertains the morallity of the Rule for Obedience, is in the
Law of God. But the original, whence all just executive Power arises, which is
Magistratical and Coercive, is from the will or free gift of the People, who
may either keep the Power in themselves, or give up their Subjection into the
hands and will of another, as their Leader and Guide, if they shall judge that
thereby they shall better answer the end of Government, to wit, the welfare and
safety of the whole, then if they still kept the Power in themselves. And when
they part with it, they may do it conditionally or absolutely; and whilst they
keep it, they are bound to the right use of it. In this Liberty, every man is
created, and it is the Privilege and just Right which is granted unto Man by
the Supreme Lawgiver, even by the Law of Nature, under which man was made.

God himself leaves man to the free exercise of this his Liberty, when he
tenders to him his safety and immutability, upon the well or ill use of this
his Liberty, allowing him the choice, either to be his own guide and
self-ruler, in the ability communicated to him, to know and execute Gods Will,
and so to keep the Liberty he is possessed of, in giving away his subjection or
not; or else upon God's Call and Promise, to give up himself in way of
subjection to God, as his Guide and Ruler, either absolutely or conditionally.
To himself he expects absolute Subjection; to all subordinate Rulers,
conditional.

While man's Subjection is his own, and in his own keeping, unbestowed and
ungiven out of himself, he is not, nor cannot be accountable by way of crime or
offense, against his Ruler and Sovereign, but may do with his own what he
please; but still at his peril, if he use not this his Liberty as he should, to
the end for which it is given him, which is by voluntary and entire resignation
to become an obedient Subject unto him who is the Supreme Lawgiver, and
Rightful King, without possibility of change or defection.

Unto this right and the lawful exercise and possession of, it this Nation did
arive by the good providence and gift of God, in calling and assembling the
Parliament, November 3d. 1640. and then continuing their Session by an express
Act, 17. Car. with power not to be dissolved but by their own consent; which
was not so much the introducing of a new Law, as declaratory of what was Law
before, according to Man's natural Right, in which he was created, and of which
he was possessed by God, the sovereign giver of all things.

But the passing that said Act of Parliament alone, was not that which restored
the Nation to their original Right, and just Natural Liberty; but only put
them in the capacity and possibility of it. That which wanted to make out to
the Nation a clearness in having and obtaining this their right, was the
obligation they had put upon themselves and their posterities to their present
Sovereign and his Authority, which in justice and by the Oaths of Allegiance
they were solemnly bound to, in the sight of God as well as of Man. And
therefore, unless by the abuse of that office of Trust, (to that degree, as on
his part, to break the fundamental compact and constitution of Government) they
could not be set free nor restored to their original Right and first Liberty:
especially if together with such breach of Trust, both parties appeal to God,
and put it upon the issue of Battle, and God give the decision; and in
consequence thereof, that original Right be asserted, and possession thereof
had and held for some years, and then not rightfully lost, but treacherously
betrayed and given up by those in whom no power was rightfully placed, to give
up the subjection of the Nation again unto any, whatsoever.

Unto which is to be added, that how and when the dissolution of the said
Parliament, (according to Law) has been made, is yet unascertained, and not
particularly declared: by reason whereof, and by what has been before showed,
the state of the Case on the Subjects part, is much altered, as to the matter
of Right, and the Usurpation is now on the other hand, there being, (as is well
known) two sorts of Usurpers; either such, as having no right of consent at all
unto the Rule they exercise over the Subject; or such, who under pretense of a
Right and Title, do claim not by consent, but by conquest and power, or else
hold themselves not obliged to the Fundamental compact and constitution of
Government, but gain unduely from the Subject, (by advantages taken through
deceit and violence) that which is not their own by Law.

For a rational Man to give up his Reason and Will unto the Judgment and Will
of another, (without which, no outward coercive Power can be) whose Judgment
and Will is not perfectly and unchangeably good and right, is unwise, and
unsafe, and by the Law of Nature, forbidden. And therefore all such gift, made
by rational men, must be conditional, either implied, or explicit, to be
followers of their Rulers, so far as they are followers of that good and right,
which is contained in the Law of the Supreme Lawgiver, and no further;
reserving to themselves, (in case of such defection and declining of the Rulers
actings from the Rule) their primitive and original Freedom, to resort unto,
that so they may in such case, be as they were before they gave away their
subjection unto the Will of another; and reserving also the power to have this
judged by a meet and competent Judge, which is the Reason of the King and
Kingdom, declared by their Representatives in Parliament; that is to say, the
Delegates of the People in the House of Commons assembled, and the
Commissioners on the Kings behalf, by his own Letters Patents, in the House of
Peers; which two concurring do very far bind the King, if not wholly.

And when these cannot agree, but break one from another, the Commons in
Parliament assembled, are ex Officio, the Keepers of the Liberties of the
Nation, and righteous Possessors and Defendors of it, against all Usurpers and
Usurpations whatsoever, by the Laws of England.

The Valley of Jehoshaphat, considered and opened, by comparing 2. Chron. 20.
with Joel 3.
IT was the saying of Austine; Nothing falls under our senses, or happens in
this visible World, but is either commanded or permitted from the invisible and
unintelligible Court and Palace of the highest Emperor and universal King, who
is the chief over all the kings of the earth. For although he has both
commanded and permitted a subordinate external Government over Men, administered
by man, for the upholding of Justice in humane Societies, and for the peace,
welfare, and safety of men that are made in Gods Image; yet, he has not so
entirely put the Rule of the whole earth out of his own hands, but that in
cases of eminent injustice and oppression (committed in Provinces, States and
Kingdoms, contrary to his Laws, to their own, and the very end of Magistracy,
which is, the conservation of the Peoples just Rights and Liberties) He that is
higher than the highest amongst men, does regard, and will show by some
extraordinary interposition of his, that there are higher than they.

Such a seasonable and signal appearance of God, for the Succor and Relief of
his People, in their greatest Straits and Exigencies, (when they have no might,
visible Power, or armed Force, to undertake the great company and multitude
that comes against them, nor know what to do, save only to have their eyes
toward him) is called in Scripture, The day of the Lord's Judgment. Then the
Battle and cause of the Quarrel, will appear to be not so much theirs, as the
Lord's: and the frame of their heart will be humble before the Lord, believing
in the Lord, and believing his Prophets, for their good success and
establishment.

This Dispensation is very lively described under the Type, and by the Name of
The Valley of Jehoshaphat, as to the Season and Place wherein God will give
forth a signal appearance of himself in Judgment, on the behalf of his People,
for a final decision of the Controversy between them and their enemies. It
Literally and Typically fell out thus, as is at large recorded, 2 Chronicles. 20.

By way of allusion to this, and upon occasion of the like, yea, and far
greater Extreamities, which God's People in the last days, are to be brought
into, is that Prophecy, Joel 3. for a like, yea, a far greater and more signal
appearance of God for their Deliverance and Rescue, in order to a final
Decision of the Controversy, between his People and the Inhabitants of the
earth, by his own Judgment. This is there called, The Valley of Jehoshaphat,
in which the Lord will sit to Judge all his enemies round about. In this Battle
and great Decision of his Peoples Controversy, he will cause his Mighty Ones
to come down from Heaven, to put in their sickle as reapers in this Vintage and
Harvest, when the wickedness is great. Unto this, Revel. 14. 14, 20. refers,
which does plainly evidence, that this grand Decision is to fall out in the
very last of times, and probably, is that, which will make way to the Rising of
the Witnesses, and will be accompanied with that Earthquake, in which shall be
slain, of men seven thousand, and the tenth part of the City will thereupon
fall, Rev. 11.

It is expressed, Joel 3. That in this day of the Lord, wherein he will be
near, in the Valley of Decision, the Heavens and the Earth shall shake, by the
Lords own roaring out of Sion; and he himself will be the Harbor, Hope and
Strength of his People. The Sun and Moon of earthly Churches and Thrones of
Judicature, that contest with them, shall be darkened, and the Stars, (even the
choicest and most illuminated gifted Pastors and Leaders, in the earthly
Jerusalem Churches, with their most refined Forms of Worship, resisting the
power of true spiritual Godliness) shall withdraw their shining. Even their
holy flesh will pass off from them and consume away upon their spiritual
lewdness, and confident opposing the Faith of Gods Elect, Jer. 11. 17. Their
very Eyes will consume away in their holes, with which they say, we see* and
for which, Christ tells the Pharisees, in like case, that therefore there sin
remains. (John 9. 41.) Or, there remains no more benefit from Christ's
Sacrifice, for their sin; and therefore only a fearful looking for of the
fiery and devouring indignation, Heb. 10. 26, 27.

Here Is that, the great confidence and boast of many professing Churches and
eminent Pastors in the earthly Jerusalem Fabric, or House on the sand, will
come to, Ezekiel. 13. and Mat. 7. Their very Eyes, their high enlightenings and
excellent spiritual Gifts, their supernatural or infused humane Learning,
that is admitted only as an adorning and accomplishment of the natural man,
(unaccompanied with that Fire-Baptisme, that is performed by the unspeakable
gift of the Spirit it self, for the transforming of the natural man into
spiritual) even these Eyes becoming evil, ( Mat. 6. 23.) and this light,
opposing and preferring it self to the more excellent discerning and mavelous
light in spiritual Believers, are turned by the just Judgment of God, into the
greatest and most fatal blindness and darkness of all. Their tongues also,
though the tongues of men and angels, for excellency and dexterity of
expressing what they see, with the forementioned eyes, will consume away in
their mouth, ( Zech. 14. 12.) and leave them exposed to become, and accordingly
be dealt with, as mere sounding brass and tinckling Cymbals, (1 Cor. 12. 31.
and 13. 1.) giving no certain sound, and right warning to the Battles of the
Lord, the good sight of Faith.

This comes to pass through their confidence in those seize, which may
be, and often are turned into an Idol of jealousy, and spiritual whoredom, Ezekiel.
16. 1, 15.

All these considerations of Church and State, put together, afford great
ground of enquiry, as to the Condition of the times in which we live, how far
the face which they bear, (and which God has put upon them, in the course of
his Providence, for some years now past) does speak or signify the near
approach of any such extraordinary and signal appearance or day of Gods
Judgment, for the Decision of his own or his Peoples quarrel and controversy
with the profane Heathen that are round about them, waiting for an advantage,
utterly and universally to remove and root them out from off the face of the
whole earth?

That which has been acted upon the Theater of these Nations, amongst us, in
the true state of our Controversy, seems to be reducible to this following
Querie;

Whether the Representative Body of the Kingdom of England, in Parliament
assembled, and in their Supreme Power and Trust made indissolvable, unless by
their own Consent and free Vote, and this by particular and express Statute,
have not had a just and righteous Cause? A Quarrel more God's, than their own?

1. It may appear they had; First, from the Ground of their undertaking the
War; Was it not in their own and the Kingdoms just and necessary defense, and
for the maintaining of the public Rights and Liberties of both?

2. Secondly, Was it not undertaken upon mutual Appeals of both Parties to God,
desiring him to judge between them, to give the Decision and Issue by the Law
of War, (when no other Law could be heard) as the definitive Sentence in this
Controversy, from the Court of Heaven?

3. Thirdly, Pursuant to such Decision, did they not recover and repossess the
Kingdoms original and primitive freedom? Did they not endeavor to conserve and
secure it, as due to them by the Law of God and of Nature? For man was made in
God's Image, and all Adams Posterity are properly one Universal Kingdom on
earth, under the Rule and Government of the Son of God, both as Creator and
Redeemer.

By virtue of this original and primitive Freedom so recovered, they were at
their own choice, whether to remain in, and retain this their true freedom
(unresigned and unsubjected to the Will of any Man) under the Rule of the Son
of God and his Laws, or else to set up a King or any other Form of Government
over them, after the manner of other Nations. In this latter case, it is
acknowledged, that when a Commonwealth or People, do choose their first King,
upon condition to obey him and his Successors, Ruling justly; they ought to
remain subject to him, according to the Law, and tenor of the Fundamental
Compact with him, on whom they have transferred their Authority. No
Jurisdiction remains in them (after that free and voluntary Act of theirs)
either to Judge the Realm, or determine who is the true Successor, otherwise
than is by them reserved and stipulated, by their Fundamental Laws and
Constitutions of Government.

And though the righteousness of this Cause (contained in the forementioned
particulars) be such, as carries in it its own evidence; yet, as (as things
have fallen out) it is come to be oppressed and buried in the grave of
Malefactors; in the room of which, a contrary Judgment and Way, is visibly
owned, upheld, and intended to be prosecuted to the utmost, for its own
fast-rooting and establishment; and this, by the common Consent and Association
of Multitudes. What then remains for the recovery and restitution of that good
old Cause and Way, but such a seasonable and signal appearance of God, (as
aforesaid) in the Valley of Jehoshaphat? What but the taking things immediately
into his own hands, for administration of Judgment, and giving the last and
final decision? Especially, since what was foretold by Daniel, is remarkably
accomplished amongst us, to wit, that the visible Power of Gods People should
be broken and scattered, so as that they should have no might remaining in and
with them, to go against the Multitudes, that design and resolve their Ruin.

There is not any remedy left to them, wherein they may expect success, but
from such a signal day of the Lord's immediate appearance in Judgment on their
behalf. For their sakes therefore, O Lord, return thou on high, ( Psalm. 7. 7.)
take thy Throne of Judicature over men, from which thou have seemed to have
departed, and execute that righteous Judgment, which thou have seemed for a
season to have suspended, upon wise and holy ends best known to thy self.

In such a dark and gloomy day, those that truly fear the Lord, are directed
and required by him, not to fear or be dismayed, because he will be with them.
They are encouraged in the way of Faith only, to expect this deliverance; even
to stand still, as having no need to fight in this Battle, but only to see the
Salvation of the Lord, through believing.

Ancient Foundations, when once become destructive to those very ends for which
they were first ordained, and prove hindrances, to the good and enjoyment of
humane Societies, to the true Worship of God, and the Safety of the People, are
for their sakes, and upon the same Reasons to be altered, for which they were
first laid. In the way of God's Justice they may be shaken and removed, in
order to accomplish the Counsels of his Will, upon such a State, Nation, or
Kingdom, in order to his introducing a righteous Government, of his own framing.

This may have been the cause of our Wanderings as it were in a Wilderness, and
of God's bringing us back again into Egypt, after our near approach to the Land
of Rest; that we have no better known, and had no more care to prosecute, what
he principally intended in and by all our Changes and Removes, in the course of
his Providence. Yea we have added this also, to the rest of our sins, that we
have improved the Gifts and Deliverances that God bestowed upon us, another
way, and to another end than was by him intended, as well as Providentially
intimated, by that holy Decree of his, in the Decision, declared at the Trial
in his Martial Court, with points of Swords.

Here the great Controversy that had been depending many Ages between Rulers
and the Ruled, (as to the Claims of the one in point of Prerogative; and of
the other in their Spiritual and Temporal Freedoms) was after many heats and
colds, many skirmishings and battles, at last decided by the Sword. This is a
way of Trial allowed by the known common Law of England, and the Law in force
throughout all Nations. By this, the Verdict is given forth from a Court of
such a Nature, as from whence there is no further appeal; Especially since
after the Trial past, quiet possesion was given to the Conquerors, and
continued some years. Upon this, Reason and Gratitude to God, obliged us to
such a prosecution as might answer the true end of Government; and in especial
after that manner, as might be most to God's well-pleasing.

The Powerful Being which by success of Arms, as given to the Peoples
Representative Body in Parliament, did communicate to it essentiallity,
according to the nature of that Being, for which it was ordained. For that
Being, with Power of continuing together at their own pleasure, were as the
Soul and Body, unseperated, and they might have performed things necessary at
present, for the safety and preservation of the Body they represented. They
might have been a good help to settle righteous Government, in a constitution
most acceptable to God, and beneficial to the Governed, on the Foundation of
God's Institution, and the Peoples Ordination, in consent together, laid by the
Power of God and the Peoples own Swords, in the hands of their faithful
Trustees.

It would imply a high contempt of God and his Dispensations, so signal amongst
us, to communicate the benefit of them to his opposers. The right of choosing
and being chosen into places of Trust in the Government, was returned by the
Law of the Sword (which is paramount to all humane Laws) into its primitive
exercise, which is warranted by the Law of God and of Nature. By that Law the
most famous Monarchies of the World in all Ages were first constituted and
settled; and by it God decided our Cause, looking for an event and fruit
answerable to the benefit by him given; even such a Government, as God would
have given us the Pattern of (had we sought it, as was our duty) whereby
Justice and Mercy should have been daily administered according to his will, to
the bringing on the new Heavens and new Earth, wherein Righteousness might
dwell.

The Vessel of this Commonwealth now weather-heaten and torn, seems to be more
in danger, than that wherein Jonah would have sled to Tarsus: For though we
have cast forth a great part of our goods to secure it, this has done us but
small good. That Ship had but one Delinquint aboard, which occasioned the
Storm; and his being thrown into the Sea, brought immediate safety. They had
also many skilful Seamen to guide it, but all our Pilots are cast overboard,
and none left in appearance, but guilty Passengers. Nay, admit with Jonah, both
the Commonwealth and Cause be brought into most desperate Exigents and
Extreamities, from whence there is no more appearing redemption for them, then
such as they have, that go down quick into the grave and belly of the Whale;
yet they may be preserved, even by that which naturally of it self is
irrecoverably destructive to them, and be employed again in service by him
against whom they have been so ungratefully rebellious after former great
deliverances. So infinite are God's Mercies, yea, so exceeding Merciful are the
severest of his Judgments and Dispensations toward his People.

Thus may both People and Army be deprived of their Power, and another party
let in to plague and root out from amongst us, such as are more wicked than
themselves, and so make room for a more righteous Generation, which will begin
all things anew.

By the course of things acted amongst us, God's sentence on our behalf is made
void, and that seems given away for ever, which was recovered by the Sword. Our
troubles are only prorogued. No Faith or Contract is thought meet to be kept
with Rebels and Heretics, when by acquired Power it may be broken. 'Twas the
great solly and self-flattery of some, to think it would be otherwise. It is
most certainly true, that no Time or Prescription, is a just Bar to God's and
the Peoples Right.

To murmr against God's Verdict, and resist his Doom, so solemnly given and
executed amongst us, in the sight and concurring acknowledgement of the Nations
round about, is to become adversaries to God, and to betray our Country. If
God then do think fit to permit such a dispensation to pass upon us, it is for
the punishment of our sins, and for a plague to those that are the Actors
therein; to bring more swift exemplary vengeance upon them. Such as have
discharged a good Conscience in what may most offend the higher Powers, are not
to fear, though they be admitted to the exercise of their Rule, with an
unrestrained Power, and revengeful mind.

Though from that Mountain, the Storm that comes, will be very terrible, yet
some are safest in Storms, as experience shows. Yea best therein by Gods
Mercies, when their greatest enemies think most irrecoverably to undo them.

Our late Condition held much resemblance with that of the Jews, and we
deserve as well to be rejected as they were. If Christ were in the flesh
amongst us, as he was with them, we are as likely to prefer thieves and
murderers before him, and crucify him.

The present necessity in a righteous Cause is to be submitted to, and we are
not to be discouraged by the danger, which to some seems threatened us, from
former or present Laws. For no man that acts for common safety, when the Sword
has absolute power, and shall also command it, can justly be questioned
afterward for acting contrary to some former Laws, which could be binding no
longer then whilst the Civil Sword had Sovereignty.

What People under Heaven have had more Experiments of God's timely assistance
in all their Extreamities, then Englishmen, as well with respect to times
past, as within our remembrance? Are the like Mercies recorded of any Nation?
In their times of greatest Confusion they were preserved. They were a living
active Body without a Head: A Bush burning in the Flames of a Civil War, yet
not consumed: A People when without a Government, not embrued in one another
Blood. A wonder to all Neighbors round about, and many signal Changes brought
about without Blood, which indubitably evidences that God is in the Bush: and
would gather us together as Chickens under a Hen, to be brooded by him, if we
were not most stubbornly hardened.

Our sins have been the cause, that our Counsels, our Forces, our Wit, our
Conquests, and our Selves have been destructive to our selves, to each other,
and to a happy advancement toward our long expected and desired Settlement.
Until these sins of ours be repented truly and thoroughly, all the Wisdom and
Power upon Earth shall not avail us, but every day, every attempt, will
increase our Troubles, until there be a final extirpation of all that hinders
God's Work; When this once is, nothing shall harm us, God being a sure refuge
against all evils, if we reconcile our selves to him by Faith and Repentance.
Then, even those things that are most mischievous in their own natures, shall
be made our advantage and security.

The Peoples Cause whom God after trial has declared free, is a righteous one,
though not so prudently and righteously managed as it might and ought to have
been. God's doom therefore is justly executed upon us, with what intent and
jugglings soever it was prosecuted by men.

Man's corruption makes him more firmly to adhere to that which is good: in
which case, it is not many times, Virtue so much as Necessity that keeps men
Constant; having no other means of safety and subsistence for the most part.

The goodness of any Cause is not merely to be judged by the Events, whether
visibly prosperous or unprosperous, but by the righteousness of its Principles:
nor is our Faith and Patience to fail under the many fears, doubts, wants,
troubles, and Power of Adversaries, in the passage to the recovery of our long
lost Freedom. For it is the same Cause with that of the Israelites of old, of
which we ought not to be ashamed or distrustful.

How has it fared with the Cause of Christ generally, for more now than 1600
years, being made the common object of scorn and persecution, not from the base
and foolish only, but from the noblest and wisest persons in the Worlds
esteem! Yet, though our Sufferings and the time of our warfare seems long, it
is very short, considering the perpetuity of the Kingdom which at last we shall
obtain, and wherein we shall individually reign with the chief Sovereign
thereof. For whereas all the Kingdoms of the World have not yet lasted 6000
years, this is everlasting and without end. They that overcome by not loving
their lives unto the death, ( Rev. 12. 11.) shall be Pillars in the House of
this everlasting Kingdom, never to be removed. They shall be Kings and Priests
to God, sitting with him upon his Throne, subjecting the Nations, and reigning
with him for ever and ever. This is a Kingdom that consists with the Divinity
of Christ, and humanity of men. Such a reign of Christ upon earth, as will not
be without Laws agreeable to humane Nature, nor without Magistrates appointed
as Officers under him; in which Election, God and the People shall have a joint
concurrence. God's Throne in men's Consciences must then be resigned, and his
People permitted to enjoy the Liberties, due to them by the Laws of Grace and
Nature. Into this, God's own immediate hand can now only lead us, by his own
coming to Judgment in the Valley of Jehoshaphat.

Meditations concerning Man's Life, etc. Penned by this Sufferer in his Prison
State.
IT is a principal part of Wisdom to know how to esteem Life; to hold and
preserve, to loose or give it up. There is scarce any thing man more fails in
than this. They that think nothing dearer than Life, esteem Life for it self,
live not but to live. Others think the shortest Life best, either not to be
born at all or else to die quickly. These are two extremes. That comes nearer
Truth, a Wise Man said, Life is such a good, that if a man knew what he did in
it, he would not accept, at least not desire it. Vitam nemo cuperet, si daretur
tantum scientibus. Wise Men, in living, make a Virtue of Necessity, live as
long as they should, not as long as they can.

There is a time to Live and a time to die. A good Death is far better and more
elegible than an ill Life. A wise man Lives but so long as his Life is more
worth than his Death. The longer Life is not always the better. To what end
serves a long Life? Simply to live, breath, eat, drink, and see this World?
What needs so long a time for all this? Me thinks we should soon be tired with
the daily repetition of these and the like Vanities? Would we live long, to
gain knowledge, experience, and Virtue? This seems an honest Design, but is
better to be had other ways by good men, when their Bodies are in the grave.

None usually employ their time so ill in this World, as Men. Non inopes sumus
vitae, sed prodigi. Some begin to live when they should die. Some have ended
before they begin. It Is incident to folly to be always but beginning to Live.
Life is but a sorrowful state, a perpetual issue of Errors. It Is a Web of
unhappy Adventures; A pursuit of diverse Miseries enchained together on all
sides. Solum id certum, nil esse certi: Nec miserius quicquam homine nec
superbius. Vanity is the most essential and proper quality of Man's first
Nature. The World is not worth that Labor and Pains Man exercises in and about
it; which caused that saying; A wise man should do nothing but for himself. It Is
not reason wise men should put themselves in danger for Fools, much less for
Knaves.

The Will only is truly Man's own, and the considerable part of the reasonable
Soul. On it depend the issues of Good or Evil, Life or Death. All the rest of a
Man, his Understanding, Memory, Imagination, may be taken from him, altered,
troubled by a thousand accidents. But the Will is so much in our own power,
that it cannot be taken away, though its action may be hindered. It Is our own,
till we knowingly and freely give it away, which may be. And he that has once
absolutely given up his Will to another, is no more his own man. He has left
himself nothing of his own. It Is by the Will we are good or evil, happy or
unhappy.

Concerning Government.
He that gives up his Will to the Rule and Government of another, becomes
subject to that other. Men that are born equal, come to be made subject two
ways; either, by the free giving up of themselves to others, or by others
violent assuming and exercising power over them, because they are strangers, as
Nimrod the mighty hunter of men, served his fellow mortals.

Government is either Royal, or Seignioral and Tyrannical, as the Turks. It Is
then properly Royal, be it administered by one, by many, or by all their
Representatives, when he or they that have Sovereign Power, obey the Laws of
Nature, preserve the natural Liberty and propriety of the Goods and Persons of
the Subjects, which no reasonable men, acted by sound judgment, will ever
absolutely give away, but secure their right in, and power over, by fundamental
Contracts and Agreements with their Governors.

Absolute Sovereignty is a perpetual power over all, without any restraint,
limitations or conditions put upon the Sovereign. This consists in a power of
giving Laws to all in general, and to every one in particular, without the
consent or gift of any others, and requiring universal and undispensable
obedience to all his Commands, under just penalties. This Sovereignty is proper
only to the highest Being, not at all to Creatures, though where the
Government is Despotical and Seignioral, it is assumed and exercised.

But Government Royal, is that which is consonant to the immutable Laws of
Nature and Dictates of right Reason, which require a conservation of the
Subjects Liberty, and Propriety in their goods and persons, as well as the
preservation and upholding of Empire and Authority in the Prince, and find out
the Medium, through the mutual Agreements of Sovereign and Subjects, for both
to consist.

In Quarrels between Subjects and Sovereigns, about the Subjects Liberty and
the Kings Prerogative, it is seldom seen, but the Error lies on the Sovereign's
part, who is apt to be flattered into the presumptuous exercise of such an
absolute Sovereignty and Legislative Dominion over them, as becomes no
creature, and exceeds all the bounds of that Contract he made with them, at his
Inauguration.

All just Power and Authority is from God, and by virtue of his Ordinance and
Institution. He therefore that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God. But all contrarient actings against the Prince, are not to be accounted a
resisting of the Power; especially, when the whole State is concerned, and the
business is managed by public Trustees, called and authorized by Law, as
Conservers of the State, and Defenders of the public Liberties and Laws
thereof. In such a public capacity, to stand in the gap, when a Breach is
made, and hinder any charge or attempt that would ruinate the State, is Duty.
In such case, they ought to withstand and hinder the violent proceedings of
any, either by way of Justice in a Legal trial, or by force. For the Prince is
not Master of the State, but only a Guardian and Defender thereof, from
injuries and evil. Yet these affairs, for redress of Grievances, in case of
Princes failers, belong not to all, but to the Tutors and Maintainers of the
State, or those that are interested therein; as Electors in Elective States,
and in Hereditary States, the States General and Representative Body of the
Kingdom, according to the tenor of their fundamental Laws. In this case it is
generally acknowledged lawful, to resist a Tyrant.

Under the cross Accidents, issuing from such Contests, to which man is subject
through others arbitrary Domination, he may carry himself well, two ways.

1. By a strong and vigorous resistance thereof, to the last, for diverting or
blunting the point of it, so as either to escape or force it.

2. The other way, and that perhaps the surest, is to take and receive these
Accidents at the worst, let them prove what they will, though to the loss of
Life and all that is dear to him in this World. To resolve within himself to
bear them sweetly and patiently, and peaceably to attend whatever shall happen,
without tormenting himself about it, or loosing the calmness and serenity of
his mind in going about to hinder or prevent it. He that takes the first
course, labors to escape; he that takes the latter is content rather to
suffer. This many times proves the better bargain. It Is possible to incur
greater inconveniency and loss in pleading and contending, than in loosing, or
in flying for safety, than in suffering.

Concerning Friendship.
Perfect friendship is a very plain and universal complication or enfolding of
two Souls in one, so, that the Conjunction is most intimate and inseparable.
They can no more be divided; nor would they, if they might.

Secondly, It is very free, being built upon the pure choice and liberty of the
Will, without any other obligation or foreign motive.

Thirdly, Without any exception of things, goods, honors, judgments,
thoughts, wills, Life.

Marriage it self is some resemblance of this divine knot, as says the
Apostle, who from thence mounts in his contemplation to the great mystery of
this kind between Christ and his Church. Abraham is called, the friend of God.

Concerning Enemies.
In reference to our Enemies we must take care, not to meditate Revenge. Yet in
some sense we may account it an excellent and worthy revenge, to slight the
worst they can do, whereby we take away the pleasure which they think to have,
in vexing us. We must in suffering Injuries, have respect to our selves and to
him that offends us. Touching our selves, we must take heed, that we do nothing
unworthy or unbecoming us, that may give the enemy advantage against us. As to
him that offends us, we should be wise as Serpents to wave his assault, till
our hour is come, and we can gain and conquer by dying.

It is a weakness of mind not to know how to contemn an offense. An honest man
is not subject to Injury. He is inviolable and unmovable. Inviolable, not so
much that he cannot be beaten; but, that being beaten, he does neither receive
wound nor hurt. We can receive no evil but of our selves. We may therefore
always say with Socrates, My enemies may put me to death, but they shall never
enforce me to do that which I ought not.

Evils themselves, through the wise overruling Providence of God, have good
fruits and effects. The World would be extinguished and perish, if it were not
changed, shaken and discomposed, by a variety and an interchangable course of
things, wisely ordered by God, the best Physician. This ought to satisfy every
honest and reasonable mind, and make it joyfully submit to the worst of
changes, how strange and wonderful soever they may seem, since they are the
works of God and Nature, and that which is a loss in one respect, is a gain in
another.

Let not a wise man disdain or ill resent any thing that shall happen to him.
Let him know those things that seem hurtful to him in particular, pertain to
the preservation of the whole Universe, and are of the nature of those things,
that finish and fill up the course and office of this World.

Meditations on Death.
IT is a fruit of true Wisdom, not only Christian but Natural, to be found and
kept in a frame of mind, ready for Death.

The day of Death is the Judge of all our other days; the very trial and
touchstone of the actions of our Life. It Is the end that crowns the work, and a
good Death honors a man's whole Life.

This last act, as it is the most difficult, so but by this a man cannot well
judge of the actions of another Life, without wronging him.

A wise Greek being asked concerning three eminent persons, which of them was
to be most esteemed, returned this Answer, We must see them all three die,
before this Question can be resolved: With which accords that saying of Solon,
the wise Athenian to Craesus, when he boastingly showed him his great
Treasures, No man is to be accounted happy before his Death.

True natural Wisdom pursues the learning and practice of dying well, as the
very end of Life; and indeed, he has not spent his Life ill, that has learned
to die well. It is the chiefest thing and duty of Life.

The knowledge of Dying, is the knowledge of Liberty, the state of true
Freedom, the way to Fear nothing, to Live well, contentedly and peaceably.
Without this there is no more pleasure in Life, than in the fruition of that
thing, which a man fears always to loose. In order to which, we must above
all endeavor that our sins may die, and that we see them dead before our
selves, which alone can give us boldness in the day of Judgment, and make us
always ready and prepared for Death.

Death is not to be feared and fled from, as it is by most, but sweetly and
patiently to be waited for, as a thing natural, reasonable, and inevitable. It
is to be looked upon as a thing indifferent, carrying no harm in it. This, that
is all the hurt enemies can do us, is that which we should desire and seek
after, as the only Haven of Rest, from all the Torments of this Life; and
which, as it gives us a fuller fruition of Christ, is a very great gain, that
the sooner we are possessors of, the better.

Death is the only thing of all evils, or privations, that does no harm, has
indeed no evil in it, however it be reputed. The sting of it is sin, and that
is the sting of Life too. There is no reason to fear it, because no man knows
certainly what it is. This made Socrates refuse to plead before his Judges, for
his justification or Life. For (says he) If I should plead for my Life, and
desire of you that I may not die, I doubt I may speak against my self, to my
loss and hindrance, who may find more good in death than yet I know. Those
things I know to be evil, as unrighteousness and sin, I fly and avoid; those
that I know not to be so, as Death, etc. I cannot fear, and therefore I leave
it to you to determine for me, whether it is more expedient for me to Dye or to
Live.

He can never live contentedly that fears to dye. That man only is a free man
who fears not Death, Life it self being but slavery, if it were not made free
by Death. It is uncertain in what place Death attends us, therefore let us
expect it in all places, and be always ready to receive it. Great virtue, and
great or long Life do seldom meet together. Life is measured by the end, if
that be good, all the rest will have a proportion to it. The quantity is
nothing, as to the making it more or less happy.

The Spirit of a good man, when he ceases to live in the Body, goes into a
better state of Life, than that which he exercises in this World; and when once
in that, were it possible to resume this, he would refuse it. Yea were a man
capable to know what this Life here is, before he receives it, he would scarce
ever have accepted it at first. The self same journey men have taken, from no
being to being, and from pre-existent being, into mortal Life, without fear or
passion, they may take again from that Life by Death, into a Life that has
immortality in it.

Death is the inevitable Law, God and Nature have put upon us. Things certain,
should not be feared, but expected. Things doubtful only are to be feared.
Death in stead of taking away any thing from us, gives us all, even the
perfection of our natures; sets us at liberty both from our own bodily desires,
and others domination; makes the Servant free from his Master. It does not
bring us into darkness, but takes darkness out of us, us out of darkness, and
puts us into mavelous light. Nothing perishes or is dissolved by Death, but
the Vail and Covering, which is wont to be done away from all ripe fruit. It
brings us out of a dark dungeon, through the crannies whereof, our sight of
Light is but weak and small, and brings us into an open Liberty, an estate of
Light and Life, unvailed and perpetual. It takes us out of that mortality which
began in the womb of our Mother, and now ends, to bring us into that Life
which shall never end. This day which thou fear as thy last, is thy Birth
day into Eternity.

Death holds a high place in the policy and great commonwealth of the World.
It is very profitable for the succession and continuance of the works of Nature.

The fading corruption, and loss of this life, is the passage into a better.
Death is no less essential to us, than to live or to be born. In flying Death
thou flyest thy self, thy essence is equally parted into these two, Life and
Death. It is the condition and Law of thy Creation. Men are not sent into the
World by God, but with purpose to go forth again; which he that is not willing
to do, should not come in.

The first day of thy birth, binds thee and sets thee in the way as well to
Death as to Life. To be unwilling therefore to die, is to be unwilling to be a
Man, since to be a Man is to be Mortal. It being therefore so serviceable to
Nature and the institution of it, why should it be feared or shunned? Besides,
it is necessary and inevitable, we must do our best endeavor in things that
are not Remediless, but ought to grow resolute in things past Remedy.

It is most just, reasonable, and desirable, to arive at that place toward
which we are always walking. Why fear thou to go whither all the World
goes? It is the part of a valiant and generous Mind, to prefer some things
before Life, as things, for which a man should not doubt nor fear to die. In
such a case, however matters go, a man must more account thereof than of his
Life. He must run his race with resolution, that he may perform things
profitable and exemplary.

The contempt of Death, is that which produces the boldest and most honorable
exploits. He that fears not to die, fears nothing. From hence have proceeded
the commendable Resolutions and free Speeches of Virtue, uttered by men, of
whom the world has not been worthy.

A gallant Roman, commanded by Vespasian not to come to the Senate, answered,
He was a Senator, therefore sit to be at the Senate; and being there, if
required to give his advice, he would do it as his Conscience commanded him.
Hereupon being threatened by the Emperor, he replied, Did I ever tell you, that
I was immortal? Do you what you will, and I will do what I ought. It is in your
power to put me unjustly to death; and in mine to die constantly. What hard
dealing cannot he suffer, that fears not to die? Other designments may be
hindered by our enemies, but they cannot hinder us from dying. The means whereby
to live free, is to contemn Death. It is no great thing to live, slaves and
beasts can do that, but it is a great matter to live freely, and die honestly,
wisely, constantly. Emori nolo (says one) sed me esse mortuum, nihil estimo; I
would not die, but to be dead, I look upon as nothing. But no man can be said
resolute to die, that is afraid to confront it, and suffer with his eyes open,
as Socrates did, without passion or alteration.

In a miserable estate of a Life, which a man cannot remedy, Death is lawfully
desirable, as our best retreat and only haven from the storms of this Life;
and as the Sovereign good of nature, the only stay and pillar of Liberty. It
is a good time to die, when to live is rather a burden than a blessing, and
there is more ill in Life than good.

There are many things in Life, far worse than Death, in respect whereof we
should rather die than live. The more voluntary our Death is, the more
honorable. Life may be taken away from every man by every man, but not Death.

It is no small reproach to a Christian, whose faith is in immortality and the
blessedness of another Life, to fear Death much, which is the necessary passage
thereunto. He ought rather to desire and thirst after death, as great gain;
Vitam habere in patientia, and mortem in desiderio; to endure Life, and desire
Death. But it is greater constancy, well to use the chain wherewith we are
bound, than to break it. A man is not to abandon his charge in Life, without
the express command of him that gave it him. Sylvanus and Proximus, being
pardoned by Nero, chose Death, rather than to Live upon those terms. Nerva a
great Lawyer, Cato of Urica, and others, died, as not able to bear the sight of
the Weal-publick in that bad and declining state, into which by Gods Providence
it was brought, in their times, but they should have considered,

Multa dies variusque labor mutabilis Aevi,
Retulit in melius.
A man ought to carry himself blamlesly and with a steady courage in his place
and calling, against his assailants, and consider that it is better to continue
firm and constant to the end, then fearfully to fly or dye. It is not a less
evil to quit the place and fly, than obstinately to be taken and perish. It is
a great point of wisdom to know the right hour and fit season to Die. Many men
have survived their own Glory. That is the best Death which is well recollected
in it self, quiet, solitary, and attends wholly to what at that time is
fittest.

But let us more particularly, and upon truly and purely Christian Principles,
weigh and consider Death.

They that live by Faith, die daily. The Life which Faith teaches, works Death.
It leads up the mind to things not seen, which are eternal, and takes it off
with its affections and desires, from things seen, which are temporary. It
acquaints the soul experimentally with that heavenly way of converse and
intercourse, which is not expressed by sensible signs, but by the
demonstration proper to spirits, whether angels, souls separate, or souls yet
in the body, as they live by faith, not by sense. In which respect, the use of
voice and mouth is attributed to God, to Christ, to Angels, who have that with
them and in them, whereby they outwardly manifest what they inwardly conceive,
although they express not the inward word of their mental conception, by any
outward voice, hand, eye, or other external sign, but by the way of its own
self evidencing brightness, and essential demonstration. Such a way of living
and shining forth in man's naked essential beams, he then arrives unto, when
the thick vail and wall of his flesh is dissolved, and his earthly tabernacle
put off.

The knowledge, sight, and experience of such a kind of subsisting and heavenly
manner of Life, that man is capable of, is the best preparative, and most
powerful motive, to leave the body, and surcease the use of our earthly organs.
This in effect is all that bodily death, rightly known and understood, does
impart; a lawful surceasing the use and exercise of our earthly organs, and our
willing and cheerful resorting to the use and exercise of that Life without the
Body, which man is capable to subsist in, when made perfect in spirit, an equal
and associate with angels, under the power and order of expressing what he
inwardly conceives, as they do. This made Paul look upon Life in the Body, and
Life out of it, with no indifferent eye, but as accounting the being at home in
the body, an absence from the Lord; and such a kind of absence from the body as
death causes, to be that which makes us most present with the Lord: which
therefore we should be most willing unto, and with greatest longing after,
desire. The strait which the Apostle found himself in, was not at all from the
least haesitation in his mind, which of the two, was in it self best and to be
preferred, but by which Christ might most be magnified, and the Church
benefitted, according to the will of Christ.

So then unless to live were Christ, and a real and clear magnifying of Christ
in his Body, he cared not for Life, but contemned Death. He saw evidently how
it was his own particular loss and hindrance, even, not to Die, since to be
dissolved, to depart and be with Christ, and in the Society of the blessed
Angels and Saints in Heaven, was best of all, and far more gainful and to be
valued by him, than any longer continuance or abode in the flesh.

The magnifying of Christ in his Body, whether by Life or by Death, was the
Consideration with Paul, that held the balance, cast the scale, and that
only. So it ought to be with every true Christian.

The end of man's coming into the Body, and his temporary continuance and abode
there, according to the Law of his Creation, is the magnifying and glorifying
Christ, either by his Life or by his Death, or both, the one of which if he do
not, it must needs be his sin, and he is left without excuse. For none can
violate or corrupt the mind of man, by the Law of Nature, nor let in Death upon
his Spiritual Substance, but himself, though they dissolve his temporary abode
in the flesh, break his outward case and shel; and rather than do the one, we
should choose the other, choose affliction rather than sin, the dissolution of
the Body, rather than the corrupting of the Mind. In so doing and dying, Christ
is magnifyed. Thus Peter was foretold, by what Death he should glorify God. And
to such it is given by Christ, not only to Believe, but Suffer and Die for his
Names sake, as a transcendent privilege and honor.

If no restraint then be upon our mind from without, what hinders that Christ
is not magnified in our Body, but something within us; in our judgment, will,
and affections, that are not right set and fixed, nor as yet wrought to this
self same thing by God, who has given us the earnest of his Spirit?

But it may be demanded, What is it, in which this great duty of man lies, as
to the magnifying of Christ in his Body by his Life, or living in the Body,
which is a more difficult thing to do than to Die? Christ himself tells us,
when he says, Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see, feel, and
sensibly discern, your good works; and so, glorify your father which is in
Heaven.

There are two sorts of signs we read of, in those that believe, which justify
their Faith, in consortship (as it were) with which their Faith works and is
made perfect, so as the work of Faith is fulfilled in them with power.

1. Signs Extraordinary, as Mark 16. 18. with which the Primitive Christians
were well acquainted, and so may all such again, as arrive to any competent
maturity in that primitive Christian Spirit.

2. Signs Ordinary, as those mentioned, Gal. 5. 22, 23. called, the fruits of
the Spirit in us, that makes us mighty in word and in deed, not only to will
but to perform that which is good; by being filled with the Spirit in our very
Bodies, made the Temples of the holy Ghost, rich in Faith and Tuch good Works,
as are the fruit of Faith, without which, Faith it self is dead and
unprofitable; and by which, Abraham justified his Faith, and was called, the
Friend of God.

It is in this sense, the Prophet urges the sanctification of our Vessels, when
he says, Be ye clean that bear the Vessels of the Lord. And the Apostle, when
he says, 1 Cor. 6. 19. What! know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the
holy Ghost, unto which Redemption by Christ extends, as well as to your
Spirits? therefore glorify God in your Body as well as in your Spirit, which is
God's, and wherein he has and challenges a special propriety.

The Body in Scripture acceptance, signifies, not only the material
substance, from which the Soul is actually separated, when it is laid in the
Grave; but very usually the Soul it self, that is to say, that part of the
Soul, which vitally unites the Body to it self, whose faculty and operation is
in and by the Body, and does properly and immediately exercise bodily Life, as
that which is co-natural, and co-essential to it.

There is a higher part in man's Soul, called Spirit, in distinction from Soul
and Body, expressed 1 These. 5. 23. as if the Spirit were an entire thing in it
self, though it be that, in and with which, Soul and Body does consist, as
parts of the whole Man. I pray God, says the Apostle, that your whole Spirit,
Soul, and Body, be preserved blameless to the coming of Christ, and that you
may be sanctified throughout, or in every part of you, in your Soul and in your
Body, which are to be esteemed but as parts, comparatively with your whole
Spirit.

Man, considered as entire in his Spirit, may have and has being, before he
partakes of Flesh and Blood, as it is written, Behold, says Christ, I and the
children which thou have given me. Forasmuch then as the children are partakers
of Flesh and Blood, he also himself took part of the same: even he, who, with
the children, were a mystery hid with the Father, before the World was, and had
their Seminal and radical Being, in the Word of Life, the Father of Spirits. In
this Word, as in the Image and Mental conception of the invisible God, the
Souls of all men, even of Christ himself, as man, were comprehended, as in
their original pattern and rule, in order at the time appointed, to come into
flesh, and there make their temporary abode, allotted to them.

By the Condition and Law of Man's Creation, he is made a Spiritual essence,
with two distinct faculties and operations, according to which he may be said
to be both Immortal and Mortal, Immaterial and Material, Spirit and Body, as
Body signifies man's animal rational Soul, that is to live in flesh, and has
its peculiar desire, faculty, and operation, proportioned thereunto. In all
this Man bears the Image and Similitude of God the Mediator, or of the Godhead
in Christ, as two Natures in him are Hypostatically united, and make but one
Compositum, or Person. This was comprehended in that Counsel which the blessed
Trinity took concerning the making of Man in their Image, and after their
Similitude. He was made male and female in his very Spiritual substance.

First, with a faculty, and operation of mind, superior, stronger and more
excellent, which is free and independent upon bodily organs, exercising Life,
properly and purely Spiritual and Immaterial, above and without the use of
sensible, signs, or shapes.

Secondly, With that inferior faculty and operation of mind, whose
subsistence, life, being, and motion, is in, with, and by the body, and through
the use of bodily organs, sensible signs, and external mediums, on the loss of
which, this second faculty and operation of man's Soul, which is the weaker,
inferior, and less valuable, ceases; at least, is for a time suspended, which
in Scripture phrase is called Death; even the Death of the Body. Yet the more
vigorous the exercise of this latter is, and the more that thereby we are at
home in the Body, the more in truth and reality we are dead; at least, asleep
in the earth, as to our more Noble and Spiritual part, in and through which, we
enjoy most of the presence of God and of Christ.

Since therefore, man's constitution of Being, in such, as he cannot live both
these Lives together, until the Resurrection, but that in the one of them, he
must be incomplete, have his operation much suspended, and be, as it were dead
or asleep.

To resolve which of these to choose and prefer, ought not to be so difficult,
as commonly it is made.

On the SUFFERINGS of the Renowned Sir H. Vane, Knight.
-- GReat Soul, never Understood
Until deciphered by thy Blood,
A Priest, a Prophet, and a King,
Systeme of every worthy thing.
Dying, that Liberty might Live,
The English Cause he does retrieve;
Stating it in no formal dress,
But in the Spirit of Righteousness.
Which he from the earth perceiving fled,
Died, to Return with it from the Dead.
Persons or Forms of Government,
Did little make to his intent.
To naught was he an Enemy,
But what was fixed in Enmity.
Against which he fought with eager breath,
Became Victorious in his Death.
And this not by necessity,
It was his Principle to Dye.
Flesh will resist, but Faith can suffer,
The soft hand's gone, beware the rougher.
Th'envy and hate of every Form,
Upon his head poured down the Storm.
Whilst he sublimed, and saved the good
Of The lowest, and sealed it with his Blood.
How great he was, his Enemies tell,
Who, while he lived, could not be well.
And in what stead his offering stood,
By resolute silence, Friends made good.
The male of the Flock is taken, the best,
To expiate the blame of the rest.
What tears and prayers wanted in strength,
His crying blood brings down at length.
Groan, English Hearts! groan! help the cry,
Lord Jesus Come! I come quickly.
FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
It Is very probable thou may meet with some faults and misprintings escaped
the Corrector, which could not be avoided, by reason of the distance between
the Transcriber and the Press; thou art desired to correct them, and pass them
by with candor. One thou may find in page 54, and 55, all those words within
the Parenthesis, should come in after the word Penetent. And page 97. in the
Title to that part, read Case for Cause.


