THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF George Busby, FOR High Treason, As a Romish
Priest and Jesuit, upon the Statute of 27. Eliz. Cap. 2.

At the Assizes and General Jail-delivery, held at Derby, for the County of
Derby, the 25th day of July, in the 33th year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord King Charles the Second, etc.

Before the Honorable Sir Thomas Street Knight, one of the Barons of his
Majesty's Exchequer.

As it was faithfully taken, by a Person of Quality.

London, Printed for Randolph Tailor. 1681.

THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF George Busby FOR High Treason, As a
Romish-Priest and Jesuit, upon the Statute of 27. Eliz. Cap. 2.
THe Court being sat, and the usual Formalities preceding business over, the
Panel of the Grand Jury was called over, and nineteen of them sworn. The Names
of which Gentlemen of the Grand Jury, which found the Bill of Indictment, etc.
against George Busby, were as follows.

1. Sir Henry Every of Eggington Baronet. 2. Sir Robert Coke of Langford,
Baronet. 3. Sir William Boothby of Ashborn, Knight. and Baronet. 4. Sir Robert
Clark of Chilcote, Knight. 5. William Fitz-Herbert of Tissington, Esquire 6. Henry
Cavendish of Douebridg, Esquire 7. William Mundy of Darlcy, Esquire 8. John Low of
Denby, Esquire 9. William Berrisford of Bently, Esquire 10. John Allen of Gresely, Esquire
11. William Hopkinson of Bonsall, Esquire 12. William Lees, Gent. 13. Lionel
Parshaw of Dionfield, Gent. 14. Joseph Harpur of Yeavely, Gent. 15. John
Stuffin of Hopton, Gent. 16. Matthew Smith of Denby, Gent. 17. John Whigly of
Cromford, Gent. 18. Paul Jenkinson, Gent. 19. George Birds of Stanton, Gent.
The Indictment being brought into Court, Billa vera. Clerk of the Assizes.
Jailer, set George Busby to the Bar which was done.


Cl. of the Arraignment. George Buzby, hold up thy hand, which he delayed to do.


Cl. again. George Busby, hold up thy hand.

Which he did not do, but instead thereof, presented a Petition to the Court to
this effect; that he was committed to the Goal in March last, for being a
Popish-Priest, and that great Industry has been used to procure Witnesses to
swear against him, and that having obtained his Habeas Corpus to be removed to
London, the Undersheriff falling Sick and being since dead, the Habeas Corpus
was not Executed; he prays he may be removed to the King's Bench, that he may
have time to make his defense, he depending upon his Habeas-Corpus, his most
material Evidence to clear him, and to prove his being an Alian, being then in
London, etc.


Baron Street. Mr. Busby, notwithstanding I must proceed to try you, the Grand
Jury having found the Bill Billa Vera; you say you are an Alian, if that be so,
then you are without this Law of the 27th Eliz.


Busby. I had not my Habeas Corpus, and so am deprived of my Witnesses to prove
that I am an Alian born.


Baron Street. If they prove you not a Native, then the Indictment falls.


Then the Clerk of Arraignments proceeded to Arraign the Prisoner. Clerk.
George Busby, hold up thy hand, which he did Thou stand Indicted by the Name
of George Busby, late of West-Hallam in the County of Derby Clerk, for that
thou being a Subject of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and being
likewise born within this Kingdom of England, was made and ordained a Priest by
the Authority derived and pretended from the Sea of Rome after the Feast of the
Nativity of St. John Baptist in the first year of the Reign of our Lady
Elizabeth, late Queen of England, etc. And before the 16 th day of March, in
the 33 th year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defendor of the Faith, etc. The
Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom of England little weighing, nor the
Punishments in the same contained not at all regarding; with force and Arms,
etc. at the Parish of West-Hallam aforesaid, in the County of Derby aforesaid,
being within this Ringdome of England, voluntarily, freely and Treasonably the
16 th day of March in the 33 th year of the Reign aforesaid, has been and
remained, contrary to the form of the Statute in that Case made and provided;
and against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity,
etc.


Baron Street. How say thou, George Busby, art thou Guilty of this Felony
and Treason whereof thou stand Indicted, or not Guilty?


Busby. This Indictment, my Lord, is not full, It recites not the particular
Case in the Statute of Queen Elizabeth, viz. That I took Orders beyond Sea, and
another point, that I am a Native of the Kings Dominions.


Baron Street. You may be made a Priest in England by the Authority of the
Bishop of Rome, as well at Rome.


Busby. How can I be made a Priest in England by the Authority of the Bishop of
Rome, where there is no such Authority?


Baron Street. You must plead to your Indictment as it stands.


Busby. Then my Lord, I humbly beg I may be allowed Council.


Baron Street. If any point in Law arise you shall be allowed Council.


Busby. The time and place is not specified in the Indictment.


Baron Street. If that be so it is material, but upon View of the Indictment,
'twas found right.


Cl. of Arraignments. George Busby, hold up thy hand, Art thou Guilty of this
Indictment, or not Guilty?


Busby. Then holding up his hand said, not Guilty.


Cl. of Arraignments. Culprit. How will thou be Tried?


Busby. By God and my Country.


Cl. God send thee a good Deliverance.


Baron Street. Now we will see if your Objections be of any weight, you hear
the Indictment read, which was Vt Ante, being a Subject of the Kings, born
within this Realm, you may be made a Priest by the Authority of Rome. in
England, Ireland, or Germany, or any where elce, and that will make you a
Priest within this Law.


Busby. I am no Native, I was born beyond the Sea.


Baron Street. Your being a Native, is matter of Fact and must be proved.


Busby. My Lord, I move I may have right of Challenging the Jury.


Baron Street. Sure we must have the Jury before us first, before you can
Challenge any of them.

So the Jury being called, Busby challenged peremptorily near the number
allowed by the Law, viz. John Burrows Gent. Henry Goodyer Gent. John Hawksworth
Gent. Thomas Cockayn Gent. Cornelius Dale Gent. Thomas Wetton Gent. Thomas
Wingfield Gent. William Kirkland Gent. John Agan Gent. Henry Wild Gent. Thomas
Cexon. James Dawson. John Rose. William Salt. John Hurd. John Stone. Robert
Rowland. Robert Cooper. Edvard Ridge. William Alsop. James Cooper. John Wallat.
Gregory Seele.


The Kings Council did except against two persons only, viz, Robert Doxey,
Christopher Holmes.


Baron Street. Have a care Mr. Busby, at your Peril, if you challenge
peremptorily above the number of 35.


The Names of the Petty-Jury sworn,
1. Samuel Ward, Gent. 2. Tho. Wilson, Gent. 3. John Steer. 4. John Ratcliff.
5. Ed. Wolmesly Gent. 6. William Horn Gent. 7. George Tricket Gent. 8. Jeremiah
Ward. 9. John Roper. 10. John Creswel Gent. 11. Edmund Woodhead. 12. Anthony
Bowne.
Then Mr. Bridges Council for the King opened the Indictment. Mr. Bridges. May
it please your Lordship and the Gentlemen of the Jury, the Prisoner at the Bar
George Busby, stands Indicted for High Treason, as it is Alleged in the
Indictment, that he being born within the Kings Dominions and made a Priest,
and having received Orders by pretended Authority from the Sea of Rome, did the
16th day of March last come into the Realm of England, as it is laid in the
Indictment, to West-Hallam, in the County of Derby, and there he did abide,
contrary to the Form of the Statute, and this is laid to be Traitorously done.
To this he has Pleaded not Guilty; and we are to prove it upon him, by the
Kings Evidence, whom we are now to call.


Mr. Coombes. A Council for the King. Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard the
Indictment read and opened, you will presently have it fully proved, and highly
aggravated by our Evidence, for Gentlemen, we shall prove that the Prisoner at
the Bar, is not only a Popish-Priest, but a Jesuit, and this by his own
Confession; and that his Name was inserted in Sir William Wallers Warrant, when
he came down into this Country to search for Jesuits. That he has held a
secret and dangerous Correspondence with Harcourt, Ireland, and other Popish
Traitors. That he has been their Procurator, and disburst and received great
sums of money for them.

Gentlemen, the Prisoner has been a person highly suspected, as well as
dangerous to the Government for some years, for Treasonable matters of another
Nature, than he stands Indicted of, have been deposed against him upon Oath at
the Council Board and thereupon a strict Warrant to Apprehend him was directed
to Mr. Gilbert, (a worthy Gentleman and Justice of Peace of this County) Mr.
Gilbert Gentlemen, will presently tell you the manner of his taking him in an
obscure place in the Roof of one Mr. Powtrels House at West-Hallam, in this
County: but here I must beg leave to digress, for I cannot but take notice of
the malicious temper and base Practices of this sort of Men, for though Mr.
Gilbert acted by virtue of a VVarrant from the Lords of the Council, and has
since received an approbation from his Majesty of what he did, under the hand
of a Secretary of State, yet could not those people forbear to raise false and
scandalous Reports of, and make false Accusations against him, upon this very
account; but what is it they will not do to discourage Protestant Magistrates
from doing their Duty against them? I confess nothing is to be wondered at,
since the barbarous Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey. But to proceed,
Gentlemen, we shall also prove to you that the Prisoner is so little a friend
even to the Civil-Government of this Nation, that he would not suffer his
Nephew Mr. Powtrel to take so much as the Oath of Allegiance, which is scrupled
only by the Jesuits, for I think their secular Priests will generally take it.
Gentlemen, the things I have already opened, are matters of high Aggravation,
and come in by way of Indictment. But that which in this case we rely upon is
this, that the Prisoner has Baptized, Married, Confessed, and absolved in the
Popish way, that he has given the Sacrament, and said Mass very frequently in
his Popish Vestments, and for proof of this we have a Cloud of VVitnesses.

Gentlemen, you hear the Prisoner is Indicted upon a Statute made in the 27th
Eliz. which makes it Treason for any Subject born to take Orders from the Sea
of Rome, and afterward to remain in England, which Law I conceive was not only
made for the security of the Government, but also in favor of the Lay-Papists
themselves, for though several Statutes were made to keep them within the
bounds of their Allegiance and to secure the Government from their Villainous
Designs; yet it was experimentally found true, that no Dangers or Penalties
whatsoever, could deter or hinder them from Plotting against the State, in
order to bring us back again to the slavery of Rome: whilst those juggling
managers of their consciences were suffered to come amongst us. and therefore I
may well call this statute upon which the Prisoner stands indicted, an Act of
Charity, to the common Papists, for it was made to prevent the dangers, they
would otherwise run themselves into, as well as the Nation, It Is true indeed,
Gentlemen, that the lively execution of this Law has (by the Clemency of our
Princes and good nature of the Goverenment) been many times suspended, and
might yet have continued in the shade, had not the popish priests and Jesuits
roused up this sleeping Lion against themselves by a damnable and hellish plot
against his Majesty's life, the true Religion and well established Government
of this Nation, the reality of which has been confirmed to us, not only by the
unanswerable evidence of Colemans papers, and other loyal proofs, but also by
frequent Proclamations, and the Uniform votes and Resolutions of several
Parliaments: I may therefore very well borrow the words of a great Man upon the
like occasion, and say that at this Time of the Day its much better to be rid
of one Priest than many Fellons: And therefore Gentlemen, if our Evidence shall
make good the Indictment, I hope you will do your King, your Country and your
selves the right to find the Prisoner Guilty.


Mr. Coombes. We shall call our evidence.

Call Mr. Gilbert, who was sworn.

Pray tell my Lord and the Jury what you can say concerning the Prisoner at the
Bar.


Mr. Gilbert. My Lord, I dwell within two miles of Mr. Powtrells house at West
Hallam the place where the Prisoner was taken, and have heard that he has been
a priest in that Family six or seven years, though I did never know him
personally, nor to the best of my knowledge ever saw him till I apprehended
him, which was the sixteenth of March last, the very day on which the Judges
went out of Derby the last Lent Assizes; the first enquiry I made after him was
occasioned by a Letter and a Messenger from Sir Simon Degg about November 1678,
at which time I sent a Warrant to the Constable of West-Hallam to search for
the said George Busby, but he could not then be found, at that time it was
reported that he was a Jesuit and concerned in the plot, which I had reason to
believe, because when Mr. Gray came to search Mr. Powtrells house for some
Jesuits the January following, by Order from the Lords of the Council (in which
service he commanded me to attend him) we perceived Mrs. Powtrel (who is Bu^bys
Niece) to be much troubled, and in great passion, the cause whereof Mr.
Powtrell declared to be for fear the said search was made for her Uncle Busby,
who as I heard afterward was then in the house, though at that time was
reported to be fled.

However the Government had a jealous eye on this Busby, above two years ago,
as may appear by a Warrant from the Lords of the Council, which warrant I have
ready and humbly pray your Lordship it may be read openly in Court.


Bar: Street. Let it be read.


Clerk Whereas Information has been given to his Majesty in Council upon Oath
that George Busby late of West-Hallam in the County of Derby is a reputed
Priest and Jesuit, and has had a considerable part in the late Conspiracy
against the life of his sacred Majesty, and the peace of the Government, these
are therefore to will and ^^quire you to repair to the place aforesaid* o^
where ever else the said George Busby shall be found, and him to seize and
apprehend and convey to the next County Jail, there ^n in close Custody, until
he shall be de^^^^^ by due course of Law. And all M^^^^^^ Sheriff^, Justices of
the Peace, Constables, and other his Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects are
to be assisting unto you in the Execution hereof, as they will answer the
contrary, for which this shall be your Warrant, Dated at the Council Chamger in
White-Hallthe 19 th. day of March, 1678.


Indorsed, to Henry Gilbert Esquire at Lockco in the County of Derby. Worcester,
Clarendon, Ailsbury, H. London. Sunderland, Essex, Folconbridge

John Nicolas.

Then Mr. Gilbert proceeded. Mr. Gilbert. My Lord, I received this Order on
Saturday the 22 th. day of March, 1678. And on Sunday Afternoon I sent to Mr.
John Bagnall of Derby, who was then Under sheriff, requiring him to meet me
early on Monday the 24 th. at Mr. Powtrells house at West-Hallam about some
earnest business lately sent down from the Lords of the Council, wherewith I
would acquaint him at our Meeting. as soon as he came I showed him the Warrant,
after which we searched very diligently in every place we could see, but could
not find him; though afterward I was informed he was in the House at that time
also.

About August 1679. Mr. Powtrel obtained a License from his Majesty to Travel
Beyond Sea, and it was confidently reported by the Papists, that this Mr. Busby
was gone over too, insomuch, that when Sir William Waller came into these parts
in January 1679. with Warrants to search for Jesuits (In one whereof I saw
Busbys Name) and would have searched at Hallam. I dissuaded him, and did assure
him I believed he was gone beyond sea, and told him how often I had searched
for him in vain, whereupon, Sir William Waller diverted to another place,
though I have been informed since, that Busby was never out of England, since
the discovery of the Plot.

But about Christmas last, and since, I having had notice that Busby was in
England, and particularly at West-Hallam, and had been seen last Corn-Harvest
to walk in Mr. Powtrels Garden with one Ann Smally a Widow. I thought it my
Duty to make some further enquiry after him, which I did on the first day of
March last, and came to the House to buy some Wood for my Cole-pits, and then
brought five or six persons with me, and sent for the Constable to help me to
search for him, which we did most part of the Afternoon, but could not find
him, though he was seen to be walking in the Garden with the said Ann Smally
when I came first into the House, as I was afterward informed, but when I
asked the said Ann Smally for him, she affirmed with many Protestations, that
he was in Flanders, and not in England, and that if I had any business with
him, I must go Beyond Sea to him, for she had not seen him for above two years;
though she had helped to convey him out of the Garden into his hiding-hole, but
a few Minutes before: However, I proceeded in my search, and found in the
Chamber where Busby Lodged, a Crimson-Damask Vestment, wherein was packed up a
Stole and Maniple of the same (as the Papist call them) an Alter Stone,
Surplice, and a Box of VVaffers Mass-Books, and diverse other Popish things,
then I told Mistress Braylsford (a kinswoman of Mr. Powtrels) and the said Ann
Smally, those things did signify that a Priest belonged to the House, for the
Book had lately been used, as was apparent by the String which was put betwixt
two Leaves whereof Festa Februarij was on the one side, and Festa Martij was on
the other side, but they stiffly affirmed that no Priest had been there of above
two years before, and Jeared me when I could not find him, and said if there
was a Priest in the House, why did not I take him?

When I had done searching and could not find him, I took away the Vestment,
and other things which I brought to the Assizes a Fortnight after, and did ask
Mr. Justice Charlton (who came that Circuit) his opinion what I should do with
them; he told me they must be burnt according to Law; I entreated his favor,
that I might send them again to the same place, for two or three days to make
the Priest more confident, that I might better Apprehend him: he told me he
could give no such permission, but insisted, that they ought to be destroyed.

When all the business was done at the Assizes on the Crown side, (where I was
obliged to attend) on March the 15th day at Night, I went to the Judge again,
and craved his Lordships Pardon for presuming to send back the Popish things
contrary to his Opinion, but acquainted him that I intended to go after them to
West-Hallam that Night, and if I could not catch the Priest, I resolved to
bring the same things again; and after I had asked his Lordship some Questions,
and received his Directions, I came to my own house, and went about eleven of
the Clock at night (with some Company to assist me) to Hallam, and set two Men
to Watch in the Garden, and one in the Churchyard (joining to another side of
the House,) to see if they could spy any Light, or hear any Walking, in the
Lofts or false Floores, when I made a noise on the other side of the House. I
sent a Man before to call up the Constable, and when he and two or three more
came, I knocked at Mistress Ann Smally's Window, about twelve of the Clock in
the Night, and said aloud, Mistress Smally, open the Doors, I am come to search
for a Popish Priest; She started up, and said, Who was there? I told her, It
was I, she knew me well enough, I dwelt at Lockco. Then I staid a pretty space
of Time, and called aloud to her again, and spoke the like Words, but by that
time, I suppose she and her Bedfellow Mistress Braylsford, were gone to give
the Priest Notice, and to help him to his hiding hole, for no body answered me;
then after a pretty space, I called to her a third time, And required her in
the Kings Name to open the Doors, for I was come to search for Busby the
Jesuit, who was a Traitor by Law, and if she would not open the Doors, I would
cause the Constable to force them open; and when I could have no Answer from
her, I went to Joseph Dudleys Chamber Window, and called there, Charging him in
the Kings Name to open the Doors, but no Answer at all was returned, for he
also was gone into the Priests Chamber, and found Ann Smalley busy in helping
Busby to secure himself, as the said Joseph Dudley did afterward inform me.

After I had stayed about a quarter of an hour, I commanded the Constable in
the Kings Name to break the Doors open, which was done; and when we came into
the Priests Chamber I found the Fire had been lately extinguished, the
counterpain and the Blankets laid in confused heaps on the Bed, and some part
of them warm and some part cold: the upper part of the Feather-Bed was cold,
which I wondered at, then I put my Hand underneath and the Bed was warm; for
they had turned it. I looked for the Pillow, Sheets, Cap, etc. but Ann Smally
(as I was afterward informed) had taken them into the Chamber where she lay. I
asked her diverse Questions about the person, that had layn in that Bed that
Night, and particularly, Whether or no it was not Busby? She told me, No body
had layn in that Bed that Night, I told her I was sure some person had layn
there, for the Feather-Bed was warm on the under side: She took many
Protestations, That no body had layn thereof diverse Nights before: I replied,
if she would discover the person who had layn there, it would save her and me
much trouble: But when all I could say, would not prevail, I told her, I must
search, for I was confident, That Busby was in the House, because she would not
declare who it was that lay there.

I began to search about one of the Clock, and continued till after ten next
Morning before I could find Him: and though the Watchers in the Garden, told
me, They heard his Paces and Steps very plainly amongst the Lofts and false
Floores, and described on the outside of the House the place where they last
heard him, within the space of nine and ten Foot where he was hid: yet were we
almost so many hours before we could find him.

At last when the Searchers were almost all tired, Ann Smally, and others of
the Family Scossed at us, and asked, What have you not found him yet, you said
there was a Priest in the House, why do you not find him then? Why do you not
take him? I said, All in good time, I was resolved to find him, or starve him
out: Nay, the Footboy of the House, seeing my Servant look within the Kitchen
Chimney, where there hung a Port-Mantua, said Jeering to my Man, Look if he be
not in the Port-Mantua.

After those persons had pleased themselves a good while with Mocking us for
our disappointment, I persuaded two or three of the Searchers once again to
Climb upon the Lofts (which I could not do my self, by reason of a Lameness in
my Shoulder,) and to look well near the place where Busby's last steps were
heard. Which when they had done some while and found nothing, I took my Sword
and Scabbard, (being in the Rooms underneath) and Knocked on the
Plaster-floores over my Head, and caused them to Answer me with the like
Knocking as near the same place as they could, and when we had examined the
Floores, in this manner, I Knocked near unto a Stock of three Chimneys, but
they could not Answer within a Yard,

I knocked again in two or three places near the Chimneys, yet still they could
not Answer near those places, but told me there was nothing but Tiles and
Roofing, I bid them break open those Tiles, which they did and espied under
them a wooden Door, and a little Iron Hinge, I bade them break the Door, then
one of the searchers put in his hand, into a little hole that was broken in the
Door and felt a Hat, then he told me some body was in that place, for a Man had
thrown his hand off the Hat, then I caused them to break open the entrance,
which when they had done, Busby spoke to them, and desired them to be civil;
when they told me what he said to them, I charged them to be civil to him, and
bring him to me, which they did. Then I arrested him in his Majesty's Name, for
High Treason, and after he had refreshed himself a little, I told him he must
get on his Boots, and prepare himself to go to Derby.

Soon after his Apprehension, (I perceiving him to be a little dismayed) I
encouraged him, and said, he should have all the favor a person in his
circumstances could expect, for I told him I understood he was a Gentleman of a
good Family in Buckinghamshire or Oxfordshire, and that his Brother lived at
Coddington in Oxfordshire. which he acknowledged, and thanked me for my
Civility.

I was so well satisfied that we had apprehended him, after much tedious
watching and searching, that I never thought of sending any Man to look what
was in the hiding-hole with him, but after an hours stay, or there abouts, I
took him away from Hallam between eleven and twelve a Clock on the 16th of
March last, and brought him to Derby between one and two of the Clock where,
after I had taken his Examination, I made a Mittimus and Committed him to
Derby-Goale.

On Satturday following, I writ a Letter to Oxford, to the Right Honorable the
Earl of Conway, one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, informing
his Lordship of the apprehending and commitment of Busby, and enclosed a Copy
of his Examination, to which his Lordship writ me a Letter in Answer, that he
had acquainted his Majesty with my Proceedings, who did very well approve of
what I had done.


Busby. My Lord I am an Alian born at Brussels.


Baron-Street. Was your Father of that place? It is a very good Family.


Busby. My Father lived at Coddington, my Mother was an Heiriss, and here is an
Affidavit ready to be produced of what Children my Father had before he went
Beyond Sea, born at Coddington, out of the Register of that place, I have had
no time to bring a particular Certificate where I was born, and what other
Children my Fathar had Beyond Sea; my Father went over about the beginning of
the Troubles, and I am about forty years of Age.


After the Judge had told Busby of the Act for Naturalisatin. Says Busby. I
suppose (my Lord) that Act may stand good as to Privileges of the Subject, but
not as to Penalties.


Baron Street. Yes as to all Intents and Purposes.


Anno XXIX. Caroli II. Regis.
An Act for the Naturalizing of Children of his Majesty's English Subjects,
Born in Foreign Countries during the late Troubles.
WHereas during the late unhappy Troubles in England, which began in the year
of our Lord One thousand six hundred forty one, and continued until the time of
His Majesty's most happy Restoration, diverse of His Majesty's English
Subjects, as well of the Nobility as others, did either by reason of their
Attendance upon His Majesty, or for fear of the then Usurped Powers, reside in
parts beyond the Seas out of His Majesty's Dominions, and it may hereafter
become difficult to make proof of the occasion of such their residence; Now for
preventing of all Disputes and Questions that may arise, whether the Children
of such His Majesty's Subjects of this Realm are Natural born Subjects of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and to erpress a due sense of the merit of all such
Loyal persons, as out of their duty and fidelity to His Majesty and His Father
of Blessed Memory, did forego, or were driven from their Native Country,

Be it Declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That Charles
Gerard, and Elizabeth Gerard Children of the Right Honorable Charles Lord
Gerard of Brandon, Trever Wheler, and Dorothy Elizabeth Wheler Children of Sir
Charles Wheler Baronet, Anne Ravenscroft the Wife of Edward Ravenscroft of
Bretton in the County of Flint Esquire, one of the Daughters of Sir Richard
Lloyd Knight deceased, born at Calice in France, and all other persons who at
any time between the Fourteenth day of June in the said Year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred forty one, and the Four and twentieth day of March in the
Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and sixty, were born out of His
Majesty's Dominions, and whose Fathers or Mothers were Natural born Subjects of
this Realm, are hereby declared, and shall for ever be esteemed and taken, to
all intents and purposes, to be and to have been the Kings Natural born
Subjects of this Kingdom; and that the said Children, and all other persons
born as aforesaid, and every of them, are and shall be adjudged, reputed, and
taken to be and to have been in every respect and degree, Natural born
Subjects, and Free to all intents, purposes and constructions, as if they and
every of them had been born in England.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Children, and all other persons as aforesaid, and every of them, shall be, and
are hereby enabled and adjudged able, to all intents, constructions and
purposes whatsoever, as well to demand, as to have and enjoy any Titles of
Honor, Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other Privileges
and Emmunities belonging to the Liege people and Natural Subjects of this
Kingdom, and to make his or their resort or pedigree, as heir to his, their or
any of their Ancestors, Lineal or Collateral, by reason of any Descent,
Remainder, Reverter, Right or other Title, Conveyance, Legacy or Bequest
whatsoever, which has, may or shall descend, remain, revert, accrue, come or
grow unto the said Children, the or persons born as aforesaid, or any of them
as also to have and enjoy all Manors, Lands and Tenements, or other
Hereditaments, by way of Purchase or Gift of any person or persons whatsoever;
as also to prosecute, pursue, maintain, avow and justify all and all manner of
Actions, Suits and Causes, and all other things to do as lawfully, liberaly,
freely and fully, as if the said Children, and the persons born as aforesaid,
and every of them, had been and were Born of English Parents within this
Kingdom, or as any other person or persons born within this Kingdom may
lawfully in any wise do; any Law, Act, Statute, Provision, Custom, or other
thing whatsoever, had, made, done, promulged, proclaimed, or provided, to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding; Provided always, That no person,
other then the persons expressly named in this Act, shall have any benefit
thereby, except such person shall within seven Years next ensuing; Receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and within one Month next after such Receiving
the Sacrament, take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy in some of His
Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and deliver into the Court at the same time, a
Certificate of such his Receiving the said Sacrament, and then make proof
thereof by Witnesses to be ezamined viva voce upon Oath.

And be it further Enacted, That no person or persons, other then the persons
expressly named in this Act, shall have any benefit thereby, until he or they
shall have Received the Sacrament, and made proof thereof by Certificate and
Witnesses, and taken the said Oath in manner aforesaid.

And for the better manifestation and proof of such qualifications as may
Entitle any person to the benefit of this Act, which in process of time may be
very hard to be proved; Be it further Enacted, That any person having Received
the Sacrament, and made proof thereof by Certificate and Witnesses, and taken
the said Oaths within the time aforesaid, in any of his Majesty's Courts, in
manner aforesaid, shall and may be admitted to make proof of such his
qualification in the said Court by Witnesses viva voce to be examined upon
Oath; and if he shall make proof thereof to the satisfaction of the said Court,
he shall thereupon have a Certificate thereof under the Seal of the said Court,
to be likewise Enrolled in the said Court, and for ever after upon showing such
Certificate or Enrollment thereof, every such person shall have full benefit of
this Law, as if he had been therein expressly named.

Bar. Street, Then you are a Natural born Subject by the late Act of
Parliament; whereby it appears that all Persons born abroad in the late
Troubles, who went out of the Kingdom by reason of their sufferings for the
King, are made Natural born Subjects, as if born here.


Then Joseph Dudley was called and Sworn. Bar. Street, Joseph Dudley, do you
know the Prisoner at the Bar, look upon him?


Joseph Dudley, I have known him these Six years and more, to belong to Mr.
Powtrells at West-Hallam, to whom I was for that time a Servant, where he
Officiated as a Priest, and was kept to do that Office; where I have heard him
say Mass, Preach, Pray, and have seen Ten, Twenty, or Thirty, or more at a time
before him in the Chapel there, when he has Officiated with his Priestly
Robes upon him; and likewise seen Children brought to be Christened by him,
others to be Catechized, which he frequently did, as if he had been a Parish
Priest, but with what Privacy he could, and I my self have taken care of the
doors at such times, which care they left to me, though I was not of their
opinion; yet upon my promising to be so, they did repose that trust and
confidence in me.


Bar. Street, Tell us what you know concerning Mr. Busbys being an Alien, as he
pretends, which I cannot believe.


Jos. Dudley, He tells you that when the Civil Wars were here in England, his
Father and Mother with their Family, went beyond Sea, where he was born; but my
Lord, in discoursing with my Master and others of the late Wars, I have heard
Mr. Busby relate what happened to their Family in those times, and that their
house was often plundered, and his Father and Mother living at Coddington in
Oxfordshire (as he tells you) the first time the Soldiers came to plunder the
House, he was about Two years old or more, and being frighted at the Soldiers,
he hid himself behind the Bed in the Curtains, so that while they were there,
none of the House knew where to find him, which made them believe that the
Soldiers had taken him, or made him away, but when the Soldiers were gone, his
Mother and some of the Family lamenting for him in her Chamber, he hearing
them, appeared; so that with great joy they received him. My Lord, I think the
place was Coddington, where he tells you his Mother lived, and that it was
hers, she being an Heiress. At least I am very certain I have heard him speak
of the place where he was born, to be in or about Oxfordshire, I think it was
Coddington; for it is the place where Mr. Charles Busby his Eldest Brother now
lives, and he says, that from thence his Father and Mother went Beyond Sea.


Busby, When did you hear me discourse any such thing as you have related, and
with whom; you speak this by hearsay, do you not?


Jos. Dudley, Several times with my Master and others, as I said before, when
they have been talking how some Families have been ruined by the great
oppressions of those times, some being Plundered, others Sequestered, and forced
to leave their Estates and Friends, which you said was your Mothers Case, for
their great sufferings forced them to go from their own house: And my Lord,
when he was about Five years old, he did also say that he could remember
Soldiers coming again to Plunder, and he being at that time in the Garden or
Orchard, he did hide himself in the Hedge, where he did continue till they were
gone, and then he came forth when it was late in the Evening, but his Mother
nor any of the Family knowing where he was, did very much fear they had lost
him; but when he came to them they were not a little joy'd: but after this they
went immediately beyond Sea, and took him with them, where his Mother continued
several years, and had several Children there, the which I have heard her say
of her self, and of her being at Brussels.


Bar. Street, Mr. Busby the Evidence says that you told a Story of your Mothers
house being Plundered, and how you hid your self in the Curtains, when you was
Two years old, and in the Garden Hedge, when Five years old, for fear of the
Soldiers, and that soon after your Mother went beyond Sea, where she had
several Children, which your self told, from your own mouth, and he had it not
from other People.


Bar. Street, But Mr. Dudley, What can you say, as to his being a Priest or
Jesuit?


Jos. Dudley, My Lord, My Master and his Family, and all Papists that were
acquainted with him, ever owned him to be a Jesuit; and several of them have
many times told me so: Besides he himself has owned that he was of the Society
of Jesus, particularly one time, when I should have been his Convert; telling
me, While I was out of the True Faith, I could not be saved; and there was no
way to be saved, but by Believing the Catholic Church, which was the Roman
Catholic, as Tradition makes appear; for God help me, I was a poor Heretic,
and led by weak and blind Pastors; for they had their Religion only from Calvin
and Luther, and every silly Fellow was made now a Preacher of the Gospel before
he understood it: but that he and all Jesuits were Fifteen years laboring in
their Studies and Degrees before they came to be Ordained.


Busby, I pray you where and when was it I said all this to you?


Jos. Dudley, In the Gardens at West-Hallam, where my Master Mr. William
Powtrell and Mrs. Anne Smalley, after great persuasions sent me to you; and
told me they had sent you before: and that I should find you there where I did.
And your first Discourse was of the Gardens, withal giving me a Description of
the Gardens of the Jesuits College in Liege, where you did (as I remember) own
your receiving Orders. Besides I have heard my Master, Mrs. Smally, Mrs
Winnifred Attwood, and George Harrison (who lived in the Colleges beyond Sea)
own it. And your self said, That Mr. Evers my Lord Aston 's Priest (who has
been with you at West-Hallam) was your Master and Tutor, when as I think you
were a Scholar at St. Omers.


Busby, How long do you say you have lived at West-Hallam?


Jos. Dudley, Betwixt Six and Seven Years.


Busby, When was that I talked of the Gardens at the College of Liege? And
whether I told you I was a Jesuit, when I spoke of Liege Gardens? What time was
it, what year?


Jos. Dudley, I cannot say the time, but 'twas since I lived at Hallam, and
'twas when you persuaded me to be a Catholic.


Busby, You take a compass of Six years, this is a mere story; pray what were
my Arguments?


Bar. Street, You were about to Convert him, and then you told him this; it is
enough you have endeavored to make him change his Religion, but it seems your
Arguments were not of so much weight as to be remembered.


Busby, I pray you, was I ever with you alone, to tell you I was a Jesuit? Let
me know the year and time, and what induced me to say so?


Jos. Dudley, I cannot satisfy you when the Discourse was, but I have been
alone with you in the Garden a hundred times and more; when you did satisfy me
that you was a Jesuit, was the time, when you did move me to be of your
persuasion; the which I did so far condescend to, that ever since there was
none in the Family more trusted than I; for, my Lord, I did give them all the
assurance that might be, of being of their Religion, but the times being
troublesome, and the fear of disobliging my Friends, particularly one or two,
who had the care and management of a house of mine (which was then in trouble)
that I durst not consent, yet my seeming inclination did very much please them,
and they did so far credit me, that my Master did intend (as he told me) to
take me beyond Sea with him, nor did I know the contrary, till I was upon the
Road for Dover, and then he told me that his Uncle Busby was Inserted in the
Pass (by the name of Thomas Jackson) which he showed me; but he having no mind
to go, stayed in England (and for the most part at Hallam) so that my Master
commanded me back, to look after his Affairs there: And for some time before he
was to return, he said he would send for me over. Ever since he left Hallam,
Mr. Busby has continued privately there, for none besides Mr. George Brent and
my self and the women of the house, were suffered to know of him; nay some of
his Relations who have lain in the house. have not known but that he was beyond
Sea, though they were Papists, yet he would not suffer them, but concealed
himself.


Busby, I pray will you tell me what day, month, or year it was, you and I had
this Discourse you speak of; and tell me how it came that I was so familiar
with you?


Bar. Street, What need you impose it upon him, when he says he has lived
with you Six years and more: He cannot remember it, but he tells you that it
was in the Garden, where he has been with you an hundred times and more, not
thinking further of it; it is impossible to satisfy you the particular time,
therefore why do you ask him such a foolish question?


Busby, I desire you will let me know how you, as you pretend, come to know I
was a Jesuit?


Jos. Dudley, Sir, it is what you know to be truth, and I am sure you cannot
but remember, it was in the Walk at the head of the Orchard, where you was
before me expecting my coming to you, and did then use all the persuading means
that might be to confirm me in your Opinion; in which I seemed so well
satisfied, that you told me you would leave me to consider of it, but that I
ought to forsake my Friends, and whatever else, to come to God Almighty, of
which you did not doubt; but bid me be careful, for delays were dangerous: And
my Lord, as to his being a Jesuit, he did own it when my Master was committed
to Prison for refusing the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance: (for he was then
private at West Hallam) withal saying, in his Conscience he ought not to take
them, for their Church would not allow it, but on the contrary did expressly
forbid it: nevertheless Mrs. Powtrell, Mr. William Powtrell, and diverse of the
Family did argue for his so doing, especially after Mr. Thomas Cannynge came
from St. Thomas in Staffordshire, and said that his Uncle Fowler, he, and all
belonging to him, had taken the Oath of Allegiance: And that it was the
Opinion* and with the consent of Mr. Fitter their Priest, that they might do
it, and for that reason Mr. Cannynge came to advise my Master the like: but Mr.
Busby did reject the motion, and said no Secular Priest could give leave so to
do, and for his part he was absolutely against it, and so was all the Society:
But if Seculars gave too much liberty, he would not be guilty of their fault;
so when all would not prevail with him, then Mrs. Powtrell and I went to Mr.
William Brent at Fox Coat in Warwickshire, her Grand Father, and Mr. Busbys
Father-in-Law a Councellor, to have his advice; and upon his writing several
Letters to my Master, and Mr. Busby, that it was proper for my Master so to do,
nor could he avoid it; then in compliance to Mr. Brent, he did not much oppose
the taking of the Oath of Allegiance: And those Letters, the next night after
Mr. Gilbert had taken Mr. Busby, Mrs. Smally (for fear he should find them) did
burn, but showed them to me as she was looking over many papers more, the most
of which, she did likewise burn.


Mr. Gilbert, For your Lordships and the Juries further confirmation, that the
Prisoner is a Jesuit as well as a Priest, and that he held a dangerous
Correspondence with some of his Order, which have been Executed for their
Treasons in relation to the Plot: I must acquaint your Lordship that this Busby
was Procurator for the Jesuits, and that he received the Rents of their Lands,
from 1673 till 1677, and that he disbursed and returned several great Sums of
Money to diverse Jesuits, as may appear by Letters, and his Account Book, which
I took; where may be seen what Dealings and Transactions he had with Gawen,
Harcourt, Turner, Ireland, Pool, Bennet, Heaton, Tomson, and others of his
Tribe: He could not deny it to be his own hand writing.

My Lord here is the Book.

( Which was presented to the Judge and Perused by him) Then Mr. Gilbert
proceeded. My Lord, I did also search at West-Hallam House for Popish Priestly
Garments, (and being well informed that there were such in the House) and found
diverse Suits of Vestments and other Popish Trinkets, which I brought away;
together with those I formerly sent back from the last Assizes; all which I
have ready in Court to be produced, and have also a Minister here (who has
formerly been a Popish Priest himself) to inform your Lordship the names and
use of all the Particulars; here are also (my Lord) a Box of Wafers, which I
suppose they use for the Sacrament at the Mass, the larger sort I am told are
for the Priests use, the lesser for the People; and here are the Wafer Irons
which made them.


Mr. Sheppey, Pray tell my Lord and the Jury the Names of all those Things, and
how the Priest uses them at Mass.


Mr. Sheppey taking up the Things, said, My Lord, this is a Vestment used when
the Mass is said, this is a Stole, and this is a Maniple, and this an
Antipendiana: And so gave an Account of the rest of the Trinkets. Then Thomas
Houis was called and sworn. Bar. Street, What can you say, Friend, of the
Prisoner? See if you know him, look upon him.


Thomas Houis, I know him well enough, he persuaded me to be a Roman Catholic,
when I was about to marry a Man's Daughter that was a Papist, whom I could not
have, until I turned to their Religion. Mr. Busby persuaded me, and when he had
converted me, bound me to believe that Matrimony was a Sacrament; he gave me
Absolution, and made me do Penance; the words of the Absolution I cannot
pronounce, but I have been several times at Mass when he said it, when I had
Absolution from him, after Confession I was to say these words:

For all which, and whatever else I cannot at this present call to mind, I am
heartily sorrow for, for the love of God; and purpose by Gods Grace to amend,
beseeching you my Ghostly Father to Pray to God for me, and to give me
Absolution and Penance.

Afterward you know you married me, and I was Cited to Lichfield Court for
being married privately by you. My Lord, I have been present when Mr. Busby
said Mass at West-Hallam, and have heard and seen him say Mass several days in
his Priestly Robes: I never knew any other Priest but him at West-Hallam; most
Sundays and Holy days he said Mass, where were present most of the Roman
Catholics in those parts; I have heard him Preach three times, and no more.


Busby, Did I come to you, or you to me?


Tho. Houis, I came to you.


Busby, Then I did not persuade you to turn Catholic, you was satisfied upon
the first persuasion before you came to me, and declared you would turn
Catholic.


Tho. Houis, I was persuaded by Mr. Shirborn of Standly Grange, yet not fully
convinced but by you.


Mr. Gilbert, My Lord, this Shirborn, he speaks of, was one Captain Shirborn a
great Papist who lived near me, a Letter Carrier (as was reported) and one that
sold them Books and Trinkets.


Tho. Houis, For I was fully satisfied then in all things by your instructions,
and hearing your Sermons; as for Mass, I did not understand it, but you said it
was Mass; besides, others called it so.


Busby, How can you swear to a thing you do not understand?


Tho. Houis, If I did not, you told me so, and I believed you, because you did
the Office of a Priest.


Bar. Street, It seems this is the matter, you courted a Papist for your wife,
and Busby told you the way to have her was to be a Papist, and you did hearken
to Busby to persuade you; he told you Matrimony was a Sacrament, and before you
were married, you must be Confessed, and have Absolution; and Mr. Busby, you put
words into his mouth to desire Absolution, but gave it in such language as he
understood not, he says he has heard you say Mass frequently: But Preach only
three times.


Busby, It is an easy matter for him to say such things, but how does he prove
it to be Absolution of Mass, when he says he understands not the Language?


Tho. Houis, My Lord, I have not only been present at that which they call
their Mass, but I have also received the Sacrament from Mr. Busby then, and
have seen him give the Sacrament to diverse other persons too, and besides, my
Lord, I did send my Eldest Child to the Chapel at Standly Grange to have it
Christened by Mr. Busby: This Woman (pointing to Sarah Clark who stood by)
carried it: When we came there, Dr. Richard Needham (who lived there) said to
me, Are you the Father of this Child, I answered yes: Then says Dr. Needham,
you ought not to be present when your Child is Christened, whereupon, my Lord, I
went into a corner of the Room, but could perceive well enough what was done,
and Mr. Busby did Christen my Child, and gave her the Name of Ann, Mr. Peter
Waldron was Godfather, and Mrs. Ann Smally Godmother.


Kings Council, We shall now call Elizabeth Evans for further proof of Mr.
Busby's exercising his Priestly Office: Who was also Sworn.


Bar. Street, Come good Woman, what can you say of the Prisoner at the Bar, do
you know him?


Eliz. Evans, Yes, I know the Prisoner at the Bar, its Mr. Busby, my Lord, and
have seen him in his Priestly Habit say Mass, in the Chapel at Mr. Powtrells
House at West Hallam, I saw him Christen Henry Avery's Child of Stauton, I was
Godmother to the Child. He has Confessed me several times; and I have received
Absolution from him: I have received the Sacrament from him.


Bar. Street, What was it he gave you, when you received the Sacrament from him?


Eliz. Evans, I know not what it was Mr. Busby gave me.

Then the Waffers were called for; they were of several sizes in a Box. And
being showed to her, she said, yes my Lord, these are what he gave us at Mass
for the Sacrament; I remember them, they were just such.


Busby, Waffers are things usually put under Biskets and Macaroons, therefore
how can she say those are the Sacrament, for they are what I have seen given to
Children to eat and to play withal.


Bar. Street, They are things indeed to give to Children.


Kings Coun. Pray call Dorothy Saunders.


who appeared, and was Sworn. Bar. Street, Well Dorothy Sanders, what say you?


Dorothy Saunders, He has several times absolved me, and given me the
Sacrament, and has said Mass, where the company were sometimes more, and
sometimes less; and having a Waffer given her into her hand and he held up the
Waffer thus and showed the Court and the Jury the manner of his Elevation of
the Host and being asked by the Judge whether she knew Priestly Vestments?
Answered


Dorothy Saunders, Yes I know Priestly Vestments when I see them which being
showed to her she said she had seen Busby in some of them; but for his
Christning of Children, I know nothing of that.


Busby, Is that the Sacrament? Those Waffers in the Box, is that the Sacrament?


D. Saunders, We took it at your hands for the Sacrament.


Bar. Street, Mr. Busby you are so Impertinent in your Questions, you think you
have weak persons to deal with, I hope the Jury will take notice of it.


Kings Council, Call Sarah Clark.


who appeared and was Sworn. Bar. Street, Sarah Clark, have you heard Mr. Busby
say Mass?


Sa. Clark, Yes my Lord, that which he told us was Mass, but I did not
understand it, for it was in another tongue, which they said was Latin.


Bar. Street, But had he his Vestments on, or how was it, tell us good Woman?


S. Clark, Yes, my Lord, he had Vestments on, and he did then give us the
Sacrament as he called it, which was a Wafer, and that he put into our mouths
after that he had Elevated the Host: And he himself told me it was the
Sacrament.


Bar. Street, Well and have you made Confession to him, and has he Absolved you
after you have done so?


S. Clark, I have been at Confession before him upon my knees, and when I had
done he spoke something to me in Latin (as I think) which he said was
Absolution, and I did take it to be so, and I have sometimes my Lord, heard him
Preach, and that I understood, because it was in English. He told me what
Absolution was, and the Mass, and the same was to be read in English, and those
that could read, at those times said the same.


Bar. Street, Several Witnesses have spoken closely that he has exercised his
Office in all things as a Priest, have you known him marry any Body, and
Christen Children, if you have speak?


S. Clark, My Lord, he did not marry me, one Mr. Gavan married me, but I have
heard that he did marry Thomas Houis, and I am sure he did Christen Thomas
Houis his First Child, for I carried it to him, and Mr. Waldron, and Mrs. Ann
Smally were Godfather and Godmother, and he did name it Ann; it was Christened
at Standly Grange at Dr. Needhams House, and several others were there at the
same time, and afterward I brought it home.


Busby, How do you know it to be Mass and Absolution, when you say you do not
understand the Language I spoke in?


S. Clark, Though I did not understand what you said, you told me what every
thing meaned, and I did believe you, because others told me so too; besides all
Papists thought it their duty (as you told us) to be there all Holy days and
Sundays, to prevent a Venial Sin, which if we omitted we were liable to
Penance.


Mr. Gilbert, My Lord, We have three or four more Witnesses, but we are loath
to trouble your Lordship and the Court with any further Testimony of this
nature; hoping the matter of the Indictment has been fully proved against the
Prisoner, and if your Lordship please we will rest here.


Bar. Street, I suppose the Jury will believe there has been sufficient
Evidence given to convict him; but Mr. Busby what can you say for your self?


Busby, Joseph Dudley tells your Lordship how I should tell a Childish Storry
of hiding my self in the Curtains, when I was Two years old; pray my Lord,
consider how I could remember what I did at two years old; I know not how I
could. I have told your Lordship I was born beyond Sea, I am sure I was bred
there; I hope your Lordship will not take notice of an hearsay; my Mother went
beyond Sea at the beginning of the Troubles, not after, 'twas before Edgehill
Fight. As to what Houis says, he himself does acknowledge, that he does not
understand what Language I Absolved him in, nor the language of the Mass, and
therefore he cannot swear to it; and for ought I know as to his being married,
it was in a priviledg'd place, and could not be Cited to Litchfield Court; and
for what the other Witnesses says, their Evidence is only that they heard
something read in an unknown Language, usually Women Pray in an unknown
Language, and those Public Prayers were only Family Duties; they swear not
what it was, because they understand it not.


Bar. Street, I believe not one in a hundred understands your Prayers that hear
them; else they would not be so juggled by you.


Busby, There are Vespers and Mattins, and Evensong; he does not distinguish
what it was that was said, by reason 'twas in an unknown Language to him: it
was only Family-Duty. I can produce a Witness to prove it, that Women do
Family-Duty in an unknown Language.


Bar. Street, I know Women do not Officiate in your Church.


Busby, He swears my Lord, to what he does not understand.

As for Elizabeth Evans, she swears concerning saying Mass, and understands not
one Service from another, and this proves not particularly my Priestly Office.


Bar. Street, Mr. Busby, you forget Christening Avery's Child, and Houis's
Child, Confessing, and Absolving diverse persons, the material Evidence: You
only offer some little Diversions.


Busby, Dorothy Saunders knows not what she swears, nor Sarah Clark, none of
the Witnesses can distinguish one service from another, they cannot therefore
swear what was, and what was not; giving of Bread is not the Priestly Office,
they do not swear positively to my exercising the Priestly Office, other
persons wear those Garments as well as Priests: those things are Monuments and
Heyre-Loomes to the Family, they were taken out of Churches in former times at
the Reformation: There are now to be seen in the Cathedral at York Church Stuff
and Vestments, which are kept for Antiquity, and so were these.


Bar. Street, Mr. Sheppey has been a Priest, and he knows the use of those
things as well as you.


Busby, My Lord, those things Laymen do wear as well as Priests, I desire to
call a Witness to prove it.


Bar. Street, You may if you will, but to what purpose?


Busby, Pray call Robert Needham.


Who was called, and appeared. Bar. Street, Well Needham do you know these
things?


The Vestments being showed unto him. Robert Needham, I have had these things
on my self, my Lord, and have said my Prayers in them, and have thought my
Prayers more acceptable when I had them on; and I have seen them used by others
several times.


Busby, More wear them that are Laymen, then such as are Priests.


Bar. Street, Needham, it seems you wore them whilst you said your Prayers,
that they might be more acceptable?


R. Needham, Such like Vestments are worn by Laymen in several places.


Busby, I desire one Mr. Charles Vmphrevill may be called, to speak to my being
an Alien born.


Who being called for the Prisoner, was not sworn. Charles Vmphrevill, To Mr.
Busbys being an Alien, I have known Mr. Busby several years, and I have heard
his Mother and Brother affirm he was born at Brussels: And I have an Affidavit
from the Register at Coddington of all their Children born in England, and we
do not find Mr. George Busbys name in the Register.


Bar. Street, How can you be sure of that? You ought to have brought the man
along with you, to testify it.


Charles Vmphrevill, My Lord, the Sexton is an old man above Sixty years of
Age, and could not come, but he made Affidavit of it, which is here.


Bar. Street, That does not signify any thing at all, that Affidavit cannot be
allowed, for he might be born there, and yet not Registered; but what makes you
say we? What makes you concerned?


C. Vmphrevill, I say we, because I was one of those employed to get Mr. Busbys
Habeas Corpus.


( Upon Mr. Umphrevills being at a stand, and Busby directing him to tell what
he had seen beyond Sea.) The Judge taking notice thereof, said, Bar. Street,
What would you have him say Mr. Busby? tell him.


C. Vmphrevil, I have seen Cannons beyond Sea, wear such Vestments, that are
not in Orders: I have seen Children wear them, and they I am sure are not in
Orders.


Busby, I call Mr. Mayo to prove that I am not a Natural born Subject of the
Kings.


Bar. Street, (Come Sir, though you are not upon your Oath, yet you must tell
us the truth, as faithfully as if you were.)


Edward Mayo, I have searched the Register at Coddington, and I do not find
George Busbys name, the Prisoner, Registered; I have searched all the Books, and
I find no Register of him.


Bar. Street, An hundred Children may be born in that Parish within this 2^
years, and not Registered: All that are Baptized, are Registered only.


Busby, Mr. Mayo, satisfy my Lord of the disappointment I had of my Habeas
Corpus, which you got for me.


Bar. Street, To what purpose: but Mr. Busby you shall not say but I will hear
him; what say you Mayo?


Ed. Mayo, My Lord I was employed about an Habeas Corpus for Mr. Busby in
Easter Term last, and did obtain one for him then, but by reason of some
slackness it was presently out of date, and so became ineffectual. Also in
Trinity Term, I procured another Habeas Corpus for him, which was delivered to
the under Sheriff of this County of Derby, who was then very Sick at London, of
which Sickness he dyed there at last, and that Habeas Corpus, for that reason
did likewise fall short, by which disappointments Mr. Busby is not so prepared
for his Trial at this time as otherwise he might, if he had not really depended
upon his being removed to London by Habeas Corpus.


Bar. Street; All this is too little to the purpose, for if he expected to have
had his Trial there, and was prepared for it a Term or two ago, how comes it
to pass he is not prepared now? Come, come Mr. Busby what can you say more?


Prisoner, I could not be Born at Coddington, I was Born beyond Sea, out of the
Kingdom. My Lord, here is not one word proved of the Substance of the
Indictment, not a word proved that I took Orders beyond Sea, nor here, from any
person that saw me take Orders; not a word of that proved: Nor not a word of
the Substance of that Statute of Queen Elizabeth, which I am Indicted upon;
only some fevv Women say they heard me pray in an unknown Language, which
was no more then Family-Duty, and I can produce a Witness that Women say their
prayers publicly in an unknown Tongue, and all answer; and by these
Circumstances I am accused for being a Priest.


Bar. Street, I find Mr. Busby you understand the Law, but pray you, Is the
Sacrament given by Women? And is Absolution given by Women?


Busby, If they understand not the Language, they understand not the Thing:
Treason may be spoke in French, and I know it not to be so.


Bar. Street. Then it seems no man can prove a Priest, that does not understand
the Latin Tongue.


Busby. None of the Witnesses has Sworn that I gave Absolution, nor that I said
Mass, but in an unknown Tongue. What they have said are only Circumstances, and
do not prove the Indictment; and what they say I I did, are things that are
performed by those that are not Priests. I offer it again to your Lordships
Consideration that I have not been proved a born Subject of the Kings. I was
deprived of my Habeas Corpus which was detained in the Sheriffs Hand, and so
lost the Benefit of it, (those things are material) and have not had time to
produce Witnesses that I was not born in England, but beyond Sea: at London I
could have got Evidence to prove that; and here has been no proof made of that,
but a story told of me when I was a Child: I have proved that my name cannot be
found in the Register at Coddington. For the rest I have not had time; if I had
had the benefit of my Habeas Corpus, to have been Tried at London, I had
Friends there that could have proved me born beyond Sea: This Dudley that
appears an Evidence against me, was a Servant of Mr. Powtrells, who was gone
away upon disgust; he sent out of the Garden several loads of goods, and now he
comes to swear against me, I am verily confident that he carried away above
Three Horse load of goods that he carried privately out of the Garden, of
Plants and such things, and sent them all away.


Mr. Gilbert, My Lord, they were his Clothes, and other things of his own,
which he took with him when he went away.


Bar. Street, All this signifies nothing, if it be proved; but bring what
Witnesses you will to prove it.


Busby, I hope your Lordship will consider that I am an Alien born, and that by
the loss of my Habeas Corpus I had not time to bring my Witnesses; and that the
Prayers I said were only Family Duties: I hope that will be considered; and
that those people that have Sworn I said Mass and Absolved, do not know what
Mass is, nor Absolution. My Lord here is nothing proved of the Indictment
against me.


Bar. Street, You have said all this six times over, if you have nothing
farther to say in your defense, I must sum up the Evidence to the Jury.


Bar. Street, You of the Jury, The Prisoner at the Bar, George Busby, stands
Indicted of Treason upon the Statute of XXVII ELIZ. Cap. II. the principal
Branch whereof is this:

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall not be
lawful to or for any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon, or
Religious or Ecclesiastical Person whatsoever, being born within this Realm, or
any other of her Highness Dominions, and heretofore, since the said Feast of
the Nativity of St. John Baptist in the First Year of her Majesty's Reign,
made, ordained, or professed, or hereafter to be made, ordained, or professed,
by any Authority or Jurisdiction, derived, challenged, or pretended from the Sea of Rome; by or of what Name, Title, or Degree soever the same shall be
called or known, to come into, be, or remain, in any part of this Realm, or any
other her Highness Dominions, after the end of the same Forty days, other then
in such special cases, and upon such special occasions only, and for such time
only, as is expressed in this Act: And if he do, That then every such Offense
shall be taken and adjudged to be High Treason. And every person so offending,
shall for his Offense be adjudged a Traitor; and shall suffer, lose, and
forfeit, as in case of High Treason.


Bar. Street, This makes every Offender against this Statute a Capital
Offender, and guilty of High Treason; now whether he is within this Law, you
are to consider? Mr. Gilbert has told you that he is a reputed Priest and
Jesuit, in the Neighborhood, and that as such he had an Order from his Majesty
to apprehend him. He used his endeavors to take him for some time, but could
not apprehend him, till the Sixteenth of March last, and then he found him; but
in such an obscure Hole, that no body would hide himself in, but such an
extraordinary Offender. Innocent people do not obscure themselves in that
manner. Joseph Dudley, to prove him a Native and not an Alien, tells you, That
when Soldiers in the time of the late Wars, came to plunder his Fathers House,
he heard him say, That at Two years old he hid himself in the Curtains in his
Mothers Chamber for fear of the Soldiers. But (says the Prisoner) my memory
could not serve me at Two years old to retain what I did then. But our Parents
tell us what we did then. If a Man be asked, What age are you of? No man can
tell, but as his Parents tells him. My Father told me I was Six years old, and
from thence I remember it. His Father and Mother were not out of England (as
appears) till about 1646, and then the War was ended; and the Prisoner
confessed himself to be about Forty years of Age, which shows him born in
England. He that but observes his Language, will find that the Tone of the
English Language remains with him. One born in Wales, (though he come young
from thence) he will have a Welsh Tone as long as he lives. The Prisoner tells
you, That no man has proved his being in Orders of the Church of Rome, nor
where, when, or by whom, made a Priest: But if all that were to be proved, it
would make the Law idle and insignificant. If he be made a Priest in England,
it is as much as if made at St. Omers or Rome. He did own io Joseph Dudley, That
he was made a Jesuit, and labored to make a Convert of him in the Garden, when
he was alone with him. The next was Thomas Houis, who courted a Woman, and must
not have her, unless he turned Roman Catholic. Busby must discourse him, and
make a Convert of him. He hears Busby preach three times, and heard him say
Mass several times; and was not only married by him, but has been Confessed and
Absolved by him diverse times. But Busby's fallacious Argument has no weight in
it, That because he understands not Latin, therefore he proves it not Mass,
nor other Services of the Church of Rome. Dorothy Saunders speaks to the same
purpose, That he Confessed and Absolved her. And she tells you, That she has
seen him elevate the Host, and has showed you the manner how; and he gave her
the Sacrament, which she and the rest took from him, as the Sacrament. And that
she has seen him officiate in some of the Robes produced in Court. Sarah Clark
speaks to the same purpose, and so did Elizabeth Evans. But Busby says, Because
this was done in an unknown Tongue, they cannot swear it; and that he is no
Priest, because they do not swear where, and when, he received his Orders.
Whoever does exercise that Profession, we do believe him of that Church. When a
Minister of our Church preaches or officiates, we do not say, Pray let us see
your Orders first; but if he officiate usually as a Priest, it is taken for
granted that he is one. He can tell where he received his Orders, but it may be
cannot produce them upon all occasions. Must he therefore be no Priest? Upon
the whole, if you believe the Witnesses or any two of them, you are to find the
Prisoner Guilty; I believe you have had full Evidence, go together and consider
of it.


The Jury went forth, and after a short stay came back into the Court. And then
Clerk, Gentlemen of the Jury, Have you agreed on your Verdict?


Jury, Yes.


Clerk, Who shall say for you?


Jury, The Foreman.


Clerk, George Busby, Hold up thy Hand, Look upon the Prisoner.


Clerk, Do you find George Busby Guilty of the High Treason and Felony he has
been Arraigned of, or not Guilty?


Foreman, Guilty.


Clerk, And so you say all?


Jury, Yes.


Clerk, Look to him Jailor.


Bar. Street, Though I must pass Sentence upon you of Course, the Jury having
found you Guilty; yet I must tell you, That His Majesty has Commanded me to
Reprieve you from Execution.


Then Mr. Bar. Street passed Sentence. Bar. Street, That you the Prisoner now
at the Bar be conveyed hence to the place from whence you came, and that you be
conveyed thence on a Hurdle to the Place of Execution; where you are to be
hanged by the Neck: that you be cut down alive, that your Privy Members be cut
off, your Bowels taken out and burnt in your view; that your Head be severed
from your Body; that your Body be divided into four Quarters; which are to be
disposed of at the Kings pleasure: And God of his infinite mercy have mercy
upon your Soul.


To the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.
Derb. ss.
WHere is His Majesty by Royal Proclamation dated the 12th day of November 1679,
was graciously pleased to promise and add to the reward of Twenty pounds, the
sum of Fourscore pound^ more; in all One hundred pounds, to any person who
should discover and apprehend any Popish Priest or Jesuit. And His Majesty does
appoint by the said Proclamation the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, or
the Lord High Treasurer of England, to pay the same accordingly without delay
or abatement; as in and by the said Proclamation at large it does appear. Now
know all whom it may concern, That at the Assizes and General Goal Delivery of
Our Sovereign Lord the King, held at Derby on Monday the 25th of July last
past, in and for the said County, before us Sir Edward Atkyns Knight, and Sir
Thomas Street Knight, Justices of Assizes, and other the Justices of Our said
Sovereign Lord the King for the said County, That George Busby Clerk, was
indicted, for that he the said George Busby being a subject of Our Sovereign
Lord the King, born in the Kingdom of England, and a Priest ordained by
Authority derived from the Sea of Rome, continued in England against the
Statute in that case made and provided: Upon which it was then and there fully
proved that the said George Busby was both a Priest and Jesuit. Whereupon he
was legally convicted and attainted of High Treason, as in and by the Record of
the same may fully appear. These are therefore humbly to certify, That it
likewise appeared to the said Court, then and there, that Henry Gilbert Esquire one
of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County of Derby, was the
person that did discover and apprehend him the said George Busby, for the
Felonies and Treason aforesaid. In witness whereof, and at the request of the
said Henry Gilbert, that he may receive the said reward of One hundred pounds,
pursuant to His Majesty's said gracious Proclamation, we have hereunto set our
hands this 27th day of July, in the Three and thirtieth year of the Reign of
Our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, over England, etc. Annoque Dom.
1681.

Edward Atkyns. Thomas Street.

FINIS.

