I Do Appoint ROBERT PAWLETT to Print the Trial of John Tasborough and Ann
Price; And let no other presume to Print the same.

WILLIAM SCROGGS.
THE Trial and Conviction OF JOHN TASBOROVGH and ANN PRICE FOR SUBORNATION OF
PERJURY, In Endeavoring to persuade Mr. Stephen Dugdale To retract and deny
his Evidence about the Horrid Popish Plot: With an Intention to stifle the
further Prosecution and Discovery of the same. At the King's Bench Bar at
Westminster, Tuesday the Third Day of February, 1679/80. Before the Right
Honorable Sir William Scroggs Knight, Lord Chief Justice, and the rest of the
Judges of that Court.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlett, at the Bible in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street, 1679/80.

THE TRIAL and CONVICTION OF JOHN TASBOROVGH and ANNE PRICE, etc.
In Hillary-Term, Feb. 3. 1679.
This day John Tasborough, and Anne Price, (who were the last Term Indicted for
the Offense in the Indictment hereafter recited, and found Guilty by the Grand
Jury of the County of Middlesex) were brought to a Trial at the Bar of the
Court of KingsBench, which proceeded thus.
FIrst, Proclamation was made for Information in usual form. Then the
Defendants were called, and appearing, were by the Clerk of the Crown advised
to look to their Challenges. Then the Jurors that were summoned to try the
Cause being called, and appearing; the Twelve that were sworn, were these
Persons following.

Jur.
Thomas Harriot, Thomas Johnson, Charles Vmphrevile, Thomas Earsby, Richard
Pagett, John Green, Edward Wilford, Richard Bull, Joseph Radcliffe, Richard
Cooper, James Supple, and George Read.
Clerk of Cr. Gentlemen of the Jury, you that are sworn, hearken to the Record.
The Defendants John Tasborough, and Anne Price, stand Indicted by the Oaths of
Twelve honest and lawful men of the County of Middlesex; which Indictment sets
forth; That whereas one Thomas White, alias Whitebread, William Harcourt, John
Fenwick, John Gavan, alias Gawen, and Anthony Turner, being Popish Recusants,
and false Traitors against our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the grace
of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith,
etc. the Thirteenth day of June, in the year of the Reign of our Sovereign)
Lord the King that now is, the thirty first, at the Sessions of Oyer and
Terminer, and Jail-delivery then held in the Old-Bailey* in the Parish of St.
Sepulchers, in the Ward of Faringdon without, London, for the City of London,
and County of Middlesex, were lawfully Indicted for certain. High Treasons in
the said Indictment specifyed; and afterward were severally tried by a ^ury of
the said County, and then and there were Attain^ed, as appears by the Record
thereof, to the Jurors aforesaid in Evidence shown. And whereas also one
Richard Langhorn Esque being a Popish Recusant, the 14th day of June, in the
year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King* that now is, the 31th
aforesaid* at the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, then held by Adjournment at
the Old-Bailey, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, was lawfully Indicted for
diverse High-Treasons in the said Indictment specified; and being afterward
Tried by a Jury of the County, was then and there thereof Attainted, as appears
by the Record thereof, to the Jurors aforesaid in Evidence shew^. And whereas
one Stephen Dugdale, upon the several Trials of the Indictments aforesaid, was
a Witness produced and Sworn on behalf of our said Sovereign Lord the King that
now is, and then and there in lawful manner, did give material Evidence against
the said William Harcourt, and the said several other Traitors, to prove them
guilty of the matters in the said Indictment specified; the said Defendants,
John Tasbrough and Anne Price, the premises aforesaid well knowing, and being
persons devilishly affected toward our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, now
King of England, etc. their Supreme and Natural Lord, and devising, and with
all their strength intending the Peace and Tranquillity of this Kingdom to
disturb, and to hinder and stifle the farther Discovery of the said Treasons,
and as much as in them lay, the due course of Law to elude, and the prosecution
of Justice in that behalf to retard and obstruct; as also to cause and procure
that it should be believed, that the persons aforesaid Attainted, were unjustly
Attainted: the said Anne Price, before the Trial of the said William Harcourt,
to wit, the 10th day of June, in the year Reign of our said Sovereign* Lord the
King the 31th aforesaid, at the Parish of St. Margaret Westminster; in the
County of Middle^ex* with Force and Arms, falsely, unlawfully, unjustly,
corruptly, and against the duty of her Allegiance, did solicit, suborn, and
endeavor to persuade the said Stephen Dugdale, that he the aforesaid Stephen
Dugdale should not be a Witness nor give Evidence against the said William
Harcourt, upon the Trial of the said William Harcourt for the Treasons
aforesaid. And that the said John Tasborough and Anne Price, afterward, to
wit, the 12th day of October, in the year of the Reign of our said Sovereign
Lord the King that now is, the 31th aforesaid, at the Parish of St. Margaret
Westminster aforesaid, with Force and Arms, falsely, unlawfully, unjustly,
advisedly, corruptly, and against the duty of their Allegiance, did solicit,
suborn, and endeavor to persuade, and either of them did then and there,
falsely, unlawfully, advisedly, corruptly, and against the duty of their
Allegiance, solicit, suborn, and endeavor to persuade the said Stephen
Dugdale, that he the said Stephen Dugdale should retract and deny all the
Evidence and Information which he the said Stephen Dugdale, as aforesaid, had
given against the Traitors and Popish Recusants aforesaid; the said John
Tasborough and Ann^ Price then and there falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, and
advisedly, corruptly promising, and either of them promising to the said
Stephen Dugdale great sums of Money and Rewards, if he the said Stephen Dugdale
would retract and deny all the Evidence and Information by the said Stephen
Dugdale, against the Traitors and Popish Recusants aforesaid, as aforesaid
given, and would withdraw and absent himself the said Stephen Dugdale, in
places unknown and beyond the Sea. And that the said John Tasborough and Anne
Price, their wicked Devices, Practices, and Intentions aforesaid to fulfill and
accomplish, afterward, to wit, the said 12th day of October* in the year of
the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King the 31th aforesaid, at the Parish
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, by Force and Arms, falsely, unlawfully,
unjustly, advisedly, and corruptly, and against the duty of their All^giance,
did produce and show, and each of them did then and there produce and show to
the said Stephen Dugdale, a certain Note in Writing; the Tenor of which Note
follows in these English words following: Being touched with a true Remorse of
Conscience, and hearty sorrow for the great Ill I did in coming in a Witness
against the Catholics, and there speaking things which in my own Conscience I
knew to be very far from the truth; I think my self bound in duty both to God
and Man, and for the safety of my own Soul, to make a true Declaration how I
was drawn into this wicked Action. But being very well satisfied that I shall
create my self many powerful Enemies upon this account, I have retired my self
to a place of safety; where I will with my own hand discover the great wrong
that has been done the Catholics, and hope it may gain belief. And likewise I
protest before Almighty God, that I have no Motive to induce me to this
Confession, but a true Repentance for the Mischiefs I have done; and hope God
Almighty will forgive me. And that the said John Tasborough and Anne Price, the
day and year aforesaid, in the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, with
Force and Arms, falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, advisedly, corruptly, and against
the duty of their Allegiance, the said Stephen Dugdale the aforesaid Note in
Writing, so as aforesaid, to the said Stephen Dugdale produced and shown to
sign and subscribe, did solicit and endeavor to persuade, and each of them
did solicit and endeavor to persuade; and then and there falsely, unlawfully,
unjustly, advisedly, and corruptly, did promise, and each of them did promise
to the said Stephen Dugdale, that if he the said Stephen Dugdale the aforesaid
Note in Writing would sign and subscribe, That then he the said Stephen
Dugdale great and vast sums of Money should have and receive; to the evil and
pernicious example of all persons in the like case offending, and against the
Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and against
the duty of their Allegiance. To this Indictment they have pleaded Not Guilty,
and for their Trial have put themselves upon the Country, and the Kings
Attorney likewise; which Country you are. Your Charge is to enquire whether the
Defendants, or either of them, be guilty of the Trespass and Offense whereof of
they stand Indicted, or not Guilty. If you find them or either of them Guilty,
you are to say so; if you find them not Guilty, you are to say so, and no more,
and hear your Evidenee.

Crier, make an O yes.


Crier. O yes, If any one will give Evidence on behalf of our Sovereign Lord
the King, against the Defendants John Tasbrough and Anne Price, let them come
forth, and they shall be heard.


Then Roger Belwood Esquire of Counsel for the King in this Cause, opened the
Indictment.

Mr. Belwood. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, The
Defendants John Tasborough, and Anne Price, stand Indicted for subornation of
Perjury. And the Indictment sets forth, That whereas Thomas Whitebread, William
Harcourt, and others, were Indicted, and that for Treason, in Conspiring the
Death of the King, and other Treasons, and were legally Tried, Convicted, and
Attainted for the same; and that Richard Langhorn was likewise Indicted and
Attainted for the same Offense: And that upon these Trials Mr. Dugdale was
produced and examined as a Witness for the King, and did depose materially
against the said Traitors; and the Defendants knowing this, and contriving and
designing to stifle the Discovery of the Treasons aforesaid, did before the
Trial of the said Harcourt, solicit, suborn, and endeavor to persuade the
said Mr. Dugdale not to be a Witness, nor to give Evidence upon the Trial: And
after the Trial, did farther solicit him to retract and deny all the Evidence
he had given on that behalf, and promised him large Rewards, and great Sums of
Money for it; and to accomplish this, they did incite him to withdraw and
retire himself, and produced a Note which he was to sign, and which has been
read to you, wherein he was to acknowledge that he was in an Error, and had
sworn falsely, and therefore had retired himself, and for this they promised
him great Rewards. And this Offense is laid to be done falsely, advisedly,
corruptly, and against the duty of their Allegiance. To this the Defendants
have pleaded Not Guilty: if we shall prove the Fact upon them, we hope you will
find it.


Then Mr. Sergeant Maynard pursued the Charge.

Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Ld. and you the Gentlemen of the Jury, I am of Counsel
in this Cause against the Defendants. For the Fact that is laid in the
Indictment, it consists of these particulars. First, an attempt to prevent the
Evidence before it was given. And Secondly, when it was given, and the Traitors
were Convicted and Condemned, then to disgrace that Evidence, and the
proceedings at Law that has been against the Traitors; and this in favor of
the Catholics. Thirdly, the means they used to persuade him, which was by
corrupt promises and engagements to him. And Fourthly, That they had prepared a
Note which has been read to the Jury, whereby he that had swore the Truth,
should publicly own to the world that he had swore a Lie, and that the
Catholics had received great injury by him, and that he had withdrawn himself
to make this Discovery: and this is the substance of the Charge upon these
persons. This practice, my Lord, is not new, it has appeared here in several
other instances. We remember what Reading did, and we have not forgotten what
Knox and Lane did; and this is the third Cause of that kind that has come
before you. Our Evidence will be this: we shall produce Mr. Dugdale, the Person
against whom this Design was laid, and he can testify all this matter. Now he
was but a single person against these two Tempters; and your Lordship remembers
what was said in the like Case, two might convince one, and therefore he
thought it safe to acquaint, and he did acquaint persons of Public Concern and
Authority with this Attempt upon him. And he did not only this, but they met
several times about it at the Tavern, and there we shall prove what they did.
Part of this has been confessed, for this has had another Examination in
another place. And the Gentlewoman has confessed, that she did offer him Sums
of Money, for it we will call our Witnesses. We shall not now aggravate the
fault, that will come after the Evidence given; but I think it is hellish
enough if it be proved.


Then Mr. Attorney General proceeded to open the Evidence.

Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, This Case is of the same nature with those that Mr.
Sergeant has mentioned of Reading, and Knox and Lane; but it goes somewhat
farther: for this must be done in Writing, and subscribed by the Party, to be
produced upon occasion, to defame all the Evidence that had been given before.
And the substance of the Note is to Recant all that he had said, and aver it to
be false: and so all that have died upon that account, must have been supposed
to have died very unjustly. This was the design of the matter: And it was not
only in this Case that these persons have been endeavoring things of this
nature; for we can prove, if it be necessary, by another Witness, that this
Gentlewoman has been tampering to persuade him to retract his Evidence against
another person, one Mr. Parsons a Priest in custody; and to bring all about,
she did presume upon Mr. Dugdale's old acquaintance with her. They had been
Fellow Servants in my Lord Aston's Family, and by that means were of ancient
acquaintance: And she did presume upon these grounds, that she could withdraw
him from all his Evidence. And we shall prove, I think, by another Witness
which does fortify this Testimony, that both these persons have already
acknowledged this Fact, and that they personated great persons in it; that is,
they pretended to come in the name of very great persons, as you will hear,
when they had nothing to do in the thing. They pretended to go to Windsor for
pardon, and assurances of protection, and they have acknowledged it; and it is
in proof that they were never near that person; that is, Mrs. Price did pretend
she should go down to Windsor and speak with the D. of York; for he was the
person named, though it is acknowledged, and was in proof by her Companion, that
she never came near him; that is, by Mrs. Harris, of whom you will hear anon.
And Mr. Tasborough did pretend the same thing to Mr. Dugdale, and did
acknowledge it to the Council, but denied that it was true. We shall call our
Witnesses, and prove the Fact as it has been opened.


Mr. Se^j. Maynard. We will first prove the Indictments that are recited, and
call for the Records of the Convictions.


L. C. I. Sure they will admit that.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. We must offer our Proof; if they will admit it, so.


L. C. I. What say the Counsel for the Defendants? do you admit the Indictments
and Convictions?


Mr. Pollexfen. My Lord, I cannot tell in this Case; if we should not stand
upon it that all the Proofs be given, our Clyent perhaps will take it ill. I
pray therefore the Evidence may be given according to Law.


L. C. I. Well, if you stand upon it, they must prove it. Produce the Records.


Mr. At. Genesis Give Mr. Clare his Oath.


(Who was sworn.)

Mr. Serj. Maynard. Put in the Copy, Sir.


(Which was done.)

Cl. of the Crown. Come, Sir, is that a true Copy?


Mr. Clare. Yes; I examined it.


L. C. I. Where?


Mr. Clare. With Mr. Adderley, the Clerk of the Peace of Middlesex: And this
other, with Mr. Tanner, Clerk of the Peace for London.


Then the Copy of the Record of the Conviction of Whitebread, etc. was begun to
be read.

L. C. I. Let them see it that are for the Defendants.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Don't read it all: if they have any Exception to it, let
them make it. Give it over to them.


Mr. Pollexfen. Ay, my Lord, let us see it, Pray Sir, you say you examined
this, is this a true Copy?


Mr. Clare. Yes, it is.


Then also the Conviction of Langho^ne in London was read.

Mr. Just. Dolben. That is the Conviction at Newgate.


Mr. Just. Pe^b. Well, go on with the rest now.


L. C. I. Go on with the Evidence.


Mr. Just. Pemb. Who do you begin with? Who do you call first?


Mr. Belwood, Mr. Dugdale, my Lord.


(Who was sworn.)

Price. Stand nearer me, Mr. Dugdale.


Mr. Attorney General. He stands near enough.


Mr. Serg. Maynard. He will be near enough you by and by Mrs. Price.


L. C. Just. Come Mr. Dugdale, what say you against Mrs. Price and Mr.
Tasborough?


Mr. Dugdale* My Lord, Mrs. Price being an ancient Acquaintance of mine, (for
she was my Fellow Servant at My Lord Aston's, may it please your Lordship) I
coming to Town as a Witness for the King, I did send for Mrs. Price as one of
my ancient Acquaintance, I think it was in January was twelve month.


L. C. Just. Is she a Papist?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, I think she is so now: We used to go to Mass together in the
Country.


L. C. Just. She was one, but is she?


Mr. Dugdale. I suppose she is one, we had Familiarity together, but never till
June last did she endeavor to take off my Evidence.


L. C I. When was it she first set upon you?


Mr. Dugdale. She began to tamper first, the Night before Harcourts Trial.


L. C. I. But she had been before with you in London?


Mr. Dugdale. Several times: For I sent to her presently after I came to Town;
but that was the first time she offered to take off my Evidence. And she was
then persuading me to be out of the way, and not to give any Evidence against
Mr. Harcourt, because he was her Ghostly Father.


L. C. I. Who was by?


Mr. Dugdale. There was no body by, but one that was an Acquaintance of mine
that heard her.


L. C. I. What is his Name?


Mr. Dugdale. Wright.


L. C. I. Then you two and Wright were together?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. I. What said you to her, when she made that offer to you?


Mr. Dugdale. I told her I could not do it; for that I was to appear the next
day, and was to give my Evidence, or I must be forsworn. In any thing else I
told her I would serve her; but that I could not do, because I should forswear
my self: and I was sworn next morning. It continued two or three days, or a
pretty while before I saw her again.


L. C. I. She was angry for a while with you, was she?


Mr. Dugdale. She was afterward well reconciled to me, and afterward she
desired me that I would speak to your Lordship, on behalf of one Mr. Parsons a
Prisoner in the Gate-hou^e, that he might be Bailed out, I told her I would, I
know not whether I did or no certainly, I suppose I did speak to some o^ your
Lordships Servants. I do confess it was not done; but I was to go into the
Country into Staffordshire, and just as I was going to take Coach, she sent a
Messenger to me to speak with me before I went. I said I could not stay to
speak with her that morning; but I would remember her Business when I came to
Town again. I supposed it to be this about Mr. Parsons. I went into
Staffordshire, and continued there about six or seven weeks: I was there at
the Assizes with your Lordship. Now she had been several times at one Mr.
Crosses (where we usually met) to enquire when I came to Town; and did desire
^he might know when I came: for ^he had important business to communicate to
me. I think this might be about the eleventh of September last my Lord. When I
came to Town, I came to Mr. Crosses that very Night, and they told me of this,
That Mrs. Price had been there several times to request them, that when ever I
came she might have Notice. I denied it that Night: I am very weary said I, and
therefore would not have her sent for. Within two or three days after, I came
there again, and she was sent for; I cannot tell whether by my direction, or
whether they s^nt for her of their own accord, they can best testify that.
When she came to Mr. Crosses, the first thing after Salu^ation from my Journey,
she asked me if I had spoken to your Lordship about Mr. Parsons. I told her no,
not as yet; but I would go straight up to your Lordships ^ou^e, and speak with
you about it. No, (said she) you need not now do that: for we have a greater
Work in hand, which Work was this; She told me she was come from a great Person
whom she did not then name, to tell me that if I would retract my Evidence
(this was the short of it, there were more particulars) and go beyond Sea, I
should either be in the D. of York's Court, or I should be supported by him.


L. C. I. Did she name the D. of York then?


Mr. Dugdale. Not the first time; she said she was come from a Great Person,
but named him not: the second time she named him, when I desired to know who
the Great Person was.


L. C. Just. But what said she the first time, if you would r^tract, what then?


Mr. Dugdale. I was to have a Thousand pounds paid into a Merchants hands to be
secured for me till I came back to give Evidence for them. I was to take the
Plot off from the Catholics, and to lay it wholly upon the Protestants. I was
to swear against some persons, as Mr. Tasborough told me, that after I was got
on Shipboard, I was to do a great deal of more Service, and come to swear
against a great Person, a Person of Considerable Note whom yet they did not
name.


L. C. Just. But before you depart from what Mrs. Price said to you, make an
end of her Discourse, when she told you you should have a Thousand pounds
deposited into what Merchants hand you thought fit?


Mr. Dugdale. I think not that, but into a Merchants Hand.


L. C. Just. Well, what should you do for it?


Mr. Dugdale. I was to retract all my Evidence, and to be no Witness against
them; but before I would much encourage this, I went to my Lord that was then
President of the Council, my Lord Shafts^ury.


L. C. Just. Who was by when this Dis^o^^^e was; was the third Person by you
speak of?


Mr. Dugdale. There was others by afterward* but there was no body but we tow
together, I think at that time: But I went to that Noble Lord my Lord
Shaftsbury, and acquainted him and Mr. Hambden, and Mr. Charlton with it: For
she threatened, that all the King's Evidence would in a short time be hanged;
and if I would come over to them, it should all be turned upon the Protestants.
The Duke had a wise Council, and had contrived it so, that if I would come over
to them, there would not be a Papist that should suffer more; but their
Religion should be established in half a year, and all the Witnesses brought to
condign Punishment. When I acquainted these persons I named with this, and
communicated it to them, they thought fit I should go on a little with her to
trepan her, to see what kind of Plot it was they were designing; and I did give
Encouragement; but not so far as to set my Hand to any Paper. But when it did
come out, the Contrivance they spoke of did prove Mr. Dangerfield's Plot, as
appeared afterward. So, as I was saying, I did encourage this to Mrs. Price,
to see what I could get out of her; for I knew their Plots were dangerous and
barbarous when I was amongst them; but I never designed to prosecute them at
any Bar, but only to know the depth of their Contrivance. And these Gentlemen
thought it very fit I should have some Evidence to testify for my Innocence,
if they should prosecute me: And I did get two persons, one Dr. Chamberlain and
his Clerk who were to be in a private place to over hear what was the
Communication between us; and when I had placed them, I asked Mrs. Price,
whether I first began the Tampering or She, she answered she did, and I
reckoned up all the Heads of our former Treaties, though not the Particulars.


L. C. I. When did Mr. Tasborough first appear in this Matter?


Mr. Dugdale. My Lord, he never appeared but twice, and it was about the 12 th
of October, I think, the first time. We appointed to meet at the Green Lettice,
that was with Mrs. Price, for I never saw the Face of Mr. Tas^orough before
that time, and from thence we adjourned to the Pheasant in Fuller's Rents.


L. Chief Just. There was the first time you met with Mr. Tas^orough you say.


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. I. What Discourse had you with him when you first met him?


Mr. Dugdale My Lord, when we came there, Mr. Tasborough was at first pleased
to open the Business to me, that Mrs. Price had acquainted him that I would
come over to them. I sat a good while and said nothing, and when I did speak,
I did rather give Encouragement than speak against it.


Lord Chief Justice. What did he tell you?


Mr. Dugdale. He said, he was brought there to confirm what Mrs. Price had
promised me.


Lord Chief Justice. Did he say so?


Mr, Dugdale. Yes, because I would not take it upon her word alone, but desired
to have some other sufficient Person; and she told me, he was an honest
sufficient Gentleman, and I might con^ide in him; and he said, what she had
promised, should be certainly made good, and that he came likewise from the D.
of York, as he said, to confirm those Promises had been made me of his
Encouragement and Protection.


Lord Chief Justice. Did he express particularly of what should be made good?


Mr. Dugdale. My Lord, in general.


Lord Chief Justice. Did he mention the money that was to be paid into the
Merchants Hands?


Mr. Dugdale. In general words only, all would be made good?


Lord Chief Justice. Then he did not say the Money; but what had been said to
you by her should be made good?


Mr. Dugdale. We had some particulars mentioned, but I cannot positively
remember which.


Mr. Attorney General. I desire my Lord, the Jury* ^ay take notice of this,
that what she had promised, was* (...) would retract his Evidence.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Did he intimate that?


Mr. Dugdale. The second time when he came, --


Lord Chief Justice. But before you come to the second time, let us make an end
of the first: Repeat what he told you, when he came to you. You say, he said I
am informed by this Gentlewoman, that you intend to come over to us, what then?


Mr. Dugdale. He told me a great many things for my Encouragement, if I did
come, that it was a very charitable Act, and it was nothing but what was acted
like a Christian, and if I had done amiss, I might have pardon for it; and he
did say, he was encouraged by more than the D. of York, that had taken my
matter into Consideration.


Lord Chief Justice. What was it in General Words?


Mr. Dugdale. It was, if I would come over and retract what Evidence I had
given. And he said what ever things had been promised me, should be sure to be
made good. Then my Lord, the second time, we did adjourn till Tuesday
following; and then we met (as I think) at the Six Cans in Holb^r^* and it was
pr^tty late that time we met; so Mr. Tasborough and Mrs. Price did tell me it
was the last time they were to come.


Lord Chief Justice. What, the second time of Ta^borough's coming?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes my Lord, and they offered me this Note. I had the Note before
left with me to consider of it.


Lord Chief Justice. Who had given you the Note?


Mr. Dugdale. Mrs. Price gave me the Note*


Lord Chief Justice. Did Mr. Tasborough leave you before the Note was given
you? For look you, when he told you about retracting your Evidence, and that
this is nothing but what you may lawfully do, it is a Charitable Act. --


Mr. Dugdale. That was the first time my Lord.


Lord Chief Justice. Did he produce the Note then?


Mr. Dugdale. He and she together did?


Lord Chief Justice. Who was it had it?


Mr. Dugdale. Mrs. Price had it from me, and produced it before Mr.
Tasborough's Face.


Lord Chief Justice. Did she give it to him to read?


Mr. Dugdale. Mr. Tasborough did read it, and reading it said, this is nothing
but what you may lawfully do; there is no hurt in it?


Lord Chief Justice. And then he went away and left you and Mrs. Price
together, what became of the Note?


Mr. Dugdale. Then Mrs. Price, after some importunity left the Note with me,
and I del^vered it to Doctor Chamberlain to copy out. And Mr. Tasborough and
Mrs. Price at the second meeting told me, that was the last time of meeting,
and if I did not then sign it, it would be much to my prejudice; and that they
should not be able to do any thing for my advantage, if I did not sign it
before the Duke went into Scotland. He was then going, and it should be much
for my Benefit if I signed it first; but Mr. Tasborough said, he could do me no
more Service except I did that.


Lord Chief Justice. He said, that that was the last time, and if you would do
it, it would be for your Advantage.


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chief Justice. What said you then, did they prod^ce the Note again?


Mr. Dugdale. My Lord, the Note was delivered to Mrs. Price, and she brought it
thither for me to sign it, and laid it upon the Table, and pressed me to sign
it.


Lord Chief Justice. I thought you had said she had given you the Note?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, but I gave it her again before we met the second time,


Lord Chief Justice. And who produced it then?


Mr. Dugdale. She again the second time. But my Lord, we have missed one thing
about Mrs. Price. When she was persuading me, she made use of the D. of York's
Name, and said, she would go down to Windsor to persuade the Duke that I should
have my Pardon: Accordingly she did go, as I believe; for she took Coach at
Charing Cross, and as she said, did go to Winds^r, and brought me word back
again, that the Duke did not seem to countenance it much, for fear he should be
drawn into a Praemunire himself; and then she told me the Duke did wish her to
acquaint the Spanish Ambassador with it; and she did go and acquaint him with
it, as she told me. I asked her when I should go to speak with the Ambassador
about it; she told me, that the Spanish Emb^ssador could not speak English, and
it was not safe to trust an Interpreter that they did not know; and so it was
to be deferred a little longer; but she said, that he would protect me, and
that all that she said that the Duke had promised for my Reward; and for my
safe going beyond Sea, he would be ready to do it; and she told me, that the
Spanish Ambassador would write Letters into Flanders. And so they made use of
the Duke of York's Name; but I could never find by any thing, nor can say,
though they made use of the Duke of York's name, that he did countenance any
such thing, or ever knew of it.


Lord Chapter I. How long was this before the Duke went away?


Mr. Dugdale, It was about the Twelfth or Fourteenth of October. The Duke went
the beginning of November. from hence.


Lord Chapter Just. Sir Thomas Doleman, do you know when the King came to Town from
Windsor?


Sir Thomas Doleman, No, I do not know.


Mr. Dugdale, It was before the Duke went over into Flanders that the King was
at Windsor. For the King and the Duke of York came from Windsor, and then the
Duke went to Flanders again, and then she went as she said, to Windsor, and
came home either the day the Duke came from Windsor or the day after.


Lord Chief Just. Her discourse when she went to Windsor, was before the Duke
went into Flanders?


Mr. Just. Pemberton, The second time you mean.


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord, the second time. For may it please your Lordship, I
do remember now, that the day when the Duke of York came back again from
Flanders I think it was the Twelfth of October, that was the time that I saw
Mr. Tasborough first, and that was the time they produced the Note, and I shall
produce some Witnesses to prove that he had discourse with me then.


Lord Chief Just. I would only know the time when she told you she went to
Windsor, to speak with the Duke of York.


Mr. Dugdale. My Lord, to the best of my remembrance, and as I think, it was
the day before the King came from Windsor, that she went down.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, He cannot swear to a day, it is hard to put him to that.


Lord Chief Just. He is not asked to a day, but we would be at some certainty
about the time as near as we can.


Mr. Dugdale, My Lord, this I dare positively say, she went down of a Tuesday,
and that was the day before the Duke of York came from Windsor.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, He does give us the time as near as possibly he can.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you a Copy of the Note Mr. Dugdale?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, my Lord, I have.


Mr. Ser. Maynard, Now we will prove that Note.


Mr. At. Genesis For the Note it self your Lordship observes, Mrs. Price had the
Original back again, but your Lordship hears Dr. Chamberlain took a Copy of it,
and he will prove it.


Then Doctor Chamberlain was Sworn.

Lord Chief I. Did she show you the Note at the time that she went to the Duke
to Windsor?


Mr. Dugdale, The Note was produced when the Duke came from Flanders, the day I
think he came, and that was in October.


Lord Chief I. When did Tasborough and she meet with you?


Mr. Dugdale, When the D. of York came back from Flanders.


Lord Chief Just. When was that?


Mr. Dugdale, My Lord, I think it was the Twelfth of October. Mrs. Price had
appointed Mr. Tasborough to come to confirm what she had said before, which was
the time that I saw him first.


Lord Chief Just. When was that?


Mr. Dugdale, The very day the Duke came from Flanders, as I think.


Lord Chief Just. Well then, she talked to you of the Duke of York, and going
to Windsor, before ever you saw Tasborough.


Mr. Dugdale, Yes my Lord.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, And so his Evidence was.


Lord Chief Just. So then here is the matter, that the Jury may understand the
Evidence; She solicited him first the day before Harcourt's Trial. Then the
next was Three or Four days after the Trial, and then she endeavored to
persuade you to retract your Evidence and go beyond Sea.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, No my Lord, that was only to get the man Bailed that was
in the Gatehouse.


Lord Chief Just. Did she not the Second time propose that?


Mr. Dugdale, No my Lord, not till I came forth out of the Country again.


L. Chapter I. Then you went into the Country before the great matter was spoken
to?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord.


L. Chapter I. And then she left word at the house, that she might know when you
came, and when she met with you she began to tamper with you, and said you
should have 1000 l. paid into some Merchants hand, and be well look^d upon, and
after that she said she would go down to the D. to Windsor.


Mr. I. Pemberton, But at that time she told him, he should have a place in the
Dukes Court.


L. Chapter I. Did she produce the Note the first time you saw Tasborough.


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord, the Note was produced the first time.


L. Chapter I. And ^asborough read it?


Mr. Dugdale, And said you might lawfully do it?


L. Chapter I. And said you might lawfully do it?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord.


L. Chapter I. When was the second time?


Mr. Dugd. It was within a few days after, about 2 or 3 days*


L. Chapter I. You are not asked to a day, was the Note produced a second time?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes.


L. Chapter I. And then he was upon the same matter still, when you swear the Note
was produced the second time?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord.


L. Chapter I. And then said he, this is the last time we must offer it to you, if
you do not do it now, I can do you no good.


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord.


L. Chapter I. But her discourse was before all this, that she would go down to
Windsor and get your pardon?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord.


Mr. I. Jones. Before your acquaintance with Tasborough?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, before ever I saw him.


Mr. I. Pemberton, Tasborough was to confirm it.


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, for I made some scruples about it, for they said before the
Duke would believe me real, I must subscribe the Note, which I would not do
without further assurance. She promised a person of good sufficiency and
quality should engage for the performance, and one Mr. Perkins as she said was
to be sent for, and was sent for out of the Country, and 3 l 10^ expended in
sending for him. And I said to Mrs. Price when a 1000 l was proposed, Lord in
heaven, that is too much money, a 100 l is enough to serve me; said she, we
must have a care how we manage this matter, for she told me the D. of York
stood upon a Tickle point, and if it should be known the Duke tampered with the
Kings Witnesses it would ruin him, but she said a 1000 l was prepared for me if
I would go beyond Sea into Flanders, where I should be maintained and
protected. But I objected my fear of the Inquisition in Spain, which I knew to
be so cruel a thnig, therefore I would not go beyond sea. Then she asked me if
I would be contented with the Protection of a Protestant Earl's house.


L. Chapter I. Did she tell you his name?


Mr. Dugdale, She asked me if I could not be content to be in a Protestant
Earls house, and not go beyond Sea? but she named no body.


L. Chapter I. When you said you were unwilling to go beyond Sea, for fear of the
Inquisition, she offered you the Protection of a Protestant Earls house, and
you desired to know who it was, but she named no body?


Mr. I. Pemberton, And you say when Mr. Tasborough came to you, he told you if
you would retract your Evidence, all the promises that had been made you by her
should be made good?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord, and without I would sign the Note, the D. and the
rest of the Gentlemen could not be serviceable to me.


Mr. I. Pemberton, And he pressed you to do it before the D. went into Scotland?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Belwood, Pray Mr. Dugdale, what discourse was between you and Mr.
Tasborough concerning the Trial of Sir G. Wakeman?


Mr. Dugdale, The last time, the 2d time we were together --


L. Chapter I. Then you were but twice with Tasborough?


Mr. Dugdale, No my Lord, but that second time, you may see says he what a
progress has been made by the acquitting of Sir Geo. Wakeman, even that the
Protestants themselves are at a stand about their belief, whether there be a
Plot or no, and if you come over to us it will overthrow all.


L. Chapter I. Had he any discourse with you about the Spanish Ambassador?


Mr. Dugdale, My Lord, I cannot tell whether he had or no, She had.


L. Chapter I. Did she say he would undertake the making good of the promises.


Mr. Dugdale, Said I, Mr. Price, suppose I should come over to you, what would
it advantage you? there is Mr. Oats, and Mr. Bedloe, and Mr. Prance when I am
gone. Said she, hang them Rogues, so as we do but get you over, we do not care,
we can quickly do their business.


Mr. Sol. Genesis And he said this I observe by the way, that if he came over, all
the King's Evidence should be hanged, and the Plot turned upon the Protestants.


Mr. I. Pemberton, Yes he did say so, that he was told by the Gentlewoman, if
he would come over, the Plot should be turned upon the Protestants, and the
King's Evidence be hanged.


Mr. Scroggs, Mr. Tasborough did not say so.


Mr. At. Genesis Is this a true Copy of the Note?


Mr. I. Pemberton, But Mr. Tasborough persuaded him to sign the Note, and
Tasborough did say it was a good Act, and confirmed and assured him, that all
should be made good to him that she had promised, and desired him to do it
before the D. went, that he might be the abler to serve him with the Duke.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Dugdale, is this a true Copy of the Note?


Mr. Dugdale, I have read it so often, that I do believe it is a true Copy. And
here is the Doctor and his Clerk who will swear it was a true Copy examined
with the Note.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Doctor Chamberlain and Cleave (which was done) with what
did you examine that Copy?


Mr. Cleave, By the Paper given me by Dr. Chamberlain.


Dr. Chamberlain, My Lord, I received the paper from Mr. Dugdale, my Lord, and
gave him order to transcribe it.


L. Chapter I. And that is a true Copy of the paper you had from Dr. Chamberlain?


Mr. Cleave, Yes, my Lord, it is.


L. Chapter I. Mr. Dugdale, did you deliver that very Note that Mrs. Price
delivered to you, to Dr. Chamberlain?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, I did, and received it back again from him.


L. Chapter I. And you Copied it out from that Note Dr. Chamberlain had?


Mr. Cleave, Yes, I did.


L. Chapter I. What is your name, Sir?


Mr. Cleave, Cleave.


L. Chapter I. Read the Note, (which was read as in the Indictment.)


Mr. I. Pemberton, Was this a Copy of the Note delivered to you, that you were
to Sign?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord, it is a true Copy. And if I may not be too
troublesome, there is one thing more which comes into my mind, that passed
betwixt Mrs. Price and me. she was instructing me how I should be conveyed
beyond sea, and she mentioned the way of the Pacquet-Boat that comes from
Dover, and goes every Tuesday or Wednesday. I made a show as if I was willing
to do it, but the next time she came, said she, We have thought it not to be so
safe as to go into a Merchant^ Ship which was the way we sent all our Priests
over.


L. Chapter I. When was this?


Mr. Dugdale, My Lord, it was before the Duke came home the second time, it was
while he was in Flanders. And being desirous to know, I pressed her to tell me
what became of Mr. Ewers, my Ghostly Father in the Country: it was a longtime
e're she would tell me, but at last she told me that he was conveyed over in
those Yachts that carried the Duke of York the first time over into Flanders.


Mr. At. Genesis Then swear Wright. (which was done) Mr. Dugdale, is this the man
that you mentioned concerning the discourse about Harcourt?


Mr. Dugdale, He hearkened as he told me afterward, but I did not then know it.


L. Chapter I. Well what say you, were you present at any discourse between Mr.
Dugdale and Mrs. Price before Harcourt's Trial?


Mr. Wright, My Lord, I was walking to and fro in the room: Mrs. Price that
Gentlewoman was talking with Mr. Dugdale at the window, and I was very
inquisitive. I did think it was upon the account of marriage, or some such
busine^s, and so harkening, I did hear her say, that Father Harcourt had been
very kind to her, and that she had visited him before he went to Execution, and
he bid her not be troubled, he dyed in a good Cause, and upon this account I
asked Mr. Dugdale afterward what her design was, and he said it was to
withdraw his Evidence.


L. Chapter I. How often were you in the company of Mrs. Price and Mr. Dugd^^e,
never but that one time?


Mr. Wright, Yes a dozen times I believe I have been with them.


L. Chapter I. When was the first time that you heard them talk concerning
Harcourt? they were always very private were they not?


Mr. Wright, Yes.


L. Chapter I. Well, what did you hear the first time?


Mr. Wright, It was at the Horsesh^^e* Tavern in Chancery Lane, and then the
great matter that she did desire of him was, to be kind to Harcourt, for he had
been her Confessor, but afterward I remember, when he was condemned, she said
she had been with him, and he had bid her be of good cheer, for he dyed in a
good cause.


L. Chapter I. Was this the time that you were at the Horsesh^oe^ Tavern?


Mr. Wright, The first time I heard no discourse of Harcourt then.


L. Chapter I. When was this? and what said she when she spoke of Father Harcourt
the first time?


Mr. Wright, It was to desire him to be kind to Father Harcourt because he was
her Confessor. They spoke so softly I could hardly hear them.


L. Chapter I. Well how do you know then?


Mr. Wright, I asked him when he came out, what it was; and he said it was to
take off his Evidence against Harcourt: and afterward (she said) she had been
to visit him.


L. Chapter I. What more did she say at that time?


Mr. Wright, I could not hear any more my Lord.


L. Chapter I. Then all that you did hear was, she said to him; pray be kind to Mr.
Harcourt, for he is my Confessor; and to that effect was all their whispering
that you heard?


Mr. Wright, That is all I did hear her say at that time.


Mr. I. Pemberton, But what did you hear Mr. Dugdale say at that time?


Mr. Wright, He said it was upon the account of taking off his Evidence.


L. Chapter I. Well, what did you hear her say afterward?


Mr. Wright, After she was saying she had been with him.


L. Chapter I. How long after?


Mr. Wright, I do not know, I cannot say to the time, for I never minded it,
they ^ent for me some times at their pleasure, but she said she had been to
visit Father Harcourt, who took her in his Arms and said, do not cry for me,
for I dye in a good Cause. And this I told Mr. Dugdale of again, and ^he did
further say, if the King should command me to be burnt at a stake, I would do
it and so would any of the party. Then said Mr. Dugdale, while you give these
kind expressions, yet you would cut off his head if you could; said she, you
are a Rogue and I am satisfied.


L. Chapter I. What was it before the time that she said, pray be kind to Harcourt?


Mr. Ser. Maynard, We call this Witness only in Confirmation of Dugdales
testimony.


L. Chapter I. But Brother, here is the matter: He says at the time that she told
Dugdale he was a Rogue, and she was satisfied, afterward she came to tamper
with him to do Harcourt a kindness.


Mr. Wright, She said many times there were not four greater Rogues between
this and Hell gate than the King's Evidence.


L. Chief. Just. What was it before she talked of Harcourt?


Mr. Wright, Yes, a great while.


L. Ch* I. That is the thing, that she should say he was a great Rogue, and yet
afterward tamper with him.


Mr. Ser. Maynard, There was some love betwixt them, and they did keep company
together.


Mr. Sol. Genesis This is before she began to tamper with Mr. Dugdale, but that we
call this Witness to prove is, that she did afterward tamper with him as Mr.
Dugdale tells you.


L. Chapter I. And the thing I say is, would she go to tamper with one she had that
Opinion of? It Is not impossible to be so, but it is not likely.


Mr. Sol. Genesis It is not impossible nor improbable at all with submission, who
should she tamper with but a Rogue, or one that ^he thought would be so?


Mr. Just. Pemberton, She thought as all the other Catholics did, and did
desire to withdraw him from his Evidence against them.


Mr. I. Dolben, And notwithstanding that she called him Rogue, yet still the
Witness says, he thought there was matter of love between them.


Mr. At. Genesis Then we will call you Cross, the man of the Tavern.


Mr. I. Pemberton, It was about a matter that concerned the whole Catholic
party, and if you ask them they will call them all Rogues. But afterward they
will begin to tamper one with one, and another with another.


Mr. ^e^j. Mayn. And they take the same Method with ev^ry one of them.


Mr. Just. Jones. But this is that that is said in confirmation of Dugdales
Evidence, that Dugdale did immediately after tell him, that her business was to
get him to retract his Evidence.


Mr. Just. Pemb. And he overheard so much, that she desired of him to be kind
to Harcourt, who was her Ghostly Father.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Now my Lord, as we have produced one witness to confirm one
part of Mr. Dugdales Evidence, now we shall produce another wittness to prove
the Subsequent discourses and her persuasion of him to retract and to sign the
Note. And for that we call Dr. Chamberlain.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis We will call Cross first to prove the meetings at the
Tavern, he is the man of the Tavern. (who was Sworn).


L. Chief Just. Come ask your Question now?


Mr. Belwood. Pray what can you say concerning Mrs Prices discourses with Mr.
Dugdale?


L. Chief Just. Do you know Mrs. Price here?


Mr. Cross. Yes, I do know her very well.


L. Chief Just. What say you then to her?


Mr. Cross. I never heard any discourse from them but what was common.


Mr. Just. Dolben. But they have been often there only them two, have they not?


Mr. Just. Pemb. Did she ever come to your house?


Mr. Cross. She has been there several times.


Mr. Attorn, Genesis I would ask you this Question Sir, whether she used not to
come there, and send for Mr. Dugdale when he has not been there?


Mr. Cross. Yes, she has been there often to enquire for him.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis What, frequently?


Mr. Cross. Yes, a great many times.


Mr. Attorn. Gen* About what time of the year?


Mr. Cross. Last Summer in June July and several months.


L. Chief Just. What say you to September and October?


Mr. Cross. I cannot say the particular months, but she has been there, and
desired me to send for Mr. Dugdale, for she had earnest business with him.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Was it presently after he came to Town?


Mr. Cross. My Lord, she sent for him before he went out of Town, and after ^e
came to Town, before he went to the Ass^zes, and since he came from the Assizes.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Pray did you never hear them speak about a Pri^st, one
Parsons?


Mrs. Cross. I have heard somewhat about Mr. Parsons, that Mrs. Price did
speak to Mr. Dugdale, that he should not proceed f^^ther against him then he
had done.


L. Chief Just. Did you hear her talk about Harcourt?


Mr. Cross. Yes, I have heard her speak something, but I do not know the
particulars of it.


L. Chief Just. But you have heard her name Harcourt's name?


Mr. Cross. Yes, I have.


L. Chief Just. You do not pretend this man was by at the Agreement?


Mr. Attorn. Genesis No, we do not. But only to prove they l^^d frequent
discourses together, and that she sent for him often about business.


L. Chief Just. And it is to the same purpose that the other was called for,
only in confirmation.


Mr. Sanders. My Lord, we pray he may be asked, whether Mr. Dugdale did not
sometimes send for Mrs. Price?


Mr. Cross. Not upon his own Account as I know of, for I have told you she
has been there, and left word she must needs speak with him, and when he has
come she has been sent for.


Mr. Sanders. Do you know she has been sent for at any other time?


Mr. Cross. Not that I know of. But when he was in the Country she came to our
house, and desired that when ever he came to Town she might speak with him
about earnest business, and she was sent for.


Mr. Scroggs* But he does not say (...) thing of Mr. ^a^borough?


L. Chief Just* No. He came only to the (...) (...), and that other place.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis No^, my Lo^d, if your Lor^ship please, Mr* Dugdale did
mention a matter that some persons were by direction to stand by and hear their
di^course, we have these persons here, who will tell you how it was, Dr.
Chamberlain and his Clerk.


Dr. Chamberlain. My Lord, ^ome time in September* Mr. Dugdale acquainted me,
that there was a design to draw him off from his Evidence, and he told me that
the Duke of York was named in it. I said, if it were so, it were a thing of
great moment, and if it could be confirmed it were well. ^e told me, if I would
come to his Chamber some morning* Mrs. Price should be there, and I should hear
the discourse; and accordingly I did come the 22 th* or 23 th. of September,
and was there about an hour, and went into the Closset with my Clerk, and bid
Mr. Dugdale speak with an indifferent voice, to see if I could hea^ what they
said. He did so, and we did hear him. At length Mrs. Price came, the
Gentlewoman I had never seen, but he called her by that name, and she answered
to it. They had several discourses, I could not overhear all, but the sum was
that the Spanish Ambassador was unwilling to treat with him, because it was
dangerous, and he must make use of an Interpreter, and that the Duke of York
would protect him, pardon him and give him a thousand pound to maintain him:
You know says he, Mrs. Price, that I began not this intrigue with you, but you
proposed it to me. She owned it, that she had proposed it to him.


L. Chief Just. Now how can you tell this is the Gentlevvoman?


Dr. Chamb. Nay, I don't know that, my Lord.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis We don't pretend that, but will prove it by another Witness
by and by.


Dr. Chamb. It was about the 22 th. or 23 th. of September, a Monday morning as
I remember.


Mr. Just. Jones. Was Tasborough there?


Dr. Chamb. No, my Lord, none but them two.


L. Chief Just. Well, go on, Sir.


Dr. Chamb. She did press Mr. Dugdale very much to go with her to the Gate
house, he would willingly have excused it, but she p^essed him so earnestly,
telling him she would not go without him, that they went together, and he came
up afterward to me, where I had staid all the time.


L. Chief Just. Did you hear her say any thing what she would have him do for
that thousand pound?


Dr. Chamb. I cannot tell truly any thing, but only to be gone.


Mr. Just. Pemb. You could hear that?


Dr. Chamb. Yes, my Lord, I did.


L. Chief Just. Whither?


Dr. Chamb Nay, I don't remember that.


Mr. Serj. Mayn. This was before the Note, my Lord.


Dr. Chamb. Yes, my Lord, for that, was brought me afterward.


Mr. Recorder. Call the other Witness, Cleave.


L. Chief Just. How was this before Harcourt's trial?


Dr. Chamb. I don't know that, my Lord, it was in September.


Mr. Just. Pemb. But the trial was long before that, soon after Trinity Term.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray, what did Mr. Dugdale say to her when she pressed him to be
gone, did he not make any Objection?


Dr. Chamb. ^ossibly he might, I did not hear all that was said.


Mr. Cleave. I was there the 22 th. of September.


L. Chief Just. In the Closset with Dr. Chamberlain?


Mr. Cleave. Yes, my Lord.


L. Chief Just. Had you ever seen Mrs. Price?


Mr. Cleave. No, never in my life, as I know of.


L. Chief Just. What did you hear then?


Mr. Cleave. Before that Mrs. Pri^e came. We shut up our selves in the Closset,
and desired Mr. Dugdale to make a feigned discourse to see whether we could
hear him, and he did so, and we heard indifferently well. We bid him to speak a
little loud that we might be sure to hear him. We staid there almost half an
hour before she came. Afterward she came up and Mr. Dugdale saluted her by the
name of Mrs. Price, to which she answered. He asked her, When shall I go to the
Spanish Ambassadors? [This I heard distinctly; for I could see her body, but
not her face, she stood with her back to the door] It Is not convenient at
present, said the, to go; for his Interpreter is out of Town. Then Mrs. Price
was saying, If so be you will come over to the Church of Rome, and take off
your Evidence, you shall have 1000 l. secured to you: but how, said he? Said
she, I will bring to you in a weeks time a person of Quality that shall secure
and confirm it to you.


Dr. Chamberlain. That I heard too.


Mr. Cleave. That will be well, said Mr. Dugdale; I had rather do that way than
any other. Said she, you shall have the Duke of York's protection, and a pardon
not only for your body, but for your soul.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. A large proffer!


Mr. Cleave. And afterward, said he, if I should come over again to the
Church, what ^igni^ies my going out of the way when there is Dr. Oats and
others to go on with the Evidence. Said she, We do not care so much for them,
for the Dukes eye is only upon you.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Did you hear that, Dr. Chamberlain?


Dr. Chamberlain. No, my Lord; the Duke was named indeed, but I do not remember
that particular. And she several times desired him to speak softly; and then
Mr. Dugdale was so honest, that he repeated it over again, that if we had not
heard him before, we might understand him.


L C. I. Now prove this Gentlewoman to be the person.


Mr. Cleave. She afterward pressed him to go with her to the Gatehouse, which
he seemed unwilling to, but went, and we have a man here that stood below the
stairs, that saw her come in and go out.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Call Holmes (who was sworn) What can you say about this
Mrs. Price?


L. C. I. Do you know Mrs. Price?


Holmes. Yes, that is the woman.


Mr. Belwood. Did you see her at Dr. Chamberlains?


Holmes. I saw her at Mr. Dugdale's that morning that my Master was there.


L. C. I. What time do you speak of?


Holmes. The 22 d of September I went along with my Master.


L. C. I. Who is your Master?


Holmes. Dr. Chamberlain.


L. C. I. What day of the week was it?


Holmes. On a Monday morning between eight and nine a clock.


Mr. Just. Dolben. That is the same time you speak of, is it not?


Dr. Chamberlain and Mr. Cleave. Yes my Lord, he went along with us.


Holmes. This is the woman that came down with Mr. Dugdale; I took great notice
of her, and know her very well again: there were some words spoke in the shop,
but I don't know what they were.


L. C. I. Dr. Chamberlain, she went out of the chamber with him, did she not?


Dr. Chamberlain. Yes, my Lord, she did.


L. C. I. How often have you seen her?


Holmes. I saw her go into the house, come out with Mr. Dugdale to go to the
Gatehouse, and when they came back again from Westminster from the Gatehouse.


L. C. I. How often have you seen her besides? you took notice of her when she
came down stairs, and when she came back again?


Holmes. Yes.


L. C. I. And this is the woman upon your Oath?


Holmes. Yes, upon my Oath.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. She came down with Dugdale, and would have him go along
with her to the Gatehouse.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we say that Mr. Dugdale did acquaint Mr. Hambden, and
Mr. Charlton, and my Lord of Shaftsbury with the business; we desire Mr.
Hambden and Mr. Charlton may be called, who promised to be here ( but they
appeared not).


Mr. At. Genesis Then my Lord, here are the Clerks of the Council, they will all
give your Lordship an account, that this woman and the Gentleman did acknowledge
this matter before the Council, and there did deny what they had sworn at first.


L. C. I. Who do you swear first?


Mr. At. Genesis Sir Robert Southwell.


(Which was done].

L. C. I. Come Sir Robert, what do you know?


Sir Robert Southwell. My Lord, she, this Gentlewoman Mrs. Price, was about the
23 d of October examined before the Council, and being examined, we were
commanded to take notes, the several Clerks of the Council, and we did take
notes, which were long; and my Lord, I must refer to those Notes.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Have you those Notes?


Sir Robert Southwell. Yes. It Is hard for me to give my evidence, unless some
particular question be asked me, because they are very long.


Mr. At. Genesis Then I ask you, sir, this particular question, whether that
Gentlewoman did acknowledge the paper she is charged with?


Sir Robert Southwell. My Lord, I do remember Mrs. Price when she was asked who
it was that framed the paper for her, (because it seemed to the Lords as if it
had been a thing so very well framed, that it was beyond a woman's capacity to
do it). Mrs. Price said, that she studied it her self, and indicted it her
self; and one Mrs. Man as I think, writ it out for her; but she took it upon
her self that she had studied it (that particular word) and contrived it.


Mr. At. Genesis What did Mr. Tasbrough say?


Sir Robert Southwell. My Lord, I do also remember that Mr. Tasborough was
cited before the Council Board; and being asked about this paper --


L. C. I. Was it shown him?


Sir Robert Southwell. I verily believe it was. It was read to him. Mr.
Tasborough did speak very cautiously, and as prudently as he could in the
matter. He did not positively say he had pressed Mr. Dugdale to sign it; but
did tell Mr. Dugdale, That unless he did sign it, he could not proceed to get
him any favor, for that was to be the foundation to testify that he was a man
of that sorrow that he had expressed himself to Mrs. Price.


L. C. I. Did he own that to Mr. Dugdale?


Sir Robert Southwell. Yes; and he added (my Lord) further (to do him justice
in all he said) in case Mr. Dugdale had signed the paper, he would presently
have carried it before a Magistrate.


Mr. At. Genesis I think we need not trouble your Lordship any further at present;
we leave it here till we hear what they say.


Mr. Saunders. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I am
of Counsel for Mrs. Price, that is one of the Defendants in this Indictment,
which as has been opened, does set forth, That she did contrive to suborn the
Kings Evidence before the Trials of those persons, and to suppress it; and
afterward to retract the Evidence given, and go off from what before he had
sworn, to disparage the Justice of the Realm, and to make it be believed that
those persons who were condemned and executed for this Conspiracy, were
innocent, and had wrong done them by him. Now for that matter, that which we
have to offer for her is this: Mr. Dugdale and Mrs. Price were fellow servants
in my Lord Aston's Family, and there they did contract a more than ordinary
familiarity, for in truth they did contract a marriage, and Mr. Dugdale did
promise her marriage; but afterward Mr. Dugdale having some other design, did
desert her, and she came to London, and lived here; but afterward when he came
up to London, he thought fit to renew his suit, and did not only send for her
when he first came to London, but we have it in proof, that from time to time
he had continually sent for her, and would not be quiet without her; and when
she denied to come upon his sending in his own name, he sent in another woman's
name, whom he knew to be an acquaintance of hers; and thus there continued all
along a great intimacy between them, insomuch that several persons, and amongst
them one of the Kings Witnesses, did observe they were speaking about marrying,
and did think they did intend to be married in a short time: my Lord, what
discourse might pass between them, I don't know; for ought I perceive she is
proved to be a Papist, and it is very like she would solicit one with whom she
had that familiarity, for those of her own party, as much as she could; but as
far as I perceive by this evidence that has been given, he under color of
kindness, and pretense that he would marry her, and sending for her from time
to time; at last to rid his hands of her, has put this upon her, That she
should solicit to suborn him against his Conscience to withdraw his Evidence;
she is a kind of weak Solicitrix for matter of judgment and reason; I know not
what other prevalency she might have with him by any other thing; but for
judgment I think --


L. C. I. If she penned that her self, as she did acknowledge and avow she did,
she was a woman of good judgment certainly.


Mr. Saunders. I perceive he was of good judgment to get rid of one he was
weary of, by this means.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Alas! alas! this is such a design indeed of
counterproving the Kings Evidence.


Mr. Saunders. Mr. Dugdale has sworn, That this was her Intrigue, and she
first began with him; if Mrs. Price be admitted to swear who is the Defendant,
as well as Mr. Dugdale who is the prosecutor, she would tell you that Mr.
Dugdale did contrive this matter himself.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. She would destroy his Evidence that way, that is very
well.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Dr. Chamberlain and his Clerks both swear, that he told her,
You know it was not I begun this Intrigue, but you.


Mr. Saunders. And if she had had but so much wit to have planted witnesses to
have taken advantage of his words, she had counter-worked him.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. They will learn such ways soon enough of themselves, you
need not teach them.


Mr. Saunders. If you please we will go on with our Evidence, and call
witnesses to prove, that Mr. Dugdale had contracted himself to her in marriage;
and this is a very unkind ill thing in him to serve us thus.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Mr. Saunders, you ought to remember publica privatis,
etc. A man should prefer the public good and safety of the Nation before such
a mistress as this is.


Mr. Just. Dolben. But hitherto the proof runs, that she sought him, and not he
her.


Mr. Saunders. But they were contracted first.


Mr. Just. Dolben. And you hear what the master of the Horseshoe says about her
leaving messages for him.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. He has very good reason why he should not marry her, for
what I can perceive.


L. C. I. It Is much they should be contracted, when she told him he was a great
Rogue.


Mr. Saunders. It may be she might; I know not what cause he has now to be
displeased with her; but it may be she might be displeased with him then. But I
beseech your Lordship and the Jury to observe, that though she did tell him he
was a Rogue, yet it was afterward that she did solicit and suborn him.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And therefore she thought plainly he was fitter for her
purpose, because she took him for a Rogue.


Mr. Saunders. But if she had a purpose to suborn him, she would not call him
Rogue to his face; that was not the way to insinuate into him. I desire Sir
John Nicholas may be sworn


[which was done].

L. C. I. What questions do you ask Sir John?


Mr. Saunders. I desire, my Lord, Sir John would tell us, whether Mr. Dugdale
in his hearing did not own he was contracted to Mrs. Price?


Sir John Nicholas. No truly sir, that I know of.


Mr. Saunders. Pray sir will you please to recollect it; it was when Mr.
Dugdale was before the Council.


Sir John Nicholas. Mr. Dugdale did then own some proposalsof marriage, but
nothing of a Contract.


L. C. I. It Is your women-witnesses are like to do that.


Mr. Saunders. That is all, Sir, you remember?


Sir John Nicholas. Yes.


Mr. Just. Pemb. Have you put the best foot forwards, Mr. Saunders?


Mr. Saunders. Which is Mary Benwell? swear Mary Benwell (which was done). We
will now prove he sent for us several times. We did not go after him so much.
What do you know concerning Mr. Dugdales sending for Mrs. Price?


Benwell. He sent for her to my house several times.


L. C. I. Did he lie at your house?


Benwell. No, my Lord, he did not.


L. C. I. Where is your house?


Benwell. In Browklow-street.


L. C. I. What is it a public house?


Benwell. It is an Alehouse, the Green-Lettice.


Mr. Just. Dolben. He told you so himself, that he did meet her at the
Green-Lettice.


L. C. I. What was their discourse when they met?


Benwell. I know nothing of that, I did not hear him say any thing; but only he
would come in, and say, Let your boy go for Mrs. Price.


L. C. I. When was this?


Benwell. The last time was Sunday sevennight before she was taken.


Mr. Recorder. She always came when she was sent for?


Benwell. Yes, if she was within.


Mr. Saunders. How often did he send for her?


Benwell. Above twenty times.


L. C. I. What great inference can you make from that? methinks it is as much
against you as it is for you; for it proves there was a great familiarity and
frequent meetings between them; and if it be so, it shows as if she had that
great confidence in him, as to attempt upon, and attack him in this affair.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Indeed Mr. Saunders, if you would have proved an
Inducement to Mr. Dugdales Evidence, you could not have proved it better, that
she had a great Confidence in him; she had an opinion, and reckoned he was sure
to her, and so had a greater influence over him than another.


Mr. Justice Jones. He sent for her to the Green Lettice, she sent for him to
the Horse-shoe; the Master of the house swears that she sent for him Twenty
times, so they might send for one another Twenty times a piece.


Mr. Justice Dolben. And he never came to seek for her but when she had been
there, and left word for him before.


Mr. Saunders. Now, my Lord, if you please, we will go on to prove. That when
she refused to come, he sent for her in another bodies name.


L* C. I. What will that do? or what does that prove?


Mr. Saunders. It is not probable then that she should solicit him. And just
at the last here are some Witnesses planted, and some words are taken from her
mouth, that it was her Intrigue all along.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Mr. Saunders, you do not show the time when those
frequent sendings and comings were.


L. C. I. It shows that which they have proved, that she believed he was fond
of her, and she was confident of him.


Mr. Justice Jones. I suppose Mr. Saunders means, and does drive at this, to
show that it was to drive on the Intrigue on his part, that these frequent
Messages were sent.


Then another Woman Witness was called and sworn.

Witness. My Lord, at the time that the Proclamation was for the Banishing of
all Papists out of Town; she came to me, and said, If Mr. Dugdale come to ask
for me, don't offer to tell him where I am.


L. C. I. When was this?


Witness. Long before Easter-Term, before the Papists were Banished out of Town.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, and Mr. Just. Jones. This was another part of the
Intrigue.


Witness. So Mr. Dugdale came to me, and asked me where Mrs. Price was? I told
him I could not tell; but if you have any Letters, I will convey them by a
messenger, or some Footboy to her.


Mr. Justice Jones. Did he send for her at any time in September?


Witness. The last time he sent for her was the Sunday was sev'night before she
was taken.


L. C. I. Did he frequently send for her a month or six weeks before that?


Witness. Yes, several times.


Mr. Saunders. Then swear Bridget Lee, (which was done.)


Mr. Saunders. Pray Mistress, you that spoke last, did Mistri^ ^rice ever deny
her self to him, but that once when she left that word with you?


Witness. Never to me, my Lord, but that time.


Mr. Saunders. Bridget Lee, pray tell my Lord, whether Mistress Price did deny
her self, and the way he used to get her to him?


Lee. Mr. Dugdale came into this Gentlewomans house, and coming into the House,
I was in the passage, he asked me, Sweetheart, let me speak with you; he
desired me to tell him, where Mistress Price was? I told him I could not tell: I
wish said he, you would fetch her to me: No, said I, I would not do it for five
Shillings: He clapped his hand in his Pocket, and said he, I will give you five
Shillings: No, said I, I will not do it if you would give me five Pound, let
every Tub stand upon its own bottom.


L. C. I. What did you mean by those words, Let every Tub stand upon its own
bottom?


Lee. I would not meddle nor make with any thing but my own Concerns.


L. C. I. How long was this before the Trial of Harcourt?


Lee. A quarter of a year before that.


Lord Chief Just. It was before he went out of Town, the Circuit.


Lee. Yes, my Lord, so it was.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. There had been no tampe^^ g then, this was before the
tampering.


L. C. I. It is no matter when the tampering was, but when Mr. Dugdale sent for
her, and she refu^ed.


Mr. Saunders. I wonder what they did together all the time before, if they
were not tampering.


L. C. I. They made Love together.


Mr. Saunders. What was the occasion that she refused?


Witness. I understand that Mr. Dugdale did find I was fearful of my self; You
may venture, said he, for I would not do her the least wrong, nor the least
hair of her head shou d not perish.


L. C. I. This was long before he went into the Country?


Witness. Yes my Lord.


L. C. I. Before the tampering?


Witness. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Saunders. Where is that other Witness Mrs. Holland? (who was Sworn.) What
do you know of M. Dugdales tending for M^^ Price? I would know the last time,
and where it was.


Holland. My Lord, I do not know what place it was he sent for her to, nor the
last time, but it was since Christmas.


L. C. I. Since Christmas?


Holland. No, before Christmas, I do not remember the day.


L. C. I. How do you know that he sent for her?


Holland. I was told by the People so, That a Messenger was come from him for
her.


L. C. I. You did not see him?


Holland. No I did not.


L. C. I. She says nothing to the purpose.


Holland. I know M^. Dugdale was in her Company one Sunday last Lent, and was
there two hours.


Mr. Justice Jones. It Is agreed of all sides they were Acquaintance, and had
great familiarity.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Ay, or she would never have had the confidence to have
attempted upon him in this manner.


L. C. I. Well, Have you any more?


Mr. Saunders. Here is one more, that is Mrs. Sheldon.


L. C. I. What do you call her for?


Mr. Saunders. To prove that there was a Note left to warn her to avoid Mr.
Dugdales Company.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Why did you not?


Mr. Saunders. It had been better for us if we had.


L. C. I. When was that Note?


Mr. Saunders. Lately.


L. C. I. That will do no good.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Come, call her however, they will say, Their Witnesses
were not heard else. (And she was called, but did not appear.)


L. C. I. Come, she is not here.


Mr. Saunders. Then, my Lord, we offer this as Evidence, That we had no Design
to Suborne him to Retract what he had said; the occasion of our being with him,
we have given you an Account of.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Why did you Write your Note then?


L. C. I. Mr. Saunders. What you have said amounts to nothing to avoid the
Evidence that has been given for the King; for all your Testimony says little
more, then what he said at first; That we were Fellow Servants, and well
acquainted. We made frequent Visits, and when I came to Town I went to see her,
and she came to me; they had no Discourse of this same matter of tampering till
the day before Harcourt'^ Trial, but Sir Robert Southwell does say, She owned
that she did study the Note, which is the great business in the Case: For if
she prepared the Note for him to sign, What can be said more?


Mr. Saunders. We can say no more, but that Mr. Dugdale might Dictate it.


L. C. I. No, she owned she Dictated it, and got Mrs. Man to Write it for her.


Mr. Saunders. I do not know my Lord --


L. C. I. But you may know if you will, for Sir Robert Sou^^well ha^h Sworn,
That she being Examined at the Council Board, the Lo^ds of the Council had so
good an Opinion of the Skill of it, that they Asked her, Who framed it for her?
and she Answered, She did it her Self.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Mr. Saunders, if you be not satisfied, here is another
of the Clerks of the Council.


Sir John Nicholas. All that Sir Robert Southwell has said is true.


Sir The. Doleman. All that Sir Robert has said I can Swear to every
particular.


L. C. I. Well, What say you M. Pollexfen?


Mr. Pollexfen. My Lord, if you please to spare me a World for the other
Defendant Mr. Tasborough; there is in the Indictment two things charged on the
Defendants, one, that they should persuade Mr. Dugdale not to give Evidence
against Harcourt; for that, there is no manner of Evidence against Mr.
Tasborough, but he ought to be found Not Guilty for that part.


L. C. I. That is true, of that he must be Acquitted.


Mr. Pollexfen. Then for the other part of the C^arge, That they should
endeavor to persuade Mr. Dugdale to Retract the Evidence he had formerly given
for a Sum of Money, and other Rewards, We do Reckon, that as this Evidence
stands before your Lordships, whatsoever is proved against M^s. Price, will
have no influence upon Mr. Tasborough, for although Dugdale and Price have had
Practices and Designs amongst themselves, unless he be a Party to them, if he
have not a part in them, they will not aff^ct him: Then the next thing is, we
must distinguish the Evidence as it stands, or else it may not be by the Jury
so well understood how they are differenced one from another: for I would not
mince the Evidence, but let it stand as it is; and how far Mr. Tasborough is
concerned in it, and how far may be done by him as an honest man in this
matter, or how far it is an illegal Act, will be to be determined by you. Now
there is only two meetings that Mr. Dugdale has had with Mr. Tasborough; and
in the next place, there is no other Witness to prove it, but Dugdale himself,
excepting only what Sir Robert Southwell says of the Conf^ss^on at the
Council, which I think will not be very much neither, as I shall show when I
come to that par^icular. Mr. Dugdale says, that at the first meeting, the ^^
th. of October, at the Green Lettice in Fullers Rents, M^. Tasborough did say
unto him, That Mrs. Price had told him, Mr. Dugdale would Re^ract his Evidence,
and he was come to Confirm what she had said.


L. C. I. Nay, but what she had Promised.


Mr. Pollexfen. Yes, what she had promised. And that he came from the Duke, and
that it was Charitably done of him to Retract, he goes no further, And that if
he had done amiss, he should be sorry for it. This is the Evidence, as near as
I can remember to repeat it.


L. C. I. Part of it.


Mr. Pollexfen. As to the First meeting.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Look you, do not mistake Mr. Poll^xfen, but observe this;
For Mr. Dugdale does Swear he told him, If you will Retract the Evidence you
have given, then all she has promised shall be made good.


Mr. Pollexfen. That he came to Confir^n what she had Promised. I would Repeat
it as right as I could, because, my Lord, I hope, as this Case stands, that
notwithstanding all that has been proved, yet Mr. Tasborough has done nothing
amis^. Then I come to the Second meeting.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. At the first meeting the Note was produced.


L. C. I. No, I think not.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Yes, my Lord, it was.


L. C. I. Was it Mr. Dugdale?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Pollexfen. Yes, he does Swear so, and that he Read it, and pressed Mr.
Dugdale to Sign it; And that this was the last time, and it must be done before
the Duke went into Scotland, or something to that purpose. This, my Lord, under
favor, may all stand and be very true, and yet Mr. Tasborough not Criminal,
with Submission: for if so be Mr^. Price were so far in her intercourse with M.
Dugdale, that as appears by his own Evidence he did seem to comply and Treat,
as if he were yielding, and to do what they would have him do, concerning his
going beyond Seas, or being kept in a Protestant Lords House, and she had such
Confidence as to tell him how the Priests were sent away, and how he might be
conveyed away. All this thus far comes to agree with what Mr. Tasborough says
for his own Defense: For Mr. Tasborough says, M. ^. Price did tell me, that Mr.
Dugdale was sorry for what he had Sworn, and would Retract all the Evidence he
had formerly given. Thus he says: I Will apply it to our Case anon; and this
appears by Mr. Dugdales own Evidence: for when he does Repeat what Mr.
Tasborough told him, he says, that he said, Mrs. Price told him of it, and he
has not told you, that he did contradict it for false.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Pray consider, he tells you, that Tasborough said, that
M^s. Price had acquainted him, with what Propositions she had made of 1000 l.
and that he was the man that was come to confirm the Promises She had made


L. C. I. That presses you, that is the truth of it. If that had not been in
the case, perhaps you don't talk much out of the way. It Is true, your
Observation is right.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. It Is ingenious indeed, but 'twill not hold our.


L. C. I. When Tasborough comes into the Company to be acquainted with Dugdale,
at that time M^. Dugdale had been advised to comply, or seem to do so to find
out the Plot and Design, and what he could get out by it. And without Q^estion,
to pursue that end, he did show yieldingness; and as you observe, for ought
Tasborough knew, she might be sincere: But was it a good way for him to tell
him? there is the matter in effect, he does tell him so. If you will Retract
your Evidence according to this Note that was produced by her, and read by him,
you shall have 1000 l. for your pains, Can you answer that?


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Or can you Answer the other, that he should say, She
has Acquainted me what you propose, that is, That you would Retract all, and
go out of the way, and be no more an Evidence; and if you would do that, that
she has Acquainted me with her Proposition, which I come to Confirm, that she
would give you 1000 l.? What can be made of that?


Mr. Justice Dolben. And withal, formerly there was a Discourse of some person
of Quality that should come to him: he desired that some such one should be a
Security for the money, and afterward she brought Mr. Tasborough, and said,
That was the Gentleman she told him of.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Come, Mr. Pollexfon, take this too, What had Mr.
Tasborough to do to use the Duke of York's Name? And to say, That he had
Authority from him to propose these things, which certainly is a very great
wrong to so great a Prince.


L. C. I. That needed not to a penitent person, that was sorry for what he had
done.


Mr. Pollexfen. He does indeed say, That Mr. Tasborough should be the man that
should secure the money.


Mr. Sol. General. And there is one thing farther, to take in all that Mr.
Tasborough did likewise say to Mr. Dugdale, That there is no harm in doing
this, that it is a very Charitable Act, and that he would do well in it.


L. C. I. But they answer that, by saying, supposing it to be true, that
Dugdale had Remorse, then it would be a very good Action, but to Talk of 1000
l. to be given for it, there is the Crime.


Mr. Pollexfen. Whether my Answer will take with your Lordship or no, I cannot
tell; but the Answer I would give is this; There are several things in that
Paper, as amongst the rest, That he should fall under great dislike, and
danger, and therefore was forced to hide and secure himself for fear of those
whom he should make his Enemies by it, and that was terror enough to any man
that should run into such a Retraction. Therefore now he must live when he has
done this, and so we should apply the other part of the Discourse, whatever
Money she had promised to take off his Fears of Want, and so his coming there
was to make good that part of the Paper, which says, he must be protected and
maintained, and preserved, that he may see he has a subsistence and provision
for him, if he did deserve it. And, my Lord, it will be greatly distinguishing
in our Case, and turn much upon this point, with submission, if I give or offer
money to any man to Swear a Falsehood or Retract the Truth, it is a very great
Crime, and if we are Guilty of that, undoubtedly our Crime is very bad; but in
order to the bringing of Truth to discovery, and to have a Retraction not of a
truth but of a falsehood, and to preserve that Witness from perishing, I may
promise him protection and subsistence.


Mr. Sergeant Maynard. Then you have found out a better way then the Devil
himself could have suggested to uphold Subornation.


L. C. I. Upon my Word, if that were a way that were allowable, then woe be to
us, we should easily have all the Witnesses tampered with by the Temptation of
1000 l. Reward. Do you think that is a good thing, for a Man to say, This thing
was rashly said, if you will unsay't, you shall have such a Reward. People
would be apt to bite at such a Bait, and we do not live in so Virtuous an Age,
that 1000 l. will not Tempt a Man to unsay what he has said at first, though
what he said then was true.


Mr. Pollexfen. It were an unjust and unfitting thing, if it were as you say.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Nay Mr. Pollexfen, consider, these things must not be
done by any one; their way, if they had been convinced of the Truth, had been
to have carried the Complaint to a Magistrate, and there to detect him by what
he had said: not to Corrupt him, and persist in it, by telling him, if he would
do so and so, he should have 1000 l. By this you let in all mann^e of
Temptations to Witnesses, that we shall never know where we are.


L. C. I. Come, Mr. Dugdale (because I will show you all very fair play, I
think very well of Mr. Dugdale.)


Mr. Justice Pemberton. He has carried himself always well.


L. C. I. Yes truly, I know nothing to the contrary; and pray tell upon your
Oath, and tell the truth, Did Mr. Tasb^rough, when he Read the Note, ask of
you, Is this true? Did he inquire of you, Whether or no you were really a
Convert, and Whether your Sorrow and Repentance were true?


Mr. Dugdale. No, he never did.


L. C. I. Did he ask you, if you could do it with a safe Conscience?


Mr. Dugdale. No, nothing of Conscience was ever named in it.


L. C. I. Did he ask you whether it was true?


M^. Dugdale. He never named truth or falsehood. It was only to get me over to
Retract what I had said.


Mr. Just. Pemlerton. What is a Temptation if this be not?


(...). Truly I ask this Question, that the World may see (...) would (...)
out the Truth by all the ways we can; for (...) h^ had been (...) (...), and
asked him, Whether (...) could do this safely, and with a good Conscience, and
Whether the matter of it were true, it would have gone a great way; but now I
have Asked Mr. Dugdale this upon his Oath, and he says it was only to get him
over to them.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And then consider all that is said against Mrs. Price, is
turned upon you, except that of the contrivance to keep him from giving his
Evidence against Harcourt. A very subtle Invention it was; but whether Mr.
Tasborough was in the business of the Note, in Contriving it, I cannot tell,
and it signifies nothing. But she having contrived as Ill a Note as can be
Penned, he is as much Guilty, for he Sollicits as well as she, and countenances
it so far, as to Undertake farther, that the Money and the Bribes she had
offered, should be paid and made good.


L. C. I. Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Tasborough talked with you of going away?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. I. Advised you to be gone?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, he did. He told me I were best to absent my (...) for a
while beyond Sea, and should have convenient passage.


L. C. I. Did he mention the Duke of York? What said he?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, he said he had acquainted the Duke, and the Duke had given
him Orders to press that Note home; for, said he, the Duke will not believe you
will be true, if you do not sign this Note.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. It Is never to be endured, that you should abuse so
Noble a Prince.


L. C. I. Did you tell Mr. Tasborough then, if I come over, there is Oats and
Bedloe, and Prance still left?


Mr. Dugdale. I did say so to Mrs. Price, but never to him.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You see then what he would have this Note signed for, to
strengthen the Catholic Cause.


Mr. Thompson. my Lord, Will you please to spare me one word for Mr.
Tasborough; I confess the Evidence does seem by Mr. Dugdale to press us very
hard, and particularly upon that matter of the money, but as Mrs. Price had
managed the business, Mr. Tasborough might have been very innocent. But, My
Lord, we must make that defense for our selves that we can in a Case of this
Nature, and therefore it will be, I hope, no reflection to say, We must
counterprove Mr. Dugdale, and disprove him as far as we can, to acquit our
selves. My Lord, it is a very great Crime that we are here charged with; and
the Crime being so heinous, ought to be well proved, and with unquestionable
Evidence. Mr. Tasborough, if he be Guilty of what he is here accused of, is a
very ill man; but men are not drawn up to great degrees of illness so soon, as
at the first act to attempt such heinous Offenses; And it is not probable that
at his first slip he should be Guilty of a fault of so high a Nature, and so
very ill as this is. My Lord, We shall call some persons that shall make it
appear to your Lordship, that after Mrs. Price had given us information of this
repentance of Mr. Dugdale's, We did make application to a Person of very great
Honor, no less than my Lord Privy Seal, that Mr. Dugdale might receive the
discouragement which it was fitting he should in such a matter. My Lord, we
must call our Witnesses to prove Mr. Tasborough to be a man of a very good
reputation, that he never did any such thing before; and I hope, We shall give
your Lordship such an account of him, that the Jury will have reason to
believe, That Mr. Tasborough is not so Guilty as he is represented; but was
drawn into this matter what ever it is. Pray call a Witness to show that Mr.
Tasborough acquainted any Lord of the Privy Council.


Then my Lord Chief Justice went off the Bench, to sit on Writts of Error in
the Exchequer Chamber.

Mr. Justice Pemberton. If Mr. Tasborough be draw in, it is by Mrs. Price, but
not by Mr. Dugdale.


Mr. Thompson. Is my Lord Privy Seal in Court?


Mr. Just. Jones. You know he is not here.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You toss great names about, and make great noise with
them, when you know they are not he^e.


Mr. Thompson. If he had not fallen ill, sure he would have been here. What say
you Mr. Tasborough?


Tasbourough. My Lord, I was to attend my Lord Privy Seal yesterday, and
desired him to do me the honor to be here to day, because I was to come to my
Trial. He told me, he had business that would hinder him from coming; but, said
he, if the Attorney General will inform himself of me, I am ready to testify,
that you gave me Information first of Mr. Dugdales Recantation, before it came
before the Council.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. We will do your Client this Right, Mr. Thompson, as to
ask whether my Lord Privy Seal was at the Council, and said so much then.


Mr. Scroggs. He was not that day, but we acquainted my Lord Privy Seal before
that; but Sir Robert Southwel, does him this right, as to say that he did
declare, if Mr. Dugdale had signed that Note, he would have gone with it
immediately to a Magistrate.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. How does that appear, he said so?


Sir To. Southwel. My Lord, he did further say, after he had said that he would
have carried it to a Magistrate in that Case, he did say he had been once or
twice with my Lord Privy Seal.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Ay, he did say so, but there was no Evidence but his
Allegation.


Mr. Just. Jones. Was my Lord Privy Seal at Council at that time?


Sir To. Southwell. No, I think not, my Lord.


Mr. Scroggs. It Is a very strange thing we should be so forward to promise for
Mrs. Price, if we had not thought Mr. Dugdale real.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. It Is a sign you had a great inclination to the thing;
Well, call your Witnesses.


Mr. Thompson. Call Sir Richard Ashfield, and Alderman Barker.


Mr. Just. Dolben. It Is a fine thing this to make a long brief with, to no
purpose.


Mr. Scroggs. We have a swingeing brief here indeed.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Ay, you come with a great Brief, but no Witnesses.


Mr. Thompson. If we do not call the Witnesses named in our Brief, our Client
will take it ill; if they do not appear we cannot help it.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You have forgot what you moved the Court about Tempest.


Mr. Just. Dolben. But we have not forgotten, that about 10 days ago you moved
to put off this Trial, because Mr. Tempest was your material Witness, and being
asked what he could prove, you said it was how you were brought acquainted with
Mr. Dugdale; but because the Court did not think fit to put off the Trial, Mr.
Attorney did say he would see if he had been examined, and what he had deposed,
and report it to us, and afterward did so, and did consent here that at the
Trial you should make Use of his Examination if you pleased; but we do not see
that you make any Use at all of it.


Mr. Thompson. We that are of Council must make Use of our Clients witnesses,
as we have them in our Brief.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. We desire they should call their Witnesses and not name
Names.


Mr. Scroggs. We desire that Examination may be read.


Mr. A^t. Genesis Produce it then.


Mr. Thompson. We have it not.


Mr. Recorder. And we for the King do not use it as Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis Come, if it be here you shall have it read, tho I believe Mr.
Tempest swears little to your purpose; for as I take it he says he does not
know Mr. Dugdale at all.


Mr. Just. Dolben. But I told you that Mr. Tasborough puts you upon trifles.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. But whatsoever they put you upon, you should not trifle
with us.


Mr. Thompson. Do you desire they should be read, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. Just. Pemberton. We cannot read them without the consent of both parties.
Do you consent to them first for whom they are produced?


Mr. Tasborough. I only desire to know by them how I came acquainted with Mrs.
Price.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Well, you hear what Mr. Attorney says is in them; will you
have them read?


Mr. Scroggs. It Is to no purpose then, if that be all.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. I desire to speak but a few words, and I am bound to speak
them --


Mr. Just. Jones. Brother, they have more Witnesses.


Mr. Pollexfen. These we shall now call are to this purpose, to prove Mr.
Tasborough's reputation, that he is a very honest man.


Mr. Just. Dolben. I don't see but that he may be a fair conditioned man in all
other things.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Look you, those that are in their dealings sometimes
honest fair men, yet when they come to be of that Religion, there they are
debauched, and there they are brought to do as wicked things as can be, in
favor and to support that Religion.


Then Alderman Barker was Sworn.

Mr. Thompson. Do you know Mr. Tasborough?


Mr. Barker. Yes, I have known him several years.


Mr. Thompson. How long?


Mr. Barker. Fourteen or Fifteen years.


Mr. Thompson. How have you looked upon him?


Mr. Barker. I have looked upon him as an honest peaceable man.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You have known him to be a Catholic?


Mr. Barker. Yes, that I have.


Mrs. Price. May I beg the Favor of this Honorable Court, that I may speak
for my self here.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Well, come Mrs. what will you say? But we must tell the Jury
beforehand it signifies nothing for Evidence.


Mrs. Price. I desire to speak the truth.


Mr. Just. Dolben. But they must not believe a word you say.


Mr. Price. Be pleased to give me leave to speak however.


Mr. Justice Jones. Well, go on.


Mrs. Price. Sir, Mr. Dugdale does here accuse me of suborning him to retract
his Evidence. I do protest it is so far from it, that he importuned me, and
solicited me to go to the Duke of York, and he told me if I would go, he would
pay my Coach-hire. Is it not so Mr. Dugdale?


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You must not interrogate him.


Mr. Just. Dolben. The very first thing you have said has discredited all you
would say; for if Mr. Dugdale (as you say) had importuned you that you would do
this thing for him, how comes it to pass that afterward you should promise him
a reward of 1000 l. and bring a Gentleman to make it good?


Mrs. Price. I assure you, my Lord, I never did.


Mr. Just. Dolben. It Is most apparent Tasborough does not deny that.


Mrs. Price. But that which is the real truth, that you say must not be
believed.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Did he solicit you to draw your Note?


Mrs. Price. Yes, he did, upon the word of a Christian.


Mr. Just. Jones. You did confess that you did study it and draw it your self.


Mrs. Price. I did so, but he importuned me to it.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. How do you prove that?


Mrs. Price. I desire to know by what words I took off his Evidence at
Harcourt's Trial.


Mr. Just. Dolben. You desired him to be kind because he was your Confessor.


Mrs. Price. I desire to ask him the question by what words it was.


Mr. Just. Jones. Well, you may ask him, but it is little to the purpose. Can
you remember the words or the effect of the words that she spoke to you in the
behalf of Harcourt? the night before his Trial, I think it was.


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, it was the night before to desire me I would not be an
Evidence against him, in regard he was her Ghostly Father.


Mrs. Price. You know you came to me, Mr. Dugdale, and told me you rid Post to
Town.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. We must have no more of these interlocutory discourses.


Mr. Dugdale. Mrs. Price, I would not do you the least injury in the World.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Mr. Justice Jones, I desire a word.


Mr. Just. Jones. If you will produce any Witnesses, do.


Mrs. Price. I desire I may speak for my self.


Mr. Just. Dolben. It Is but reason she should speak for her self.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. But I hope if she ask unreasonable Questions she is not
to be heard.


Mrs. Price. I only speak Truth.


Mr. Just. Dolben. But we must not take your Evidence of it, produce your
Witnesses.


Mr. Just. Jones. If you have any to prove what you say, call them.


Mrs. Price. Whether you will take my Evidence or not; pray let me speak for my
self.


Mr. Just. Dolben. We cannot believe you, nor must the Jury believe you, I Will
tell you that before hand.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. We tell you, you must not be heard. If you have any
questions to ask let your Council propose them.


Mr. Just. Dolben. If you apply to Jury, you are not to tell the matter of
Fact, but to prove it to them by Witnesses.


Mrs. Price. I desire, however, I may be heard my self.


Mr. Just. Jones. If any thing has been omitted by your Council, which is
material for your defense, and you have Witnesses to prove it, they shall be
called.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Mrs. Price you must know the course of the Court, and the
way of Evidence is, we are not to hear the Persons indicted make long Speeches
to the Court, or to the Jury, or come with great confidence to deny the thing
that is proved against them; if you have any thing material to say, we will
hear you by your Council; you must not trouble us.


Mrs. Price. My Lord, I have matter enough to say, but it cannot be heard.


Mr. Saunders. We desire Wright may be called again.


Mr. Just. Jones. To what purpose?


Mrs. Price. To prove that you, Mr. Dugdale, would suborn him.


Mr. Dugdale. Call him if you will, if you can prove any practices upon me.


Mrs. Price. You have good practices we know; you are a man of excellent
practices; you had need commend your practices. You know very well, Mr.
Dugdale, that you told me you were perjured.


Mr. Recorder. It Is not Language fit for you to give.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Is that liberty of Speech fit to be given? she tells Mr.
Dugdale that he said himself he was perjured.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You are an impudent woman to talk so.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Your mouth must be stopped if you can use your Tongue no
better.


Mr. Justice Jones. What would you ask him when he does come?


Mrs. Price. I have told my Council.


Mr. Saunders. She says she would ask him whether Mr. Dugdale did not offer him
money to suborne him in this Case. You are sworn already, Sir, are you not?


Mr. Wright. Yes.


Mr. Saunders. Then pray answer the Court this Question, Did Mr. Dugdale at any
time offer you any money to take an Oath, or give Evidence?


Mr. Wright. Offer me money?


Mr. Saunders. Yes you. Answer upon your Oath.


Mr. Wright. No, my Lord.


Mr. Saunders. Or any thing else, did he offer?


Mr. Wright. No, my Lord, He has often sent to me to come, and when I did
come, has said, I am glad you are come, I Will do you as great a kindness, but
he did not know of my coming because his Messengers had not met with me.


Mr. Saunders. Did any one on his behalf offer you any thing?


Mr. Wright. No, I think not; if it was, I think it was in vain.


Mr. Saunders. But did he, or did he not?


Mr. Wright. No.


Mr. Recorder. If Mrs. Price has any more such Witnesses, she may call them.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Sir, under your favor, here has been a strange way of
defense. Consider what a Crime we are upon, and in what times we are. That
there is a Plot of a very high and transcendent Nature under Question, that
diverse Witnesses have been suborned, and persons tried in this place convicted
for it, it is undeniable. Now after Trials for so high a Crime in the most
public way, here come Price and Tasborough; what to do? she indeed before, but
both Tasborough and she afterward, by Rewards, and such Temptations,
Endeavors to disgrace his Evidence, but there is not only that, but the great
thing looked after by their party, was, the Issue of it; upon this all the
King's Evidence were to be hanged. What has been said is only to make a Jest,
and make the Company merry, that there was a Contract of Marriage between them,
but what will be the Consequence of that? He that spoke it, has unquestionably
proved the probability of our Charge, we have made it probable, and he has
proved it; and the Inference drawn by them is, She certainly did not tempt him,
because she had an interest in him, which concludes very naturally. But then
for the other, Mr. Tasborough, Alderman Barker comes in, and swears the
Gentleman is a very honest man, I hope he did hear the Evidence, and then I
wonder how he could swear it; but do we come to prove whether he be an honest
man in his life? it is not at all our question' if we should have offered to
have disparaged him in another way, we had not, I think, done our duty, and the
Court would justly have reproved us for it; but there is one thing, which if it
had not been spoken, I would have held my peace: How is Tasborough concerned in
the Case? Diverse have been questioned and executed for High Treason, upon Mr.
Dugdale's Evidence; and after such an Execution, what is Mr. Tasborough's duty?
it has been represented as if he had been persuaded by her, and drawn in that
way, and he thinking that it was a falsity, that had been sworn before, and
that Mr. Dugdale repented of the injury he had done them, he should help to
make this discovery. But what was he concerned? did he go to a Justice of
Peace, or any just way? did he not contrive with the Devil rather than the
Justice? 1000 l. must be paid to daaw off a man, and corrupt him, to make him
own himself perjured, in a truth that had been spoken. And this is not the
first time that they have done it; for we remember the Case of Reading, very
well. I shall say no more, but this, under favor, it is not well to say, That
a man may persuade another to deny his Testimony, that is nothing concerned in
the Case, in a case of this public Nature especially, and for money too, that
was never meant by the Law, and I hope is not meant ever to be countenanced
here. I hope the Court will give that Caution to all that hear it, as will
discourage any Attempts of this Nature for the future. And that it shall not be
enough to excuse it, for him to say he was persuaded, and thought his sorrow
was real, and thereby to put the King's Witnesses to prove that thing to be
true that they had proved already. What had Mr. Tasborough to do, as if he were
a judge of the proceedings of the Court, and Witnesses? Nothing at all, under
favor, but is a very ill man, and as such I hope shall be punished.


Mr. Justice JONES. Gentlemen, You of the Jury:

THese two Persons have been Indicted for a very great Offense. The Indictment
sets forth (that which we all know to be true) that Whitebread, and diverse
others, have been Tried and Condemned for a very execrable Hellish, Popish
Plot: That upon these Indictments, Mr. Dugdale did give Material Evidence; But
that, when some other of the Conspirators were to be Tried, and brought to
Punishment, these two Persons did endeavor to make Mr. Dugdale absent himself,
and retract his Evidence. And not only so, when Harcourt was to be brought to
his Trial, (for whom it seems Mrs. Price had a particular Kindness); but
likewise, it was endeavored, he should be gone, and not give any further
Evidence at all; and he should have a Thousand Pound for a Reward. This is the
Indictment.

The Inducement to the Indictment (that is the Trials of the Conspirators) is
all well known: And there have been Coppies of the Records produced, which have
been inspected and per^sed by the Council, on the Defendants Parts; and they
cannot say, but that the Records agree with the Matter, in that respect: So
that, there is nothing at all, but the bare Matter of Fact, that you are to
inquire into.

I shall distinguish the Persons: Mrs. Price, according to the Evidence, has
gone through the whole Charge of the Indictment; and indeed, has committed
some further Crimes, than have been mentioned in the Indictment.

First, It has been proved to you by Mr. Dugdale, that she did not only desire
Kindness to Harcourt, who was her Ghostly-Father; but she did design, as much
as in her lay, that he should not come in at all, to give Evidence against him:
This is proved by Mr. Dugdale; And another Person that was by, that did hear
Mrs. Price say, She would have him be kind to Mr. Harcourt, because he was her
Ghostly-Father; Withal, tells you, That immediately after, Dugdale did tell
him, that she did persuade him, he should absent himself, and not give Evidence
against Harcourt.

She is likewise Charged, (as they are both) that she did treat with Mr.
Dugdale, for to Retract all that he had said, to be gone, and to leave a Paper
behind him, which should signify, that there was Trouble of Mind upon him; and
that he had done wrong in his Testimony, given against the Catholics:
Therefore, he would be gone, and leave a Testimony of it in Writing, when he
was gone. And she provides for his Security abroad, and he should have a
Thousand pound Reward.

Dugdale is the Person, with whom the first Treaty was: But because he knew,
and it was observed, that it was unsafe to deal with Persons, that were
tampering with him in such a Nature as this was, and upon a Matter of this
kind; he does acquaint Persons of very great Quality, as he swears; my Lord of
Shaftsbury, and two other Persons. They do advise him, that he should get some
Persons to be by, when they should come to some further Treaties concerning
this Business. And to that purpose, he should hold up a Correspondence, and
condescend to a kind of Agreement and Compliance, that he might be able to have
further Testimony, to confirm his Evidence. Whereupon Dr. Chamberlain, and his
Servant, are placed in a Closet in Mr. Dugdale's Chamber, in such a Place that
they might hear what was discoursed in the Chamber: In comes Mrs. Price, they
being in the Closet, Mr. Dugdale and she discoursed about the Business so loud,
that Dr. Chamberlain and his Servant (as both of them tell you) heard their
discourse upon it. The Question was asked, and put, to Mrs. Price: Mrs. Price,
I hope, you know, you are the Person that first moved this Intrigue; it began
from You, and not from M^: And this was confessed by her. So that you have, in
Confirmation of Mr. Dugdale, the Testimony both of Dr. Chamberlain, and of his
Servant, to that part of the Charge against her. And withal, it is added, not
only that he was to go Beyond Sea, to retract what Evidence he had given; but
likewise, it was thought expedient, he should come over again, and swear
against all the rest of the Evidence that had been given, or should be given
for the KING. And when it was said by Mr. Dugdale, What will it avail you, if I
do Retract my Evidence? There is Mr. Oats, and Mr. Prance, to testify the same
thing. She said, No matter for that: If we get you on our side, for the
Catholick-Cause, to be our Friend, we shall be sure to ba^^le all they can say
or do: And we shall not only save the Catholics, but turn the Plot upon the
Head of the (...) and all the KING's Witn^sses shall be Hang^d. That, you may
remember, was testified by some of the Witnesses.

Mrs. Price deals frequently with Mr. Dugdale, to this purpose.

Dugdale, that he might know (and (...) very like, with that honest Intention,
and no other, he did it)! and that he might discover the Bottom of the
Business, tells her, This is a thing of dangerous Consequence; and it is fit,
that I have better Security, than your Promise of this Thousand Pound: I will
have some Substantial Person, that shall come and confirm what you promise. And
thereupon she tells him, He should have a Substantial Person brought: and, he
should have Thanks from very great Persons; naming the Duke of York: For he it
was, as they said, that would take care to Protect him, and procure a Pardon
for him.

Now, Gentlemen, this is the Evidence against Mrs. Price. In Defense of this,
What does she o^^en, but that she has been acquainted with Mr. Dugdale, and
there has been great Familiarity between them? If there had not been such a
Familiarity, would there have been such an Intrigue? Is this a Matter to be
Communicated to a Stranger? If there were a Doubt before, whether there were
this Contrivance; Does not this give us a better Assurance that it was so,
because there was such an Acquaintance between them?

Then, as to Mr. Tasborough: He indeed is not in the Beginning of the Design,
at all: There is no Evidence against him, for that Part of the Charge, That he
should Absent himself, and not give Evidence against Harcourt. He comes not in
at that Time: Nor can I perceive by Mr. Dugdale, that he had any Acquaintance
with him at all, till the Twelfth of October. And he says, he was but twice in
his Company.

Now, Gentlemen, What does Mr. Tasborough do? First, Dugdale is told by Mrs.
Price, That a Man of QUALITY should come to him, and confirm all the Promises
she had made him. Tasborough does come to him, and tells him, He has had some
discourse with Mrs. Price, what she had proposed; and he is now come to make
good and confirm, That all shall be effected, that she had proposed to him. Ay!
but it is supposed, that Mr. Tasborough is a very Honest Man, and a
Conscientious Man; and does come for nothing in the World, but to persuade Mr.
Dugdale to do the Office of a Christian: It was a Charitable thing of him, to
take off the Scandal that was upon the Innocent. But you do not hear him charge
it upon Mr. Dugdale's Conscience, that he had given a false Evidence against
any of those Persons; nor urge him much to Repent: But he must begone: He must
give no more Evidence against the Catholics: And, What if he do comply with
this Desire? Then he tells him, he shall have a Reward; What Reward? A thousand
Pound; which was made known before; and Protection, and Pardon, and Security:
And he comes to him in the Duke of York's Name, to enforce it the more strongly
upon him, and make him do it: Whereas, indeed, the Duke of York (as he himself,
and Mrs. Price have since confessed) never knew any thing at all of the
Business.

Now, Gentlemen, to move by honest Christian means, any one that has done an
injury of any sort, to Repentance, and Contrition, and Recantation, that is a
very good thing, but to do it with promise of a Reward of a Thousand Pound,
cannot be justified; what way is there to insinuate into any Person, an
intention of doing a Mischief, but such a way as this? Will any one come to
another, and say, forswear your self; whereas you know such a thing to be true,
swear it to be false, or retract the Evidence you have given about it, and I
will give you a Thousand Pound? No, but serve the Catholic Cause, a great many
have suffered, and by your Testimony; retract, be gone, be secure; you shall
have a certainty, that you shall be secure in another Kingdom; or else you
shall have it in a Protestant Family, though neither that Protestant nor any
Protestant was named.

Is not this a Bait to tempt a Man to all the Villainy in the World? If a
Thousand Pound be offered, who can resist? Such People as these are, will not
easily resist such a Temptation.

But, Mr. Tasborough is a very honest Man in his Life and Conversation, he
produces those that tell you his Reputation is good, and the like; there is no
doubt of it, and if he had produced Twenty Witnesses, do you think he would
produce any one that should speak against himself? He chooses out those
certainly, as would speak as much in his Favor as they can; but if a Man has
been an honest Man in his Conversation, may he not be enticed or seduced?
Especially when it will be told him, if you do this you shall merit Heaven; you
shall be Sainted and Canonized, you do the greatest service in the World, to
the Catholic Cause.

These Temptations may work upon a Man, perhaps that is Morally honest, when he
is infatuated with this Principle, that any thing may be done for the Catholic
Cause, as it is a Catholic Doctrine, too often instilled into them, that any
thing is become Sanctified, when it tends to that end; it is easy then to
prevail upon them in things of this Nature.

I should have told you, (which I omitted before) one Circumstance concerning
matter of proof against Mrs. Price, more than Tasborough; two Witnesses said
they were in the Closet, and heard a Woman discourse; but neither of them did
see her Face; but afterward it is proved by another that he was desired to
observe who came into, or went out of the House; and he swears, he saw Mr.
Dugdale and her come out of the House, that they went to the Gate House; and he
saw her come again from the Gate House with Mr. Dugdale, and he is sure this is
the Person. And you remember that part of their discourse was of going to the
Gate House.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. They do not deny it neither.


Mr. Just. Jones. I don't see they do.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. It Is a very strong and plain Evidence as can be given.


Mr. Just. Jones. There is nothing can be said for Mrs. Price, little for Mr.
Tasborough.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. I see nothing that can do him any good.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Come Gentlemen, lay your Heads together, and consider of the
Matter.


(Which the Jury did at the Bar.) And being asked by the Clerk of the Crown,
Whether they were agreed? They answered, Yes.

Cl. of Crown. Who shall say for you?


Omnes. Foreman.


Cl. of Crown. Do you find the Defendants Guilty of the Trespass, and Offense
whereof they stand indicted, or not Guilty.


Foreman. Guilty.


Pollexfen. As to part only for Mr. Tasborough.


Foreman. Guilty of the Indictment.


Mr. Just. Jones. We all know he is not found Guilty of one part, and that must
be considered at the setting of the Fine.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Mr. Tasborough has been upon Bail; but I suppose he must not
go upon Bail now; we pray that he may be Committed.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. They must both be Committed; take them both.


Mr. Saunders. Mrs. Price is still in the Gate House.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. We have her here now, she is in our Custody.


Mr. Saunders. If you please, Sir, we desire she may be remanded back.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. No, they shall go both into the Marshals Custody.


Mrs. Price. I beg of your Lordships, I may go back to the Gate House.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. What! these are not things to be trifled with.


Mr. Just. Dolben. No, we must not shew^ you any favor at all.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. No, we must have no favor for you that would destroy us
all.


Then the Prisoners were taken into Custody by the Marshal, to be kept till
their Judgment.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed.
THe Trial, Conviction, and Condemnation of Anthony Brommich, and William
Atkins, for being Romish Priests, before the Right Honorable the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs, at this last Summer-Assizes at Stafford, held there for the
County of Stafford; where they received Sentence of Death accordingly.

Together with the Trial of Charles Kern, at Hereford-Assizes last, for being
also a Romish-Priest.

The Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, his Speech in the King's Bench, the first day
of this Michaelmass-Term, 1679. occasioned by the many Libellous Pamphlets,
which are published against Law, to the Scandal of the Government, and public
Justice.

Together, with what was declared at the same time, on the same occasion, in
open Court, by Mr. Justice Jones, and Mr. Justice Dolben.

The Trial and Conviction of Thomas Knox, and John Lane, for a Conspiracy to
(...) and Scandalize Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedloe; thereby to discredit their
Evidence about the Horrid Popish-Plot.

The whole Duty of Man is now Printed in ^ignificant Latin, for the use of
Schools.

Sold by Robert Pawlet, at the Bible in ChanceryLane, near Fleet Street.


