THE TRIAL OF Elizabeth Cellier, AT THE Kings-bench-Barr, On Friday June the
11 th. 1680.

LONDON, PRINTED for Randal Tailor, in the Year 1680.

The TRIAL of ELIZABETH CELLIER, at the Kings Bench Bar, on Friday June the
11th. 1680. where the usual Formalities being passed, and the Jury Sworn, the
Indictment was read, which is as follows.
The INDICTMENT.
THe Jurers for our Lord the King do present, that Elizabeth Cellier, Wife of
Peter Cellier, late of the Parish of St. Clement Danes in the County of
Middlesex Gent. stands Indicted, for that she as a false Traytoress against our
most illustrious and excellent Prince, King Charles the Second, her natural
Lord, not having God before her Eyes, nor weighing the Duty of her Allegiance,
but by the Instigation of the Devil moved and seduced, and the Cordial Love and
true due natural Obedience which all faithful Subjects of our said Lord the
King toward him should bear, and of right, are bound to bear; utterly
withdrawing, and divising, and with all her Might intending the Peace and
common Tranquillity of this Kingdom to disturb, and to bring and put our said
Lord the King to Death and final Destruction; and the true Worship of God in
this Realm by the Law Established and Used, to alter to the Superstition of the
Church of Rome, to move and stir up War against the King in this Kingdom, and
to subvert the Government of this Realm, the first Day of November, in the
thirty first Year of the said Kings Reign, at the Parish of St. Clement Danes
aforesaid, with diverse other false Traitors unknown, traitorously did compass,
imagine, and intend the killing, death and final destruction of our said Lord
the King, and to change, alter, and utterly to subvert the ancient Government
of this Realm, and to depose, and wholly to deprive him the said King of his
Crown and Government of this Kingdom, and to extirpate the true Religion within
this Realm established; and to fulfill and accomplish the same most wicked
Treasons and traterous Imaginations and Purposes, the same Elizabeth Cellier,
and other false Traitors unknown, the said 1 st. day of November, in the 31 th.
Year aforesaid, with Force and Arms, etc. at the Parish of St. Clements Danes
aforesaid, advisedly, divillishly, maliciously, and traterously assembled,
united, and gathered themselves together, and then, and there, devilishly,
advisedly, maliciously, cunningly, and traterously consulted and agreed to
bring the said Lord the King to Death and final Destruction, and to depose and
deprive him of his Crown and Government, and so introduce and establish the
Romish Religion in this Kingdom, and the sooner to fulfill and effect the same
most wicked Treasons and traitorous Imaginations and Purposes, the said
Elizabeth Cellier, and other unknown Traitors then and there did contribute,
pay, and expend diverse great Sums of Money to several unknown Persons, to
procure them traitorously to kill the said King, and introduce the Romish
Religion into this Realm, and for the better concealing of the Treasons
aforesaid, the said Elizabeth Cellier then and there did pay and expend to
diverse other Persons unknown, diverse other Sums of Money, falsely to impose the
said Treasons upon some other Persons unknown, against the Duty of her
Allegiance, and against the Peace of our Lord the King, his Crown, and Dignity,
and against the Form of the Statute in such Case made and provided, etc.

John Gadbury Sworn. L.C.J. Mr. Gadbury, What do you know concerning this Plot?


Mr. Gadbury. I know nothing of it, neither one way, nor another.


L.C.J. Do you know of any Contrivance of Mrs. Celliers, to kill the King?


Mr. G. No; rather the contrary.


L.C.J. Do you know of any attempts to change the Government:


M G. I will tell your Lordship what I do know, if these Gentlemen will not be
too nimble for me. I have suffered a great deal of Prejudice of late in
relation to a Plot, as if I had known of a Plot; but God is my Witness, I know
of none, unless it were a Plot to bring Sir Robert Peyton over to the Kings
Interest. That Plot I had some Concern in, and had some knowledge of Mrs.
Celliers Concern in it; but she was so far from doing any thing against the
Kings Interest, that she was willing to bring over with him the three Gentlemen
turned out of Commission when Sir Robert was. So that how she could be acting
for the King, and against the King at the same time, I do not understand.


L.C.J. Mr. Gadbury, You are a man of Learning, pray will you give your
Testimony of the things that you know in relation to Mrs. Cellier.


Mr. G. Mrs. Cellier was not committed upon my Accusation; therefore, I hoped
she might have been tried without my Testimony. But when I was in danger of my
Life, when I lay in the Gate House, Mrs. Cellier was reported to be a third
Witness against me, and then I raked up every trifle: but if I had thought it
Treason, I would have discovered it before. And as to that particular Business
concerning Mr. Smith, that Smith sometime since did come to me, being my old
Acquaintance, to ask my advice in his Affairs, and he had then an Affair of so
great moment, that it was necessary to ask my Advice in it, which was to go to
the Lords in the Tower. I asked him what to do? says he, I can say enough
against Dr. Oats to serve them, and take off his Evidence, and asked me if he
should do it. By no means, Mr. Smith, said I. Mrs. Cellier afterward told me,
this Smith, and one Phillips were willing to tell some Stories or other of Mr.
Oats and Mr. Bedlow, and I told her this very Story; says she, you being
acquainted with him, it is possible you may do some good upon him, and says
she, I had as lieve as ten Guineys, that you could do it.


L.C.J. That is, when that you advised Mr. Smith not to meddle with any thing
against Dr. Oats.


Mr. G. She said, she did not care if she had been at the Charge of ten
Guineys, if he would be honest and discover the Truth. And, my Lord, she did
say she had heard Mr. Dangerfield talk of a Nonconformists Plot that would off
the Popish Plot.


L.C.J. Did she say, that she had heard Dangerfield say there was a
Nonconformists Plot, and that he was to have a Commission among them? and did
she say, that she had heard him say, that he hoped under the color of that,
the Popish Plot would go on? or did she say it of her own accord, that she
hoped that would carry on the Popish Plot?


Mr. Gad. My Lord, I cannot remember particulars.


L.C.J. There is a great deal of difference between Dangerfields saying it, and
her saying it.


Mr. G. I have no reason to spare her: but I am unwilling to speak any thing
that is contrary to truth, though she has done me the greatest Injury in the
World.


L.C.J. How came you to talk of a Non-conformists Plot?


Mr. G. It was only common Discourse as it was at Coffee-Houses.


R. Had you heard of it before she spoke of it, that you say it was common?


Mr. G. No, not till she spoke of it.


L.C.J. Did Mrs. Cellier tell you of any Popish Priests or Jesuits coming
hither from beyond the Seas?


Mr. G. Upon the going over of one Clay, I think she did say she heard there
were some more coming over.


L.C.J. What to do?


Mr. G. God knows what.


L.C.J. Did she speak of any Plot or Contrivance to kill the King?


Mr. G. No, she was always an Enemy to Plots, or else I would not have kept her
Company.


L.C.J. Did she say there were, or that she heard there were several Priests
and Jesuits coming over?


Mr. G. My Lord, I think she said she heard it. And I have said several times
to her, the Popish Plotters would be destroyed: but she answered, she was
afraid the Nation would be destroyed first.


L.C.J. Did she say she was afraid of it, or, that the Nation would be
destroyed first? I ask you once more, we must try People according to their
Oaths. By the Oath you have taken, when you said you thought the Popish
Plotters would be destroyed, what Answer did she make?


Mr. G. She said she was afraid the Nation would be so; because, she said,
abundance of the best of the Nation went into other Nations, to weaken our
Nation, and spend their Money, and therefore she was afraid the Nation would be
destroyed before them.


L.C.J. What Discourse had you with Mrs. Cellier passing through Westminster
Abbey?


Mr. G. My Lord, my memory has been exceedingly bruised; but I remember, my
Lord, as I was going through the Abbey in a rainy afternoon, she said, this Abbey
was formerly filled with Benedictine Monks, or something to that purpose, and,
says she, what if it should be so again?


L. C. J. Are you a Protestant or a Papist?


Mr. G. A Protestant, my Lord.


L.C.J. He talks as like a Papist as can be, was it, what if it should be
filled?


Mr. G. She said, what if it should be again.


L.C.J. What did you say to that?


Mr. G. I only smiled to hear a Woman's Discourse, my Lord.


L.C.J. You make all the Company laugh, What did she say of the Temple?


Mr. G. That the Temple had been filled with Friars too.


L.C.J. And what then? Did she talk of filling it again?


Mr. G. Says she, this Place was filled with Benedictine Monks, and the Temple
with Friars.


L C.J. This may do well enough: but what did she say else concerning the
Temple?


Mr. G. Nothing, my Lord.


Mr. Sergeant Maynard said something to him here, which was not heard, but Mr.
Gadbury replied. Mr. G. Mr Sergeant, I was none of the Tribe of forty one.


Here Mr. Gadbury was going to read in his Paper: but the Court told him that
would not be allowed; but he might refresh his Memory with it. L.C.J. Now tell
me what she said: Mr. Gadbury, keep it in your Hand.


Mr. G. My Lord, she put it by way of Interrogation to feel my Pulse.


L.C.J. What did she say else?


M. G. There was nothing but transient Discourse, my Lord.


L.C.J. We must ask you what the truth is, and you have looked upon your Paper.
Now, consider what you say, and consider that you are upon a solemn Occasion,
and are to testify it in the presence of God Almighty. I would have you tell
plainly what it is, and neither to make it more, nor stifle it.


Mr. G. It was only transient discourse.


L.C.J. Say what it was. Was it, this Place was once filled with Benedictine
Monks?


Mr. G. She said that the Abbey had been filled with Benedictine Monks, as the
Temple had with Friars.


J. Jones. Look upon your Paper.


L.C.J. You have looked upon the Paper, and pray tell us what she said. Did she
say she hoped to see this Place filled with Benedictines?


Mr. G. My Lord, I do not remember that word hope.


J. J. How long have you been acquainted with Mrs. Cellier?


Mr. G. Ten or a dozen Years.


L.C.J. Did she never ask you any Questions about the Life of the King?


M. G. My Lord, when the King was very ill at Windsor, and all People were
fearful that he would die, she did move the Question to me.


L.C.J. What Question?


Mr. G. To know whether I thought his Majesty would live or die: but it was her
fear that he would die.


L.C.J. Had you seen the King?


Mr. G. No, my Lord.


L.C.J. How then did she expect you should give her an Answer? from your Art?


Mr. G. From my Art, my Lord.


L.C.J. Did she desire you to consult your Art, how long the King would live?


Mr. G. She did as I said.


L.C.J. What did you say to that?


Mr. G. I would not tell her, because he was my Sovereign.


L.C.J. What Answer did you make?


Mr. G. I told her I would not meddle with it.


L.C.J. She would have had you consult your Art or Scheme, or whatever it is,
to know whether the King would live or die?


Mr. G. It was something of that.


L.C.J. And you said you would not meddle nor make with it?


Mr. G. Yes, my Lord.


L.C.J. She desired you to make a Scheme?


Mr. G. No, my Lord, I cannot say she mentioned a Scheme; but she asked the
Question.


J. Raymend. What did she ask else?


Mr. G. Only that Question.


L.C.J. How often do you believe she spoke of it?


Mr. G. Never, my Lord, but when he was ill. I will not baffle any thing that
may conduce to the safety of the King, and Kingdom.


L.C.J. Indeed it is very conducible to the safety of the King and Kingdom, if
any go about to destroy him, and with evil Intentions to ask how long he will
live, and you ought in Duty to God, and your Sovereign, to declare it. Did she
ever make any enquiries about the Kings Death more than what you have said?


Mr. G. No more, my Lord, and then she was fearful he would die.


L.C.J. Did she say she would go to some Body else?


Mr. G. My Lord, when she perceived me shy, says she, I see you are afraid of
me, I will go to some other Astrologer.


L.C.J. For what?


Mr. G. To satisfy her Curiosity, as a great many do.


L.C.J. What Curiosities did she ask besides this?


Mr. G. She would ask me sometimes about the Condition of Bodies, whether they
would be prosperous in the World and several other Questions


L.C.J. Were you nice in these Curiosities?


Mr. G. Truly, my Lord, I was shy of meddling with any thing, when I heard
there was a talk about Plots.


L.C.J. Was you nice to give her satisfaction according to her hopes concerning
these things you call Curiosities, questioning whether one should be well wedd,
how many Children she should have, etc. Were you scrupulous in that?


Mr. G. I think I might not be nice in that very particular.


L.C.J. How came it then, that she would go to another Astrologer?


Mr. G. She asked me something about Mr. Dangerfield.


L.C.J. For what?


Mr. G. How to get him out of Prison.


L.C.J. Pray how came she to say she would go to another Astrologer? You were
not shy to give her an answer to these Questions.


Mr. G. It was something about Mr. Dangerfield, My Lord, she asked me something
about some Deeds or Papers which he was to search for or seize, which concerned
Mr. Bedlow.


L.C.J. She had better have gone to one of the Clerks than to a Conjurer for
them. But why would she go to another Astrologer?


Mr. G. Because I was shy.


L.C.J. You were not shy in these things about Bedlow. Did she not say when you
refused to meddle with the death of the King, that she would go to another
Astrologer?


Mr. G. Yes, my Lord.


L.C.J. Dd you any thing for her at that time?


Mr. G. My Lord, I did calculate a Scheme, which since I found to be for Mr.
Dangerfield, but I knevv nor fot whom it was when I did it.


L.C.J. How! Can you apply one Scheme to any Body?


Mr. G. My Lord, when Mrs. Cellier came to me, she gave me the time of a
Persons Nativity, and I set the Figure of the Heavens to that Sign, to know
whether he were a Person fit to be trusted, her Husband being a French Merchant
to get in Money.


L.C.J. For ought you know, Dangerfield was a Woman, and the question was,
whether Dangerfield was with Child, and he happens to be a Man. -- How did it
fall out?


Mr. G. I have forgotten, my Lord.


L.C.J. When did you know it was for Dangerfield?


Mr. G. My Lord, never before I came before the King and Council, neither did I
know his Name before; for he went by the Name of Willoughby before.


L.C.J. What other Discourse had you with her? Did she not at any time talk of
Mr. Dugdale?


Mr. G. She did say, she had heard of some People that were to discourse with
Mr. Dugdale: she had heard such a thing; but I don't know whether she knew any
thing of it or no.


L.C.J. What discourse had you about that?


Mr. G. She told me, there was a Woman to go down to Windsor to beg Mr.
Dugdale's Pardon; for he was penitent for what he had said in some Trial or
other.


L.C.J. Call another Witness.


Attor. Genesis Mr. Dangerfield, pray give the Court an account of what you know
of Mrs. Cellier, the Prisoner at the Bar.


Mrs. Cel. My Lord, I accept against that Witness.


L.C.J. Why so? You must show some reason, and then we will do you Justice in
God's Name.


Mrs. C. If I can prove he was whipped, and transported, pilloryed, perjured,
etc. he is no Witness. The last time I was upon my Trial, he threatened some of
my VVitnesses, that if they would not Swear as he would have them, he would
kill them.


L.C.J. If you can show any Record whereby he is convicted of any thing, that
can by Law take away bis Testimony, do it.


Mrs. C. He has been Indicted for Burglary.


L.C.J. (to Mr. Dangerfield) Was you Indicted for Burglary?


Mr. Danger. I will take it at their Proof.


Ralph Briscoe, a VVitness for the Defendent, Sworn. L.C.J. Do you know
Dangerfield?


Briscoe. I remember one Thomas Dangerfield. I saw him burnt in the Hand at the
Old Bailey.


L.C.J. Is this the same Man?


Bris. I do believe it is the same Man: but I have not seen him these several
Years.


L.C.J. Let every Body have their right in God's Name. Have you any more?


Mrs. C. My Lord, I can prove him perjured.


L.C.J. Have you any Records to show he was perjured? is he convinced?


Mrs. C. No.


L.C.J. Then you cannot do it.


Mrs. C. My Lord, I can prove him guilty of Forgery.


L.C.J. If you don't produce the Record, you do nothing.


R. That which she calls Forgery, is not that which the Law calls Forgery: it
is counterfeiting Guineys.


L.C.J. Can you show he forged any Deeds. If you can prove that he has
committed Forgery, and be not convicted, it is no Error.


L.C.J. Have you your Pardon? She has proved the Conviction of Felony, prove
your Pardon.


Mrs. C. I have the Copies of several Records here in Court, which will be
sworn to.

To which Mr. Dangerfield pleaded his Majesty's most gracious Pardon. To which
Mrs. Cellier replied, that she had a Copy of the said Pardon in Court, but it
did not extend to some of the Crimes for which he stood convicted, and then
produced a Record, wherein it did appear, he was outlawed upon a Felony. Upon
which the Court commanded Mr. Dangerfield to go and fetch his Pardon, in the
interim examining several of the Kings VVitnesses.
Thomas Williamson Sworn. L.C.J. Did you ever see Dangerfield and Mrs. Cellier
in company?


Williamson. No, my Lord, but I have been employed for Mrs. Cellier in several
Businesses of Charity to get Prisoners out. When Mr. Dangerfiield was in
Newgate, she employed me to get him out.


L.C.J. Why was she so kind to Dangerfield?


W. My Lord, I don't know that: but she bid me get him out, whosoever staid
behind.


J.R. Why should she get him out? Did she tell you what she would do with him
when she had him out?


W. No, my Lord.


R. We bring him for a VVitness, that she had a great kindness for Dangerfield.


Margaret Jenkens Sworn. L.C.J. What discourse have you heard between
Dangerfield and Cellier?


J. I never saw them together but twice. It is a Year since I came from them.


L.C.J. When you saw them at Dinner or Supper together, what other Company was
there?


J. Her Husband was with her one time.


L.C.J. What did they talk about?


J. They were talking about the Prisoners that were Condemned.


L.C.J. Where was it? at her House?


J. No, at my Lady Powis's House.


L.C.J. How came you there?


J. I carried Notes backwards and forwards.


L.C.J. Did you never hear no discourse about the Plot?


J. No.


Susan Edwards Sworn. R. What Intimacy have you known between Dangerfield and
Mrs. Celliers?


L.C.J. Did you ever see them together?


Edwards. Yes, very often, my Lord. She said that the Popish Plot would turn to
a Presbyterian Plot.


L.C.J. Who did she say that to? to Dangerfield?


E. No, my Lord, but I have heard him say those words, and that he would make
it his Interest it should be so.


L.C.J. What did you say to him, when he said he must turn Rogue, and discover
all their Plots?


E. I said he would be no greater Rogue than he was before.


L.C.J. You were pretty nimble with him.


E. He thought he should be hanged.


L.C.J. For what?


E. If he did not turn Rogue, he thought he should be hanged.


E. (to Mrs. Cellier) You were very often together in your Chamber.


Mrs. C. Who gave you your Clothes?


E. Her Husband was gone to Church one Morning, and he was with her in her
Chamber.


L.C.J. I cannot see why you should prove this matter too far.


R. Susan is a civil young Woman.


E. She said she would do my business for me, and I go in danger of my Life.


Bennet Dowdal Sworn. L.C.J. What do you know of any Intimacy between
Dangerfield and Mrs: Cellier?


Dowd. I have seen them together.


L.C J. What did they talk about?


D. Mrs. Cellier proposed a match between Mrs. Mary Ayrey and I, and they used
to talk of that when I was with them.


L.C.J. Did they talk of the Plot at any time?


D. No.


L.C.J. Did you ever hear them talk of the King?


D. No.


L.C.J. Have you any more?


R. Not till Mr. Dangerfield comes.


L-C.J. (to Mrs. Cellier) Have you any Record to show he was put in the Pillory.


Mrs. C. Yes, my Lord.


Upon which the Copy of a Record from Salisbury was read, of his standing on
the Pillory, for uttering counterfiet Guines. As also, the Copy of a Record of
an Outlawry for Felony. L.C.J. What say you to this Outlawry?


R. It is not the same Person.


L.C.J. We ought to be very careful in these Concerns, else we may do a work
this day, may make all the Kingdom rue it. It is a sad thing that People of a
vicious profligate Life, both before they came to Newgate, and all along in
their Life time, should be fuffered to be VVitnesses to take away the Life of a
worm. I question whether he will come again, or no, he has been gone a great
while. Such are fit to be employed to find out: but hard to be believed when
they find out.


L.C.J. Captain Richardson, is this the Man that broke Chelmsford Goal?


Cap. Rich. My Lord, I can say nothing to that; but he was brought by an Habeas
Corpus from thence to me.


L.C.J. was he burnt in the hand for Felony?


C.R. Yes, my Lord, I believe he was.


L.C.J. He made me believe as though he would fly, I believe he is. We will
not hood-wink our selves against such a Fellow as this, that is guilty of so
notorious Crimes. A man of Modesty after he has been in the Pillory, would not
look a Man in the Face. It appears that after he has been burnt in the Hand,
he has been outlawed for Felony, and so it does appear by Record.

After about half an hours stay, Mr. Dangerfield returned and brought his
Pardon, which was read, and the word Felony omitted, and in stead of Utlagaria
Qualiacunque pro Felloniis quibuscunque, there was only inserted, Omnia
Malesicia and Utlagaria qualiacunque, which Omission had made the Pardon
Defective, it being my Lord Chief Justice his Opinion, that the word Utlagaria
did only reach to Outlawries between Party and Party, by which his Evidence was
wholly laid aside.
L.C.J. (to Mr. Dangerfield) Such Fellows as you are, Sirrah, shall know we are
not afraid of you.

He produces us here a Pardon by the Name of Thomas Dangerfield of Waltham, and
says, his Father and Kinsman are both of that Name and Place. Will you have
him Sworn whether his Father or Cozen Thomas was ever convicted of Felony. It
is notorious enough what a Fellow this is, he was in Chelmsford Goal. I will
shake all such Fellows before I have done with them. Have you any more to say?
Are there any Waltham Men here?


Mr. Dan. My Lord, this is enough to discourage a man from ever entering into an
honest Principle.


L.C.J. What? Do you with all the mischief that Hell has in you think to brave
it in a Cout of Justice? I wonder at your Impudence, that you dare look a Court
of Justice in the Face, after having been made appear so notorious a Villain.


J. Jones. Indeed, if he be the same Man, he is not fit for a Witness.


L.C.J. And that he is the same Man is very notorious. Come Mrs. Celliers, What
have you more to say?


Mrs. C. Enough, my Lord.


L.C.J. You have said enough already. Come Gentlemen of the Jury, this is a
plain Case, here is but one Witness in a Case of Treason, and that not direct,
therefore lay your heads together.

Which being done, they returned her not guilty, upon which the Clerk of the
Crown bid her down on her Knees, which she did, and cried, God bless the King
and Duke of York.
L.C.J. Where is Dangerfield? Is he gone? Call him.


Who being come, the Court asked if he had Bail for the good Behavior. Mr.
D. No, my Lord, but with the leave of the Court, will fetch some.


L.C.J. Let a Tipstaff go with him, and return before the Court rises.


Mr. D. My Lord, that cannot be, for I cannot return so soon.


L.C.J. Then let him be committed.


Which was accordingly done. FINIS.

