THE Trial, Condemnation, and EXECUTION OF THREE WITCHES. VIZ. TEMPERACE FLOYD,
MARY FLOYD, AND SUSANNA EDWARDS.

Who were Arraigned at Exeter on the 18 th. of August, 1682. And being proved
Guilty of Witchcraft, were Condemned to be Hanged, which was accordingly
Executed in the view of many Spectators, whose strange and much to be lamented
Impudence, is never to be forgotten.

Also, how they Confessed what Mischiefs they had done, by the assistance of
the Devil, who lay with the abovenamed Temperance Floyd Nine Nights together.
Also, how they Squeezed one Hannah Thomas to death in their Arms; How they also
caused several Ships to be cast away, causing a Boy to fall from the top of a
Mainmast into the Sea.

With many Wonderful Things, worth your Reading.

Printed for I. Deacon, at the sign of the Rainbow, a little beyond St. Andrews
Church, in Holborn. 1682.

The Trial, Condemnation, and Execution of three Witches, who were Arraigned at
Exeter on the 18th. of August, 1682.
LEt not my assertions seem strange to the Ingenious Reader, who seems to
affirm this (by some incredulous) Story, concerning the subsequent matter; nor
will I trouble you with a long Prologue, to stir you to believe that which so
many Letters have verified, concerning the matter in hand, but so it was.

THe Assizes being held at Exon, (alias) Exeter, on the 18 th of August, 1682.
It happened that there was three Persons Arraigned for Witchcraft, whose Names
take as follows, (viz.) Temperance Floyd, Mary Floyd, and Susannah Edwards,
all dwelling in one Town, in the aforesaid County of Devon, namely Bideford, by
some called Bythford, all three being stricken in years, which might have
taught them more Grace; but Man's Enemy, Souls destroyer, and the Author of
Wickedness, so prevailed with them* that they made an Interchange, accepting a
Hell for a Heaven, rather willing to please the Devil then the great Creator,
whose smiles are more precious then refined Gold, the loss of whose love is no
less then Everlasting Destruction. These I say, these poor souls (aiming at
nothing but ruin) embrace Folly instead of Wisdom, present pleasure for
eternal pain; take Flames for Crowns, misery for happiness, change God for a
Devil, and a Soul for Hell. It is much to be lamented, that these persons
should take delight in nothing more then to converse with Divils, who reason
tells, seeks nothing but Destruction, Gods dishonor, Man's overthrow (to, if it
were possible) empty Heaven and fill Hell.

I come now to the Particulars, the aforesaid persons whose names are already
inserted, came to their Trial, having been some time before accused of
VVitch-craft, and for that cause Imprisoned; when they came to the Bar their
Indictment was read, and though the Devil had so much power over them, yet had
they not Impudence enough to deny what they there were accused for: Intemperate
Temperance Floyd who was the eldest of the three, pleaded to her Indictment,
and owned the Accusation, acknowledging she had been in League with the Devil
20. years and upwards, and that in the term of those years she had been guilty
of many Cruelties, and by Hellish power afflicted both Man and Beast; but now
to the other Two who were Instructed in that Damnable Art of VVitch-craft by
the aforementioned Temperance Floyd, they acknowledged that they had served five
years to her to learn her accursed Art, and during the Term of those years they
saw and were acquainted with many wonderful and unlawful Tricks. For they owned
that they had not been idle in their Hellish practices, but had served him
faithfully, who will reward them gratefully for their Diabolical Indulgence.
We have an account of some of their Wicked, Inhumane, Accursed, Damnable, and
Preposterous Actions. But let us chiefly mind the Eldest and worst of these
Three, namely, Temperance Floyd, Let her be the substance of our matter, who
was the Introducer and cause of the other Two's overthrow* These Wicked
VVretches being all of one mind, at last began to exercise their Divelish Arts,
and upon one Mr. Hann a Minister in those parts; a person of good Repute and
honest Conversation; who sought his souls eternal happiness, while they
designed their everlasting Ruin. These Hellish Agents intended mischief and
misery to the person of Mr. Hann: but the Overruling Power prevented them; but
because they could not be suffered to exercise their Diabolicism upon his body,
they thought they would be some other way Revenged; so VVitch like, they laid
their Diabolical Charms upon his Cattle, so that those Cows that used to give
Milk, when they came to be Milked they gave blood, to the great astonishment of
the Milkers; but finding themselves Outcasts from everlasting Happiness, they
grew insolent in their Cursed Conceits, resolving to make use of that Art which
they should so dearly pay for; But I too much insist upon the Old Hag whose
Cruelties are and were sufficiently manifested by her own Confession at her
Trial, the other Two Witches being somewhat younger then the Old Shape of
Prince Lucifer, who acknowledged themselves to have been servants to the Old
one for Five Years, to learn the Art and Mystery of Hellish, Damnable,
Accursed, and most to be Lamented Witchcraft; and in the term of those 5 years
grew to be as dexterious as their Devilish Tutor, trying their Experiments upon
Man and Beast, to the Injury of both; but the Old one Confessed plainly that
she had caused several Ships at Sea to be Cast away, to the loss of many men's
lives, and the prejudice of many others: She confessed also that the Devil lay
Carnally with her for Nine Nights together, and that she had Paps about her an
Inch long, which the Devil used to suck to Provoke her to Letchery: but the
other two seemed to be more Pensive then she, for they confessed that she was
the Introducer of their Misery, and that they had served both the Devil and her
five years slavery, to understand the ready way to everlasting Destruction. But
Heavens Vengeance never fails to follow such Offenders who do wickedly,
presumptuously, and profanely, make use of the Devil to satisfy their Impious
wills. But to proceed, this Old VVitch whose name was Temperance Floyd, was
without doubt perfectly Resolute, not minding what should become of her
Immortal Soul, but rather Impudently at, as well as after her Trial, so
Audacious, that she had done many wicked Exploits by the power (not virtue) of
her Hellish Discipline; She confessed that she had been instrumental to the
Death of several, namely, one Hannah Thomas by pretense of Love, Squeezing her
in her Arms so long till the blood gushed out of her mouth; she confessed that
she and the other two had been the Death of Two more, besides several others
that they had Lamed by their Hellish Art; they confessed that they had been the
Destruction of many Cattle both small and great, and many more things too
tedious to relate; being asked at their Trial to say the Lords Prayer, they
answered, that they could not, except it were backward, they said that the
Devil used to be with them on nights in several Shapes, sometimes like a Hound,
who Hunted before them (but without doubt he Hunted for Souls.) There was many
more Accusations laid against them, which they all owned (except one) which was
about causing a Ship to be Sunk, and a Boy that fell from the Topmast of
another Ship and so broke his Neck, or as some say, Drowned in the Sea.

It being asked how long they had been in league with the Devil, one of them
said twenty-years she had been his Familiar Acquaintance, the other two were of
lesser standing, but long enough to Ruin their Precious Souls. They also
Asserted, that the Devil came with them to the Prison Door, and there left
them, much like what he is, the Author of Lies, the Inventer of Mischief, the
Betrayer of Souls, the unsatisfied deceiver, and Gods Enemy.

All these things being Confessed by their own Tongues, it is not strange to
think that Judgment past upon them regularly in such Cases.

But now to proceed;

As to the manner of their Deportment going to the place of Execution. It is
certainly affirmed the Old Witch Temperance Floyd, went all the way Eating, and
was seemingly unconcerned; but Mary Floyd was very obstinate, and would not go,
but lay down, insomuch that they forced to tie her upon a Horseback, for she
was very loath to receive her deserved Doom: But when they came to the place of
Execution, they desired the Minister to pray for them, and that part of the 40
th Psalm might be sung, which was accordingly done, and presently after the
Executioner did his Office.

Thus have you heard of the Wicked life and miserable death of three gross
Offenders, who slighted Gods Commandments, despised a Christ and embraced a
Devil, lost Heaven to purchase Hell, at the dear rate of their Immortal Souls:
Let this then be a Caution for all Sinners to forsake Sin and Satan, whose end
and design is to ruin Souls, to enslave Mortals, and without doubt were it
possible, to pull Gods Almighty Majesty out of his Everlasting Throne. It Is
great pity that some have so little esteem of their Jewels which Jesus Christ
the Son of the Almighty, purchased at so dear a rate; yet vild Sinners, never
call to mind, or at least very seldom, what Labyrinths of misery they involve
themselves in, how they crush Christ, how they wound his already wounded side
for sinners: But now to conclude, take a poor Sinners advice, Walk uprightly
and Justly, and let not the fruition of present enjoyments, cause you to
neglect Eternal Happiness, the enjoyment of which, is beyond Expression, and
the loss thereof Eternal Misery, Destruction, and Ruin.

FINIS.

