A TREATISE OF THE OATH OF SUPREMACY.

Printed in the YEAR, 1679.

THE Words of the Oath.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
Majesty is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other His
Highnesses Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal: And that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate has or ougbt to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm: And
therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign Jurisdictions, Powers,
Superiorities and Authorities: And do promise, that from henceforth I shall
bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, His Heirs and lawful
Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Pre-eminencies and Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, His Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm: So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

Introduction.
1. THe Oath of Supremacy has long been thought, by the generality of
Catholics, Inconsistent with Faith, both for what it affirms of the King, and
denies of the Pope. And truly, who considers only the Words, as they ly naked
there, without seeking to inform himself what they mean of any thing but the
bare sounds, has reason at first sight to check at it. I am apt to believe that
every body does not look farther; at least I my self did not a great while, and
therefore thought of it as others did.

2. Yet it seemed strange, that the most Learned of the Church of England,
should freely take it without scruple; and at the same time Irreprehensibly
affirm, both of the Kings Power and the Popes, what Catholics therefore refuse
the Oath, because they think it denies. I perceived they must of necessity
understand it otherwise than We did. For to suspect, that either of us proceed
otherwise than according to our conscience, They in Taking, and We in
Refusing, is not either for a Charitable, or Reasonable Man. I would not
handsomely unriddle, when a mistake there must needs be on one side, how the
mistake should ly on theirs, or which way they should misunderstand an Oath of
their own making. In short, I knew not what to make of it; and while I had no
Key to the Lock, but the bare words, could not easily open it. For still those
words seemed Irreconcilable to Truth, and to that Truth which they profess, as
well as that which I believe.

3. Upon farther search, things appeared something otherwise. I found, that what
those Learned Men mean when they swear, and which they think the Words of the
Oath mean, is not only suitable to what they believe themselves, but likewise to
what we believe; and I found there is more Reason, than I imagined, to believe
that the words of the Oath do indeed mean, as they judge they do, and not as
We thought. What occurs to me, I thought a seasonable Charity to communicate
to others, lest by seeking to avoid one Error we fall into many.

4. For, as we are on the one side obliged to prefer a good Conscience before
all Worldly respects, so we are obliged on the other, to obey our Sovereign and
his Laws, where with a good conscience we can. No Man can justify the refusal
of an Oath, tendered by Lawful Authority, without a sufficient Reason. The
Reason why we have refused this Oath, is, because we apprehended it
Inconsistent with Faith. And that is undoubtedly a sufficient Reason, if the
apprehension be true; but if it be not, we are left in the Lurch. If the Oath,
as some think, do not renounce the Faith of all Catholics, but only the
Opinions of some, and those both false and pernicious, to refuse it, is not to
preserve, but to scandalize our Faith, with the imputation of obliging us to
things, by the Wisdom of the Nation, judged Intolerable. It is to confirm the
bad opinion which some have of us, that our Religion is indeed Inconsistent
with the security of the Commonwealth. In a word, what we took for Religion,
would prove Faction.

5. Before I speak of the Oath it self, it will be convenient to observe, that
diverse privileges have at diverse times, been granted, by the Piety of Princes,
to the Church, and Churchmen, when being long used, and their origin either
forgotten or dissembled, have at length been commonly enough looked upon and
claimed as the proper and inherent Right of the Church. Among these is the
right of holding Judiciary Pleas and Courts, proceeding like Secular Courts to
Sentence, even of Temporal and Corporal Punishments, as Fines, Imprisonment,
etc. and Executing their Sentences by their own Officers, unless in case of
Death; for which, whether for Form or Substance, the Prachiam Seculare, was
usually called upon. These Courts were settled by little and little, and their
Power was sometimes more, sometimes less, which variety remains to this day, as
the Secular Power in several Nations concurs, more or less with them. But it
became at last the general Practice, that Ecclesiastical Persons should appear
only in these Courts for all causes, and the Laity for some, chiefly such as
had relation to the Law of God. The Judges there, being either Ecclesiastical
Men themselves, or acting by Commission from them, the Courts got the Name of
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Courts; the matters determinable in them, of
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual matters, or causes; and their Power of
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Power. But

6. When things had gone thus Time out of mind, and People saw them constantly
act, not by renewed Commissions, as Subordinate Officers use to do, but by a
Right of their own, a Right charily preserved by them, and freely confessed by
every body else, as undoubtedly it was, both by a good Title at first, and a
quiet possession of many Hundred Years; it came to be thought at last, that
this Right of theirs was given them with their Character by God; whereas in
Truth it proceeded from the condescendence of Pious Men; and, as all Humane
things are subject to change, may, by the same Power which gave it, on just
occasion be taken away.

7. In the mean time the Notion of Spiritual, when applied in the Law to Power,
Judge, Court, Matter, Cause, or Thing has generally relation to these External
Courts. The word is ordinarily taken so in our common Language, but there
seldom otherwise, and when we find it in the Law, we must expect it should
signify as it uses to do in the Law, not as it does in Philosophy, or
Controversy, or Ascetics. It is so well known, that I know not whether it be
not idle to mention the different Significations which the same words have in
different Occasions. For example, who thinks of the Theological virtue, when he
is to swear Faith to his Prince? who of a Stone or Tree, when he hears of a
Body, not in Philosophy but Physic? and when a Man of business is talking of a
Material action or consideration, He would be thought strangely to rove, who
should fancy Material there signified as among Metaphysicians. The frequency of
such cases made it necessary, that People might understand one another, to
settle a Rule for the understanding of words, and establish this maxim, that
they be always understood Secundum subjectam Materiam as they phrase it,
according to the subject of which they speak. I cannot tell, whether this Rule
have always been remembered in the case of this Oath: but doubt that who
forgets it any where, hazards to perplex himself into inextricable confusion.

Section I. Of the Affirmative Clause of the OATH.
1. THis premised, I come to the Oath, which consists Principally of two
Clauses; One Affirmative, the other Negative; according to which, the rest
which have any show of difficulty, are to be understood. The Affirmative
acknowledges the King to be the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and the
rest of his dominions, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or
causes; as Temporal. By this clause it was apprehended not only by Catholics,
but others too, that the King was invested with Power to do all that a Supreme
purely Spiritual Governor could do, Preach, Confer Orders, Administer the
Sacraments, etc. Which as it is evidently false, so it is evident likewise, that
it is not the meaning of the Clause.

2. For, First, the Oath being enjoined by Law, for the acknowledgment of what
was re-setled by Law in the King, it is words must bear the sense they use to
do, in Law-Language, and Law Books, which according to what has been said
before, is, that the King is Supreme Governor of this Realm; So that who ever
has any share in the Government of it, be he Spiritual or Temporal Man, has
it from and under the King.

3. Secondly, These words being in two Acts of Parliament, whose declared sense
is, to restore what was due to the Crown, ought so to be understood as to
acknowledge, all and no more in the King, then those two Acts, either in
themselves, or in those of King Henry the Eighth revived by them, restored to
him: since no more at most, and perchance not all of them, are ordered to the
making, and consequently sense, of this Oath. Now, what was restored by these,
every diligent Reader of them, will find to be only what may, without injury to
Gods Law, be possessed by the King.

4. For to begin, with King Henry the Eighth, in the first of them, viz. Stat.
23. H. 8. C. 9. He only claims, or exercises the Power of ordering, where
citations belonging to Spiritual Courts of this Realm shall be made, which may
be seen to be evidently his due. In the Second (24 K. H. 8th. C. 12.) he takes
Power, only to order that no appeals in matters of Wills, Marriages, Divorces,
Tithes, Oblations, and Obventions, shall be made out of this Realm; alleging
for reason, that as to the Temporal part of them, they belong to the Imperial
Crown, and, as to what in them may concern the Law of God, to the Clergy of
this Realm, as being of parts fit for it; to whom he expressly leaves this part,
not assuming it to himself.

5. In the 3d. (Stat. 25. C. 20.) He uses the Power to restrain the payment of
Annats, and First Fruits to Rome, (to which Temporal Power extends) and with
his Bishops in Parliament, orders how others are to be elected, and consecrated
by them; which Catholic Kings use to do.

6. In the 4th. (25. C. 9.) The Power which he exercises is, that no new
Canon-Laws shall be made, or old ones stand, without his approbation. Which he
may have as a Knowing Man; they being things of human institution; nay, as a
Prince, he ought to have, since it is known, that Canon Laws do often clash with
the Laws of the Realm. Though, if he abuses this Power, by hindering good Laws,
and unprejudicial to the State, He is to answer for that; though to God alone.

7. In the 5th. (25. K. H. c. 21.) He takes Power to hinder Paying of Money to
Rome; to hinder the Pope from Dispensing in Human Spiritual Laws: to dispense
in them Himself by his Bishops; and with his Parliament to annul them. All
which, certainly he may do as King. And that he intended here to do no more
than he might do, appears by a Proviso of this Act, revived by Q. E. and
afterward to be Cited.

8. In the 6th. (26. C. 14.) He only assigns Suffragans by consent of Bishops
in Parliament: Which Assignment is a thing of Human Institution; and as it
depends on the Law of the Land, may proceed from him. And, if it be said by
any, That, since Christ gave his Apostles Power to Preach where they should
please, and think fit, and so, that they have from Christ Power independent of
any Law of the Land, (as in times of Heathen Emperors) to agree among
themselves, what Territories every one shall have to do his Duty in; which the
King cannot take from them, as he may seem here to do: It Is replied, That They
may agree among themselves, to have what Territories the Law or King shall
assign them. And thus, at least, the King may without Injury, (because with
their Consents) assign them Diocess's, as well as the Legislators in England,
and in Foreign Countries, divide one Parish into two, or compound two into
one, as occasion invites; without the least Danger apprehended of violating
Faith; or (to speak more properly) transgressing any Divine Institution. And
that it was done with their Consents, is evident; because here They did agree
to it in Parliament: Or it may be said, That They themselves in Parliament did
this. And the Laity agreed with them, to make it the Law of the Land.

9. In the 7th. (28. C. 16.) He takes Power to give those Temporal Gifts, which
the Pope formerly gave; to put Bishops into their Bishoprics, Curates into
their Cures, (as Catholic Princes now do) and to give them leave to do their
Duties, not as to the purely Spiritual, Intrinsical Power in common; but as to
some Circumstances belonging to the Exercise of it, and commodious for the
Subject: So as they should have it from Parliaments, and not from Rome. Which
he might lawfully do, as is just now explicated, and also make a Law they
should not have it from Rome, it being not necessary They should; They having
Power from Christ to Preach every where, till they limited their Territories by
their own Consent; and here dissent from doing it at the Pope's Pleasure.

10. In the 8th. He takes Power to make a Civil Law, as to Degrees of
Marriages. And, if as he did this, he judged what was of Faith in the Case; he
did it not, as sent by Christ, but, as a Scholar Authorized by Law, which he
may also do; or, as pre-inform'd by his Bishops.

In the 9th. and last, He only makes a Civil Order concerning the Marriage of
Doctors of the Civil Law.

11. The Title of Q. E's. first Act (made 1. El. c. 1.) being an Act restoring
to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual, and abolishing all Foreign Power, repugnant to the same: evidently
denotes, that what she took, was in Catholick-Times due to the Crown; And
Possessed by Gift or Usurpation from it, till she took it back. For she could not
call what might be due, only since the 22th. Year of her Father's Reign,
Ancient Jurisdiction. And since purely Spiritual Jurisdiction was not then in
the Crown, it could not be in her Time restored to it. The Preamble also speaks
of K. H. 8's. restoring Ancient (to wit, in respect of his Times) Jurisdictions
of Right belonging, etc. which could be only those of Catholic Times.
More-over, By this Preamble (which contains the Design of the whole Act)
praising K. H. 8th. for taking away from the Pope what Power he had Usurped,
and restoring it to the Crown, dispraising Queen Mary, for un-doing what he had
done in this, and desiring a Remedy; or that Things be brought into the state,
in which K. H. put them; as also by this Acts reviving the aforesaid Nine
Statutes, it seems evident, that this Act intended to give the Queen no more,
than the Revived Acts gave him; giving her here in general Words, (and the same
is to be said of taking away from the Pope) and at once, what those several
Acts gave by parts. Now, that they gave him only Natural, Temporal, Earthly, or
Civil Power, and not any Supernatural, derived from the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; we have seen by numbering up all Particulars given, and finding ever one
of them to be but Temporal; and we may also find, by reflecting, that he
declares in the Preamble to the Second of them, That he intended to do more
fully, what several Catholic Kings had done in part. And this is clearly
confirmed, by seeing in particular, what it was, which this Act, when it comes
to Establish, does Establish in her: For we see the Particulars mentioned are
only, Power for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, (to
wit, to the end that she might know their Faults) and for the Punishment of all
such Faults. And as for giving Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, it is already
seen, to be in our Law Books, but Human.

12. Presently after this, the Act tells us; That the End designed to be
brought about by the Oath, is the Maintenance of the Act, or the acknowledging
what is in it Established. And hence, except we are so unreasonable, as to
think, that the Oath was designed for the Maintenance of this, and some thing
else, not spoken of; and for want of its Knowledge that way, not to be
maintained or acknowledged, (since no Man can maintain or acknowledge a Position
he does not know of) we must say, That the Words of the Oath signify nothing at
all more in the King, than the Acts give him. Since then it is by the
Consideration of all Particulars given, evident, that the Act, neither by its
self, nor by the Acts revived in it, gives the King any Power, as from Christ,
to preach Christ's Doctrine, persuade People, and help them, by giving them the
Sacraments, to practice those Parts of it: It Is also evident, that the Words of
the Oath signify no such thing in him.

13. It only remains, to see whether the one other Act, made (5. E. cap. 1.)
concerning this Matter and Oath, gives her any more than this former. What
represents it self first to our View, is its Title, which runs thus: An Act for
the Assurance of the Queens Majesty's Royal Power over all States and Subjects
within her Dominions. Now that [Royal] is no more than Human, every Body that
understands both these Words, knows. Next, comes the Act it self in all its
Particulars, doing what the Title speaks, and no more. For, first; For
Conservation of the Queen, and the Dignities of the Crown; and to avoid several
Mischiefs proceeding from the usurped Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, it makes
the Maintaining of this, Praemunire and Treason; and to hinder the Maintenance
of this, because it did those Human Mischiefs, for those Human Good's sake,
What is it else but assuring her Royal Power? Secondly, It makes a Law, that
the Sense which the Queens Admonition gives the Oath, shall be its Sense. And
that this gives her only a Regal Power, we shall here after clearly see.
Thirdly, and (as to our purpose) Lastly, It makes a Proviso, to exempt the
Temporal Lords from this Oath, and any thing contained in this Act. And why
does it do this? It says expressly; Because her Majesty was otherwise assured
of their Faith and Allegiance. Which would have been no good Reason, in case
she had required more than Faith and Allegiance to be given her: For though she
had been assured of these, yet for the Assurance of that other thing, which she
requires to be given her, she might have caused them to take the Oath, and not
have exempted them from it.

14. Thirdly, Our Assertion may be confirmed, by considering that the Oath
says not barely, That she is the Supreme Governor in all Causes Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical; where Supreme Governor might possibly be in Sense the same as
Supreme Preacher: but expressly, that she is the Supreme Governor of the Realm
in all such causes. And since Supreme Governor of a Realm is in common, and
indeed all speech, the same exactly as Temporal Governor; the Oath only says,
That she is the Supreme Temporal Governor in all Spiritual Things: Which it
would be Treason to deny her, not only in all those Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Things, of which only we have showed the Oath to speak in the
Common Sense of those Words, as they are used in Law: But also, in the most
Spiritual Thing that can be imagined; as in the Faith of the Trinity,
Incarnation, and the like. For she is by her Office, the Temporal Rewarder of
this Virtue, and Punisher of i^s contrary Vice; which is to be a Temporal
Governor, as to this Virtue and Vice.

15. Fourthly, Because she says expressly in her Admonition (in which she calls
it an Oath of Allegiance, and not Religion and Allegiance; thereby showing,
that she required no more, than Allegiance by it; except we will say, It is an
Oath of more, than she said it was, who best understood it) that she took only
what K. H. 8th. and K. Ed. 6th. took; to wit, in the Acts which she liked and
revived; and not in Acts which she disliked, with what was taken in them; and
therefore repealed, as is most reasonable to understand her: Especially since
she adds, lest we should mistake her, to take any thing that in them might seem
Uncatholick; And what was of Ancient (which is the same as Catholic) time due
to the Crown. Now, what K. H. 8th. took, which only is to our purpose, (all
that K. Ed. 6th. might do remaining by her Repealed) we have largely, and I
think fully seen to be only Temporal. Nay, one may probably guess by his
Institution of a Christian Man, (to be seen in the Christian Loyalty, a Book
lately set forth, and that King's Letter (to be found in the Cabala) to the
Clergy of Yorkshire) that he took no more even in the Repealed Acts, concerning
his Headship of the English Church. Possibly Bishop Fisher, and Sir Thomas Moor
might be the more Jealous of his being Head of the Church; because They never
saw that Book, it being set forth some Years after their Death? But that King
Henry 8th. did not confound Regal and Pastoral Power, purely Spiritual, appears
by his Book of Ordination; wherein he declares, that Pastoral Authority (he
means purely Spiritual) was by Ordination only committed to Men; and also, by
his Injunctions: And therefore, could not assume such kind of Pastoral
Authority, or that which is purely Spiritual to himself; nor Queen Elizabeth
neither, who took no more than he did. But besides, she farther explains her
self in express Words, not to take the Power Of Administering Divine Service in
the Church; but the Sovereignty and Rule over all Persons, of what State soever
they be; And what can be desired clearer than this, for her not taking Power to
Preach, Persuade, and Help Christians, as Christ bid his Apostles do; which is
in other words, to administer Divine Service in the Church? And what is Power
over Ecclesiastical Persons, without Power in Ecclesiastical Functions, but
Power Quantum per legem Dei licet (with which Addition Bishop Fisher himself
agreed to the Title of Supreme Head of the Church) added by Act of Parliament,
in the Confirmation of Queen Elizabeth's Exposition.

And that the said Words, [Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other
His Highness's Dominions and Countries, taking them all together, as they ly,
(as we ought) can never signify other than a Civil Governor; whatever Things
or Causes his Power is expressed to be in, appears farther by this, that those
Words are a very unsuitable and improper title for any purely Spiritual Head.
For, who-ever heard the Archbishop of Roan (for example) called, Supreme
Governor of all his Province of Normandy, in all Things or Causes purely
Spiritual? Or, How would Roman Catholic Princes take it, to have the Pope
write himself, [Supreme Governor of all his Dominions or Countries, throughout
the whole Catholic- Church, in purely Spiritual Affairs?] These Words then
will not suffer themselves to be meant of any other Power, than that of a Civil
Magistrate; nor can they, without much straining them from their common Use,
signify, that he assumes to Himself any thing, properly belonging to any Bishop
or Priest; and so, they have no show of touching any thing concerv'd to be of
Faith.

Again, The King of Spain has and exercises Supreme Spiritual Authority, and
Spiritual Monarchy in Sicily; which are as harsh Words, as any in the Oath: And
yet all Christendom knows, and the Pope, and Court of Rome it self, that that
King claims a Governourship or Power, called Spiritual, (nay, and which is much
more, Supremely such) without any ones Fancying, that Faith is prejudiced by
such a Title. Nor imports it, whether that King have this Spiritual
Jurisdiction from the Pope, or no: We have nothing to do with their Bargains;
our only Question at present, is concerning the meaning of the Word
[Spiritual,] when applied to Kings; which, if it signifies a Power purely
Spiritual, could never have been given him by the Pope himself, without
Creating him Bishop. Now, I would ask upon this occasion, Whether, if the King
of Spain had thought fitting to Command his Subjects in Sicily, to take an Oath
of Supremacy, expressed in these Words; That he is Supreme Spiritual Monarch, or
has Supreme Spiritual Authority in that Kingdom; whether it could stand with
the Duty of his Subjects there, to refuse to obey him, and to take it, upon a
Caprichious Conceit, grounded on the double Signification, which the Words
(Spiritual Supremacy) may possibly bear; and thence take shadow, that they
renounce their Faith? or, Whether such a whimsy ought to excuse them? I
conceive, no good Statesman, though never so good a Christian, would think him
blameless. You Will say, It Is a different Case. I add then this forcible Reason,
which I am sure is unanswerable.

If the Words [In Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Things or Causes] subjoined to
[Supreme Governor, etc.] wrong Faith; that is, if those Words give the King a
Power purely Spiritual, as is feared and objected; then the word [ONLY] joined
to [Supreme Governor,] and [ALL] to [Things or Causes] being so Ample and
Extensive, must either give him the whole Latitude of Power purely Spiritual;
or None at all, but All Power of some Other kind: But it must cost us the
Forfeiture of Common Sense to imagine, that either the Oath makers should intend
to Give, or the King to Receive the whole Latitude of Power purely Spiritual;
For then he must have Power to confer Orders, consecrate the Eucharist, absolve
in Confession; which no Christian ever attributed to a Secular Magistrate:
Therefore, it is evident, those Words do not give the King any Power or
Supremacy purely Spiritual at all; nor consequently can they breed the least
Scruple in any Person of Loyal Principles, that they concern or shock Faith.

16. These Things seem evident enough: How-ever, for a 5th. Proof and
Explication of many Things that have been said, concerning what K. H. 8th. took
upon him in the Revived Acts, (that make the same belong to our King, and be by
us in this Oath acknowledged as his due, or annexed to his Crown) let us
consider, that the Power so proper to a Pastor, that we cannot give it to our
Prince, is nothing else, but a Man's being by our Savior's Appointment,
Immediate (to his Apostles,) or Mediate (to their Successors) deputed to Preach
his Faith, Persuade, and (in the Sacraments) help the Practice of it; and by
that Deputation, enabled to do these Things. Whereas a Layman, out of Charity
and Goodwill to another, or any other Good Motive, besides our Savior's
Appointment, (which he has not, in our Supposition, that he is a Layman or
not Appointed; and so would Usurp, if he pretended to it) may teach him his
Catechism, or send a Pastor, that is his Friend, or his Chaplain, to do it: And
out of the same, and other Reasonable Motives, the King may have a Human Power
either to teach a Man, if he pleases, or send all his Subjects that are
Pastors, to do their Duties, or exercise the Power Christ gave them; Nay, and
to hinder them from exercising of it, in case (of Wicked Life, for example) it
be unreasonable they should; since the Law can prohibit and punish any
unreasonable Thing or Vice; and since the Pastor himself, though he has the
Power, ought not then to exercise it. And as the King may order them to do
their Duties apart, so in Counsel: And as he may, out of those said Motives,
Teach; so he may out of the same, as a knowing Christian Man, judge what he
ought to Teach, or judge what is Faith, what is Heresy; likewise, what is or
is not a convenient Canon Law, or a fit Prayer to be used in his Churches, and
the like. And more than these we do not find, that the Acts ever gave K. H.
8th. I believe it will be found, that Solomon, at the Dedication of the Temple,
and the Kings of Judah did as much or more; as in reforming Abuses in God's
Worship, pulling down Superstition and Idolatry, and the like; and yet none
imagined, they in so doing usurped the Office of the High Priest, as sacredly
reserved to him then, by the Law of Moses; as the Pope's, or that of Bishops is
now to them.

17. To these Examples, I know it is commonly replied, That these Kings did not
do these Things without usurping the Priest's Office, in case they did more
than Execute what the Priests judged to be the Law of God, and its Convenient
Practice: It being not the King's, but Priest's Office, to judge what was the
Law of God, to Teach it to the People, and persuade them to Practice it. And
hence, that they reach not King Henry's Case, who was empowered with Sixteen of
the Clergy, and Sixteen of the Laity, to judge what Canons were not repugnant
to the Law of God, (as in 25 H. 8. C. 19.) and in his Court of Chancery, to
judge of Appeals from Spiritual Courts: Nor Queen Elizabeth's Case, who took
upon her to order a New Form of Prayer, and a New Manner of Consecrating
Priests and Bishops.

18. But this Reply invalidates not the Application of these Examples. First,
Because in the Preamble of the Statute 24. C. 12. the Judgment of Things
concerning the Law of God and Divinity, is left to the Clergy, as a thing of
their (and not the Laity's) Office: By which it appears, that the King no more
acted out of such an Office in himself, than the Jewish Kings did. And the same
Office Queen Elizabeth denies to her self in her Admonition; and so leaves it,
and its Exercises to the Clergy. And this is also evident, because no Power is
given to either of them by Act, (which only concerns us) to order concerning
the Law of God, or its Practice, without the Clergy's ordering it, with them.
For in the First, Sixteen Clergymen are mentioned: In the Second, the
Spiritual Court, if the Matter belonged to it, Judged First: And though an
Appeal lay to the Chancery, 'twas not the Chancery, but Commissioners, who were
to judge of that Appeal; which Commissioners, if the Case concerned the Law of
God, it is to be presumed, were to be Clergymen; as we shall see by and by.
Likewise, Queen Elizabeth left the making of the Common Prayer, and Form of
Consecration to Clergymen. And hence, they were never hindered from doing their
Office, that Christ gave them Power to do: Neither did our Princes by these
Laws pretend to do it; but do what they did by the Clergies Directions, as far
as they judged them to direct right.

19. Hence I Reply, Secondly, according to what has been said already, That
though no Layman can be a Judge of what is Faith, or a Preacher of it, (to
which are reduced an Excommunicator, or Denouncer of him that does contrary to
it, or its Practice, as of a Man to be avoided; and a Maker of Laws or
Directions for its best Practice, without any other Force, than that of
Excommunication) in the most common or most proper Sense of these Words; which
is the same, as a Judge or Preacher authorized, or made by Christ's Immediate
or Mediate Appointment: Yet if the Word [Judge] be used to signify no more,
than one that knows or judges what is true Faith, or its best Practice, by
Natural Reason, not Authoritative Mission, in this Sense, every Layman is and
ought to be Judge of Faith, and of its Preachers too; because every Man has,
and ought to use his Reason in Faith, as well as every thing else: And he
seeing many sorts of Faith pretended to be Christ's, and many sorts of
Preachers pretending to be True Ones, is this way to judge of both these, by
the Reasons they bring for themselves, and their Faith. And hence, the King, as
a Christian Man, is in this Sense a Judge of Faith: Nay, in a particular
Manner, as he is King. For, as King, he ought to use the Power he has, to see
that Christ's true Faith be believed and practiced by his People: And, how can
he see that Laws be made and executed for this, without he knows or judges
which it is? Or, how can he put in True, and put out False Preachers, without
he knows by more than their own Words; which are so? And, how can he establish
right Laws for its Practice, and abolish wrong Ones, except he judge which are
Good Ones, which not? Neither do I by this Power given to Princes of Judging in
Matters of Faith, give them that Power of Judgment, which is proper to the
Church. Christ delivered his Doctrine not to Princes, but Pastors; and
commanded Them (not Princes) to Teach the Flock, and all the Flock: Princes, as
well as private Men, to hear their Voice. Yet Faith being one of the many
Things, which fall under a Princes Care, and about which he must needs Act one
way or other; I conceive, he cannot Act in any thing, without Judgment; and so
must of Necessity judge his way, of Faith, if he Act about Faith. But, the
Church judges, in order to Teach the Faithful; the Prince, in order to Govern
his Subjects, and appoint Rewards or Punishments. We hold the Church
Infallible; and therefore, She can oblige People to Interior Assent. The Prince
may happen to judge wrong; which, if he do, we are not bound to Believe as he
Judges: Though we are bound to submit, and patiently suffer the Penalties, to
which that wrong Judgment may expose us. Other Differences there are, which it
is to no purpose to mention.

20. Likewise, If the Word [Preacher] signify no more, than one that Teaches
another what he knows of Christ's Doctrine, and it is right Practice; then a
Layman may, without Injury to the Clergy, be a Preacher: witness, Apollo in
the Acts; Sir Thomas Moor, in his proving Faith, and disproving Heresies, and
writing Devout Treatises; Parents, in respect of their Children; and
Godfathers, in respect of their God-Children. More-over, What Injury would it
have been, if Sir Thomas More had been made such a Writer or Preacher by Act of
Parliament? And the same may be said of a King, or Queen, who either by
Themselves or Counsel, may be Learned enough. Nay, though every King be not a
Preacher by Writing, or Speaking; yet he is a Supreme Authoritative Preacher in
his kind, since he by establishing one Faith, and its Practice, before another,
both Teaches, and persuades to Practice it: and in this way he has none above
him. And since all (properly called) Preachers here, have Leave or Jurisdiction
from Christ, and from our Law, he supremely gives them the Later: Much more,
the Jurisdiction they have to make Temporal Laws, to judge those that do
against them, and execute their Sentence. And in this we have seen, how the
King, as a Christian, may be Judge and Teacher of Faith; and that Authorized by
the Law of the Land: How, as a King, he may, and ought to be Supreme Civil
Judge of what Faith ought to be established by Law, and the Supreme of those
that Preach (or cause People to Believe and Practice) by establishing Faith,
its Preachers sent by Christ, and their Directive Laws by Law; and by giving
them the Jurisdiction they may have from Law, to do what Christ bid them;
lastly, how he is the Supreme Giver of Power, to make Civil Laws, to Judge by
them, and Execute them.

21. Thirdly, There is in Truth, more Assumed in the Objection, than there is
warrant for in the Act mentioned. It does not appear there, that the King is
empowered to judge of the Repugnance of Canons to the Law of God: On the
contrary, it seems meant, that that Matter should be left to the Clergy: For,
why else should Sixteen of them be put into Commission? Neither are the Words,
on which the Objection is grounded, viz. That such Canons shall be retained, as
shall be approved to stand with the Laws of God, etc. the Words of the
Parliament, but of the Clergy themselves; who cannot be thought to mean by
them, that the Laity should be Judges of the Law of God. They are only recited
by the Parliament; which, when it comes to do its own part, uses other
Expressions. There are other Reasons, why the King should interpose: The Reason
of the Act is assigned to be, because Diverse Constitutions, etc. be thought,
not only to be much Prejudicial to the King's Prerogative Royal, and Repugnant
to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, but also overmuch onerous to his
Highness and his Subjects. Of those things who can Judge so well as the King,
with the Assistance of some of the Laity, best versed in the Laws of the Land?
Again, the King was to add his Authority to those Canons, to make them Binding;
and therefore, must needs know, what he should Authorize, and see why he should
do it. And this is all the Power in him, which can be Collected from this
Statute. As for Appeals, the Act indeed orders they should, for lack of Justice
in other Courts, be made in Chancery; but not determined there, but by
Commission to be granted by the King, that all Differences of his Subjects be
finally determined by his Authority. But it is not said, nor is to be supposed,
that those Commissions shall be granted to the Laity, where the Case concerns
the Law of God. For, Appeals are ordered by this Act, to be as was directed by
a former Act of the same Parliament, An. 24 H. 8. By which Act, where any Cause
of the Law-Divine, or Spiritual Learning happened to come in question, the
Body-Spiritual of the Realm is declared to be Qualifyed, and to have Power to
determine it; and therefore, to them it must needs be meant to be left.

To return to our Matter again, Since those Parliaments evidently knew, their
King was neither Bishop nor Priest; which even in their Thoughts was the same,
as not to have Power to Act in Spiritual Things, by our Savior's immediate or
mediate Supernatural Mission; or, which is the same thing, by the Power of the
Keys: They evidently saw, he neither had, nor could have, any Pastoral Power,
purely Spiritual; much less, the Supreme Power of that kind, whatever the
Supremacy of that kind consists in. Hence, they could never intend to give him,
what they saw he could not have given to him; nor signify any such Gift, or
Sense, by their Words in the Act or Oath; But only a Gift of the
above-explicated Power, arising from Nature and Reason. A Legal Power to
exercise which, as a Governor, they knew he might have from them; and to say,
that they intended to flatter him, with the Acknowledgment of a Power in him,
which they knew was not in him, is a Fault, that they cannot be proved Guilty
of, (especially when we remember their Proviso): And so according to the Axiom,
Every one is to be presumed Good, till he be proved to be Bad; they ought to be
acquitted.

23. Wherefore upon the whole, it is many ways evident, that the Words in the
Affirmative Part of the Oath, cannot mean any thing but Supremacy of the Sword;
which, whether in Temporal or Spiritual Things, cannot be exercised but by
Authority derived from the King. And this Supremacy is so evidently His, that
He needed not this Act for it: He has it from God and Nature; and, as it is
inseparable from the Crown, always had it, even when Ecclesiastical Authority
was at the Highest. For, though the Bishops claimed an Independent Power of
their own; yet, as Things do not cease to be, by not being acknowledged, They
truly acted under him, and in virtue of his Allowance, and subject to his
Control. Whenever he pleased to interpose, as the Statutes of Mortmain,
Provisions, Praemunire, and the rest made in Catholic Times, show he often did,
His Pleasure and Laws carried it, notwithstanding their Pretenses.

24. That they did mean only thus, is, beyond all doubt, apparent by all manner
of ways, by which any thing can appear. And though what has been already said
out of the Oath it self, and all the Acts, which are any way ordered to
Establish the Duties to be acknowledged by it, seem to force a Persuasion, that
only Royal Power is required to be owned by the Affirmative Clause. I cannot
leave this Part, till I put the Reader in mind, lest he should suspect these
Reasons Fallacious, as seeming good Ones only to my self, how both Learned
Protestants, and the Protestant-Church, understand this to be the Sense of it.
I allege then, that all Protestant Authors, not one I think excepted, agree,
That it is not the Power of the Keys, but of the Sword, which is in the King: I
could name several, but choose to mention only Doctor Bramhal, late Archbishop
of Armagh; because no Body speaks, or I think can speak plainer: And what he
says, I take to be the Sense of the Church of England; his Works being very
lately Reprinted in one Volume, Dedicated by the Bishop of Limric to the
Archbishop of Dublin. In his Schism Guarded, p. 311, 312. speaking of this Act,
he says thus: In a Word, there is no Power ascribed to our King, but merely
Political and Coactive, to see that all their Subjects do their Duties in their
several Places. Coactive Power is one of the Keys, of the Kingdom of this
World; it is none of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. This might have been
expressed in Words less subject to Exception; but the Case is clear.

25. Next, The 37. Article of the Church of England: Where we attribute to the
King's Majesty, the Chief Government. -- We give not to our Prince the
Ministering either of God's Word, or the Sacraments, but that only Prerogative,
which we see to have been given to all Godly Princes in Holy Scriptures by God
himself: That is, That they should Rule all Estates and Degrees committed to
their Charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal; and restrain
with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil Doers.

26. I could add here diverse other Eminent, and publicly approved Authors, who
are very full in expressing the same Sense of the Oath; as Doctor Bilson,
Bishop of Winchester in Queen Elizabeth days, Doctor Carlton, Bishop of
Chichester, in King James's Time, (both cited at large by Mr. Cressy in his
Reflections upon the Oaths, Sect. 6.) and others: But I conceive, enough is
said to the clearing the Affirmative Clause of the Oath; and perhaps, they may
be more proper here-after to explain the Negative Part of it, to which we now
address.

Section II. Of the Negative Clause of the OATH.
THe Negative Clause runs thus: That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within
this Realm. Now, though there want not some, who think, that taking the Words
of the Oath in a Law-Sense, and allowing Common Reason to scan the whole, and
not Fancy to catch suddenly at single Words, the Oath, even as it lies, may
lawfully be taken by those, who are able to penetrate thoroughly into it: Yet
the Generality (whom chiefly I must endeavor to satisfy) are more apt to
judge, that if those Words be taken in the full Latitude of what they seem
first to sound, they cannot be sworn by any Catholic. And they have Reason.
For it is plain, that no Human Authority can take away what is given by Christ.
It is plain in Scripture, that Christ did give to his Apostles, and in them
their Successors, Power to Teach and Feed, to Bind and Lose, etc. and this over
all the World. The Exercise of this Power may be, and is restrained by Human
Constitutions; because, it being to Edification, not Destruction, it is against
its Nature, to be used where 'twould do harm; as, if every Pastor should
promiscuously Feed every Flock, there would happen so much Confusion and
Disorder, that a good part of the Sheep would be (not Fed, but) Starved. It Is
this, which truly binds up the Power: Human Laws show, and that Authoritatively
and Obligingly, where the Harm is; but have their obliging Virtue from that
Harm. Should They, under pretense of Destruction, forbid what Truths were to
Edification, They would indeed expose the Contraveners to Penalties, but induce
no Obligation to Obedience upon the Conscience. So we see the Apostles, the
great Masters of Submission and Obedience to Authority, when they were
commanded to forbear Preaching the Doctrine of Christ, declared plainly, it was
their Duty in that case, to prefer God before Man. But, where Edification
requires the Power should be exercised, no Power of Man can hinder the
Ordinance of God; nor shelter those, who do not Evangelize from the Woe, with
which they are threatened. As any Bishop, and any Priest might perform the
Functions of a Bishop and Priest, in any Part of the World, before Canons were
made to limit them to Places and Persons, so They may still, where Necessity,
or whatever Circumstance takes off the Restraint, and leaves the Power to its
own Original Liberty. Now, the Words of the Oath saying, That no Foreign
Prelate has any Spiritual Power in England, do, in the utmost Latitude of their
Sound, deny, that the properly Spiritual Power, given and commanded to be used
by Christ in all the World, can, even on any occasion, be exercised by any
Foreign Prelate in England. And this being contrary to the Appointment and
Grant of Christ, cannot I think, be sworn by any, who believes in Christ: For a
Foreign Prelate, being a Prelate, cannot be without the Power of a Prelate;
nor that Power excluded from any Part of the World, where Edification requires
it.

2. I purposely abstain from speaking particularly of the Pope, because the
Oath speaks not particularly of him; though it comprehends him under the
General Term Prelate; And because I conceive his Power concerns us not at
present, since the Case would be the same, though there were no such thing as a
Pope in the World. For, our Question is not, What Power foreign Prelates have?
but, What they have not? If the Oath be meant, of the Power given by Christ, it
is opposite to the Power given by him to all Prelates, and so not Takeable for
their sakes: If it be not meant of that Power, it is not opposite to what was
given by Christ to any; and so not Refusable for the Pope's sake. Our Business,
at present, is to inquire, What Power the Oath means, not what Christ gave. If
we find the Oath leaves it untouched, it is best for us to leave it so too: For
to do otherwise, is to stray into a different and unconcerning Question, and
amuse our selves unprofitably, with what is not spoken of.

3. That the Oath does not speak of that Power at all, there are many Reasons
to persuade me. They who framed the Oath, were Christians; and knew, and
acknowledged the uncontrollable Power of Christ: I cannot imagine, they either
would go about to take away any thing which he gave, or think they could,
though they would. They knew, that notwithstanding the Confinement of Pastors
to their own Flocks, as firmly established as Human Laws, both Ecclesiastical
and Civil, can establish any thing, nothing is more apparent in Ecclesiastical
History, than that Prelates thought themselves at liberty to exercise the Power
of Prelates upon occasion any where: As Lucifer, Bishop of Calaris in Sardinia,
made them a Bishop at Antioch; St. Gregory of Nazianzen, took care of
Constantinople; and a hundred such Examples there are. England, to its great
Advantage, has had Experience of the same; as when Germanus and Lupus came
hither out of France, and preserved us from Arianism. At this day, if a Bishop
of the Church of England happen to go beyond Sea, as I think some did, when His
Majesty was there himself; though they carry not with them that External Power,
which they have in their own Dioceses, I suppose, they do not think themselves
bard from Preaching, or Ordaining, or Exercising any Episcopal Function, where
they think it necessary or expedient, because they are in the Diocese of
another Man. And so, though the Priests, which are Ordained in the Church of
Rome, are liable in their Persons to the Penalty of the Laws in England, no
Body thinks their Acts invalid. None will Re-baptize one, whom they have
Baptized; or think they live in Adultery, who, pursuant to the Doctrine of that
Church, receive the Sacrament of Marriage from them. Every Foreign Person is
as much excluded by the Oath, as Foreign Prelates. Had Luther or Calvin come
hither, would They have been bard from Preaching or Baptizing by it? Have we
not seen Peter Martyr, and diverse others, freely Preaching, and Administering
the Sacraments in this Realm? The Archbishop of Spalato ordained here, whose
Ordinations if the Oath rendered invalid, there would be much Confusion in the
Church of England: For those who were ordained by him, in likelihood ordained
others. These indeed acted with License from Authority here: But Power is one
thing, License to exercise it another. License supposes, but does not give
Power: For, they could not by any License be enabled to exercise what they had
not. How can it be, that Power of this kind should be thought spoken of, and
meant to be excluded out of England by the Oath, which it is known, and by the
Practice of all sides confessed, cannot be excluded any where?

4. But let us consider the Words themselves: Every one of the Words, Power,
Jurisdiction, Superiority, Pre-eminence, Authority, Privilege, does in its
primary, proper, and most common Acceptance, signify something Human or Civil:
I mean, so as Power, for example, in its primary, proper, and most common
Acceptance, signifies as much as these two Words, Human Power, or Civil Power;
After the manner, that this Word Man signifies as much as these two,
Living-Man, and the word Foot, as much as Foot of a Living Creature. In a
Secondary, less proper and less common Sense, every one of them signifies the
Power our Savior gave his Apostles, and their Successors, to preach his
Doctrine, persuade People to practice it, and help them to practice those Parts
of it, (to wit, the Sacraments) which they cannot practice without their Help;
some thing after the manner as the Word Man does sometimes denote a Picture or
Statue, the Word Foot, a Table-Foot or Mountain-Foot. And the Reason of it is,
because those Words had the former Sense before Christianity and the Power
belonging to its Preaching and Practice came into the World: and so must needs
be used in this Case, in a Secondary Sense: And this, though those Words were
used before, concerning other Religions then on foot, from which they might be
borrowed, and applied to Christianity; because, even at their first Application
to Religion, they were borrowed from Families, Cities, or Kingdoms, that were
before Religion was settled. Next, in the former Sense it is applied to
Fathers, in respect of their Children; to House-holders, in respect of their
Families; to all sorts of Governors of Parishes, Towns, Cities, Armies and
Kingdoms; and all Officers under them, in respect of those they are over; also,
to the Teachers of all Trades and Arts: But in the later Sense, to one only
Order of Men, or Teachers of one only Doctrine; and so, more commonly or oftener
applied to them, than to these. Hence, this is also the most proper Sense,
because this is the same as the first Sense; especially if the first be most
commonly used.

5. Again, Were these Words in a Treatise of Military-Discipline, every One
would be as much as Two: For example, Jurisdiction would be as much as Military
Jurisdiction, and No Jurisdiction as much as No Military-Jurisdiction; and No
Jurisdiction in a Book concerning Confession, would without any more ado, be
the same as No Jurisdiction to absolve from Sins: And for the same Reason,
these Words in a Treatise of Civil Matter (as Laws are) ought to be
understood, so that No Jurisdiction, be as much as No Civil Jurisdiction.
Insomuch, that as it would be ridiculous to think, that Jurisdiction, in a
Military or Confession-Book, means not Military or Sacramental Jurisdiction; so
it would be absurd to think, that this Word [Jurisdiction] in a Law-Book,
means any thing but Civil; except there be something, to determine it to another
Sense.

6. Out of this may be seen, that every one of these Words, Power,
Jurisdiction, etc. in the Negative Part of the Oath (which is contained in a
Law-Book, and is Part of a Law) ought rather to be taken in the former Sense,
then later; So that No Jurisdiction be the same as these three Words, No Civil
Jurisdiction; in which Sense it is evident, that the Pope's, or other Foreign
Prelates, not purely Pastoral, or purely Spiritual, Ministerial, and
Supernatural Power of the Keys, which only regards the Inner-Court of
Conscience; but that Ecclesiastical (otherwise in its own Nature, truly
Temporal and Political) Authority in the External Court, which the Pope either
had or usurped, or prescribed or challenged here in England, is excluded. I
say, in case there be nothing in the Oath, or its Acts, to determine them to
another Sense: For, if there be nothing to determine them to this later Sense,
then (as I said) they must have the former; as the Words, No Man at all is at
Home, signify no more, than No Living Man at all is at Home; except they are
by some Word or Circumstance determined to signify No Carved or Painted Man.

7. That then there is nothing to determine them, is the only thing to be
proved: And first, that the Words Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, do not determine
them, we have already seen; because these Words in Law-Language and Law Books,
where they at present were found, signify what is External, Political, and
Civil: and so these Words determine them rather to their Law-Sense, than draw
them from it: Especially since this Negative will not bear a Coherent-Sense
with the Affirmative; except No Spiritual Jurisdiction be the same, as No Civil
or Royal Jurisdiction. For to say in the Affirmative, that the Queen has all
Royal Jurisdiction, (or Royal Jurisdiction, in all Causes which is the very
same) and in the Negative, that no Body else has any Royal Jurisdiction, is
Coherent Sense: But to say, that she has all Royal Power of the Sword, and no
Body else has any purely Spiritual and Supernatural Power of the Keys or
Sword; or that she is Queen, and no Body else is a Preacher, is very Incoherent
and Ridiculous: And yet this must be the Sense, in case the Words No Spiritual
Jurisdiction, be the same as No Sacerdotal, or the same as both, No Royal, and
No Pastoral, as some do fancy.

8. And as the Words Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical, and the Coherency of Sense
(which we must admit, except we be such wise Commentators, as to make our Text
speak Nonsense) do determine the word Power, etc. to signify Royal Power; so
does the whole Design aimed at, as to be brought about by the holding of the
Affirmative and Negative Sense of the Oath: For this (as appears in the later
part of the Oath) is Faith, and Allegiance to our Prince, and the Defense of
the Jurisdictions of the Crown; which cannot at all be professed or assured by
these words, No Power, Jurisdiction, etc. as taken to mean any thing else, but
No Human Power. For, if one should deny by them, that our Savior gave the
Pope, or other Foreign Prelate, any Power to preach his Doctrine in England,
how does this Denial conduce to my Allegiance? Except one should impiously say,
that the Power our Savior gave to preach his Doctrine, was repugnant to
Allegiance, and to the Jurisdictions of any Crown. And hence to say, the Makers
of the Oath intended, that People by those Words, should deny that Power, is to
say, they intended People should deny a thing, in order to bring about their
Allegiance, which has no order toward the bringing is about: And which they
saw had none. For, being Christians, they could not think any Power our Savior
gave the Apostles, and their Successors, (which only is of Faith, and which
only we contend they never intended to exclude) was contrary to Allegiance; or,
if they thought he gave any such, and yet denied it, they left off being
Christians. What then they apprehended in him, was some Power not given by
Christ, but usurped from our Crown, hurtful to it, (as they expressly say;) and
this, and only this they could deny him, in order to secure Allegiance, which
was their Design.

9. Next, that the word Prelate (which is the only remaining Word that has any
show of Difficulty) does not determine them, appears from this, that the Prelate
there intended, (as all suppose) is one by whom Temporal Power, as well as
Power to Preach, was in many particulars here usurped; and, as to the rest, or
all other Branches of it, challenged; and that not only on the pretext of
Divine, but even of Human Right, viz. of the famed Donation or Submission of
King John. And so, the word Prelate is sometimes, by its being applied to him,
determined to Temporal, and sometimes to Preaching Power. And since he is in
our Law, and in this Oath, looked upon as opposite to Allegiance, and the
Jurisdictions of our Crown, and so rather as a Prince, than a Preacher; he here
determins it to a Temporal Sense, even as it is applied to him: For, as it is
applied to all the rest, as Prince, Person, State, or Potentate, it is
evidently made to suppose for Human Power; and these Words being more, it
ought, if it have but one Sense, rather to have their Sense, than the Sense of
Prelate. But some guess, all those other Words are, according to the Redundance
of our Law-Language, put to signify only one thing; to wit, the Pope; who only,
(as far as I can learn) had any Power in England to be turned out, as he is
looked upon in our Law; as Prince, Person, State, or Potentate.

10. The words of the Oath then, do not determine the word No Power, to be No
Preaching-Power. And as for the Acts, who reads them, will find, that there is
not so much as one word of him, as a Preacher, Perswader, or Administerer of
Sacraments: And consequently, not so much as one word to determine these Words
to such a Sense. But on the contrary, all the Discourse of him, is as of a
Getter of Power by Sufferance of Princes, and Consent of People, and Usurpation
from the Crown, in detriment of it: As of a User of this Power, in making
human, Ecclesiastical Laws; as Judging by those Laws, in Cases of Marriage,
Divorces, Wills, Tithes, Oblations, Obventions; and as Dispensing in these and
the like Laws: In Getting great and Intolerable Sums of Money for these
Dispensations: In Giving of Benefices, Receiving Annats, and First Fruits:
Giving Leave to Bishops, and others, to do their Duties; which needed not,
except in case of Human Law, they having from Christ this Power: and in Doing
such like Things as these. And since the Actor of these Things, is a Temporal
Actor, or an Actor by a Temporal Power, he being constantly considered, and
spoke of in these Laws, as an Actor of these Things, must constantly determine
the Words of the same Laws, Power, Jurisdiction, etc. to import Temporal
Power; and consequently in this Oath, which is made to deny all, and only that
which these Acts denied him.

11. In truth, the words Power, Authority, and the rest, have not the same
Notion, when applied to Churchmen, as when they are applied to Secular
Superiors. Power in this case, signifies Power to Constrain; in the other, to
Persuade. A Bishop invites a Man to obey him; that is, to Believe, and Live as
he from Christ instructs him, by the Hopes and Assurances of the greatest
Goods; and frights him from disobeying, by the Fears of the greatest Mischiefs;
which he will certainly bring upon himself, who will not be directed by him. If
any remain Obstinate, he with-draws from him those Helps to Salvation, which
Christ has left in the Church, and which his Perverseness now renders useless to
him; that by considering the Danger of his Case, besides the Shame, and what
else attends Excommunication, he may be Reclaimed, and Spiritus salvus sit in
die Domini. Farther than this, a Churchman cannot go, by the Nature of his
Power, abstracting from supervening Laws. He cannot take away Meat from the
Glutton, nor Wine from the Drunkard, nor lay out the Covetous Man's Money in
Alms; nor by Violence, force any Sinner to Virtue. But the Prince, if any Man
disobeys his Commands, lays hold of him, and by Force constrains him to obey.
Now, let us consider, which of these two Notions is, in Common Language,
generally understood by the Words in question: We do not say, a Friend, a
Lawyer, a Physician, etc. have Power or Authority; though by not following
their Directions, we miscarry in our Affairs, or lose our Estates, or Health.
But a Magistrate, a Father, or Master, we say, have Power over their Subjects,
Children, and Servants; because they can force them to do what they command.
Plainly therefore, Power in Common Language, means Compulsive Power: Which, if
it be so, who understands the words Power, Authority, and the rest in the Oath,
of purely Pastoral, or purely Spiritual, or properly Church Power of the Keys,
understands them otherwise, than as they properly, and usually, and always
signify, unless they be determined to that less proper Signification otherwise;
which here we have seen they are not.

12. Another evident Argument may be formed thus; In the Act (1 Eliz. c. 1.) it
is expressly said, that this Oath is made for the Observation of that Act.
Hence there is no more denied the Pope by this Oath, than by that Act: What is
otherways denied by the Queen, or her Divines in their Religion, or in
Controversie-Books, being not a Denial to be acknowledged by Oath; else it
would be to deny all other Things of Faith, in which we differ as well as this,
which no Body dreams of. Now, only Temporal Power is denied by the Act;
therefore, none but Temporal is denied by the Oath: Only the Second Proposition
wants Proof.

13. For its first Proof, it is sufficient to read over this Act, and all Acts
revived by it, and consider the Pope's Power there spoken of; and whether all
of it, there spoken of, be Temporal: For, if all spoken of be Temporal, all
denied him must needs be so. The first of the Revived Statutes, which takes
any thing from the Pope, is in the 24 K. H. 8. c. 12. Its Preamble speaks only
of such a Power of the Pope, as was by reason of its Opposition to the
Prerogatives of the Crown, by Catholic Kings taken from him, and restored to
the Crown. And of such a one as he exercised, with great Damage to the Nation,
in Causes of Appeals in several Cases; and for Remedy of this Damage, it is
enacted, That he shall have this Power, of being a Judge in those Causes, no
longer. And if it be said, that in this Preamble he is spoke of, at least once,
as a Preacher, when it is said, that the Clergy of this Realm were always able
to Judge of God's Law, without him: I answer, This invalidates not the
Argument; for it is Founded in this, that where any Power is denied him, all
there spoken of is Temporal: Whence is inferred, that all denied him is
Temporal. Now, it is not there said, the Pope cannot, or shall not Judge what
is God's Law, when a Question may rise in England about some Point; as a
Preacher, or one skillful in God's Law: But that the Clergy is able to do it
without him. And thence he seems to infer, that it is needless to appeal out of
this Realm, to know of him, what is the Law of God; if there should chance to
be any doubt, in case of Matrimony or Divorce, for Example: And, it being a
needless thing to appeal to him even as a Preacher, and inconvenient to appeal
to him as a Judge, commands this not to be done. And thus no Power was denied
him, where he was spoke of as a Preacher; but only, where he is spoken of as a
Judge in those Causes, as far as they depend on Human Laws.

Next, the Statute 25 K. H. 8. cap. 20. speaks of no Power taken away, but the
Power of exacting Annats, and First Fruits, and of Electing of Bishops; which,
having accrew'd to him by time, could not be Divine or Supernatural Power; that
is, Power derived to him, or conferred upon him, Jure Divino.

15. The Statute (in the 25 K. H. 8. cap. 19.) excludes perchance his, as well
as our Clergie's Power, of continuing old Canon-Laws, or making new Ones,
without the King's Approbation: And the Power of making such Laws, is grounded
only on Human Reason, showing the Things prescribed to be convenient; Of which
Convenience, our Clergy, and also Layity, as knowing it best by living here,
(where a thing may be Inconvenient, that elsewhere is Convenient) and not the
Pope, ought to be Judge: Which is the Reason, why Laws even of General
Councils, do not Oblige, except where they are Received. Hence not so much as a
Just Human Authority is here taken from the Pope.

16. But if it be here upon this Occasion, asked, Whether the Clergy and
Layity could in Reason, and good Conscience, renounce their Human Power, to
continue all such old Canons which the King should not approve of; when as they
being more in Number, and more likely to be in the Right than he, might judge
either an Old or New Canon convenient, which he might think to be inconvenient?
And, hence, whether the King in Reason, and good Conscience could then, and now
(by this Act's being Revived, and giving this same Power to the King) take, and
keep the Power of Repealing all such Canons, as he should please? And
consequently, whether we can with a good Conscience, Swear (as we do in the
later part of the Oath) to defend this his Power, if Conscientiously possessed by
him? I answer; That, I believe, they did according to Reason and Conscience, in
rather choosing the little Harm that might be in the Repealing of some good Old
Canons, than the great One that might proceed not only from the King's
Displeasure, but either from the Continuance of many former bad Canons, or the
Enacting of as bad New Ones; or upon such other account, upon which a Man may
now, after it is made Law, upon the same or a better Motive, continue to
consent to the Continuation of what they did. Likewise, the King might as
reasonably take upon him, that a Law may not be continued, which he dislikes,
as that a Bill, which both Houses like, may not be a Law, except he likes it;
or, as that a Law which he likes, shall not be discontinu'd, though both
Houses, that are more, dislike it: And this is for Public order sake.

17. The Statute (25 K. H. 8. cap. 21.) speaks of no Power to be taken away,
but Power of dispensing in the King's Laws; to the Prejudice of the Crown, and
impoverishing of the Subjects; which Power must be of the same Nature, as the
Laws dispensed with.

18. The last revived Statute, that takes any thing away, is in the 28 K. H. 8.
cap. 16. and it takes away only Power of giving Licenses in abundance of Human
Cases; and among the rest, the Power of putting Bishops into their Bishoprics,
and Priests into their Parishes; and of giving them leave to do their Divine
Offices: Which, though it may at first Sight, look like Pastoral Power given
him by Christ, yet it is not: For, wherever an Apostle dyed, the People and
Clergy of the Place had Power to choose themselves a Bishop; and put him into
his Bishopric, without the Pope's Consent. And this Power they Exercised for
many hundred Years, all over Christendom, according to the Ancient Canons and
Customs; till partly, under pretense of Respect to St. Peter's Successor, (but
whether truly or only for that Reason, is another Question) it was by several
Concordates between some Emperors, Kings, and Princes, and States of Europe, of
one side, and Popes on the other, agreed, There should be no Bishops allowed in
their Territories, but whom the Pope, or Bishop of Rome, should approve of.
Hence the Power which the Pope had, that a Bishop could not, or should not, be
put in, without his Consent, he got by Human Agreement; and only this Power was
taken here away. For, it is not said here, that the Pope cannot, or shall not,
persuade People to choose themselves a Bishop, that he sees want one; or
persuade a Bishop, who has Authority from Christ to do it, to go and preach to
People that want him, (which may belong to the Care our Savior gave him over
the Church) but that they having a mind to have Bishops, will have them of
their own choosing, and putting in; and not of the Pope's, as was of former
Times practiced. And that this is their Sense, is evident out of the History of
what the Pope did before that time, and of what they themselves did, and
hindered him to do afterward: Or, it may be said, in short, that as they saw
it not necessary by God's Law, that the Pope should choose and give them a
Bishop, who were ready to do it themselves, so they thought it not convenient,
he should; and thence made a Law, that he should not, The Law not saying, that
he could not, nor should not, send them a Bishop in case of necessity, (in
which case he has Power from our Savior, to provide for the Flock; and so
have other Bishops too, in such case, besides him) but only, that he should not
in this case of no-Necessity: Which is to take from him, not the Power, but the
unnecessary Use of that Power; which last, was certainly not given by God.

19. Likewise, Bishops and Priests had from our Savior, Power to preach, and
that all the World over, as they should think fit; without its being necessary
to have this Power from St. Peter's Successor: But after some time, they
thought fit to agree, that each one should not do his Duty every where, nor at
his own Discretion; but only in the Place allotted to him, and at the
Discretion chiefly of the Pope, at least, within his Patriarchate. And the
Power, that was by this Agreement given the Pope, was here, by the Disagreement
of this Nation in Parliament, taken away: So that now they should have their
Places allotted by it; and at the Discretion of it, exercise the Power they had
from Christ.

20. Having thus seen, that when any Power of the Pope was in the Revived
Statutes turned out, none but Human was spoken of: Let us now see, of what kind
Q. Elizabeth speaks, in her Acts.

21. In the Title of her First Act, (1 Eliz. cap. 1.) none is spoken of, but
Power Repugnant to the Ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown. Now, one Human Power
is often Repugnant to another; and in our Case, the Pope's having Power to
Judge some Causes here, without having it, as from or under her, is Repugnant
to her Imperial Power, of having all Judges in the External-Court, proceed
under and from her: But not the Ministerial Power our Savior gave to preach
his Doctrine, and feed his Sheep; a part whereof, is to render to Caesar, what
is Caesar's. In the Preamble, we hear only of Usurped Power, taken from the
Pope by K. H. 8th. And who can think, that it here calls the Power our Savior
gave to preach, Usurped? But, least one should think, they meant not to call
the Power which our Savior gave, Usurped, but to call his pretense of being
Chief Preacher, so; let him consider, how the Ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown
restored is put both here and every where, as relative to it: So that,
wherever there is mention made of Power taken from the Pope, there is also
mention made of Power restored to the Crown; and where ever of Power restored
to the Crown, also of Power taken from the Pope: Which gives one reason to
think, that none was taken away from Him, but what was given to the Crown; nor
any thing given to the Crown, but what was taken from Him. And this is rendered
more evident, by Bishop Bramhal's Words, Schism Guarded, p. 340. Whatsoever
Power our Laws did divest the Pope of, they invested the King with it. Now,
this being so, how is it possible, they should apprehend the Pretense of being
Chief Preacher or Pastor, though false, so usurped, as to belong of Ancient
Time to our Crown, and to be now restored to it?

22. Next, by the Fruit, let him know the Tree: And, what is all the Good Fruit
there mentioned, as proceeding from what was taken away from the Pope, and
restored to the Crown? Being kept in good Order, and freed from intolerable
Charges: which are Temporal Fruits. And, what is all the bad Fruit there
mentioned, as proceeding from the Pope's having got all his Old Power again, by
Queen Mary's Act of Repeal? Bondage under an Usurp'd-Forreign Power, to the
intolerable Charges of the Subjects. If this be all the Fruit that grew upon
all the Stocks of Power he had formerly taken from him, could any of them be
any other, than the Temporal Stock of Power, opposite to that by which the King
kept them in good Order, or of Power to get Money? And, lastly, since this
Preamble desires nothing but Freedom from these Evils; who can imagine, that
this Act speaks of any other Roots but these, to be plucked up? Especially,
since in that Part of the Act, in which this Power is taken away, it is still
all called Usurped, all called Spiritual or Ecclesiastical: Which Words, as
being in our Law, must determine the word Power, to import Temporal.

23. Lastly, The Title of the Act, 5 Q. Eliz. cap. 1. being An Act for the
Assurance of the Queen's Majesty's Royal Power, over all States and Subjects
within her Dominions; the word Power, as often as it is used in the Act, must be
understood in a Sense conducing to the Assurance of Royal Power; except one
should think the Lawmakers to be so Imprudent, as to use it in a Sense no ways
conducing to effect their Design: and what only Sense conduces to that end, we
have already seen. Moreover, the Preamble declaring no Design, but the
Preservation of the Queen, and the Dignities of her Crown, and the avoiding of
Mischiefs, that have befallen Her, her Crown, and Subjects, by reason of the
Usurped Power of the Sea of Rome, all the Words of the Act are to be
understood of no other Power, than that which is the Reason or Cause of those
Mischiefs, and of that only; which being taken away, the Ends aimed at will be
compassed: and this for the same Reason alleged before. And now, being come to
the end of our View of every Particular denied by the Acts: And being
conscious, that every particular Power denied to the Pope, is Temporal; we may
solidly conclude, that all denied him, is such.

24. For a Second Proof of the said Second Proposition, let us reflect, how it
is altogether unreasonable to think, that these Acts take away any Power from
the Pope, of which they express no dislike, nor make any Complaint, of its
being in him; and how our Eyes testify, that they signify no dislike of his
Preaching Power: But only of his Power, which was a Diminution of the King's
Power, as being Part of it, and so Repugnant to its being entirely in him; and
of his Power to exact Money, for Dispensations, Licenses, etc. which was
chargeable to the Nation; and which was far different from that other, which
Christ gave him.

25. For a Third Reason, it is incredible they would have done a thing in these
Acts, no ways conducing to the Design they express themselves to have in them,
(which only we ought to judge they had.) For they only speak of restoring what
was Usurped from the Crown, and abolishing what was Repugnant to its being
Restored; of freeing the Subjects from inconvenient Laws, Judicatures, and
great Charges; of securing the Queens Person, her Royal Authority over her
Subjects, and their Allegiance to her. To the compassing of which End, the
taking away the Pope's Power to preach Christ's Doctrine, (which enjoins the
giving the Crown its due, and is no Power to oppress People by Inconvenient
Laws, or Exactions of Money in the Cases complained of; nor to prejudice the
Queen, or her Sovereignty over her Subjects, or their Allegiance to her) is no
way conducing: When as the taking the aforesaid Temporal Powers away, is very
much, as I have already proved.

26. For a Fourth Reason, we may reflect, that this Act, both by its Title and
Preamble, seems to intend, the Exclusion of only what K. H. 8. excluded, in his
here approved and revived Acts; only with this Difference, that this seems to
do, at once, and in general Words, what his did by Parts, and in more
particular Terms. And he, as we have seen by looking into all Particulars,
excluded not the Pope, as Pastor. More-over, as she did, what he did; so he did
fully what Catholic Kings showed him Example to do. If one may take his Word
in the Preamble to the Statute, 24 King Henry the 8th. cap. 12. and the express
Words of his Proviso, An. 25. cap. 21. after which he did nothing of Note,
besides ordering that Bishops should have their Bishoprics, and preach without
the Pope's Order; as they did for a long time among the Britains, and others.
Also, we may gather their Senses are the same, from alike way of proceeding,
and speaking, in Law.

27. For a Fifth, That it is unreasonable to think, that this Parliament should
in this Act exclude the Pope's purely Spiritual Power, as far as it is held to
be a Tenet of Catholic Religion all over the World; and in the same Act,
revive the aforesaid Proviso, that formerly commanded it should not be
excluded: Except we should say, that it had at the same time, a mind it should,
and should not be kept in. Kept in, because the Will they had, that the Words
of the former Statute, should not be taken in a Sense contrary to the Religion
of the then Catholic Church, which believed Religiously, the said purely
Spiritual Power of the Pope, (which Will these Men expressed, by Reviving the
Proviso) could proceed only from a mind, that no such Religious Tenet, nor
consequently this of the Pope's purely Spiritual Power, should be denied: And,
Not kept in, if in this it denies or excludes it. And, that the Proviso
commands that, is clear; for it runs thus:

28. Provided always, that this Act, nor any Thing or Things therein
contained, shall be hereafter interpreted, or expounded, that your Grace, your
Nobles, and Subjects, intend by the same to decline, or vary from the
Congregation of Christ's Church, in any Things concerning the very Articles of
the Catholic- Faith of Christendom; or in any other Things declared by Holy
Scripture, and the Word of God, necessary for Your and Their Salvation: But
only to make an Ordinance by Policies, necessary and convenient to repress
Vice, and for good Conservation of this Realm in Peace, Unity, and Tranquillity,
from Rapine and Spoil; ensuing much the old Ancient Customs of this Realm, in
that Behalf: Not minding to seek for any Reliefs, Succors, or Remedies, for
any Worldly Things, and Human Laws, in any Case of Necessity within this Realm,
but at the Hands of your Highness, your Heirs and Successors, Kings of this
Realm: which have, and ought to have an Imperial Power and Authority in the
same; and not obliged in any Worldly Causes, to any other Superior.

29. A Sixth Reason is, Because a Proviso of the last Act, 5 Eliz. cap. 1.
says thus: Provided always, that for as much as the Queen's Majesty is
otherwise sufficiently assured of the Faith and Loyalty of the Temporal Lords,
of her Highnesses Court of Parliament: Therefore, this Act, nor any Thing
therein contained, shall not extend to compel any Temporal Person, of or above
the Degree of a Baron of this Realm, to take or pronounce the Oath abovesaid;
not to incur any Penalty limited by this Act, for not Taking, or Refusing the
same; any thing in this Act, to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.
Where we see, the Queen's being, without this Act and Oath, sufficiently
assured of the Temporal Lords Faith and Loyalty, is brought as a Reason, why
neither it, nor its Oath belongs to them; which would have been no Reason, in
case it had been also to deny the Pope's being Chief Preacher, (or such a
Preacher, as is to have a particular Care, that all Christians, and English
among the rest, know and practice Christ's Doctrine; and that all Preachers,
and English amongst the rest, Preach, and help others under them to Practice
the same.) For the Act and Oath being, in this Supposition, made upon two
Accounts; to wit, for the Assurance of Allegiance, and Denial of Religion; the
Act might have belonged to them, and the Oath might have been offered them,
(though the Queen had been other-wise assured or their Allegiance) for Denial
of that Part of Religion, which the Queen was so far from being other-wise
assured that they did deny, that she otherwise certainly knew that, abundance
at least of them, did constantly profess it.

30. For a Seventh and last Reason, I allege, that they could not intend to
make People swear in the First and Fifth of her Reign, (when this Oath was made
and enjoined) that the Pope had not the Power of a Pastor then in England; when
as they certainly knew, he had and exercised such a Power over Multitudes of
Catholics, that then were by the State, permitted to Live in, and profess an
Obedience to him, as such: Especially, if it be found, that the greatest Part
of this Parliament, were Catholics; which would not vote the Forswearing of
their Faith. And if they did not intend it, their Words do not signify it. If
it be said, they could not intend, to make the People swear he had not, de
facto, such a Power, (since every Body knew this to be evidently False,) but
that he had not, de jure, or ought not to have such a Power. I answer, 1st.
That the Words are; And that no Foreign Prince, etc. has or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, etc. within this Realm: And unless one will say, that Has, and
Ought to have, are just the same; and that Has has not its Signification, as
well as Ought to have, (which is not very likely) the Meaning must be, that he
has not, de facto, the Power they there speak of: Which infers, that they
there speak not of Pastoral Power.

31. Next, I answer, That this Argument evidently concludes, what it
endeavored; to wit, that they could not intend, that the Words of the Oath
should signify, that the Pope had not any Pastoral Power in England, de facto.
And hence, I argue, that they could not intend to take them, in the whole
Latitude of their Sound; and also, that they intend to exclude no Pastoral
Power, de jure: First, Because their Words speak no more of this, than they do
of that, of which they speak not at all: Next, Because it is not likely, that
they should intend to make his Pastoral Power, de jure, be abjured by some, as
prejudicial to the Jurisdictions of the Crown, for example; and that others
should not abjure it, but be irreprehensibly permitted to believe, and profess
it. Lastly, Because it was Praemunire and Treason, to hold or profess, what the
Acts denied the Pope: But it was neither Prmunire nor Treason, for a Lord or
other, in those days, to profess himself a Catholic, (though it was
punishable, not to be at Common Prayer) which includes the holding and
professing the Pope's Pastoral Power de jure, as well as de facto: Therefore,
it evidently was not this Pastoral Power de jure, that was there denied.

32. Having thus seen, that neither the Words of the Oath, nor the Acts, to the
Profession of whose Sense only the Oath is ordained, deny the Pope's Pastoral
Power; let us in the last Place see, whether the Explication given it by Act of
Parliament, 5 Eliz. cap. 1 denies it: For, if this does not, nothing does that
concerns it and us. Now, this Act makes that to be the Sense of the Oath, which
the Queen gives it in her Admonition: And sums up the Sense of the Admonition
in short, to be, To confess and acknowledge in her Majesty, her Heirs and
Successors, none other Authority, than that was challenged and lately used by
the Noble King Henry the Eighth, and King Edward the Sixth, as in the said
Admonition more plainly may appear. Now, since the whole Design here spoken of,
(which is to be supposed all of it) is the confessing of Power in the Queen,
the Negative Part is to be taken to signify no farther, than to deny to
another, what is confessed to be in the Queen; else the whole Business of the
Oath would not be Confessing of Power in her: Whence evidently follows, that
they are not to be taken in a Sense, exclusive of the Pope's Pastoral Power.
The Admonition it self, is as follows.

An Admonition to Simple Men, deceived by Malicious.

33. The Queens Majesty being informed that in certain places of the Realm,
sundry of her Native Subjects being called to Ecclesiastical Ministry in the
Church, be by sinister Persuasion and perverse Construction, induced to find
some scruple in the form of an Oath, which by an Act of the last Parliament is
prescribed to be required of diverse Persons for the Recognition of their
Allegiance to her Majesty, which certainly never was ever meant, nor by any
Equity of words or good sense can be thereof gathered; would that all her
loving Subjects should understand, that nothing was, is or shall be meant or
intended by the same Oath, to have any other duty, Allegiance or bond required
by the same Oath, than was acknowledged to be due to the most noble Kings of
famous Memory, K. Henry the 8th. Her Majesty's Father, or K. Edward the 6th.
Her Majesty's Brother. And farther, her Majesty forbids all manner her
Subjects, to give ear or credit to such perverse and malicious persons, which
most sinisterly and maliciously labor to notify to her loving Subjects, how by
words of the said Oath, it may be collected that the Kings or Queens of this
Realm, Possessors of the Crown, may challenge Authority and Power of Ministry
of Divine service in the Church: wherein her said Subjects be much abused, by
such evil-disposed persons; for certainly, her Majesty neither does nor ever
will challenge any other Authority than that was challenged, and lately used by
the said noble Kings of famous Memory, K. Henry the 8th. and K. Edward the 6th.
which is, and was of ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. That
is, under God to have the the Sovereignty and Rule over all manner of persons
born within these Realms, Dominions, and Countries, of what estate (either
Ecclesiastical or Temporal) soever they be, SO AS, no other foreign Power
shall or ought to have any Superiority over them. And if any person that has
conceived any other sense of the form of the said Oath, shall accept the same
Oath, with this Interpretation, sense or meaning, her Majesty is well pleased,
to accept every such in that behalf, as her good and obedient Subjects, and
shall acquit them of all manner of Penalties contained in the said Act, against
such as shall Peremptorily or Obstinately refuse to take the same Oath.

34. That the Popes Pastoral or purely Spiritual Power is not denied in this
Admonition, may be collected from her saying there, that the Oath was required
of certain Persons for the Recognition of their Allegiance, and such as was in
Ancient (and so Catholic) times, due to the Crown. For the Recognition of
which, no Exclusion need or ought to be made of that Power of the Pope which is
no way Repugnant to it, but so he use his Power as he ought (and if he do not,
he is not to be obeyed) a Commander of it. Next, from the words, so as no
foreign power, etc. shall or ought to have any Superiority over them. First,
because the proper and common (that is, first) sense of the words Power and
Superiority, is Temporal. Next, because Superiority is not joynd here to the
Pope, as Prelate, but as foreign Power or Prince. And therefore, is by being
applied to it, determined to a civil sense; and so are both of them determined
to the same, by being used in an explication of a Law, and in in a matter of
Allegiance and Sovereignty over all Persons.

35. Lastly, because the words SO AS must either retain their most proper
sense, and be an answer, to the Great Question that caused this Admonition,
which was, how she pretended to be Supreme Governor in all causes Spiritual?
whether as a Queen, or as an Administer of divine service in the Church? which
therefore, seems to be a sense of those words directly belonging to her
Purpose: And then, it is evident that the following words can signify only
Temporal Authority. For, if it be asked after what manner, is the Queen Supreme
Governess? whether after a Civil or Spiritual manner? and it be answered, after
such a manner as no foreign power has or ought to have any Superiority;
(which is the same, as if it had been answered, after a civil manner; since it
was then known to all, that no foreign power had a Superiority after a civil
manner, and as certainly known that the Pope had one, de facto, at least, after
a Spiritual manner) It follows out of this Answer, that she has the Supreme
Government, after a Civil manner; because, it is the same thing to say, she has
the Supreme Rule after that manner, as no Forreigner has any; as to say, she
has it after a Civil Manner: Of which Truth, she endeavored to persuade
simple deluded People.

36. Or the words SO AS must mean the same as SO THAT. And then we must either
say the Pope's Pastoral power is not excluded by the words following; or elss
that no Coherent sense is in them. For in case it be excluded, the sense must
be, The Queen has the whole Temporal rule over all persons, so that no
Forreigner has power to Preach Christ's Doctrine; or she is Queen, so that no
Forreigner is a Preacher or Pastor: might not she as pertinently say, she is
Queen, so that no French Man is or ought to be a Dancing Master? Indeed, if she
had taken upon her to have the whole power to Preach, she might have said she
is Preacher, so that no Forreigner has, or ought to have any power to preach
here; for her having the whole power, hinders any body from having any of it,
except under or from her: but not, now, she renounces that: For, the being a
Queen, is not at all inconsistent with another's being a Preacher. Hence the
sense can be no other than either this, she has the Rule here, and no body
has any part of it, which is the same, as she has the Rule, and all the Rule:
or elss this; she has all the Rule, whence it follows, that no Forreigner has
any part of it, as he pretended.

37. Lastly, from the Queens saying, that She will accept of those that take
the Oath in the above said Sense, as her good and obedient Subjects; which
seems to signify, that this Oath was intended, not to know of what Religion
People were, but to know who were Good and Obedient Subjects; which they may be
as well without denying the Pope's preaching Power, as with it. Hence, it is
extremely more probable, at least, that the Admonition does not exclude the
Pastoral Power, than that it does; and so, it is a sufficient Ground for any one
to say to a Justice of Peace, I intend to take this Oath in the Sense, which to
the best of my Judgment, is given it by Act of Parliament: Which, as it is
sufficient for the Satisfaction of my Conscience, (in case there be no Scandal)
for I in my Conscience, judge, that the King has the Rule of this Kingdom, and
that the Pope has no part of it; and this only I acknowledge upon Oath. Next,
I truly say, that this Sense and no other is to the best of my Judgment,
(though this may possibly be misinformed) the Sense given it by Law; and in
this, and no other, I take it: So, he can require no more of me, who being to
understand it, and take it in the Sense of the Law, do my best to do both
right. And, more over, agree with almost all (as far as I can learn; all)
Protestant Authors, in holding this to be the Sense of the Law and Oath: And
consequently, am not to be denied Leave to take it in this Sense, upon pretense
that the Sense I take it in, is not allowable, since it is allowed Publicly.

38. Since then (as we shall find, if we reflect back upon the whole) the
Pope's Pastoral Power, if excluded, must be excluded, by not taking the Words
of the Oath in their most Common and Proper Sense; to which also they are
determined by being in Law Books, by all other words of the Oath, by its
Design, and the words of all Acts concerning it: Since it must be excluded by
speaking, without being spoke of; since it must be excluded by Reason of some
dislike, without expressing that Dislike; when as it is the Custom of these
Laws, to express the Reason that moved the Parliament to do what it did: Since
it must be excluded by the Parliament's doing a thing, even in their own
Thoughts, nothing conducing to the End they designed; viz. to Allegiance,
Freedom from Charges, etc. which a Power purely Spiritual in the Pope no way
prejudices: Since it must be excluded by following the Example of Catholic
Kings, as to manner of Proceeding, Words, Things, and All, except some few
Particulars; which looked into, seem no more to exclude his Pastorship, than
what they did: Since it cannot be excluded without the Parliament's willing,
that like Words of a former Act, should not be taken in a Sense exclusive of
it; which could proceed only from a Will to have it not-excluded: And willing
at the same time, that the Words of this Act be taken in a Sense exclusive of
it; which could proceed only from a Will to have it excluded: Since it cannot
be excluded without their bringing a Reason for the Lords not taking of it,
which was no Reason; without having a mind to swear, that the Pope had not,
what they certainly saw he had; or, at least, to swear he had not a Power, in
words that did not signify the Exclusion of it, more than of that they did not
exclude: Since it could not be excluded, except it was Treason to profess what
was excluded, and not Treason to profess what was excluded; (since if it be
supposed, that the Pope's properly Pastoral Power was excluded, it was Treason
according to the Act, to profess it; and otherwise, we know it was not Treason
to profess it; all Catholics being not then esteemed and punished as
Traitors): Since it could not be excluded, except the Negative Clause be put
so, as not to conduce at all to bring about the only Design of the Oath; which
was acknowledging Power in the Queen, professing Allegiance, and Knowledge of
who were good Subjects: Nor except the words of the Admonition be taken
improperly, and the later part of it be construed into Nonsense. Since these
Things are so, as likewise, that almost all Words (especially, if not
considered in their proper Circumstances, as these use not to be, but as they
ly in a single Paper, separated from all that belongs to them) are liable to
have a wrong Sense forced into them; it is, I think, as evident as any thing of
this Nature can well be; that this which I have endeavored to prove to be the
Sense of the Oath, is indeed the true Sense of it: And so, as evident, (when
these Things are publicly known) as we need desire for our Swearing, that the
Pope's Power (as of Faith) is not excluded nor abjured, what ever may be said
of his other Powers, that were in process of Time added to this. Neither am I
alone, in this Thought: Protestant Divines, of the greatest Note, and very
learned in the Law, (which alone seems able to give solid Satisfaction in this
Point) bear me company, or rather, I bear them. They may be seen at large cited
by Mr. Cressy, in his Reflections upon the Oaths, page 27. to 33. and in the
Seasonable Discourse about the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, very lately
Printed, from p. 27. to p. 32. The Sum of their Sense is this, That they clear
both the Affirmative and Negative Clause in the Oath, from intending either to
exclude the Pope's Pastoral, Supernatural, purely Spiritual, or Ministerial
Power of the Keys, or to give (as I have shown) any such Power to the King; and
this in as express Words, as can be invented: Which, lest this Treatise should
be any way defective, I shall here repeat.

39. In Queen Elizabeth's reign, we have the Testimony Dr. Bilson, Of Subject.
2. Par. p. 218.
of Doctor Bilson, afterward Bishop, of Winchester, whose expressions are
these; The Oath (says he) expresses not the duty of Princes to God, but ours
to them. And as they must be obeyed when they join with the Truth, so must they
be endured when they fall into error. Which side soever they take, either
obedience to their Wills, or submission to their swords, is their due by Gods
Law. And that is all which our Oath exacteth. Again, This is the supreme power
of Princes, which we soberly teach, and which you Id. ibid, p. 256.
[JESUITS] so bitterly detest, That Princes be Gods Ministers in their own
Dominions; bearing the Sword, freely to permit, and publicly to defend that
which God commands in Faith and good Manners; and in Ecclesiastical
Discipline to receive and establish such Rules and Orders, as the Scriptures
and Canons shall decide to be needful and healthful for the Church of God in
their Kingdoms. And as they may lawfully command that which is Good in all
Things and Causes, be they Temporal, Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical: So may they
with just Force remove whatsoever is Erroneous, Vicious, or Superstitious
within their Lands, and with External Losses and Corporal Pains repress the
Broachers and Abettours of Heresies, and all Impieties. From which Subjection
unto Princes, no Man within their Realms, Monk, Priest, Preacher, nor Prelate
is exempted. And without their Realms no Mortal Man has any Power from Christ,
judicially to depose them, much less to invade them in open Field; least of
all, to warrant their Subjects to rebel against them. Moreover, intending to
explain in what sense Spiritual Ibid. p. 173. in marg.
Jurisdiction seems by the Oath to be given to Princes, he says first: We make
no Prince Judge of Faith. And Ibid, p. 252.
then more particularly: To devise new Rites and Ceremonies, for the Church is
not the Princes Vocation: But to receive and allow such as the Scriptures and
Canons commend, and such as the Bishops and Pastors of the Place shall advise,
not infringing the Scriptures or Canons. And so, for all other Ecclesiastical
Things and Causes, Princes be neither the Devisers nor Directers of them; but
the Confirmers and Establishers of that which is Good, and Displacers and
Revengers of that which is Evil. Which Power, we say, they have in all Things
and Causes, be they Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, or Temporal. Hereto his
Adversary is brought in replying; And what for Excommunications and
Absolutions, be they in the Princes Power also? To this he answers; The Abuse
of Excommunication in the Priest, and Contempt of it in the People, Princes may
punish: Excommunicate they may not, for so much as the Keys are no part of
their Charge. Lastly, to explain the Negative Clause in the Oath, he says; In
this sense we defend Ibid. p. 218.
Princes to be Supreme, that is not at liberty to do what they list, without
regard of Truth or Right: But without Superior on Earth to repress them with
violent Means, and to take their Kingdoms from them. Thus Doctor Bilson; whose
Testimony may be interpreted to be the Queens own Interpretation of the Oath;
since, as appears by the Title page of his Book, what he wrote was perused and
approved by Public Authority. And to such a Sense of the Oath as this, there
is not a Catholic Clergy Man in France, Germany, Venice, or Flanders, but
would reatdly subscribe.

40. In the next place, suitable to him, Doctor Carleton in King James his
time, thus states the Matter: Bellarmine (says he) disputing of Jurisdiction,
says, There Carleton of Jurisdict. c. 1. p. 8, 9.
is a Triple Power in the Bishop of Rome: First, of Order; secondly, of
Internal Jurisdiction; Thirdly, of External Jurisdiction. The First is referred
to the Sacraments; the Second to Inward Government, which is in the Court of
Conscience; the Third to that External Government, which is practiced in
External Courts. And confesses, that of the First and Second there is no
question between us, but only of the Third. Then of this (says Carleton) we
are agreed, that the Question between us and them, is only of Jurisdiction
coactive in External Courts, binding and compelling by Force of Law, and other
External Mulcts and Punishments, besides Excommunication. As for Spiritual
Jurisdiction of the Church standing in examination of Controversies of Faith,
judging of Heresies, deposing of Heretics, excommunication of notorious
Offenders, Ordination of Priests and Deacons, Institution and Collation of
Benefices and Spiritual Cures, etc. this we reserve entire to the Church, which
Princes cannot give or take from the Church. This Power has been practiced by
the Church, without Coactive Jurisdiction, other than of Excommunication. But
when Matters handled in the Ecclesiastical Consistory, are not Matters of Faith
and Religion, but of a Civil Nature; which yet are called Ecclesiastical, as
being given by Princes, and appointed to be within the Cognizance of that
Consistory: And, when the Censures are not Spiritual, but Carnal, Compulsive,
Coactive; here appears the Power of the Civil Magistrate. This Power we yield
to the Magistrate; and here is the Question, Whether the Magistrate has right
to this Power or Jurisdiction, etc? This then is the thing that we are to
prove, That Ecclesiastical coactive Power, by force of Law and corporal
Punishments, by which Christian People are to be governed in external and
contentious Courts, is a Power which of right belongs to Christian Princes.
Again, Id. ibid. p. 42.
afterward he says; Concerning the Extention of the Churches Jurisdiction, it
cannot be denied, but that there is a Power in the Church, not only Internal,
but also of External Jurisdiction. Of Internal Power there is no question made.
External Jurisdiction, being understood all that is practiced in External
Courts, or Consistories, is either Definitive or Mulctative. Authority
Definitive in Matters of Faith and Religion, belongs to the Church.
Mulctative Power may be understood either as it is with Coaction, or as it is
referred to Spiritual Censures. As it stands in Spiritual Censures, it is the
right of the Church, and was practiced by the Church, when the Church was
without a Christian Magistrate, and since. But Coactive Jurisdiction was never
practiced by the Church, when the Church was without Christian Magistrates: But
was always understood to belong to the Civil Magistrate, whether he were
Christian or Heathen. After this manner does Doctor Carleton, Bishop of
Chichester, understand the Supremacy of the King, acknowledged in the Oath.

41. In the last place, Doctor Bramhal, Bishop of Derry in our late King's
days, and now Archbishop of Armagh, thus declares both the Affirmative and
Negative Parts of the Oath, touching the King's Supreme Authority in matters
Ecclesiastical, and renouncing the Pope's Schism guarded.
Jurisdiction in the same, here in England, in his Book called Schism Guarded,
etc. The sum of which Book is in the Title Page expressed to consist in showing,
That the great Controversy about Papal Power, is not a question of Faith, but
of Interest and Profit; not with the Church of Rome, but with the Court of
Rome, etc. This Learned and Judicious Writer, thus at once states the Point in
both these Respects. My last Ground (says he) is, That neither King Henry the
Eighth, nor any of his Legislators, did ever endeavor to deprive the Bishop of
Rome of the Power of the Keys, or any part thereof; either the Key of Order, or
the Key of Jurisdiction: I mean, Jurisdiction purely Spiritual, which has
place only in the inner Court of Conscience, and over such Persons, as submit
willingly. Nor did ever challenge or endeavor to assume to themselves either
the Key of Order, or the Key of Jurisdiction purely Spiritual. All which they
deprived the Pope of, all which they assumed to themselves, was the External
Regiment of the Church by Coactive Power, to be exercised by Persons capable of
the Respective Branches of it. This Power the Bishops of Rome never had, or
could have justly over their Subjects, but under them whose Subjects they were.
And therefore, when we meet with these Words, or the like, (That no Foreign
Prelate shall exercise any manner of Power, Jurisdiction, etc. Ecclesiastical
with this Realm) it is not to be understood of Internal, or purely-Spiritual
Power in the Court of Conscience, or the Power of the Keys, (we see the
contrary practiced every day) but of External and Coactive Power in
Ecclesiastical Causes, in Foro contentioso. And, that it is, and ought to be so
understood, I prove clearly by a Proviso in one main Act of Parliament, and an
Article of the English Church. [Which Act and Article have been produced
above.] The Bishop continues: They (that is, the Parliament) profess, their
Ordinance is merely Political: What has a Political Ordinance with Power
purely Spiritual? They seek only to preserve the Kingdom from Rapine, etc. And
then having produced the Article, he concludes: You see the Power is Political,
the Sword is Political, all is Political. Our Kings leave the Power of the Keys
and Jurisdiction purely Spiritual, to those to whom Christ has left it.
Nothing can be more express, than this so clear a Testimony of so Judicious a
Bishop, touching the King's Supremacy, in matters Ecclesiastical, acknowledged
by Oath.

42. Again, the same Bishop thus further adds: Wheresoever Ibid. p. 169.
our Laws do deny all Spiritual Jurisdiction to the Pope in England, it is in
that Sense that we call the Exterior Court of the Church, the Spiritual Court.
They do not intend at all to deprive him of the Power of the Keys, or of any
Spiritual Power that was bequeathed him by Christ, or by his Apostles, when he
is able to prove his Legacy. To conclude, omitting a World of other Passages to
the same effect, he says; We have not renounced the Substance Ibid. p. 219.
of the Papacy, except the Substance of the Papacy do consist in Coactive Power.

43. And that we may see this still continues the Sense of the Protestant
Church (and consequently of the State) even to this day, Mr. Falkner of Lynn
Regis, in his Book entitled, Christian Loyalty, so lately Printed, that it was
Antedated 1679, and dedicated to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Page 200. gives
us the Sense of this Oath in these Words: This Oath tending, according to the
Design of that Statute by which it was Established, to restore to the Crown
its Ancient Jurisdiction, that Authority which is chiefly rejected thereby, is
such as invaded or opposed the Royalty of the King; and particularly, that
which claims any Supreme Cognizance of Ecclesiastical Affairs, as if they
were not under the Care of the Temporal Power, or that pretends to any other
Authority above and against the Just Rights of the Crown.

44. Now, that such Authors, (especially the Three first) so Universally read
by all Learned-Men in their respective Times, and (doubtless) amongst others by
Thousands learned in the Law, should pass without any the least Reprehension
for interpreting the Oath and our Laws wrong, in case they had, in such their
Declarations and Expositions, declined from the true Sense of the Lawgivers;
nor be discountenanc't by those respective Princes, as diminishing the Extent
of their Power, or by the Protestant Church and State; for reserving more to
the Pope than was meant by them, when they required Roman Catholics to take
the Oath; but, on the contrary, that their Works should pass without the least
Control and Censure; nay, be Universally received with the highest Esteem and
Applause; and that their Persons should be so Caressed and Advanced by those
Princes, is a Riddle past mine or any man's Solving. Princes and States use not
to be so supine in such Matters, as to permit a wrong Sense to be imposed upon
their Laws; least of all, those who are not in Communion with Rome; especially,
when their own and the Pope's Authority are concerned: And yet, we must either
say, that such Persons, in such Matters, were thus strangely negligent; or else
be forced to acknowledge, that in the Sense of all England, the Lawyers there,
and even of our Princes themselves, that was the True and Legal Sense of the
Oath of Supremacy, which those eminent Authors assigned and declared. This
Argument will have far greater Force, if we add, that not one Protestant Author
amongst so many, that have either written expressly, or touched upon that
Subject, was ever found, who contradicted this Explication of theirs, or
affirmed any Power purely Spiritual, to be given the King, or taken from the
Pope by this Oath: Which, the Fancies of Mankind, (especially those of many
several Judgments in other things, and all of them averse to the Pope) and the
Opinions of Writers, being naturally so various, evidences that this Sentiment
of theirs concerning the abovesaid Meaning of the Oath, was not only
Universally, but moreover Firmly and constantly held as an undoubted Truth. And
let it be noted here, that all these four Learned Authors speak of the Oath,
both as to the Affirmative and Negative Clause in it; that is, both of what
they attribute by it to the King, and deny by it to the Pope. Out of which
Discourse it follows, that though these Testimonies taken singly, do not amount
to a Public Declaration of the Sense of the Oath; yet taking them conjoyntly,
with all their respective Qualifications and Circumstances, they evidently
argue, that the Sense they and we affix to the Oath, is agreed to by all sorts
of intelligent People in England, to be indeed the True Sense of it: Which
Universal Consent seems equivalent to any Public Declaration whatsoever.

Section III. Objections Answered.
NOtwithstanding the Evidence of what we produced above, men's Fancies,
Interests and Humors being various, there remain diverse Scruples in the minds
of many, and I will endeavor to ease them of those that have come to my
knowledge, and seem any way Material.

1. First, It Is Objected that the words of the Oath deny all manner of Power to
the Pope. But how could they do otherwise? Had they gone about to have numbered
all the particulars which they intended to Abolish, besides that 'twould have
been extremely tedious (in an Oath especially), some perhaps would have escaped
their utmost diligence. Had they excluded Ordinary Power, Extraordinary or
Delegate might still have pretended. The Abolishing the Legantine, might have
left that Ex plenitudine Potestatis; Annates had not taken away Appeals; nor
Appeals, Habilitating to Inheritances, etc. Nor they Expectatives, nor
Reservatives, nor Non Obstantes, etc. Had they gone that way to work,
whatsoever had not been expressly named, would have been understood not
comprehended; and then a new Law or a new Oath must have been made for that;
and then another might have been found out, and no end have ever been.
Wherefore, to compass what they intended, it was necessary to use a General
Expression; which they knew was to be understood as all Rules of Law and
Language require it should, of the matter in hand: so that [No Power] here
imports as much as no Civil Power, no Power repugnant to the Kings Governing
Power in all Causes, no such power as Queen Elizabeth and her Ancestor-Princes
had of old in this Realm, as was largely shown above. And hence, to take the
Oath right, one ought to think not of the single words taken in their whole
Latitude as divested of Circumstances, but as taken in Complexion with them; it
being but a very Odd Scrupulosity to think the Oath is to be taken in such a
manner as if one did not live in the world, nor knew any thing of it is
Circumstances; but were to lay aside all knowledges he had gained all his life,
except only of the signification of those very Words, abstracting from all
Subjects of which they may be conceived to speak; which amounts in other Terms
to this, that, while they take the Oath, they must lay aside all use of common
sense; nay, and swear too they know not what: for, laying aside the knowledge
of all Circumstances, every word in the world is ambiguous.

2. It Is objected, Secondly, that the Church of England, which may be presumed
to understand this Oath best, says in the latter part of the 37th Article, in
which it seems to relate to the Negative part of this Oath, that the Bishop of
Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England. It Is answered, the proper
and primary sense of the word Jurisdiction, is the Powers of a Magistrate
giving Sentence according to Right or Law, with Authority in External Courts,
to make it be Executed; from whence in a secundary signification, it is
transferred to the inward Court of Conscience. But it carries it is notion in
it is Terms: Dictio Juris, or Jus dicere importing in it is first, and obvious
sense to determine with Authority which may force Obedience to what is
Sentenced. This it seems, is all which the Church of England understands denied
to the Pope by the Oath, which Bishop Charleton cited above, in terms
acknowledges, by saying, that There is no question between us, concerning
Carleton Of Jurisdiction, c. 1. p. 8, 9.
the Internal Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome; but only the External: And
this plainly relates to the Judiciary Power spoken of. Especially, since the
Church of England here speaks of No Jurisdiction of the Pope, immediately after
she had spoke what was due to the King; and consequently, in the same Sense
here, as she did there; that so, by saying the Pope had No Civil Jurisdiction,
she might signify, that the King had not only Civil Power, but also all of it,
since the Pope has now none, who had some formerly; else we must come to the
before-noted Inconsequent way of speaking, He is King here, and the Pope is not
a Preacher or Pastor here. That I may not omit, that she speaks here in
reference to our Laws, which speak of Jurisdiction in this Sense only, and
which took from the Pope only this kind of Jurisdiction.

3. And this is fully and clearly affirmed by the foresaid Dr. Bramhal, Schism
Guarded, p. 308. as above cited. And again, p. 340. Our Laws do not intend at
all to deprive the Pope of the Power of the Keys -- in relation to England it
self: Our Parliaments did never pretend to any Power, to change or abridge
Divine Right, etc. -- for the Whole is too long to be Transcribed, and yet
it is fit it should be read. Again, p. 337. Our Ancestors cast out External
Coactive Jurisdiction; the same do we. They did not take away from the Pope the
Power of the Keys, or Jurisdiction purely Spiritual; No more do we. We have a
second, or at least a Confirmation of this Answer, in Franciscus a St. Clara's
Paraphrastical Explication of the 39. Articles of the Church of England, page
412. where he says on the abovesaid Negative Passage of the 37. Articles,
That, peradventure, it meant only to deny England to be held in Fee from the
Pope, by virtue of King John's Donation, Submission to, and Reception of his
Crown again, from Innocent the Third, and his Promise of paying Tribute to the
Pope for it. This vain, ridiculous, empty Title, (as Sir Thomas More himself
called it, Inanem Titulum) was that peradventure, says the foresaid a St.
Clara, which that Negative Passage of the 37. Article rejected. For the Lawful
Rejection of which, he brings Proofs sufficiently convincing in the Page now
quoted. But whether or no he ghesses aright at the Meaning of that Passage, it
matters not much; since the Objection has been otherwise already and
sufficiently answered.

4. A Third Objection proceeds from King James's saying, That the Oath of
Supremacy was devised for putting a Difference between Papists, and them of our
Profession: And Bishop Andrews, that the Oath of Supremacy was made to discover
those who acknowledged the Pope's Primacy, and deny the King's. Whence it seems
to follow, that what ever Sense this Oath might have had in Q. Elizabeth's
Days, yet King James gave it another, opposite to a Tenet held generally by
Catholics; else how could it distinguish them, in case there was no Sense
opposite to such a Tenet? For in this case, they might take it as well as the
rest, and not be distinguished from them by taking it. And the Sense K. James
gave it, seems to continue still, since no Body since ever took it out of the
Oath. I answer, It does not follow: For in Supposition, that neither Q.
Elizabeth gave it that Sense, nor K. James, nor he so much as apprehended it to
be given by her; yet, since he saw, that all Catholics did apprehend it in a
Sense opposite either to some Religious Tenet of theirs, or at least, some other
Position, which they judged True; and upon that account did as constantly
refuse it, as if it had really denied such a Tenet or Position; he might if he
pleased, make use of their Refusal, as a way (though needless, as Bishop
Andrews observes) to know they were Catholics. And as this Argument does not
prove, that he did give it a New Sense, different from what Q. Elizabeth gave
it; so it is evident, he did not. For, that Sense must have been either opposite
to the Queen's, and this he did not give it, since he let the Queen's Act
remain unrepeal'd; by which it necessarily retained her Sense, with which its
Opposite could not be: for a Sense exclusive of Pastoral Power, must have been
superadded to the former Sense; and this he also did not; First, because, since
he takes not that Power to himself, the Words will not with good Sense, bear
the Exclusion of the Pope's Power: Next, because he in his Apology for the Oath
of Allegiance, page 46. declares himself not to be against this Power of the
Pope; saying, That he could be content, that the Bishop of Rome were Patriarch
of the West, and were the First among all Bishops, and Princeps Episcoporum, so
as he be no otherwise, than as Peter was Princeps Apostolorum; which is all we
contend for; and who can think, that he put a Sense into an Oath, to make
People forswear, what he himself did not dislike?

5. Lastly, because this could not have been done by him, so at least, as to
oblige Catholics, by reason of its being in, not to take the Oath, in case it
were otherwise lawful; except he had declared by Law, or at least, by some
Authentic Act, such a Sense to be newly put into it: For, in case they had not
known of it, it would have been all one to them, as if it had not been in at
all: And how should they know of it, unless it had been some such way made
known to them? Neither will an accidental and ambiguous Sentence in a Book, be,
in the Judgment of any wise Man, a sufficient Declaration of his Mind.
Moreover, the Case seems to be this; He did not doubt, but that a great many of
his Catholic Subjects were Loyal; but did doubt, some were not: And had a mind
to know, who was of the former, and who of the later Sort; but could not by the
tendering the former Oath, which both Sorts refused. Hence he, out of Kindness
to the Loyal, made another Oath, which he thought These would, and Those would
not take. And this is all the apparent Reason of his former Assertion; except
He, or Bishop Andrews might be of the general Opinion of Catholics, that, that
Oath was begun and continued, with design to distinguish them from Protestants.
For, besides this, to think, as some Speculators seem to do, that K. James
designed the very Action of taking the Oath, though the Sense of it were held
True by Catholics, to be a new Sign, to signify as much as these Words, I am
no Catholic, without either Law or other Declaration, is a Conceit as odd, as
it is groundless. Besides that, these Words writ by Chance, as it were, should
have so much weight put in them, seem to me so unreasonable, that I think it
very reasonable to be of the contrary Opinion. But the Truth is, there is a
grand Mistake in the Ground of this Objection, and these Authors are indeed
misrepresented; for neither of them say, that the Oath of Supremacy was
intended at first, when it was made in Q. Elizabeth's Days, to distinguish
Catholics from Protestants; nor can it with any Sense be so thought, as has
been shown above. And as for King James, his Words are these; As for the Oath
of Supremacy, the Intention of the CONTINUATION of it, was to the end to
discover who were Roman Catholics, and who Protestants. With which words it
may very well consist, that since Catholics, some out of Ignorance, others out
of interest or bad Principles, had Universally refused it, and so, had made
themselves liable to discovery, by not taking it; he, like a wise and politic
Prince, made use of their Refusing him that just Duty, by continuing the said
Oath, so to discover them, without any necessity, that he should either impose
a new Sense on it, or declare, that the Original Sense was indeed opposite to
Catholic Faith, or a Sign really distinguishing them from Protestants by any
Act or Intention of the State; but only by their own private Opinion, that the
Oath clash't with their Faith.

6. A Fourth Objection is grounded upon this, That Q. Elizabeth, who made the
Oath, made several Laws to destroy the Romish Faith, by hindering any Priest by
Authority of the Sea of Rome, to Preach it here, and so to abolish his Pastoral
Authority; which seems to argue, that in her Oath she also denied it; and upon
this, that Protestants, who endeavor to have the same Faith destroyed, may now
give this Oath a New Sense, in order to bring about that end; and in this
Sense, which we cannot deny, offer it us now. But I deny the Consequence;
because, it is most likely, that she denied nothing by this Oath, but what is
denied by it as understood in the Sense of the before mentioned Acts, and her
Admonition; which last assures us, that who ever takes it in that Sense, shall
be esteemed her good and obedient Subjects, and freed from all the Penalties of
that Act; which is all we need aim at. And all She aimed at by the Oath, was
(as we have seen) to know, who were to be esteemed her good and obedient
Subjects: And not to destroy by it, that Article of our Faith, equally
consistent with Allegiance, as the rest; which it is certain, she did not
intend to destroy, by that Oath; though by other Means, she might then, or
rather afterward, (for it was long after that, she made those severe Laws
against the Catholic Faith) intend to destroy, not only that, but also all
other Articles of our Faith, which were opposite to hers; that so she might make
the State-Religion increase, and not that she might know who were her good
Subjects. Moreover, it is unlikely, that she should give an Oath, which she
explicated in any other Sense, than that in which she explicated it by Law;
since the giving it in that other Sense, could proceed from no other Design,
than of having that other Sense denied by the Taker; which he could not, in our
Supposition deny, because he knew nothing of it. And hence, my Opinion is, that
her only Design, was not to have any Tenet of Catholic Religion, Doctrine, or
Persuasion denied; but to know, who would be True to her, against the Pope,
King of Spain, and Queen of Scotland. Moreover, it is evident, that Information
given of a Horrid Treason, caused our good King to enjoin its being taken now.

7. But though it be supposed, that we are out in these Speculations, and that
the Queen afterward had a design, to make some Tenet of Catholic Religion be
denied by it, (and the same be said at present) yet she used an Instrument,
that was inefficacious, to bring about that Effect; except a Sense opposite to
Catholic Religion or Doctrine, had been so put into it, that a Catholic might
have been obliged to take it in that Sense: For, if he be still at Liberty to
take it only in a True Sense, and does this, he denies not his Religion. Now,
that a Catholic was and is still at Liberty to take it only in that true Sense
given it by Law, is evident; because, if he will take it in that, and will not
take it in any other, he is freed from all Penalties that may force him to take
it. Add, that the Queen's Admonition, being allowed by a Statute Law, made in
the Fifth of her Reign; the Allowance to take it in that Sense, cannot Legally
be denied any.

8. A Fifth Objection arises from our swearing to defend all Jurisdictions,
etc. annexed to the Crown; among which is the Power to execute Laws, made
against what we hold to be Christ's Doctrine: And who can speak or fight in
defense of such a Power? But that part we may well swear: For, it is no more
than to swear she had all Regal Power; and among the rest, a Legal Power,
inherent in her as Queen, to execute those Laws; which, being a Truth, we may
defend, without holding it reasonable for her to use or exercise it: As we
truly say, a Man has Power or Ability, to do both Reasonable and Unreasonable
Things; but deny, that he has reason, or a reasonable power to do these
latter, and we only swear to defend that she has a Power or Ablity given her
by Law, to destroy what is by us, not by them, esteemed Christian Faith or
certain Truth. Or it may be said that they never intended to give the King a
Power to destroy Christ's true Faith or any Truth: not consequently to destroy
our persuasion of the Pope's purely Spiritual Authority in England, and other
Dominions given by Christ: Or that they gave him a Power to destroy ours, only
in supposition of no such Authority in the Pope; which supposition being false,
they gave no Power to destroy our belief of it: and hence we swear not that the
King has such a Power.

9. A sixth is, because most think that Sir Thomas Moor and Bishop Fisher (who
were such knowing and good Men, that it would be very hard to imagine they
either misunderstood or acted amiss) died for not taking this Oath: And all
know that our Catholic predecessors from the time it was made till our times,
constantly refused it, which they would not have done, in case they had not
thought it denied either some Article of their Faith, or at least, some
Theological or otherwise certain Truth. At least, the First of those, who lived
and talked with those that made this Oath, had better Opportunites to know the
sense of it than we: and so we have more reason to stand to their Judgments
than our own. As to the First part, it is certain that Sir Thomas Moor and
Bishop Fisher, died long before our Oath was made; to wit, in King Henry the
8th days: when as ours was not made till the first of Queen Elizabeth, and so
could not die for refusing what was not made till after they were dead. Nay,
they were both dead before either of the two Oaths of Supremacy, made in the
days of King Henry the 8th, were enacted. What then they truly died for, was
for speaking (as it was pretended at least) against King Henry the Eight's
being Head of the Church, which is quite different from being Governor of the
Realm; or at least, more apt to bear a false sense; and they had reason to fear
the King meant to assume by those words, an undue Power, because he would not
be contented with the fair play of the Explication quantum per Legem Dei licet,
added in the Convocation, by Bishop Fisher's means; who, that explication being
added, concurred to the Title of Head of the Church with the rest; the
equivalent whereof we have to ours, and that by Act of Parliament. But Queen
Elizabeth, disliking what they dislik't, made it Law that the Act that gave her
Father that Title should remain repealed, and left those Words Head of the
Church, out of the Oath; and so our case is neither the same, nor like theirs.
Besides, it is not clear that either of them did dye for refusing to
acknowledge Henry the 8th's very Headship attributed to him by an Act of
Parliament, made indeed before their Death, but during their Imprisonment. For
it is certain they were both Imprisoned on that very day, wherein Elizabeth
Barton, called the Holy Maid of Kent, was Executed: and that the cause of their
Imprisonment was, for refusing then the Oath lately before enacted for
acknowledging the King's Marriage with Queen Ann lawful, and her Issue, the
Princess Elizabeth then born, lawfully begotten, or true Heir of the Crown,
(vid. Sanderum dep. Schis. Anglicano. l. 1. p. 86. edit. Ingolstad.) Moreover,
it is known, that very great Saints died in material Errors. And that such
Errors did not prejudice their Sanctity, nor Martyrdom either. Witness S.
Cyprian of Afric, etc.

10. As to the Second, I confess, those who lived in the Parliament's Days,
which enacted the Oath, might have understood the Sense of the Oath, as well,
or better than I: For, who am I that I should pretend to have as good or better
Understanding, than any of them had? Next, I say, that the first of them, at
least, had something a better Opportunity, by discoursing with that Part of the
Parliament that worded the Oath and Act; which perhaps, only knew the Meaning
of both, better than other Folks. Yet, whether they, or at least, more than a
few of them, went this way to work, is not a thing that we have any knowledge
of; and, if they did not use this Means, we are upon equal Terms with them, or
rather better. For, we have the Oath, and all Statutes concerning it, as well
as they had: And, besides this, have several Treatises writ on both sides,
which they had not. But, as many have better Judgments, and better
Opportunities to understand Divinity, Philosophy, or Law, than others, and yet
fall short of Understanding so well as they, either by not looking at all,
looking slightly, the wrong way, or not hap'ning to think of so good Reasons as
others do: so, it may happen in our Case, as well as it happened in the Case of
the Oath of Allegiance; which, neither as to the Sense of the Words, nor the
Truth of that Sense, seemed to be nigh so well understood formerly, by those
that lived with its Makers, as by us that live now. Nay, some fancied no less
than Three Heresies in it, which Ghosts have since disappeared; and more than
one is not now so much as pretended to be in that Oath. And the Excellent
Answer of the Three Treatises of the Jesuits, writ against that Oath, shows
plainly, there is neither Heresy nor Error in it, but honest and just Duty to
our Sovereign.

11. This being so, the Question ought to be, Whether of us do actually see
best into this Matter? And since neither We nor They could see into it, but by
the Reasons brought on both sides, those of us must be judged to see best into
the Sense of the Words, who bring the best Reasons. Now, those I have here
brought for the Pope's Pastoral, or purely Spiritual Power of the Keys not
being excluded, show to me far better than any I find them bring, to prove the
contrary: And it is most likely, they brought the best Reasons they had, as
they use to do in other Matters. But, though they had better than they did
produce, and also better than these I have produced, yet, since I know not that
they had them, and also think it most likely they had them not, it is all one
to me; who being able to consider Reasons on both sides, may act according to
the best Reason I can get; it being unreasonable for a Man that can judge of
Reason, to be guided by other Men's Judgments farther than they have, or, which
is all one, produce Reason: The Supposal of which in them, showing them the
way, is the only Reason why others should be guided by them: For, why should
one be guided by another, that knows the way no better than he, and in our Case
worse? Moreover, the adhering to Predecessors Opinions, what ever Reason there
be against them, is a certain way for the World, never to get out of any Error,
unless our Forefathers be supposed to be always Infallible; the Contrary to
which, frequent Experience has shown. So that, this Argument of blindly
following our Forefathers in Things subject to Reason; which seemed so
Plausible at first, will be found, when well looked into, of a most pernicious
Consequence.

12. Neither is the leaving of their Judgment in this particular, the leaving
of their Faith. For, unless we will wrong them, by making them hold for Faith
what was not Faith, they could hold nothing of Faith but what was taught, or
rather in this case given, by Christ. And so much we hold as well as they, and
conceive the Oath does not at all touch it. In this indeed we may differ from
them, who might think it does. But, whether such words mean so or so, is far
from a question of Faith. It Is at most a difference in Opinion about the meaning
of a Law, such a difference as every body has almost with every body, and
which, if it were not unblamable, there would be no living without blame in the
world, where there always has and always will be, as many Opinions as heads. If
we be in the right, as the reasons alleged persuade us we are, nothing can be
more preposterously alleged against us then their Example. For, they followed
the dictates of their Conscience, and we should go against ours? They had
indeed renounced their Faith if they had taken the Oath in Case they were
persuaded, though untruly, that it did deny their Faith; we cannot renounce
Faith by taking the Oath while we are persuaded it meddles not with Faith; no,
though our persuasion should happen to be false; but we should plainly refuse
to do our duty, which we think the Oath only requires. In short, they did well
and we should do ill.

13. But perchance they and we may not differ even in this Opinion. For it does
not follow, They denied the Oath, therefore they thought the Oath denied Faith.
For they might think the Oath denied some other truth or Probability, which
they thought they could not, and so would not forswear. For Example, they might
think it true or probable, that the Queen was not Temporal Governor in
Spiritual or mixed Causes, and over Ecclesiastical Persons; because they might
think it true, or probable, that these Causes and Persons were exempted, Jure
Divino, from Secular Jurisdiction, and did belong to the Pope, as many do at
this Day; and others might think, the Pope had a direct or indirect Temporal
Power to depose the King, either by Divine Right of Quodcumque ligaveris, etc.
or by the Title of King John's Donation, etc. And hence, could not swear, they
thought no such thing. But hence arises.

14. A Seventh Scruple, How one may lawfully swear these things are false,
which one does not know to be so? And how can any know them to be so, when he
sees great Scholars hold the contrary? For a full Answer to this, I remit the
Reader to the Answer to the Jesuits Loyalty, and the Second Treatise of it. In
short, I reply, That of those, who held these Things to be False, some think
they certainly knew them to be so; and these certainly may swear they are so.
Others hold them to be so; but are Conscious to themselves, that they hold this
upon Reasons only more probable, than are brought for the other side; and
though these may not lawfully swear they are false, yet they may swear, that
they are so in their Judgment or Conscience; because, that they are so in their
Judgment, is certainly true. And this is all the Oath does or can reasonably
require of the Generality of those, unto whom it is offered; they being able to
say and swear, what they hold in these Questions; and not able to say or swear
they certainly know what they hold to be true. And this is sufficient for
securing Allegiance; since People use not to act contrary to what they hold,
though they hold it upon probable Reasons only: On the other side, those that
are certainly or probably persuaded they are true, cannot swear they are, so
much as in their Judgment or Conscience, false; and so cannot take this Oath.
But I judge, they may find Reason enough to alter their Judgment, if they read
late Authors upon this Subject, to whom I remit them.

15. And in this case we make a Schism, (as some are pleased to call it, to
fright Timorous Consciences which are used to abhor the horrible Sin, which
that word most commonly signifies) or Division only in Opinion; which is
certainly known, and confessed to be in other Cases, lawful. And, I hope, they
will not argue, that those who leave their Opinions, will also leave their
Faith; there being no Consequence from one to the other. All the Schools, that
is in a manner, all the Teaching Part of the Church, make Schisms daily, and
are divided from one another in this Sense; and, which is more, are never
likely to leave this kind of Schismatizing, and return to an Union; or rather,
it is impossible they should. For, how can it be expected, that in Things
depending on Opinions, Men's Fancies, Tempers, Education, etc. their Judgment
should light to be the same? Neither do we condemn our Pious Ancestors, (as
some object) but applaud their Fortitude, who choose rather to die, than to
swear a thing which they thought either false or opposite, if not to Catholic
Faith, at least to Truth. What we condemn, is only their Opinions; and this
upon better Reasons against them, than they brought for them. And who can
condemn us for this? or look upon us the worse for receding from them upon such
Terms, as every good Man is bound to recede from his former self?

16. An Eighth Objection is, That be it how it will, whether former Catholics,
since Queen Elizabeth's Days, had reason to do what they did or no, or the Oath
in it self contains the King's just Right or no; yet now, the constant taking
the Oath by Protestants, and refusing it by Catholics; and this for so
considerable a Tract of Time, is become a Distinctive Sign between Catholics
and Protestants; and so, the Taking it implies a Renouncing of Faith, which
consequently must needs be Scandalous and Unlawful? I answer, Signs are but of
two sorts, Extrinsecal, which appertain not to the Thing at all, but are merely
Arbitrary; as that of the Jews wearing a Yellow Hat at Rome: Or else,
Intrinsecal, which are connected with the very Nature of the Thing; And this
either as Cause with Effect, as the Whiteness of the Ears of Corn is a Sign of
Harvest approaching; or as Effect with Cause, as Smoke is a Sign of Fire: Or,
lastly, as one Part seen, is a Sign of the Presence of the Whole, with which
it is connected. One of these Kinds of Signs, then, the taking this Oath must
be, or it is none at all. Again, it can be but one of them, they being
contradistinguish't to one another. First then, if it be only an Extrinsecal
Sign of being a Protestant, then it must be said, that there is no Harm in it
at all, taking it as in it self, nor does it at all relate to Faith; which yet
is contrary to the Sentiment of all those who opposed the Oath hitherto, and
the Opinion of former Catholics, who refused to take it: Nay, I much fear, to
the Judgment likewise of our present Objecters, however they are pleased, that
they may make something of this Objection, to lay it aside. Besides, the
swearing to a Form of Words which have a meaning under them either true or
false, and express some Tenets (either relating or not relating to Faith) is a
very odd thing to make an Extrinsecal sign of. Mere sounds may serve for
Extrinsecal marks to distinguish Parrats, but words made to express men's
Conceptions, will necessarily reach their Minds, and affect their interior, or
have something Intrinsecal in them, and so if they judge differently of their
meaning, will distinguish them Intrinsecally, do we all we can. Secondly, to
allege in this Occasion, that the Taking this Oath is any kind of Intrinsecal
sign, that is either Cause, Effect or a Part of Protestant Religion as
distinguished from Catholic, is as void of reason as the other, unless we beg
the Question, and suppose it granted to our hands that the Oath contains a
sense opposite to Catholic Faith; without which proved or admitted, it is
impossible to pretend, it is a sign Intrinsecally distinguishing those two
parties. Truth is, these Objecters should say that it is only an Extrinsecal
Sign, if the nature of the Thing would permit them; for if it have an
Intrinsecal Connection with any Tenet contrary to the Religion of Catholics, it
must necessarily be, (even in their own opinion) malum in se, and so, the
Refusal of it should, as all solid reason requires, be settled upon it is
Opposition to what they judge Catholic Faith, and not on it is being a bare
Sign of Protestant Religion; and this a pitiful one too, as never having been
constituted such by any Public Authority, but merely taken up by the
ill-grounded Fancies of private men.

17. But, say they, we abstract whether the Oath bear a good or bad sense, and
affirm that even taking it in this abstractive State, it is a Distinctive Sign.
I reply, It Is very hard, when one takes an Oath, to abstract whether it have a
good or bad Sense^ and therefore, I much doubt, it will not pass current.
Christianity, that an Oath, which consists of Words that have a Meaning in
them, should bear a Consideration which is indifferent to a good or bad
Meaning. Besides, I like this Abstraction worse than any part of the Discourse:
For, it seems to signify thus much, Let the Words import only a just Duty to my
Prince, or how you will; yet, if our Ancestors have refused to pay their
Allegiance, by taking this Oath when lawfully administered, I will prefer their
Example before my own Duty.

18. And, as it is impossible, to rank the taking this Oath, under either Head
of a Distinctive Sign, so it is most evident, it is not held for such. For
first, (to omit the Laws and Lawmakers, of which enough above) the most
Learned Protestant Authors before cited, who interpret the Oath consistently
with our Faith, and as many as read, approve and abet them, (which includes
Princes, and the generality of the most Intelligent Men of our Nation) cannot
hold it, to argue a Distinction of one Religion from another. Next, the Test
proposed heretofore, to incapacitate Roman Catholics from bearing any Offices;
which imports a renouncing Transubstantiation, and other Points, plainly shows,
they did not think the taking this Oath distinguished them from Protestants.
Again, which of our Neighbors, seeing those who take the Oaths live in all
other Regards like Catholics, judges them, ipso facto, upon the taking them,
to become Protestants? Not one. It remains then, that only our selves fancy to
our selves, it is a Distinctive Sign, and cry it up for such, and are only
seconded by some few others, who hear how fiercely our weaker Brethren inveigh
against those who take it, as Heretics. And such Distinctive Signs as these,
we should have had good store, had it not pleased God to raise from time to
time, some few good Men, who loved Truth so well, as to dare to be Honest. Had
it not been for Widdrington, and one or two more, the Oath of Allegiance would
shortly have got to be a Distinctive Sign too, and the Deposing Power an
eminent One. No fewer than three Heresies were said to be in that Oath; and
certainly, that which contains three Heresies, deserves with far better Right
to be made a Distinctive Sign, than the Oath of Supremacy, which was thought
to contain but One at most. Now, the Pretense of such Distinctive Signs as
these, is so far from deterring Ingenuous Men from writing against it, that it
rather induces an obligation in them to oppose with Reason, the loud
insignificant Noise, which stuns so many: The Honor of our Catholic Faith,
and the Duty to our Prince and State, being both concerned, that such ill
grounded Pretenses do not get Head. And as for the Scandal, which they will
needs take when none gives it, and raise by their Noise, when by using calm
Reason they might settle it, we refer them to St. Bernard, who tells them;
Melius est ut scandalum ortatar quam at verum non dicatur. It Is better Scandal
should arise, than Truth not to be told. And to St. Thomas of Aquin, who says;
Ob nullam scandalum relinquenda est veritatis defensio: The Patronage of Truth
is not to be left off for any Scandal whatsoever.

19. The last Scruple arises from the Consideration of all that has been
hitherto said: For, after all this Dispute, it is not absolutely impossible but
that the Oath might have been intended by the Makers of it, to deny the Pope's
purely Spiritual Power of the Keys, even in any Case or Contingency in England,
and other his Majesty's Dominions; though we have shown this to be altogether
improbable; and, hence, peradventure, they do actually deny it, who take this
Oath. But, I answer, That notwithstanding what Possibility of Truth soever
there be in the Antecedent, there is no danger at all of the Consequent: For, I
am as certain as that I live, and know my own Thoughts, that I understand the
Words in a Sense not opposite either to Catholic Faith, or to any Truth
whatsoever. Next, I am certain I take the Oath in that Sense only in which I
understand it: And hence, I am certain likewise, that I deny not my Christian
Faith, or any other Truth. Only, I may perchance have some small Doubt, (as I
may have of the Words of many Public Oaths in the World, which are
notwithstanding generally held to be lawfully taken) whether the Sense I take
them in, be meant by Law. But, however this Matter be, or whether I doubt, or
not doubt, in any manner at all, sure I am, I do not swear this doubtful thing;
to wit, than my Sense of them is given by Law; but only acknowledge upon Oath,
that the Sense I have of them is, in or according to my judgment, True.

20. And hence, I am induced to believe, if these Reasons should help to effect
a general Persuasion, that the Oath means not to exclude the Pope's, or other
Foreign Prelates Pastoral Power in all Contingencies, that then, after such a
general Persuasion, the Oath may be lawfully and freely taken. In the mean
time, because no tenderness can be too great in such matters, to avoid giving
Offense to any, whether of our own or of a different Communion, who, if they
understand the Oath otherwise, will be apt to judge according to their own
Apprehension, that to take the Oath is to renounce the Religion which the Taker
professes: I conceive it advisable, that who takes it declare plainly
beforehand, in what Sense he understands it; viz. that he takes it not in the
most large Sense of the Words, which might seem to some to deny his Religion;
but only in that Sense, which to the best of his Judgment is assigned it by
Law; or in that Sense in which Learned Protestants, allowed and approved by
Public Authority, have expounded it, and understood it to be the Law-Sense of
it; or that he understands the Power meant by the Law to be acknowledged in the
King, is the Power of the Sword, not of the Keys: Likewise, that the Keys are
not denied to the Pope, or other Foreign Prelate, but the Sword. Or rather,
because the Power of the Keys has been stretched by some to Temporals, to the
disposing even of Kingdoms, and such like Exorbitancies; which have not only
been claimed but practiced, and the Power to do them all the while called the
Power of the Keys; it were fit to make this Declaration in words not liable to
Exception. For which, I know none more proper, than those before mentioned of
the Arch Bishop of Armagh; that the King only has the Supreme, External,
Coactive Jurisdiction, or Power of the Sword, within his Dominions, over all
Persons, and in all Things or Causes; and that no Foreign Prelate either has,
or ought to have any Part thereof: and that he understands the Oath so, and no
otherwise, and so takes it. By this means he will deal uprightly, and heartily,
and unblameably before God and Man, and without any Shadow of Offense or
Scandal, whether to Protestants or Catholics.

Conclusion.
1. HAving been longer than I intended, I conceive it not amiss to take a short
view of what has been said, at parting. The whole in Truth lies in a narrow
compass: who refuses the Oath, for what concerns the Pope, must either think
that his Pastoral Power is denied by it; or that what without question is
denied, viz, That External Coercive Judiciary Power, which he has in some other
Princes Dominions, and heretofore had here, is so his right, that it can by no
Humane Power be taken away. There is no more in the Case. For, as to what
relates to the King, I take it to be very clear.

2. As for the First, the expressions of the Oath are so general, that who
looks upon them as they lie there, and judges according to their bare sound,
has reason to except against them; so much reason, that were they taken out,
and digested into Propositions, to be considered and judged of purely by the
import of the Terms, perhaps there is not a Catholic in the World, at least I
believe there are but very few, who would approve them. In likelihood our
Ancestors, who refused the Oath, looked upon them no otherwise; which I the
rather believe, because I see that many, I think the most, go no farther at
this day. And then it is no wonder that They refused, and These condemn it. All
Catholics generally would refuse and condemn it too, if they looked upon it in
the same manner.

3. But who look upon the same expressions, as part of an Oath contained in an
Act, and reflect that the Oath is declared to be for the better Observation and
maintenance of that Act; and therefore, and in force of the general Rule of
understanding words according to the matter spoken of, ought to be understood
only of what the Act speaks: That all the Power, of which the Act speaks, is
Power repugnant to the Ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown; Power both Foreign
and Usurped; Power burdensome and intolerably chargeable to the Subject: That
this Limitation is not only in the Title, and Preamble, but in the very Branch
which abolishes the Popes Power, where the intent is particularly expressed to
be, that All usurped and foreign power be forever extinguish't: That the Popes
Pastoral Power, if it may be called Foreign cannot be thought Usurped, by a
Christian who reads the Scripture, and sees S. Peter, and in him his Successor,
'empower'd there and commanded by Christ to feed his Sheep: That, where a Law
declares it is own intent, it is not for others to think it intended more, or
otherwise then as it declares: That no more was extinguished, then was intended
to be extinguished, with what else is said in the foregoing Papers; may find
reason to judge, that the Meaning of the Words of the Oath is not altogether so
large as their Sound, and that all the Power denied there signifies no more
than all the Power spoken of in the Act; and, therefore, that Pastoral Power is
not renounced; that which is renounced being limited by the Act to Oppressive,
and Usurped, and to Soveraignty-repugnant Power.

4. Again, who considers that the Oath Actually is understood in this manner by
those of greatest note in the Church of England: That Archbishop Bramhall
tells us (Schism Guarded p. 311.) That by this Act there is no foreign Power
abolished, but only that which is repugnant to the Ancient Laws of England, and
to the Prerogative Royal: p. 340. That Jurisdiction purely Spiritual (the same
which I call Pastoral) does neither disinherit the Prince nor the P^ers, nor
destroy and Annul the Laws and Prerogative Royal, nor vex the Kings Liege
people, nor impoverish the Subject, nor drain the Kingdom of its Treasures,
etc. infint, is not guilty of any of the grievances of which our Laws complain.
It is the external Regiment of the Church by new Roman Laws, etc. that are
apparently guilty of all these evils. These Papal Innovations we have taken
away indeed -- more than these Innovations we have taken nothing away, that I
know of: page 353. We have not renoanced the Substance of the Papacy, except
the substance of the Papacy do consist in coactive Power: who considers besides
that these things are not whispered in Corners, but owned in the face of the
World; nor the private fancies of a single man, (his Book being lately
Reprinted after the Authors Death, with the countenance of more considerable
Authority than Books usually have, and the same may be said of the other
Protestant Authors above cited) will find himself put to it, if he be urged, to
make out how he comes to pretend to understand the meaning of Protestant Laws,
better than Protestants themselves.

5. It may very well be, that a Protestant may be willing to swear, what a
Catholic cannot: because one may think true, what the other does not: But,
where they both agree in the thing, and what the Protestant means when he
swears, the Catholic thinks true as well as he, and yet will not swear the
same truth in the same words, looks like a Riddle. If the words All Power
signify All Usurped Power to a Protestant, I see not but they may signify the
same to a Catholic too. And, if it be known that he means by them as the
Protestant does, it is plain, They cannot signify otherwise. For the
signification of words is nothing but the known meaning of those who use them.
And though they should signify otherwise elsewhere, they can signify no more
but so, where it is known no more but so is meant by them.

6. This difficulty then, in two words, is only this: Whether All Power in the
Oath means absolutely All, or All the Power mentioned and intended by the Act,
for the observation whereof the Oath was made. That General words are
ordinarily, I had almost said always, confined by Circumstances, is a thing so
known, that it is impertinent perhaps to mention; at least, to bring examples of
it. Whether Those words are confined in This Case, is all we have to consider,
and to every man's Judgment and Conscience I leave it. Only who is not satisfied
with what has been said, has still I conceive, a safe way of proceeding, by
declaring before hand, if he take the Oath, that he takes it in the sense of
the Law, as understood by all Protestant Writers, none excepted, particularly
Archbishop Bramhal; which, as was shown, seems to amount to a Consent of the
Nation; After which I for my part see no cause of Scruple remaining for the
first Point.

7. For the second, who is persuaded that the Power Renounced by the Oath, does
indeed belong to the Pope by Divine Right, (For what is settled by Human, may
by Human Authority be unsettled) undoubtedly cannot take the Oath. But he
should do well to consider, how he comes to be so persuaded. This is no place
to treat the Question: I shall only say, that, if any one take that Persuasion
for Faith, he is certainly mistaken; and that many of the most Learned among
Catholics are mistaken too, if it be true. It is a Power which heretofore has
drawn perpetual complaints from our Catholic Ancestors, and many Laws for
Redress of the Inconveniences they suffered by it. It is a Power for whose
sake our Religion is at this day aspersed with the imputation of Inconsistence
with the Ease of Subjects, and Security of the Commonwealth. Who will maintain
it, engages himself to clear it from these Objections. For, if he do not, he
will not clear himself from doing his part to bring his Country again into what
the Law calls Bondage, and his Religion into the Scandalous shame of being
indeed guilty of what is laid to her Charge. No man can go about it, without
maintaining in the first place that our Catholic Ancestors complained always
without cause, and felt nothing when they cried out of the burden. If They had
reason to complain, Protestants have none to endure what they complained of,
nor can Catholics of all men expect they should.

8. In short, there is nothing does more harm in the world then mistaken Zeal,
which, under a mistaken pretense of Religion, we see transports Men to things
the most contrary to Religion that can be. It Is not to be thought that in our
Communion there is no Humane Frailty. Opinions have been broacht concerning the
Pope, and are to this day maintained, prejudicial, to say no more, both to the
Sovereignty of Princes, and Hierarchy of the Church. Whether the Power in
question to exercise an independent, Sovereign, Coactive, Judiciary Authority,
in all Princes Dominions, and all Bishops Diocesses, upon the matter to govern
the Church and World alone, be not of the number, They should do well to
consider, who refuse the Oath for it is sake. For if it be, their Zeal is
plainly a mistaken Zeal; which, as it uses to do, deceives and carries them
just contrary to what they mean, the Scandal, and, to their Power, ruin of
Religion, which they think to preserve. For my part I beg of God the grace
rather to suffer the loss of my own life, than deny the Pope, or any man any
just right; and I beg the same grace to preserve me from abetting unjust things
even in the Pope. Time has been when England has seen three Hundred Foreigners
sent over at once, by the Power in question, to be provided of the first Vacant
Benefices. I should think my self neither good Englishman, nor good Christian,
if I should obstinately stand for a Power to commit such Exorbitancies.

FINIS.

