THE TRIAL OF THE LORD RUSSEL.
July 13. 1683. My Lord Russel was set to the Bar, within the Bar. Clerk of the
Crown. William Russel, hold up thy hand which he did Then this Indictment was
read, which is as follows.

London.
THe Jurors of our Sovereign Lord the King upon their Oaths present, That
William Russel late of London Esquire together with other false Traitors, as a
false Traitor against the most Illustrious and Excellent Prince, our Sovereign
Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King, his natural Lord; not having the Fear of God in his Heart, nor
weighing the Duty of his Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the
Instigation of the Devil; and the true Duty and natural Obedience, which true
and faithful Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the King, toward him our said Lord
the King do bear, and of right ought to bear, wholly withdrawing; and with his
whole Strength intending the Peace and Common Tranquillity of this Kingdom of
England to disturb, and War and Rebellion against our said Lord the King to
move, and stir up; and the Government of our said Lord the King within this
Kingdom of England to subvert; and our said Lord the King from his Title,
Honor, and Kingly Name of the Imperial Crown of this his Kingdom of England,
to put down, and deprive; and our said Lord the King to Death and final
Destruction to bring and put; the second day of November, in the Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second King of England, etc. the 34th,
and diverse other days and times, as well before as after, at the Parish of St.
Michael Bassishaw, in the Ward of Bassishaw London, aforesaid, maliciously and
traitorously, with diverse other Traitors, to the Jurors aforesaid unknown, he
did conspire, compass, imagine and intend, our said Lord the King, his Supreme
Lord, not only of his Kingly State, Title, Power and Government of this his
Kingdom of England, to deprive, and throw down; but also our said Lord the
King, to kill, and to Death to bring and put; and the ancient Government of
this his Kingdom of England to change, alter, and wholly to subvert; and a
Miserable Slaughter amongst the Subjects of our said Lord the King, through his
whole Kingdom of England, to cause and procure; and Insurrection and Rebellion
against our said Lord the King to move, procure, and stir up, within this
Kingdom of England. And to fulfill and perfect the said most horrible Treasons,
and Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations, and Purposes aforesaid, he the said
William Russel, together with other false Traitors, as a false Traitor, then
and there, and diverse other Days and Times, as well before as after,
Maliciously, Traitorously, and advisedly, between themselves, and with diverse
other Traitors, to the Jurors aforesaid unknown, they did meet together,
consult, agree, and conclude, and every of them, then and there, did consult,
agree and conclude, Insurrection and Rebellion against our Sovereign Lord the
King, within this Kingdom of England, to move and stir up; and the Guards for
the Preservation of the Person of our said Lord the King, to seize and destroy,
against the Duty of his Allegiance, against the Peace, etc. And also against
the Form of the Statutes, etc.


Cl. of Cr. How say thou, art thou Guilty, or not Guilty?


L. Russel. My Lord, may I not have a Copy of the Matter of Fact laid against
me, that I may know what to answer to it?


L. Chapter J. My Lord, we can grant you nothing till you have pleaded. Therefore
that which is put to you now is, whether you say you are Guilty, or not Guilty?


L. Russel. My Lord, I am not Guilty.


Cl. of Cr. Culprit, How will thou be tried?


L. Russel. By God and my Country.


Cl. of Cr. God send thee a good deliverance.


L. Russel. My Lord I thought a Prisoner had never been arraigned and tried at
the same time, I have been a close Prisoner.


L. Chapter Just. For Crimes of this Nature, My Lord, we do it continually.


L. Russel. It is hard, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord has no reason to complain for want of notice, for since
Monday seven-night he had notice of his Trial, and the matters alleged against
him he had notice of, for Questions were put to him about this matter, he has
been fairly dealt with, he has had the liberty of Counsel to advise him; there
has been no sort of liberty denied him, which becomes any Subject to have in
this condition.


L. Chapter J. My Lord, I do not know whether you hear Mr. Attorney. He says your
Lordship has had a great deal of Favor shown you already, in that you have
been acquainted with the Crimes for which you are now Indicted, that you have
had a great deal of warning given you, that you have had the liberty of
Counsel, which has not been known granted to any under your Lordships
Circumstances. He says, he doubts not but your Lordship is prepared for your
Defense, because you have had so much knowledge, and warning of the Time and
Matter for which you were to be called in question.


L. Russel. My Lord, I am much to seek, I only heard some general Questions,
and I have Witnesses, that I believe are not yet in Town, nor will be, I
believe, till Night; I think it very hard I cannot have one day more.


Mr. At. Genesis Monday seven-night your Lordship had notice.


L. Russel. I did not know the matter I was charged with.


Mr. At. Genesis Yes certainly, for I was with you my self, my Lord; and those
Questions you were examined upon, were a Favor to you, that you might know
what the matter was you were accused of.


L. Chapter J. My Lord, without the Kings consent we cannot put off the Trial; if
the Kings Council think not fit to put it off, we cannot grant your Lordships
Request in this Case.


L. Russel. I would desire a Copy of the Panel of the Jury, that I might
consider of it; for how else can I make any just Challenge? I thought the Law
had been very favorable to Men upon their Lives; and therefore it had allowed
people to have some little notice.


L. Chapter J. Has not your Lordship had a Copy of the Panel? I think your
Lordship was allowed one, We gave Order your Lordship should have a Copy of
the Panel.


Mr. At. Genesis We did indulge him so far, that he might have a Note of all the
Men returned.


L. Russel. I never had a Copy of the Panel.


L. Chapter J. It was the fault of your Lordships Servants then; for I gave Order
for it my self. It Is such a favor, that in regard a man's life lies at stake,
we never did deny it, to my knowledge. And therefore in this Case I gave order
to the Secondary to deliver a Copy. I know the King did not design to be hard
upon my Lord in his Trial, but that he should have as fair a Trial as ever any
Noble Person had.


L. Russel. I pray I may have a Copy then.


Sir G. Jeff. If my Lord had sent his Agents, and it had been refused, there
had been something in it.


Mr. At. Genesis Secondary Normansell was with me, and I gave him my Allowance,
though it was not his Right.


L. Chapter Just. That my Lord may not be surprised, what think you of giving my
Lord time till the Afternoon, and try some of the rest in the mean time?


Mr. At. Genesis Truly, my Lord, if I could imagine it were possible for my Lord
to have any Witnesses, I should not be against it.


L. Russel. It Is very hard.


Mr. At. Genesis Do not say so, the King does not deal hardly with you, but I am
afraid it will appear you would have dealt more hardly with the King: You would
not have given the King an hours notice for saving his Life.


Secondary Trotman. I gave my Brother Normansell a Copy of the Panel on my
side, and hear that my Brother Normansell has said that he delivered a Copy.
Then Secondary Normansell was sent for, and the Court stayed for him some time.


Mr. Atwood. My Lord, a Gentleman told me, he did not know whether it was sit,
till he had consulted the Attorney General; afterward I had a Copy as it stood
then, not as it is now.


Mr. At. Genesis I desire my Lord may be asked who he sent for it?


L. Russel. I did not send for it; I inquired, and they said it would be
refused.


Mr. Atwood. No, the Gentleman had it with the fair Perriwig.


L. Chapter Just. It was delivered to your Servant, or Agent, what did you do with
it?


L. Russels Gent. Sir, the Gentleman gave me out of a Book some Names.


Sir Geo. Jeff. What did you with them?


L. Russels Gent. I writ them down, they were not perfect, I did not know what
they were.


L. Chapter Just. Sir, you were to blame not to deliver it to my Lord.


L. Russels Gent. I was not bound to deliver an imperfect thing to my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. Sir, you should have consulted your Lords advantage, so as to
have delivered any thing for his good.


L. Russels Gent. My Lord was in the Tower, I was not admitted to my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you give it to my Lady?


L. Russels Gent. Yes, those Names I had, my Lady had.


Sir Geo. Jeff. How long ago was it?


Mr. Atwood. Tuesday or Wednesday last.


L. Chapter Just. To Lord Russels Servant. Look you, Sir, when had you this?


L. Russel. I had no Panel, I will assure you, delivered me; I had some Names
of people that they said were usually on Juries.


L. Chapter Just. They were the Names of the Jury.


L. Russel. They were only the Names of them that were like to be of the Jury,
no other Panel came to me.


L. C. J. M Lord, there can be no other Copy given, but the same that was
delivered; for your Lordship does know in this case, any person accused, as
your Lordship is, may challenge 35; and therefore there is a Return generally
of 3 score, or 4 score, and these are returned in case of your Lordships
Challenge. When you have challenged so many as you please, then the 12 men that
stand after your challenge are to be of the Jury: and therefore this is not
like a Panel made up by the Sheriff, in ordinary Causes between Man and Man;
there they make a formal Panel, from which they cannot depart, when that is
once returned; but here in Criminal Cases, because of the Challenge, they
return either 60 or 80. And I presume your Lordship was attended with the Names
delivered.


Sir Geo. Jeff. How many Names was delivered?


Mr. Atwood. Above 100.


L. Russel. I had nothing of a Panel delivered to me, but some Names.


L. Chapter Just. There was never any formal Panel delivered to any person
accused: The Copy of it is in Paper always.


L. Russel. How can I know who to challenge?


L. C. J. My Lord, the Copy of it is in your hands; your Lordship has been
deceived in this, by not understanding the true Nature of these things: if we
were to give you a new one, we could give you but such an one.


L. Russel. I had no Paper from the true Officer.


L. Chapter Just. No, but from your Servant.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, you will have cause to complain, if they are not the
same men we now shall call.


L. Chapter Just. My Lord, That Paper will guide your Lordship in your Challenges.


L. Russel. My Lord, I did not mind it, I put it away. My Lord, with your
Favor, I must needs insist upon having a Panel, and that you will put it off
till the Afternoon; I have a Witness that is not in Town. My Counsel told me it
was never done, or very seldom, Arraigning and Trying at the same time; except
in case of common Malefactors.


L. Chapter J. Mr. Attorney, why may not this Trial be respited till the Afternoon?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray call the Jury.


L. Chapter J. My Lord, the Kings Counsel think it not reasonable to put off the
Trial longer, and we cannot put it off without their Consent in this Case.


L. Russel. My Lord, it is hard, I thought the Law had allowed a pretty deal of
favor to a man when he came upon his life. How can I know to except against
men, that I never heard or saw one of them.


Cl. of Cr. You the Prisoner at the Bar; those good men that have been now
called, and here appear, are to pass between you and our Sovereign Lord the
King, upon your Life or Death, if you challenge any of them, you must speak as
they come to the Book to be sworn, before they are sworn.


L. Russel. My Lord, may not I have the use of Pen, Ink and Paper?


Court. Yes, my Lord.


L. Russel. My Lord, may I make use of any Papers I have?


L. Chapter Just. Yes by all means.


L^ Russel. May I have some body write to help my memory?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, a Servant.


L. Chapter Just. Any of your Servants shall assist you in writing any thing you
please for you.


L. Russel. My Wife is here my Lord to do it.


L. Chapter Just. If my Lady please to give her self the trouble.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, you may have two Persons to write for you, if you
please.


L. Russel. My Lord, here has been a name read, that I never saw in the list
of the Jury I had, I heard Sir Andrew Foster called.


L. Chapter Just. He is not called to be of the Jury.


Cl. of Cr. Call John Martin. He appears.


L. Russel. Are you a Freeholder of 40 s. a year, I hope none are allowed in
the Panel, but those that have Freeholds?


L. Chapter Just. There is no Panel made in London by Freeholders, we have very
few Freeholders capable of being impannel'd, because the Estates of the City
belong much to the Nobility and Gentlemen that live abroad, and to
Corporations: therefore in the City of London the Challenge of Freeholders is
excepted.


L. Russel. My Lord, I thought it had been always so, and the Law had been
clear in that Case throughout England, that no man ought to be tried for his
life, but by those that have Freeholds. My Lord, I remember I read the Statute
of 2 H. 5. where it is positive, that no Persons shall be Judged in cases of
life and death but by those that have 40 s. a year.


L. Chapter Just. My Lord, that Statute extends not to this Case. Read the Statute.


Cl. of Cr. Whereas Perjury is much used in the City of London upon persons,
etc,


L. Chapter Just. Is this the Statute your Lordship has read?


L. Russel. This is not in the case of Life and Death.


L. Chapter J. It is not, my Lord.


L. Russel, That that I read is positive. And if your Lordship will not allow
of it, I desire my Counsel may come and argue it, for it is a matter of Law, and
I cannot argue it, whether the Jury are not to be Freeholders.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. There is nothing mentioned in that Statute with relation to
the City of London indeed, but the necessity of the thing requires it.


Mr. At. Genesis It will not be material, it is a collateral point, for most of
the Jurie have Freeholds.


L. C. J. Do you allow the Exception?


Mr. At. Genesis No, my Lord.


L. C. J. Therefore we must, if my Lord stand upon it, hear his Counsel. My
Lord, we will hear your Counsel; what Counsel do you desire, my Lord?


L. Russel. The Counsel that were allotted me.


L. C. J. No you must have Counsel assigned by us. The Counsel that was
assigned elsewhere signifies nothing.


L. Russel. Mr. Pollexfen, Mr. Holt, and Mr. Ward.


The said persons were called, and came into Court. L. Chapter Just. To the
Counsel. Gentlemen, my Lord here desires Counsel, you are here assigned as
Counsel for my Lord Russel that is at the Bar, it is concerning a thing wherein
he doubts the Law, he would except to the Jury upon this account, to the Poll,
because they have not Freehold within the City of London, and he desires you
may be assigned his Counsel to make it out that this is a cause of Challenge.


Mr. At. Genesis It Is a case of Treason, Mr. Pollexfen.


Mr. Ward. We take it so.


Mr. Pollexf. My Lord, perhaps if we had more consideration of it we should
speak more, but if your Lordship pleases to hear us what we can say; first, we
take it, with submission, at common Law a Freehold was necessary to make a man
a Juryman. But that which falls out in this case is the Statute of 2 H. 5. c.
3. which Statute, I suppose, is here in Court; That Statute says this (if you
please I will quote the substance of it,) that none shall be admitted to pass
upon any Inquest upon the Trial of the Death of a man, except he have Lands and
Tenements of the yearly value of 40 s. Now we are here, I think, within the
Words of the Statute, and I take it to be no Question at all were we not in a
City and County. I think this would be no Question upon any Trial in any County
at large. The Statute does not make any exception or distinguishment between
Cities and Counties at large, but the Words are general, as I have opened them.
My Lord, the Statute does also provide in cases of Freehold, or 40 Marks. Now,
my Lord, to prove this Statute extends to London, though a City and County,
there are other Statutes that have been subsequent make it plain that it does
so extend. But before I speak to them, there is, 1 Inst. so. 157. that takes
notice of this Statute, and speaks it generally that the Freehold ought to be
in the same County, nor do I remember to have seen any Book that distinguishes
between Counties at large and Cities and Counties. But Statutes that have been
made concerning Cities and Counties are a plain declaration that this is meant
of Juries both in Cities and Counties. I will mention the Statute 7 H. 7. c. 5.
The substance of the Statute is this; It takes notice that there were
Challenges in London for that they had not 40 s. per Ann. and that this
Challenge was to be made in the Wards, which are the same with Hundreds in the
Counties, so this Statute is made to take away the Challenge of 40 s. Freehold.
This Statute of 7 H. 7. that takes away the Challenge in London for not having
40 s. is, with submission, a strong Evidence and Authority that it was before
that time a good Challenge, for otherwise to what end should they make a
Statute to take away the Challenge, unless it were before a good cause of
Challenge. In the next place 4 H. 8. c. 3. that extends to Civil Causes in
London, and says, That in London Jurors shall (but provides only for London in
Civil Causes) be admitted in Civil Causes, that have Goods to the value of 100
Marks. My Lord, if that first Statute, or the Common Law, had not extended to
require Freeholds in London, then there would have been no need of this Statute
that was made to enable men to be Jurors that had Goods to the value of 100
Marks. So that we take it to be good Authority, that by the Common Law Freehold
was required in all Civil Causes. Then there is another Statute 23 H. 8.13. and
that will be a strong evidence to show what the Law is: For the Statute says,
in Cities and Boroughs, in Trials of Murder and Felony, if a Freeman of the
City of London is to be tried, the Freemen shall be upon the Jury, though they
have not Freehold, and then there is a Proviso, that for Knights and Esquires
that are out of the Borough, though they are arrained in the Borough, that
extends not to them, though in cases of Murder and Felony. As for this Statute,
we take this sense of it, First that it does not extend to Treasons; for when
it only names Murders and Felonies, that makes no alteration as to Treasons,
therefore that stands as before: But if there be any alteration, that extends
only to Freemen and Burgesses that are to be tried, but not to Knights and
Esquires, so that if we were in a case of Felony and Murder, I think we are
not concerned in this Statute, for we are no Freeman nor Burgess, but we are an
Esquire, and therefore ought to be tried by Freeholders: so that for the Law we
rely upon these Statutes, that we have looked upon as strong evidence that
there ought to be in the Trial of the Life of a man, especially for Treason,
Freeholders. First, if it were in Civil Causes, if this qualification be not in
Jurie-men, then an Attaint would lie; the Penalty in an Attaint is, that their
Houses should be pulled down, etc. This is provided by the Law, to the intent
the Jurie may be careful to go according to their Evidence. It Is true, no
Attaint does lie in Criminal Causes, but if so be in Civil Causes there be
required Freeholders, and an Attaint lies if there be not, it is not reasonable
to think but there should be as great regard to the Life of a man, as to his
Estate. Next, my Lord, I do not know any Law that sets any kind of
qualification but this of Freehold, so that be the persons of what condition or
nature soever, (supposing they be not outlawed) yet these persons, if this Law
be not in effect, may then serve, and be put upon the Life of a man. These are
the reasons, my Lord, for which we apprehend they ought to be Freeholders.


Mr. Holt. My Lord, I would desire one word of the same side: We insist in this
case upon these two things; First, we conceive, by the Common Law, every Jurie
man ought to have a Free hold, we have good Authority for it, Cokes first
Institutes, but if that were not so* I think the Statute Mr. Pollexfen has
first mentioned, 2 H. 5. c. 3. to be express in this point. My Lord the Statute
in the Preamble does recite all the mischiefs, it says great mischiefs, ensued
by Juries that were made up of persons that had not Estates sufficient; in
what? as well in the case of the Death of a man, as in the case of Freehold
between Party and Party: the Statute reciting this mischief, does in express
words, provide two Remedies for the same in these cases: first on the Life or
Death of a man, the Jury or Inquest to be taken shall have 40 s. per ann. and
so between party and party 40 Marks, so that this being the Trial of the Death
of a man, it is interpreted by Stamford 162. a. that is in all cases where a
man is arraigned for his Life, that is within the express words of the Statute.
Besides this Exposition that has been put upon the Statute, my Lord, it does
seem that the Judgment of several Parliaments has been accordingly in several
times and ages. My Lord, to instance in one Statute that has not been
mentioned, and that is the 33 of H. 8. c. 23. that does give the King Power to
award Commissions of Oyer and Terminer for Trials in any County of England: and
that (says the Statute) in such cases no Challenge to the Shire or Hundred
shall be allowed; that is* you shall not challenge the Jury in such a case,
because they have not Freehold, are not of the County where the Treason was
committed; but that upon the Trial Challenge for lack of Freehold of 40 s. a
year shall be allowed, though it alters the manner of trying Treason by the
Common Law; so that, my Lord, here is the Opinion of that very Parliament; that
though it took away the usual method of Trials, yet it says the Prisoners
Challenge for want of Freehold. Now indeed that Statute is repealed; but I
mention it as to the Proviso that it shows the Judgment of that Parliament at
that time: My Lord, those other Statutes that have been made to regulate Cities
and Towns Corporate, why were they made? 33 H 8. That no Freehold should be
allowed, that shows that 2 H. 5. did extend to these Cases. But, my Lord, these
Statutes that show the Judgment of the Parliament, sufficient to our purpose,
do not extend to this Case; the Statute goes only to Murders and Felonies, but
not to Treasons: And we are in the Case of a Penal Statute, and concerning the
Life and Death of a Man, which ought to be taken strictly, it ousts the
Prisoner of a Benefit; and by parity of Reason. If Treason be not mentioned,
your Lordship cannot by Equity extend it to it, when it only mentions inferior
Offenses, and takes away the benefit in lower Cases: Like the Case of the
Bishop of Winchester, where the Statute set down Dean and Chapters, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons, it shall not extend to Bishops, because it begins with
Persons of an inferior Nature: No more shall Murder and Felony extend to
Treason. But further the Statute only concerns Freemen, for there is an express
Proviso,n the Case: for in case any Knight, or Esquire come to be Tried in the
Place, he has his Benefit as before. My Lord, we are in this Case, as in the
Case not mentioned in the Statute, we are not a Freeman of London. My Lord,
there is another thing 7 H. 7. c. 5. Why there was not only requisite at the
Common Law, that the Jurors had sufficient Freehold, but it was required it
should be in the Hundred; and Freehold in the Wards in the City is the same
with Freehold in the Hundreds in the Country: So that the want of Freehold in
the Hundred, was a good cause of Challenge. So that I think it will hardly be
denied, but that a Jurie that passes upon the life of a Man, ought by the Law,
by the Statute, and by the Judgment of the Parliament, to have Freehold. Where
is there then any Statute whatsoever that makes a difference in this Case,
between London and other Counties; We are in the case of Treason, we have taken
our Exceptions, and on behalf of the Prisoner at the Bar we pray the Challenge
may be allowed.


Mr. Ward. My Lord, I shall be short, because Mr. Pollexfen has observed these
things, so particularly already, I observe the Statute of H. 5. is a general
Statute, and extends throughout the Realm: Now when the thing is thus general,
there is no room to except particulars. And in this case it is within the very
words of the Law, if the words be so generally penned in the negative, then we
conceive there is no construction to be made upon them, unless some subsequent
Parliament alter it. Coke's Institutes 157. where it is said in Treason as well
as any thing else, upon H. 5. there shall be Freeholds. If they have provided
in Civil and other Criminal Causes, it were strange that this should be Casus
omissius, but there is no construction against a negative Law. For the
Parliament taking care of the City of London (as the subsequent Statutes say)
that he that has 100 Marks shall pass in Civil Causes, and then it says in
Murders and Felonies, and that only confined to the Freemen of the place, does
sufficiently explain the Law, where it is not altered by any subsequent Act,
therefore I desire the Challenge may be admitted.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, these Gentlemen's Foundation is not good, for they prove
it not by any Books, that at Common Law it was requisite for a Juryman to have
Freehold. My Lord, I deny their Foundation, there is no such Law, and at this
day in all Criminal Cases where the Statute does not direct it, as for Riots
and other Informations for Misdemeanour, there is no Law restrains them, and
they may be tried by any men they have no exception against. Then 2 H. 5 says,
None shall be admitted to pass upon the death of a Man, (I take it to extend to
all Capital matters, though it is pretty odly expressed; for when a Man is
accused of Felonies and other High Treasons, it is of the death of a Man) unless
he have Lands or Tenements, of the yearly value of 40 s. But I will take it as
these Gentlemen do at this Time, it not being so at Common Law, nor in other
criminal cases, but what are provided for by the Statute: as to other matters
of Felony and Murder, no doubt there these Challenges are to be taken upon the
Statute, but not for Treason, because the Statute of Queen Mary does expressly
repeat their Statute; and no Statute since takes away the force of that of Q.
Mary; that all Trials for Treason shall be as at the Common Law; and according
to this the constant practice in all Cities (not only London) where Persons
have been Indicted for High Treason has been. There was never any such thing
pretended: Most of London; so that the Statute they speak of, and the
Interpretations of the several other these Gentlemen have Freeholds, but we
would not have this point lost to the City of Statutes too, are to no purpose;
for we say by Common Law all Causes might be tried by any Persons, against whom
there was not sufficient cause of Challenge; and the Common Law is by that
Statute restored in this point.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, I have little to say; Mr. Attorney has given a true
Answer to it, the Foundation does fail them. It was not necessary at
Common Law, for a Jury-man to have Freehold: but then they must show you, my
Lord, it is altered, and made necessary. The Statute of H. 5. does not seem to
extend to Treason, but if it did, it is now out of doors, by that of Q Mary,
whereby all Trials of Treason are reduced to the Common Law. This is that we
answer, they fail in their foundation, they do not make it out, that it was
necessary for a Jury-man at Common Law to have Freehold.


Sir Geo. Jeff. My Lord, I confess they have cited several Acts of Parliament,
and upon them laid their Foundation, and drew Inferences from them? But they
will find, that in several Acts of Parliament which they have quoted, there is
a particular regard had for the preservation of the constant Usage and Custom
for Trials within the City of London. That notwithstanding several Acts of
Parliament have in other places ascertained the value of Jurors; yet they had
still an Eye that the City of London should continue in its Usages. I think it
will be necessary to put you in mind of the Case of the City of Worcester. It
would be very hard, say they, because an Attaint does not lie in Criminal
matters; if you intend by that to have People of Ability, it is well known,
that the ablest People in the City of London, have scarce any Freehold in it;
for that most of the Inheritances of the City of London remain in the Nobility
and in Corporations. Now in the Case of my Lord Russel, he has a peremptory
Challenge to 35, and I think I may adventure to say, there can scarce be 35
more that can call themselves Freeholders in London; consider the Consequence
then, Treason should be committed in the City of London, and there would not
be enough in the City of London to try it. In the Case of the Quo-Warranto
brought against the City of Worcester, to know by what Warrant several took
upon them the Offices of Aldermen; the Gentlemen at the Bar objected that it
was reasonable that no Freehold should be determined, but by Freeholders. But
the Judges of the King's Bench (the Court being full) for the necessity of the
thing, lest there might not be sufficient Freeholders in the City, having sent
one of the Judges of that Court to your Lordships of the Common Pleas, for that
Reason did agree the Challenge was not good. I know these Gentlemen will please
to remember the Case; so that I say, as in one Case we ought to be tender of
the life of the Prisoner, so we ought surely to be tender of the life of the
King, otherwise it may so happen, that the Kings life may be encompassed, and
Treason committed in the City, and there would be no way in the World to try
it; therefore we pray for the King the Challenge may be overruled.


M. North. My Lord, it is the practice to make the Venire facias, without
mentioning Freehold, for it does not Command, that they return so many men that
have Freehold, but probos and legales homines de viseneto; therefore at the
Common Law, those were good Inquests to try any man that were not
Excommunicated, nor under any Outlaw. It Is true, there are Statutes that say,
all Jurymen shall have Freehold; but we say these Statutes do not extend to
the City of London, but that it is governed by its own Customs; and we say it
is the Custom that Citizens of Ability have been returned, that have no
Freehold. But granting what we do not, but by way of supposal, my Lord, it does
not extend to this Case, because Trials are to be according to the use at
Common Law, by the Statute of Q. Mary, which does set them at large again; and
that is the reason the Prisoner, in this Case, has his Challenge for 35, and
is in other Cases restrained to 20; so that we say these men of Ability are
good, and there is no Statute affects them.


L. Chapter J Mr. Pollexfen, do you find any Judgment, that in Cases of Treason by
Common Law, they might except for want of Freehold? Have you any resolution in
the Case?


Mr. Pollexf. I think there are Books that say, at Common Law there must be
Freehold.


L. Chapter J. what in Treason?


Mr. Pollexfen. No, my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Unless you speak of Treason, you do not speak ad idem. For I do take
it that in Cases of Treason, or in Cases of Felony, at the Common Law, they had
no liberty to except to Jurors, that they had not any Freehold, but that at the
Common Law any good and lawful men might pass. Then take, as introductive of a
new Law, the Statute of H. 5. I am of the mind that this Statute of H. 5.
peradventure may extend to Treasons and Felonies; but when the Statute of Q.
Mary comes and says, all Trials shall be by such Evidence, and in such manner,
as by Common Law they ought to have been, I do not see how it is possible to
make an Objection afterward of this nature. For, admitting this Act of
Parliament of H. 5. had altered the Common Law, and given a Challenge, why then
when the Statute of Q. Mary comes and sets all Trials at large in the Case of
Treasons, then certainly the Challenge is gone again, and I doubt you will not
find one Exception in this Case, ever since that Statute concerning the Juries
Freehold in Cases of Treason, but it has generally passed otherwise, and there
has not been any ever excepted; I doubt it will be a very hard thing to
maintain such a Challenge now. Here are my Lords and Brothers will be pleased
to deliver their Opinions. It is a business of great consequence, not only for
this Noble Person at the Bar, but for all other Persons.


L. Chapter Bar. I agree with your Lordship perfectly, but if the Counsel had laid
a right Foundation that it had been so at Common Law, there had been much said;
But I take it at Common Law there was no Challenge for want of Freehold, and I
am induced to think so, for otherwise what needed the Statute of H. 5. been
made? But whether it extended to Treason or no, I am not so clear. And if it
did, it is wiped off again by that of Q Mary, which reduces all to the Common
Law Trial.


Mr. Just. Wyndham. I am of the same Opinion: I conceive at Common Law, lack of
Freehold no good cause of Challenge. It Is true, that Challenge is given in some
Cases by Act of Parliament, yet I doubt whether it extend to a thing of so high
nature as Treason, for other Statutes have not mentioned any thing of Treason.
But suppose 2 H. 5. did extend to it, yet it is very plain, the Statute of 1.
and 2. Q. Mary has set all at large again. They are to be good and lawful men,
and I do not find that any thing of the lawfulness must be the Freehold. And
therefore, I conceive this is no just Exception in this Case.


Mr. Just. Jones. My Lord, I am of the same Opinion: I am of Opinion that the
Common Law did not require Freehold to be a good cause of Challenge in the Case
of Treason, and the rather, Because at the Common Law a man that was Indicted
of High Treason, had liberty to Challenge, peremptorily, to the number of 35
Persons. My Lord, if the Common Law be altered by the Stat. of H. 5. yet I take
it, that the Statute of 1 and 2 Ph. and M. does restore the Common Law in this
particular point. For whereas there was a Stat. of H. 8. to restrain the
Prisoner to the number of 20, for his Challenge, now the Statute restoring it
to Common Law, the Prisoner has his Challenge to 35, as he had before that
Stat. of H. 8. So I take it, the King shall have his privilege also to try a
Prisoner for Treason, by Persons that have not Freehold.


Mr. Just. Charleton. I am of the same Opinion. And truly the rather, because
no President has been offered of any such Challenge before, and many men have
suffered, and sure if it could have been, many would have made use of it.


Mr. Just. Levins. I am of Opinion it is not to be allowed. I do not think my
self driven to the necessity to determine now whether Freehold was a good
Challenge at Common Law in point of Treason. I think the Statute of Ph. and M.
has restored the Trials to the Common Law. What was the Common Law? The Common
Law is the Custom of England, which is other in Cities than in Countries, and
the Custom of London is part of that Common Law, So, though it be a cause of
Challenge in a County at large, yet it is not a cause of Challenge in Cities,
where Freeholders are not to be found. Now that which satisfies me is, That
this Custom is restored by the Statute of Ph. and M. Because never such a
Challenge has been. And it is known when 20 were tried for Treason together in
this very place, and one of them a notable cunning Lawyer, and if such a
Challenge were to have been allowed, no doubt, he would have made use of it,
but the Challenge was not taken, and if he had made such a Challenge, and it
had been allowed, perhaps he could not have been tried: That was Cook. I have
heard several persons tried for Treason my self, and never heard it taken.
Therefore I am of Opinion, that before any Statute was made in this case, it
was the Custom in London to try without Freeholds, and since by the Statute of
Q. Mary it is restored.


Mr. Baron Street. I think there was no such Challenge at Common Law. The Jury
were only to be probos and legales homines, and no more, till the Statute made
it so, but there is a particular Reservation for Corporations. And certainly,
if this should be admitted to be a good Challenge, though it were between party
and party, there would be in some Corporations a perfect failure of Justice. So
that without doubt at Common Law there was no such Challenge. As for the
Statute of H. 5. it is gone by that of Q Mary. If this were admitted within
London, nothing would be more mischievous to this Corporation. Methinks we have
been very nice in this matter, when the Life of the King is at stake, and all
the Customs and Privileges of the City of London seem to be levelled at in
this point. I am of the Opinion with the rest of the Judges, that this,
Challenge ought to be overruled.


Mr. Justice Withins. I am of the same Opinion.


L. C. Just. My Lord, the Court is of Opinion, upon hearing your Counsel, and
the Kings, that it is no good Challenge to a Jurie in a case of Treason, that
he has not Freehold within the City. But I must tell your Lordship withal, That
your Lordship has nothing of hardship in this case, for notwithstanding that, I
must tell you, you will have as good a Jurie, and better than you should have
had in a Country of 4 l. or 40 s. a Year Freeholders. The Reason of the Law for
Freeholds is, That no slight persons should be put upon a Jury, where the Life
of a man or his Estate comes in Question, but in the City the persons that are
impanell'd are men of Quality and Substance, men that have a great deal to
lose: and therefore Your Lordship has the same in substance, as if a Challenge
was allowed of Freehold. It will be no kind of prejudice to your Lordship in
this case; Therefore, if you please, apply your self as the Jury is called, and
make your Exceptions, if you shall make any.


L. C. J. Mr. Pollexfen, you shall have liberty to stay any where here, if you
please.


Counsel. Here is such a great crowd, my Lord, we have no room.


Then the Jurymen were called, and after the Lord Russel had challenged One and
Thirty of them, the Jury sworn were as follows. John Martin, William Rouse,
Jervas Seaton, William Fashion, Thomas Short, George Toriano, William Butler,
James Pickering, Thomas Jeve, Hugh Noden, Robert Brough, Thomas Omeby.
Then was made Proclamation for Information Cl. of Cr. William Russel Esquire hold
up thy Hand. which he did. You of the Jurie, look upon the Prisoner, and
hearken to his Cause. He stands indicted by the name of -- prout before in the
Indictment. Upon this Indictment he has been arraigned, and thereunto pleaded
Nor Guilty, and for his Trial has put himself upon his Country, which Country
you are: Your Charge is to inquire whether he be Guilty of this High Treason
whereof he stands indicted, or Not Guilty: If you find him Guilty, you shall
inquire, etc.


Mr. North. May it please your Lordship, and you that are sworn, The Prisoner
at the Bar stands charged in this Indictment with no less than the Conspiring
the Death of the Kings Majesty, and that in order to the same, he did, with
other Traitors named in the Indictment, and others not known, November. 2. in the
34th Year of this King, in the Parish of Bassishaw, within the City of London,
meet and conspire together to bring our Sovereign Lord the King to death, to
raise War and Rebellion against him, and to massacre his Subjects. And in order
to compass these wicked designs, there being assembled, did conclude to seize
the Kings Guards, and His Majesty's Person. This is the Charge, the Defendent
says he is Not Guilty, if we prove it upon him, it will be your Duty to find
it.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jurie, most of our Evidence
against this honorable Person at the Bar is to this purpose, This Person, the
Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong, and Mr. Ferguson, they
were the Council of State, as I may call them, to give forth directions for the
general Rising that has appeared was to have been within this Kingdom. The
Rising was of great concern and expense, and must be managed by persons of
interest, prudence and great secrecy. These Gentlemen had frequent meetings in
October and November last, (for then, you may refresh your memories again, was
the general Rising to be) and there they did consult how to manage the Rising;
they consulted how to seize the Kings Guards; and this Noble person being mixed
with these others, especially with Ferguson, who with others of an inferior
rank was also engaged in a Cabal for managing worser things (though this is bad
enough); at several meetings they receive Messages from my Lord Shaftsbury
touching the Rising. They being looked upon as the persons that were to
conclude and settle the time and all circumstances about it.

We shall make it appear to you in the course of our Evidence, that those
Underlings (for this was the great Consult, and moved all the other Wheels) who
managed the Assassination, did take notice that these Lords and Gentlemen of
Quality were to manage and steer the whole business of the Rising. It seems
these Gentlemen could not give the Earl of Shaftsbury satisfaction to his mind,
for he pressed them to keep their day, which was the 17. of November last, But
the honorable Person at the Bar, and the rest, made him this Answer, That Mr.
Trenchard had failed them, for that he had promised to have 1000 Foot and 2 or
300 Horse at 4 hours warning, but now it was come to pass, he could not perform
it, that some Persons in the West would not join with them, and therefore at
this time they could not proceed, and therefore they must defer the day. And as
a Council, they sent my Lord Shaftsbury word he must be contented, they had
otherwise resolved, and thereupon my Lord Shaftsbury went away, and Mr.
Ferguson with him.

To carry on this practice they took others into their Council, Sir Tho.
Armstrong was lest out, and there falling that Scandalous Report upon my Lord
Gray he was to be left out, and then there was to be a new Council of Six,
whereas the inferior Council to manage the Assassination was Seven. At this
Council there was this honorable Person at the Bar, the Duke of Monmouth, my
Lord Howard, and another honorable Person, who I am sorry to name upon this
account, who has this morning prevented the hand of Justice upon himself, my
Lord of Essex, and Coll. Sidney, and Mr. Hambden: These Six had their frequent
Consults at this honorable Persons house; for they had excluded Sir Tho.
Armstrong, and my Lord Gray, for these Gentlemen would have the Face of
Religion; and my Lord Gray was in their esteem so scandalous, that they thought
that would nor prevail with the people, if he was of the Council. There they
debated how they should make this Rising, after several Consultations they came
to this Resolution, That before they did fall upon this Rising, they should
have an exact account both of the time and method of the Scotch Rising; and
thereupon a Messenger was sent on purpose by Coll. Sidney, viz. Aaron Smith, to
invite Scotch Commissioners to treat with these Noble Lords. Pursuant to this,
just before the Plot brake out, several from Scotland came to treat with them
how to manage the work; 30000 l. was demanded by the Scots, in order that they
should be ready in Scotland; then they fell to 10000, and at last (for the
Scots love Money,) they fell to 5000, which they would take and run all hazards,
but they not coming to their terms, that broke off that week the Plot was
discovered.

Gentlemen, if we prove all these Instances, besides we shall call some to show
you that all the inferior Party still looked upon these to be the Heads; and
though they kept it secret, God has suffered it to come to light with as plain
an Evidence as ever was heard.


Sir Geo. Jeff. I will not take up any of your Lordships time; we will call our
Witnesses to prove the Fact Mr. Attorney has opened. Swear Colonel Romsey,
(which was done) Pray Colonel Romsey will you give my Lord and the Jury an
Account, from the beginning to the end of the several Meetings that were, and
what was the Debates of those Meetings.


Col. Romsey. My Lord, I was at my Lord Shaftsbury's Lodging where he lay down
by Wapping about the latter end of October or the beginning of November. and he
told me there was met at one Mr. Sheppards house the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord
Russel, my Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong, and Mr. Ferguson, and he desired me
to speak to them to know what resolution they were come to about the Rising of
Taunton. I did go there accordingly, and call for Mr. Sheppard, and he carried
me up where they were, and the Answer that was there made me was, That Mr.
Trenchard had sailed them, and there would be no more done in the matter at
that time.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell the whole passage.


Col. Romsey. I did say my Lord Shaftsbury had sent me to know what resolution
they had taken about the rising of Taunton. They made me this answer, that Mr.
Trenchard had failed them, that he had promised 1000 Foot and 300 Horse, but
when he came to perform it he could not. He thought the people would not
meddle, unless they had some time to make provision for their Families.


L. Chapter Just. Who had you this Message from?


Col. Romsey. Mr. Ferguson did speak most of it.


L. Chapter Just. Who sent this Message back?


Col. Romsey. Mr. Ferguson made the Answer, my Lord Russel and the Duke of
Monmouth were present, and I think my Lord Gray did say something to the same
purpose.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray how often were you with them at that house?


Col. Romsey. I do not know, I was there more than once, I was there either
another time, or else I heard Mr. Ferguson make a Report of another Meeting to
my Lord Shaftsbury.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Was my Lord Russel in the Room when this Debate was?


Col. Romsey. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis What did they say further?


Col. Romsey. That was all at that time, that I remember.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there nothing of my Lord Shaftsbury to be contented?


Col. Romsey. Yes, that my Lord Shaftsbury must be contented; and upon that he
took his resolution to be gone.


L. Chapter Just. Did you hear any such Resolution from him?


Col. Romsey. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you know of their meeting there, or was it by my Lord
Shaftsbury's direction?


Col. Romsey. No, but my Lord told me I should find such Persons, and
accordingly I found them; and this Answer was given.


Mr. At. Genesis What time did you stay?


Col. Romsey. I think I was not there above a quarter of an Hour.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any discourse happened while you were there about a
Declaration?


Col. Romsey. I am not certain whether I did hear something about a Declaration
there, or that Mr. Ferguson did report it to my Lord Shaftsbury, that they had
debated it.


Sir Geo. Jeff. To what purpose was the Declaration?


L. Chapter Just. We must do the Prisoner that right; He says he cannot tell
whether he had it from him or Mr. Ferguson.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you hear no Discourse to what it tended?


Col. Roms. My Lord, There was some Discourse about seeing what posture the
Guards were in.


One of the Jury. By whom, Sir?


Col. Roms. By all the Company that was there.


L. C. J. What was that Discourse,


Col. Roms. To see what posture they were in, that they might know how to
surprise them.


L. Chapter Just. The Guards?


Col. Roms. Yes, that were the Savoy and the Mews.


L. Chapter Just. Whose were the Words? Tell the Words as near as you can.


Col. Roms. My Lord, the Discourse was, that some should --


L. Chapter Just. Who made that Discourse.


Col. Roms. My Lord, I think Sir Thomas Armstong began it, and Mr. Ferguson.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it discoursed among all the company?


Col. Roms. All the Company did debate it. Afterward they thought it necessary
to see with what care and vigilance they did guard themselves at the Savoy and
the Mews, whether they might be surprised or not.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any undertook to go and see there?


Col. Roms. There were some persons.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Name them.


Col. Roms. I think the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Gray and Sir Thomas Armstrong.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Was my Lord Russel, the Prisoner, there, when they undertook to
take the view?


Col. Roms. Yes, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis To what purpose was the view?


Col. Roms. To surprise them, if the Rising had gone on.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Did you observe, by the Debates that happened, that they did
take notice there was a Rising intended?


Col. Roms. Yes.


Sir Geo. Jeff. And that Direction was given to take a view of the Guards, if
the Rising had gone on?


Col. Roms. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Pray Sir, declare justly the Discourse.


Col. Roms. I went to them from my Lord Shaftsbury: And I did tell them, That
my Lord did pray they would come to some Resolution; and they told me, Mr.
Trenchard, who they depended upon for Taunton, had failed them, who, when he
came up to Town first at the Term, had assured them, that in three or four
Hours time he could have One Thousand Foot, and Three Hundred Horse: but now it
came to be tried, he answered, it was not possible for him to undertake it; for
the People would not rush into it of a sudden, but have some time to prepare
for their Familes.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it pretended there should be a Rising at that time?


Col. Roms. Yes, the 19th of November was appointed for the Rising.


L. Chapter Just. Was it before that time, you went to press them from my Lord
Shaftsbury?


Col. Roms. Yes, I think it was a matter of a Fortnight before, or something
more. For I think it was concluded Sunday Fortnight after my Lord Gray met.


Mr. At. Genesis But you say, besides what you heard there, you understood there
was to be a Rising at that time. Was you to be engaged in this?


Col. Roms. Yes, I was.


L. Chapter Just. You must speak so, that what you deliver may be sensible; for if
you speak, I apprehend so and so, that will be doubtful.


Col. Roms. No, my Lord, the Rising was determined, and I was to have gone to
Bristol.


Mr. At. Genesis In what capacity, as Colonel or Captain?


Col. Roms. There was no Determination of that, no Quality.


L. Chapter Just. By whose Appointment was that?


Col. Roms. My Lord Shaftsbury spoke that to me.


Sir Geo. Jeff. But pray Col. Romsey, this you are very able to know, what the
Debates were, and need not be pumped with so many Questions; Pray was there any
Debate, when you came with the Message from my Lord Shaftsburies, was there a
Debate about the Rising?


Col. Romsey. There was no debate of it, because they made answer, Mr.
Trenchard had failed them.


Sir Geo. Jeff. But did not they take notice of the Rising? Give an account of
it.


Col. Romsey. I have done it twice.


Jury. We desire to know the Message from the Lord Shaftsbury.


L. Chapter J. Direct your self to the Court; Some of the Gentlemen have not heard
it, they desire you would with a little more loud Voice repeat the Message you
were sent of from my Lord Shaftsbury.


Col. Romsey. I was sent by my Lord, to know the Resolution of the Rising in
Taunton; they answered, Mr. Trenchard, whom they depended upon for the Men, had
failed them, and that it must fall at that time, and my Lord must be contented.


Mr. At. Genesis Was the Prisoner at the Bar present at that Debate?


Col Romsey. Yes.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Did you find him averse to it, or agreeing to it?


Col. Romsey. Agreeing to it.


Baron Street. What said my Lord Shaftsbury?


Col. Roms. Upon my return he said, he would be gone, and accordingly did go.


Sir Geo. Jeff. If my Lord Russel pleases to ask him any Questions, he may.


L. Russel. Must I ask him now?


L. Chapter Just. Yes my Lord, propose your Questions to me.


L. Russel. I have very few Questions to ask him, for I know little of the
matter, for it was the greatest accident in the world I was there, and when I
saw that Company was there, I would have been gone again. I came there
accidentally to speak with Mr. Sheppard; I was just come to Town, but there was
no discourse of Surprising the Guards, nor no undertaking of Raising an Army.


L. Chapter J. We will hear you to any thing by and by, but that which we now
desire of your Lordship is, as the Witnesses come, to know if you would have
any particular Questions asked of them.


L. Russel. I desire to know, if I gave any Answer to any Message about the
Rising: I was up and down; I do not know what they might say when I was in the
Room; I was tasting of Wine.


L. C. J. Did you observe that my Lord Russel said any thing there, and what?


Col. Roms. Yes, my Lord Russel did speak.


L. Chapter Just. About what?


Col. Roms. About the Rising of Taunton.


L. Russel. It was Sir Tho. Armstrong that conversed with Mr. Trenchard.


L. C. J. What did you observe my Lord Russel to say?


Col. Roms. My Lord Russel did discourse of the Rising.


L. Russel. How should I discourse of the Rising at Taunton, that knew not the
place, nor had knowledge of Trenchard.


Mr. At. Genesis Now my Lord, we will give you account, that my Lord Russel
appionted this place, and came in the dark without his Coach.


L. Russel. My Lord, I think the Witness was asked, if I gave my consent.


L. Chapter Just. What say you, did my Lord give any consent to the Rising?


Col. Roms. Yes my Lord, he did.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Swear Mr. Sheppard, which was done. Pray will you speak
aloud, and give an account to my Lord, and the Jury, of the Meetings at your
House, and what was done.


Mr. Sheppard. In the month of October last, as I remember, Mr. Ferguson came
to me in the Duke of Monmouths name, and desired the conveniencie of my House
for him and some other Persons of Quality to meet there. And as soon as I had
granted it, in the evening the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Gray, my Lord Russel,
Sir Thomas Armstrong, Col. Romsey, and Mr. Ferguson, came. Sir Thomas Armstrong
desired me, that none of my Servants might come up, but they might be private;
so what they wanted I went down for, a Bottle of Wine or so. The substance of
their discourse was how to surprise the Kings Guards. And in order to that, the
Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Gray, and Sir Thomas Armstrong, as I remember, went
one night to the Mews, or thereabout, to see the Kings Guards. And the next
time they came to my House, I heard Sir Tho. Armstrong say, the Guards were
very remiss in their places, and not like Soldiers, and the thing was
feasible, if they had strength to do it.


Mr. At. Genesis How many Meetings had you there?


Mr. Sheppard. I remember but twice, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Did they meet by chance, or had you notice they would be there
that night?


Mr. Sheppard. Yes I did hear it before.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Who had you notice would be there?


Mr. Sheppard. The Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Gray, my Lord Russel, Sir Thomas
Armstrong, Col. Romsey, and Mr. Ferguson.


Mr. At. Genesis Did they come with their Coaches, or a foot, in the night time
and in the dark?


Mr. Sheppard. I cannot tell; it was in the evening, I did not let them in.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any Coaches at the door?


Mr. Sheppard. None that I heard, or saw, they came not altogether, but
immediately one after another.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Had they any Debate before they went into the Room?


Mr. Sheppard. No, they went readily into the Room.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Was my Lord Russel both times there?


Mr. Sheppard. Yes, Sir, as I remember.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Had you any particular business with my Lord Russel, or he with
you?


Mr. Sheppard. No, not at that time, but since I have had about the Affairs of
my Lord Shaftsbury.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Do you remember, Col. Romsey at the first time had any
discourse about any private business relating to my Lord Russel?


Mr. Sheppard. No, I do not remember it.


Mr. At. Genesis Besides the seizing of the Guards, did they discourse about
Rising?


Mr. Sheppard. I do not remember any further discourse, for I went several
times down to fetch Wine, and Sugar, and Nutmeg, and I do not know what was
said in my absence.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Do you remember any Writings or Papers read at that time?


Mr. Sheppard. None that I saw.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Or that you heard of?


Mr. Sheppard. Yes, now I recollect my self, I do remember one Paper was read.


Sir Geo. Jeff. To what purpose was it?


Mr. Sheppard. It was somewhat in the nature of a Declaration; it was read by
Mr. Ferguson, who was present at the reading, I cannot say whether they were
all present or not. The purport of it was setting forth the Grievances of the
Nation, but truly what Particulars I cannot tell: it was a pretty large Paper.


Mr. At. Genesis But you can tell the Effect of it, when was that to be set out?


Mr. Sheppard. It was not discoursed, it was shown only I suppose for
Approbation.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was it showed to?


Mr. Sheppard. Sir Tho. Armstrong.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Who else?


Mr, Sheppard. As I remember the Duke was present, and I think Col. Romsey.


Col. Romsey. No, I was not, it was done before I came.


Sir Geo. Jeff. What was the design of that Paper? Recollect your self, what
was the design?


Mr. Sheppard. The design of that Paper, was in the nature of a Declaration,
setting forth the Grievances of the Nation, in order to a Rising, I suppose by
the purport of the Paper; but cannot remember the particular Words of it.


Foreman of the Jury. Can you say my Lord Russel was there, when that
Declaration was read, as you call it.


Mr. Sheppard. I cannot say that.


Mr. At. Genesis But he was there when they talked of Seizing the Guards?


Mr. Sheppard. Yes, my Lord was there then.


L. Russel. Pray Mr. Sheppard, do you remember the time when these meetings
were?


Mr. Sheppard. I cannot be positive as to the Time, I remember it was at the
time my L. Shaftsbury was absent from his own house, and he absented himself
from his own House about Michaelmas day; but I cannot be positive as to the time.


L. Russel. I never was but once at your house, and there was no such design as
I heard of. I desire that Mr. Sheppard may recollect himself.


Mr. Sheppard. Indeed my Lord I cannot be positive in the times. My Lord I am
sure was at one meeting.


L. Chapter Just. But was he at both?


Mr. Sheppard. I think so, but it was 8 or 9 months ago, and I cannot be
positive.


L. Russel. I can prove I was then in the Country. Col. Romsey said there was
but one meeting.


Col. Roms. I do not remember I was at two; if I was not, I heard Mr. Ferguson
relate the Debates of the other meeting to my Lord Shaftsbury.


L. Russel. Is it usual for the Witnesses to hear one another?


L. Chapter Just. I think your Lordship need not concern your self about that, for
I see the Witnesses are brought in one after another.


L. Russel. There was no Design.


Sir Geo. Jeff. He has sworn it.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear my Lord Howard, which was done. Pray will your Lordship
give an account to the Court, what you know of a Rising designed before my Lord
Shaftsbury went away, and afterward how it was continued on.


L. Howard. My Lord, I appear with some confusion. Let no man wonder that it is
troublesome to me. My Lord, as to the Question Mr. Attorney puts to me, this is
the Account I have to give. It Is very well known to every one, how great a
ferment was made in the City, upon occasion of the long Dispute about the
Election of Sheriffs: And this soon produced a greater freedom and liberty of
Speech one with another, than perhaps had been used formerly, though not
without some previous preparations and dispositions made to the same thing.
Upon this occasion, among others, I was acquainted with Captain Walcot, a
person that had been some Months in England, being returned out of Ireland, and
who indeed I had not seen for 11 Years before. But he came to me as soon as he
came out of Ireland, and when these unhappy divisions came, he made very
frequent applications to me; and though he was unknown himself, yet being brought
by me he soon gained a confidence with my Lord Shaftsbury, and from him derived
it to others, when this unhappy rent and division of mind was, he having before
got himself acquainted with many Persons of the City, had entered into such
Counsels with them, as afterward had the Effect, which in the ensuing
Narrative I shall relate to your Lordship. He came to me, and told me that they
were now sensible all they had was going, that this Force put upon them --


L. Chapter Just. Pray my Lord raise your voice, else your Evidence will pass for
nothing.


One of the Jury. We cannot hear my Lord.


L. Howard. There is an unhappy accident happened, that has sunk my voice, I
was but just now acquainted with the Fate of my Lord of Essex -- My Lord I say,
he came to me, and did acquaint me that the People were now so sensible, that
all their Interest was going by that violence offered to the City in their
Elections, that they were resolved to take some course to put a stop to it, if
it were possible. He told me there were several Consults and Meetings of
persons about it, and several persons had begun to put themselves into a
disposition, and preparation to act; That some had furnished themselves with
very good Horses, and kept them in the most secret and blind Stables they
could; That diverse had intended it, and, for his own part, he was resolved to
imbark himself in it. And having an Estate in Ireland, he thought to dispatch
his Son thither; (for he had a good real Estate, and a great Stock, how he
disposed of his Real Estate I know not); But he ordered his Son to turn his
Stock into Money to furnish him for the occasion: This I take to be about
August. His Son was sent away. Soon after this, the Son not being yet returned,
and I having several Accounts from him, wherein I found the Fermentation grew
higher and higher, and every day a nearer approach to Action. I told him I had
a necessity to go into Essex to attend the concerns of my own estate, but told
him, how he might by another name convey Letters to me, and gave him a little
Cant, by which he might blind and disguise the matter he wrote about, when I
was in the Country. I received two or three Letters from him, that gave me an
Account in that disguised style, but such as I understood, that the Negotiation
which he had with my Correspondents was going on, and in good Condition; and it
was earnestly desired, I would come to Town; this was the middle of September.
I notwithstanding was willing to see the result of that great Affair, upon
which all Men's Eyes were fixed, which was the Determination of the Sherivalty
about that time. So I ordered it to fall into Town, and went to my own House on
Saturday night, which was Michaelmas day. On Sunday he came to me, and Dined
with me, and told me (after a general Account given me of the Affairs of the
times) that my Lord Shaftsbury was secretted and withdrawn from his own House
in Aldersgate street; and that though he had a Family settled, and had absconded
himself from them, and diverse others of his Friends and Confidents; yet he did
desire to speak with me, and for that purpose sent him to show me the way to
his Lodging: He brought me to a House at the lower end of Wood street, one
Watson's House, and there my Lord was alone. He told me he could not but be
sensible, how Innocent soever he was, both he and all honest men were unsafe,
so long as the Administration of Justice was in such hands as would accomodate
all things to the humor of the Court. That in the sense of this he thought it
but reasonable to provide for his own safety, by withdrawing himself from his
own House into that Retirement, That now he had ripened Affairs to that head,
and had things in that preparation, that he did not doubt but he should be
able, by those men that would be in a readiness in London, to turn the Tide,
and put a stop to the Torrent that was ready to overflovv. But he did complain
to me, that his design, and the design of the Public was very much
obstructed, by the unhandsom deportment of the Duke of Monmouth and my Lord
Russel, who had vvithdravvn themselves, not only from his Assistance, but from
their own Engagements and appointments. For when he had got such a formed
Force as he had in London, and expected to have it ansvvered by them in the
Country, they did recede from it, and told him they were not in a condition or
preparation in the Country, to be concurrent with him at that time. This he
looked upon but as an artificial Excuse, and as an instance of their
Intentions, wholly to desert him; but notwithstanding there was such
Preparation made in London, that if they were willing to lose the Honor of
being concurrent with him, he was able to do it himself, and did intend
speedily to put it into Execution. I asked him, what Forces he had, he said he
had enough; says I, what are you assured of? Says he, there is above Ten
Thousand brisk Boys are ready to follow me, when ever I hold up my Finger: Says
I, how have you methoded this, that they shall not be crashed, for there will
be a great Force to oppose you? Yes, he answered, but they would possess
themselves of the Gates; and these Ten Thousand Men in twenty four Hours, would
be multiplied into five times the Number, and be able to make a Sally out, and
possess themselves of White Hall, by beating the Guards. I told him, this was a
fair Story, and I had reason to think, a man of his figure would not undertake
a thing that might prove so fatal, unless it were laid on a Foundation that
might give a prudent man ground to hope it would be successful. He said he was
certain of it, but confessed it was a great disappointment, that these Lords
had failed him: I told him, I was not provided with an Answer at that time,
that he well knew me, and knew the general frame, and bent of my Spirit. But I
told him, I looked upon it as dangerous, and ought to be laid deep, and to be
very well weighed and considered of; and did not think it a thing fit to be
entered upon, without the Concurrence of those Lords: And therefore desired,
before I discovered my own Inclination, to discourse with those Lords. He did
consent, with much ado; but says he, you will find they will wave it, and give
doubtful and deferring Answers, but you will find this a Truth. I went to Moor
Park the next day, where the Duke of Monmouth was, and told him the great
Complaint my Lord Shaftsbury had made, that he failed him: Says he, I think he
is Mad, I was so far from giving him any encouragement, that I did tell him
from the beginning, and so did my Lord Russel, there was nothing to be done by
us in the Country at that time. I did not then own I had seen my Lord, but
spoke as if this were brought me by a third Person, because he had not given me
liberty to tell them where his Lodging was. Says I, My Lord, I shall be able to
give a better account of this in a day or two; Shall I convey it to my Lord,
that you are willing to give a Meeting? Yes, says he, with all my heart: This
was October 2, 3, or 4; I came to Town on Saturday and was carried to him on
Monday; and I suppose this was October 2. On Wednesday I think I went to him
again (but it is not very material) and told him I had been with the Duke of
Monmouth, and given him a punctual Account of what I had from him; and the Duke
did absolutely disown any such thing; and told me, he never did give him any
encouragement to proceed that way, because the Countries were not in a
dispsiotion for Action, nor could be put in readiness at that time; Says my
Lord Shaftsbury, It Is false, they are afraid to own it. And says he, I have
reason to believe, there is some artificial Bargain between his Father and him,
to Save one another: For when I have brought him to Action, I could never get
him to put on, and therefore I suspect him: And says he, several honest Men in
the City have puzzled me, in asking how the Duke of Monmouth lived: Says he,
they puzzled me and I could not answer the Question; for I know he must have his
Living from the King; and, says he, We have different Prospects; We are for a
Common Wealth, and He has no other Design but his own personal Interest, and
that will not go down with my People now, so he called them they are all for a
Common Wealth: And then says he, It Is to no purpose for me to see him; it will
but widen the Breach, and I dare not trust him to come hither. Says I, my Lord,
That Is a good one indeed, Dare not you trust him, and yet do you send me to him
on this Errand? Nay, says he, It Is because we have had some misunderstanding of
late; but I believe he is true enough to the Interest. Says I, It Is a great
unhappiness to take this time to Fall out; and I think it is so great a Design,
that it ought to be undertaken with the greatest Strength and Coalition in the
Kingdom. Says he, my Friends are now gone so far, that they cannot pull their
Foot back again without going further; for says he, it has been communicated
to so many, that it is impossible to keep it from taking Air, and it must go on.
Says he, We are not so unprovided as you think for; there are so many Men, that
you will find as brisk Men as any in England. Besides, we are to have 1000. or
1500. Horse, that are to be drawn by insensible Parties into Town, that when
the Insurrection is, shall be able to Scour the Streets, and hinder them from
forming their Forces against us. My Lord, after great enlargement on this Head,
and Heads of the like nature, I told him I would not leave him thus, and that
nothing should satisfy me, but an Interview between him and the Lords: No, I
could not obtain it: But if I would go and tell them what a Forwardness he was
in, and that, if they would do themselves Right, by putting themselves upon
correspondent Action in their respective Places, and where their Interest lay,
well, otherwise he would go away without them, so I went again to the Duke of
Monmouth, I spoke to him only, (I never spoke to my Lord Russel then, only we
were together, but I had never come to any close conjunction of Counsels in my
life with him at that time.) Says I to the Duke, This man is mad, and his
Madness will prove fatal to us all; he has been in a Fright by being in the
Tower, and carries those Fears about him, that cloud his Understanding: I think
his Judgment has deserted him, when he goes about with those strange sanguine
Hopes, that I cannot see what should support him in the ground of them.
Therefore, says I* Pray will you give him a Meeting. God-soe, says the Duke,
with all my heart, and I desire nothing more. Now* I told him, I had been with
my L. Shaftsbury, with other inlargements, that I need not trouble your
Lordship with; Well, says he, pray go to him, and try if it be possible to get
a Meeting: So I went to him, and told him. Says I, This is a great unhappiness,
and it seems to be a great absurdity, that you are so forward to act alone in
such a thing as this. Pray, says I, without any more to do, since you have this
confidence to send for me, let me prevail with you to meet them, and give them
an interview, or else you and I must break. I will no longer hold
Correspondence, unless it be so. Says he, I tell you they will betray me. In
short, he did with much importunity yield, That he would come out the next
Night in a Disguise. By this time it was Saturday, I take it to be the 6 th of
October; an Almanac will settle that: So the next Night being Sunday, and the
Shops shut, he would come out in a concealment, be carried in a Coach, and
brought to his own House, which he thought then was safest. I came and gave the
D. of Monmouth an account of it; the Duke, I suppose, conveyed the same
Understanding to my L. Russel; and I suppose both would have been there
accordingly, to have given the Meeting; but next Morning I found Col. Romsey
had left a Note at my House, that the Meeting could not be that day. Then I
went to the Duke of Monmouth, and he had had the Account before, That my Lord
Shaftsbury did apprehend himself to be in some Danger in that House, and that
that Apprehension had occasioned him to remove; but we should be sure to hear
from him in two or three days. We took it as a Waver, and thought he did from
thence intend to abscond himself from us, and it proved so to me, for from that
time I never saw him. But Captain Walcot came to me and told me, that he was
vvithdravvn, but it was for fear his Lodging might be discovered, but he did
not doubt, but in a Week he would let me know where his lodging was. But
told me within such a time, which I think was 8 or 10 days, there would be
a Rising: and I told the D. of Monmouth, and I believe he told my L. Russel;
And we believed his Frenzy was now grown to that height, that he would
rise immediately, and put his design in execution: so we endeavored to prevent
it. Upon which my Lord Russel (I was told) and the Duke of Monmouth, did force
their way to my Lord Shaftsburies, and did persuade him to put off the day of
his Rendezvous. I had not this from my L. Russel, for I had not spoke a Word to
him; But the Duke told me, my L. Russel had been with him, (I had indeed an
intimation that he had been with him); but the Duke told me, says he, I have
not been with him, but my L. Russel was, having been conveyed by Col. Romsey.
After this day was put off, it seems it was put off with this condition, That
those Lords, and diverse others, should be in a readiness to raise the Country
about that day fortnight, or thereabouts; for there was not above a fortnights
time given: And, says the Duke of Monmouth, we have put it off, but now we
must be in Action, for there is no holding it off any longer. And, says he, I
have been at Wapping all night, and I never savv a Company of Bolder and
Brisker Fellows in my life; And, says he, I have been round the Tower, and seen
the Avenues of it; and I do not think it will be hard, in a little time, to
possess our selves of it; But says he, they are in the wrong way; yet we are
engaged to be ready for them in a Fortnight, and therefore, says he, now we
must apply our selves to it, as well as we can. And thereupon I believe they
did send into the Country; and the Duke of Monmouth told me, he spoke to Mr.
Trenchard, who was to take particular care of Sommersetshire, with this
circumstance, says he, I thought Mr. Trenchard had been a brisker Fellovv; for
when I told him of it, he looked so pale, I thought he would have svvooned,
when I brought him to the brink of Action; and said, I pray go and do what
you can among your acquaintance: And truly I thought it would have come then to
Action. But I went the next day to him, and he said it was impossible; they
could not get the Gentlemen of the Country to stir yet.


L. Russel. My Lord, I think I have very hard measure, here is a great deal of
Evidence by hear say.


L. Chapter Just. This is nothing against you, I declare it to the Jury.


Mr. At. Genesis If it please you, my Lord, Go on in the method of Time. This is
nothing against you, but its coming to you, if your Lordship will have
patience, I assure you.


L. Howard. This is just in the order it was done. When this was put off, then
they were in a great hurry; and Capt. Walcot had been several times with me,
and discoursed of it. But upon this disappointment they said, it should be the
dishonor of the Lords, that they were backward to perform their parts; but
still they were resolved to go on. And this had carried it to the latter end of
October. About the 17th. or 18th. Captian Walcot came to me, and told me, now
they were resolved positively to rise, and did believe that a smart Party might
perhaps meet with some Great Men. Thereupon I told the Duke of it; I met him in
the street, and went out of my Coach into his, and told him, That there was
some dark intimation, as if there might be some Attempt upon the Kings Person;
with that he struck his breast with a great Emotion of spirit, and said,
Godsoe, Kill the KING! I will never suffer that. Then we went to the Playhouse
to find Sir Thomas Armstrong, and send him up and down the City to put it off,
as they did formerly; and it was done with that success, that we were all
quieted in our minds, that at that time nothing would be done. But upon the day
the King came from New Market, we dined together; the Duke of Monmouth was one,
and there we had a notion conveyed among us, that some bold Action should be
done that day; which comparing it with the Kings coming, we concluded it was
designed upon the King. And I remember my L. Gray, says he, By God, If they do
attempt any such thing, it cannot fail. We were in great anxiety of mind, till
we heard the Kings Coach was come in, and Sir Thomas Armstrong not being there,
we apprehended that he was to be one of the Party (for he was not there). This
sailing, it was then next determined (which was the last Alarm and News I had
of it) to be done upon the 17 th. of November, the Anniversary of Queen
Elizabeth; and I remember it by this Remark I made my self, That I feared it
had been discovered, because I saw a Proclamation a little before, forbidding
public Bonfires without leave of my Lord Mayor. It made some impressions upon
me, that I thought they had got an intimation of our Intention, and had
therefore forbid that Meeting. This therefore of the 17 th. of November being
also disappointed, and my Lord Shaftsbury, being told things were not ripe in
the Country, took Shipping and got away; and from that time, I heard no more of
him, till I heard he was dead. Now, Sir, after this, we all began to lie under
the same sense and apprehensions that my Lord Shaftsbury did, That we had gone
so far, and communicated it to so many, that it was unsafe to make a Retreat;
and this being considered, it was also considered, that so great an Affair as
that was, consisting of such infinite particulars, to be managed with so much
sineness, and to have so many parts, it would be necessary, that there should
be some General Council, that should take upon them the care of the Whole. Upon
these Thoughts, we resolved to erect a little Cabal among our selves, which did
consist of six persons; and the persons were, the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord of
Essex, my Lord Russel, Mr. Hambden Jun. Algernon Sidney, and my Self.


Mr. At. Genesis About what time was this, when you settled this Council?


L. Howard. It would have been proper for me in the next place to tell you
that, and I was coming to it. This was about the middle of January last, (as
near as I can remember); for about that time, we did meet at Mr. Hambdens House.


Mr. At. Genesis Name those that met.


L. Howard. All the Persons I named before: that was, the Duke of Monmouth, my
L. Essex, my L. Russel, Col. Sidney, Mr. Hambden Jun. and my self. When we met
there, it was presently agreed, what their proper Province was, which was to
have a care of the Whole: And therefore it was necessary some General things
should fall under our Care and Conduct, which could not possibly be Conducted
by individual Persons. The things that did Principally Challenge this Care, we
thought were these; Whether the Insurrection was most proper to be begun in
London or in the Country, or both at one instant. This stood upon several
different Reasons: It was said in the Country; and I remember the D. of
Monmouth insisted upon it, that it was impossible to oppose a Formed, well
Methodiz'd, and Governed Force, with a Rabble hastily got together; and
therefore whatever Numbers could be gathered in the City, would be suppressed
quickly before they could Form themselves: Therefore it would be better to
begin it at such a distance from the Town, where they might have an Opportunity
of Forming themselves, and would not be subject to the like panick Fear, as in
the Town, where half an hour would convey the News to those Forces, that in
another half hour would be ready to suppress them.


Mr. At. Genesis Was this Determined among you all?


L Howard. In this manner that I tell you, Why it was necessary to be done at
some reasonable distance from the Town. And from thence it was likewise
considered, that the being so remote from the Town, it would put the King upon
this Dilemma, That either the King would send His Forces to subdue them, or
not; if He did, He must leave the City Naked, who being Proximi Dispositioni to
Action, it would give them Occasion to Rise, and come upon the back of the
Kings Forces; if he did not send, it would give them time to Form their Number,
and be better Ordered.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We do not desire all your Discourse and Debates; What
was your other General thing?


L. Howard. The other was, What Countries and Towns were the fittest and most
disposed to Action: and the Third. What Arms were necessary to be got, and how
to be disposed; and a Fourth, (which should have been indeed first in
Consideration) propounded by the D. of Monmouth, That it would be absolutely
necessary to have some Common Bank of 25 or 30000 l. to Answer the Occasions of
such an Undertaking. Nothing was done, but these things were offered then to
our Consideration, and we were to bring in our United Advice concerning them.
But the Last and greatest was How we might so order it as to draw Scotland into
a consent with us, for we thought it necessary that all the Diversion should be
given. This was the Last.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you any other Meetings?


L. Howard. We had about Ten days after this at my Lord Russels.


Mr. At. Genesis The same Persons?


L. How. Every one of the same Persons then meeting.


Mr. At. Genesis What Debates had you there?


L. How. Then it was so far, as we came to a Resolution, That some Persons
should be sent to my Lord Argyle, to settle an Understanding with him, and that
some Messengers should be dispatched into Scotland, that should invite some
Persons hither, that were judged most able to Understand the Estate of
Scotland, and give an Account of it: The persons agreed on were, Sir John
Cockram, my Lord Melvil, and another, whose Name I have since been told upon my
Description, Sir Campbel. For this purpose we did order a Person should be
thought on that was fit --


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know who was sent, and what was done upon this Resolution?


L. Howard. I have heard (I never saw him in six Months before) that Aaron
Smith was sent.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was entrusted to take care of that business?


L. Howard. Colonel Sidney, We in discourse did agree to refer it to Colonel
Sidney, to have the care of sending a Person.


Mr. At. Genesis Who acquainted you Aaron Smith was sent?


L. Howard. Colonel Sidney told me he had sent him, and given him Sixty Guineys
for his Journey.


Mr. At. Genesis What more Meetings had you?


L. Howard. We did then consider that these Meetings might have occasioned some
observation upon us, and agreed not to meet again till the return of that
Messenger. He was gone I believe, near a month before we heard any thing of
him, which we wondered at, and feared some miscarriage; but if his Letter had
miscarried, it could have done no great hurt, for it carried only a kind of
Cant in it; it was under the disguise of a Plantation in Carolina.


Mr. At. Genesis You are sure my Lord Russel was there?


L. Howard. Yes Sir, I wish I could say he was not.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he sit there as a Cipher, What did my Lord say?


L. Howard. Every one knows my Lord Russel is a Person of great Judgment, and
not very Lavish in discourse.


Sir Geo. Jeff. But did he consent?


L. Howard. We did not put it to the Vote, but it went without contradiction,
and I took it that all there gave there consent.


Mr. Sol. Genesis The raising of Money you speak of, was that put into any way?


L. Howard. No, but every man was to put themselves upon thinking of such a
way, that Money might be Collected without administering Jealousy.


Mr. At. Genesis Were there no persons to undertake for a Fund?


L. Howard. No, I think not. However it was but opinion, the thing that was
said, was Jocosely, rather than any thing else, that my Lord of Essex had
dealing in Money, and therefore he was thought the most proper Person to take
the care of those things; but this was said rather by way of Mirth, then
otherwise.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know else my Lord?


L. Howard. I was going to tell you, I am now at a full stop. For it was six
Weeks or more, before Smith's Return, and then drew on the time, that it was
necessary for me to go into Essex, where I had a small concern, there I stayed
about three Weeks, when I came back, I was informed that he was Returned, and
Sir John Cockram was also come to Town.


L. Chapter Just. Did you meet after this?


L. Howard. No my Lord, I tell you that I was forced to go three Weeks upon the
account of my Estate, and afterward I was necessitated to go to the Bath,
where I spent five Weeks, and the time of coming from the Bath to this time, is
five Weeks more; so that all this time has been a perfect Parenthesis to me,
and more then this, I know not.


L. Chapter Just. My Lord Russel, Now, if your Lordship pleases, is the time for
you to ask him any Questions.


L. Russel. The most he has said of me, my Lord, is only hearsay, the two
times we met, it was upon no formed design, only to talk of News, and talk of
things in general*


L. Chapter J. But I will tell you what it is he testifies, that comes nearest your
Lordship, that so you may consider of it, if you will ask any Questions. He
says after my Lord Shaftsbury went off (all before is but inducement as to any
thing that concerns your Lordship, and does not particularly touch you) after
his going away, he says the Party concerned with my Lord Shaftsbury, did think
fit to make choice of six Persons to carry on the Design of an Insurrection or
Rising, as he calls it in the Kingdom. And that to that purpose choice was made
of the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord of Essex, your Lordship, my Lord Howard,
Colonel Sidney, and Mr. Hambden.


L. Russel. Pray my Lord, not to interrupt you, by what Party (I know no Party)
were they chosen?


L. Howard. It Is very true, we were not Chosen by Community, but did Erect our
selves by mutual Agreement, one with another into this Society.


L. Russel. We were People that did meet very often.


L. Chapter Just. Will your Lordship please to have any other Questions asked of my
Lord Howard?


L. Russel. He says, it was a formed Design, when we met about no such thing.


L. C. J. He says, That you did consult among your selves about the Raising of
Men, and where the Rising should first be, whether in the City of London, or in
more foreign parts, that you had several Debates concerning it; he does make
mention of some of the Duke of Monmouths Arguments for its being formed in
places from the City; he says, you did all agree not to do any thing further in
it, till you had considered how to raise Money and Arms; and to engage the
Kingdom of Scotland in this Business with you; that it was agreed among you,
that a Messenger should be sent into the Kingdom of Scotland. Thus far he goes
upon his own Knowledge, as he says, what he says after, of sending a Messenger,
is by Report only.


Mr. At. Genesis I beg your pardon, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. It Is so, That what he heard concerning the sending of Aaron Smith.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any Questions?


L. Russel. We met, but there was no Debate of any such thing, nor putting any
thing in method. But my Lord Howard is a Man has a voluble Tongue, talks very
well, and is full of Discourse, and we were delighted to hear him.


Mr. At. Genesis I think your Lordship did mention the Campbells?


L. Howard. I did stammer it out, but not without a Parenthesis, it was a
person of the Alliance, and I thought of the Name, of the Argyles.


L. Russel. I desire your Lordship to take notice, that none of these Men I
ever saw, my Lord Melvile I have seen, but not upon this account.


Mr. Atterbury sworn. Mr. At. Genesis Aaron Smith did go, and Campbell he went
for is here taken. This is the Messenger. Pray what do you know of the
Apprehending of the Campbells?


Mr. Atterbury. If it please your Lordship, I did not apprehend Sir Hugh
Campbell my self, but he is now in my Custody; he was making his Escape out of
a Woodmongers House, both he and his Son.


Mr. At. Genesis How long did he own he had been at London?


Mr. Atterbury. Four Days, and that in that time he had been at three Lodgings;
and that he and his Son, and one Baily, came to Town together.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we shall, besides this, (now we have fixed this upon my
Lord) give you an account, that these Persons that were to rise always took
them as their Pay masters, and expected their Assistance. Mr. West, Mr. Keeling
and Mr. Leigh.


Mr. West sworn. Mr. At. Genesis That which I call you to, is to know whether or
no, in your managery of this Plot, you understood any of the Lords were
concerned, and which?


Mr. West. My Lord, as to my Lord Russel, I never had any Conversation with him
at all, but that I have heard in this, That in the Insurrection, in November,
Mr. Ferguson, and Colonel Romsey, did tell me, that my Lord Russel intended to
go down and take his Post in the West, when Mr. Trenchard had failed them.


L. Chapter Just. What is this?


Mr. At. Genesis We have proved my Lord privy to the Consults, now we go about to
prove, the Under-Acters did know it.


Mr. West. They always said my Lord Russel was the Man they most depended upon,
because he was a person looked upon as of great Sobriety.


L. Russel. Can I hinder people from making use of my Name? To have this
brought to influence the Gentlemen of the Jury, and inflame them against me, is
hard.


L. Chapter J. As to this, the giving Evidence by hearsay, will not be Evidence,
what Colonel Romsey or Mr. Ferguson told Mr. West, is no Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis It Is not Evidence to convict a man, if there were not plain
Evidence before, but it plainly confirms what the other swears. But I think we
need no more.


Sir Geo. Jeff. We have Evidence without it, and will not use any thing of
Garniture; we will leave it as it is, we will not trouble your Lordship any
further. I think Mr. Attorney, we have done with our Evidence.


L. Chapter J. My Lord Russel, the Kings Counsel do think to rest upon this
Evidence that they have given against your Lordship. I would put your Lordship
in mind of those things that are material in this Case, and proved against your
Lordship, Here is Colonel Romsey does prove against your Lordship this, That he
was sent upon an Errand, which, in truth, was Traitorous, it was a Traitorous
Errand sent from my Lord Shaftsbury by him to that Meeting. He does swear your
Lordship was at that Meeting, and he delivered his Errand to them, which was to
know what account could be given concerning the Design of the Insurrection at
Taunton, and he says, your Lordship being there, this Return was made, That Mr.
Trenchard had sailed them in his Undertaking in the Business, and therefore my
Lord Shaftsbury must be contented, and sit down satisfied as to that time. Mr.
Sheppard does likewise speak of the same time that your Lordship was there with
the rest of the Persons, the Duke and others, That there was a Discourse
concerning an Insurrection to have been made, (though he is not so particular,
as to the very Notion of it, as Colonel Romsey is) as to the time they do agree.


L. Russel Col. Romsey is not positive that I said, or heard any thing.


L. Chapter J. My Lord, If you will have a little patience to hear me, I will tell
you what it is presses you, there is this which I have mentioned, and Mr.
Sheppard does say there was a Paper purporting a Declaration then Read among
the Company there, which was to be printed upon the Rising, setting forth the
Oppressions and Grievances of the Nation. And then my Lord Howard (after a
great discourse concerning the many designs of my Lord Shaftsbury) comes
particularly to your Lordship and says, that Six of you, as a chosen Council
among your selves, (not that you were actually chosen) but as a chosen Counsel
among your selves, did undertake to manage the great matter of the
Insurrection, and Raising of Men in order to surprise the Kings Guards, and for
to Rise, (which is a Rebellion in the Nation.) He says that you had several
Consults concerning it. I told you the several particulars of those Consults he
mentioned; Now it is fit for your Lordship, and it is your time to give some
answer to these things.


L. Russel. My Lord, I cannot but think my self mighty unfortunate to stand
here charged with so High and Heinous a Crime, and that intricated and
intermixed with the Treasons and horrid Practices and Speeches of other People,
the Kings Council taking all advantages, and improving and heightning things
against me. I am no Lawyer, a very unready speaker, and altogether a stranger
to things of this Nature, and alone and without Council. Truly my Lord, I am
very sensible, I am not so provided to make my just defense as otherwise I
should do. But my Lord, you are equal, and the Gentlemen of the Jury, I think,
are Men of Consciences, they are Strangers to me, and I hope they value
Innocent Blood, and will consider the Witnesses that Swear against me, Swear to
save their own Lives, for howsoever Legal Witnesses they may be accounted, they
cannot be Credible. And for Col. Romsey, who it is notoriously known has been so
Highly Obliged by the King and the Duke, for him to be capable of such a design
of Murdering the King! I think no body will wonder, if to save his own Life, he
will endeavor to take away mine; neither does he Swear enough to do it. And
then if he did, the Time by the 13th of this King is Elapsed, it must be, as I
understand by the Law, Prosecuted within 6 Months, and by the 25 E. 3. a design
of Levying War, is no Treason unless by some overt Act it appear. And my Lord,
I desire to know what Statute I am to be Tried upon, for Generals, I think, are
not to be gone upon in these Cases.


L. Chapter J. To the Attorney General Mr. Attorney, You hear what it is my Lord
Objects to this Evidence, He says that as to those Witnesses that Testify any
thing concerning him, above six Months before he was Prosecuted, he conceives
the Act of Parliament, upon which he takes himself to be Indicted, does not
extend to it, for that says that within six Months there ought to have been a
Prosecution, and my Lord tells you, that he is advised, that a design of
Levying War, without actual Levying of War, was not Treason before that Statute.


Mr. At. Genesis To satisfy my Lord, He is not Indicted upon that Statute. We go
upon the 25 E. 3. But then for the next Objection: surely my Lord is informed
wrong. To Raise a Rebellion or a Conspiracy within the Kingdom, is it not that
which is called Levying of War in that Statute, but to Raise a Number of men to
break Prisons, etc. Which is not so directly tending against the Life of the
King. To prepare Forces to Fight against the King, that is a design within that
Statute to Kill the King; And to design to depose the King, to imprison the
King, to raise the Subjects against the King, these have been settled by several
Resolutions to be within that Statute, and Evidences of a Design of killing the
King.


L. Russel. My Lord, This is matter of Law; Neither was there but one Meeting
at Mr. Sheppards House.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, If you admit the Fact, and will rest upon the Point of
Law, I am ready to argue it with any of your Counsel. I will acquaint your
Lordship how the Evidence stands. There is one Evidence since Christmas last.


L. Russel. That Is not to the business of Sheppards House, My Lord, one Witness
will not convict a Man of Treason.


Mr. At. Genesis If there be one Witness of one Act of Treason, and another of a
second, another of a third, that manifest the same Treason to depose or destroy
the King, that will be sufficient.


L. Chapter J. My Lord, That has been resolved, the Two Witnesses the Statute
requires are not to the same individual Act, but to the same Treason, if they
be several Acts declaring the same Treason, and one Witness to each of them,
they have been reckoned two Witnesses within the Statute of E. 6.


Sir G. Jeff. If my Lord will call his Witness --


L. Russel. This is tacking of Two Treasons together, here is one in November
by one Witness, and then you bring on another with a Discourse of my Lord
Howard. And he says the Discourse passed for Pleasure.


L. Chapter Just. If your Lordship do doubt whether the Fact proved against your
Lordship be Treason or not within the Statute of E. 3. and you are contented
that the Fact be taken as proved against your Lordship, and so desire Counsel
barely upon that that is matter of Law; You shall have it granted.


L. Russel. I am not knowing in the Law, I think it is not proved, and if it
was, I think it is not Punishable by that Act. I desire Counsel may be admitted
upon so nice a Point My Life lies at stake; here is but one Witness that speaks
of a Message.


Sir Geo. Jeff. The Fact must be lest to the Jury; Therefore if my Lord Russel
has any Witnesses to call, in opposition to these matters, let him.


L.C.J. My Lord, there can be no matter of Law but upon a Fact admitted and
stated.


L. Russel. My Lord, I do not think it proved, I hope you will be of Counsel
for me, it is very hard for me that my Counsel may not speak for me in a point
of Law.


L. Chapter Just. My Lord, To hear your Counsel concerning this Fact, that we
cannot do, it was never done, nor will be done. If your Lordship doubts whether
this Fact is Treason or not, and desire your Counsel may be heard to that, I
will do it.


L. Russel. I doubt in Law, and do not see the Fact is proved upon me.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Will your Lordship please to call any Witness to the matter of
Fact?


L. Russel. It Is very hard a man must lose his life upon hearsay: Col. Romsey
says he brought a Message, which I will swear I never heard, nor know of. He
does not say he spoke to me, or I gave him any Answer. Mr. Sheppard remembers
no such thing, he was gone to, and again, here is but one Witness, and seven
months ago.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, if there be any thing that is Law, you shall have it.


L. Russel. My Lord, Colonel Romsey, the other day before the King, could not
say that I heard it, I was in the Room, but I came in late, they had been there
a good while, I did not stay above a quarter of an hour tasting Sherry with Mr.
Sheppard.


L. Chapter Just. Read the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2. My Brothers desire to have it
read.


Cl. Cro. Whereas diverse Opinions have been before this time, in what Case
Treason shall be said, and in what not: The King at the Request of the Lords
and of the Commons, has made a Declaration in the manner as hereafter
follows. That is to say, when a Man does compass or imagine the Death of our
Lord the King, or of our Lady his Queen, or of their eldest Son and Heir, or if
a Man do Violate the Kings Compagnion, or the Kings eldest Daughter unmarried,
or the Wife of the Kings eldest Son and Heir; or if a Man do levy War against
our Lord the King, in his Realm, or be adherent to the Kings Enemies in his
Realm, giving to them Aid and Comfort in the Realm or else where, and thereof
be proveably attainted of open Deed by People of their Condition. And if a Man
counterfite the Kings Great or Privy Seal, or his Money: and if a Man bring
false Money into this Realm, counterfite to the Money of England, as the Money
called Lushburgh, or other like to the said Money of England, Knowing the Money
to be false, to Merchandise or make Payment in deceit of our said Lord the
King, and of his People: and if a Man Slay the Chancellor, Treasurer, or the
Kings Justices of the one Bench or the other, Justices in Air, or Justices of
Assise, and all other Justices designed to hear and determine, being in their
Places during their Offices. And it is to be understood that in the Cases above
rehearsed, that ought to be Judged Treason, which extends to our Lord the King,
and his Royal Majesty.


L. C. Just. My Lord, That which is urged against you by the Kings Council, is
this. You are excused by the Indictment of compassing and designing the Kings
Death, and of endeavoring to Raise an Insurrection in Order to it; That, that
they do say, is, that these Counsels, that your Lordship has taken, are
Evidences of your Compassing the Kings Death, and are Overt Acts, Declaring the
same: and upon that it is they insist your Lordship to be Guilty within that
Statute.


L Russel. It is in a Point of Law, and I desire Counsel.


Mr. At. Genesis Admit your Consultations, and we will hear them.


L. Chapter J. I would set your Lordship right, for probably you may not apprehend
the Law in this Case; If your Counsel be heard, they must be heard to this,
That taking it, that my Lord Russel has consulted in this manner, for the
Raising of Forces within this Kingdom, and making an Insurrection within this
Kingdom, as Col. Romsey and my Lord Howard have deposed, whether then this be
Treason, we can hear your Counsel to nothing else.


L. Russel. I do not know how to answer it. The point methinks must be quite
otherwise, that there should be Two Witnesses to one and the same time.


Mr. At. Genesis Your Lordship remembers in my Lord Staffords Case, there was but
one Witness to one Act in England, and another to another in France.


L. Russel. It was to the same point.


Mr. At. Genesis To the general point, the lopping point.


Sir Geo. Jeff. There was not so much Evidence against him, as there is against
your Lordship.


L. C. J. My Lord, if your Lordship will say any thing, or call any Witnesses
to disprove what either of these Gentlemen have said, we will hear your
Lordship what they say. But if you contradict them by Testimony, it will be
taken to be a Proof. And the way you have to disprove them is, to call
Witnesses, or by asking Questions, whereby it may appear to be untrue.


Mr. Sol. Genesis If you have any Witnesses, call them, my Lord.


L. Russel. I do not think they have proved it. But then it appears by the
Statute, that Levying War is Treason, but a Conspiracy to levy War is no
Treason; if nothing be done, it is not Levying War within the Statute. There
must be manifest Proof of the matter of Fact, not by inference.


Mr. At. Genesis I see that is taken out of my Lord Coke. Levying War is a
distinct branch of the Statute, and my Lord Coke explains himself afterward,
and says, it is an Assuming of Royal Power, to Raise for particular puposes.


Just. Wythins. Unless matter of Fact be agreed, we can never come to argue the
Law


L. Russel. I came in late.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray, my Lord, has your Lordship any Witnesses to call, as to
this matter of Fact?


L. Russel. I can prove I was out of Town when one of the Meetings was, but Mr.
Sheppard cannot recollect the Day, for I was out of Town all that time. I never
was but once at Mr. Sheppards, and there was nothing undertaken of viewing the
Guards while I was there; Colonel Romsey, Can you swear positively, that I
heard the Message, and gave any Answer to it?


L. C. Just. To Colonel Romsey. Sir, did my Lord Russel hear you, when you
delivered the Message to the Company? were they at the Table, or where were
they?


Col. Romsey. When I came in they were standing at the Fire side, but they all
came from the Fireside to hear what I said.


L. Russel. Colonel Romsey was there when I came in.


Col. Romsey. No, my Lord. The Duke of Monmouth and my Lord Russel went away
together, and my Lord Gray and Sir Thomas Armstrong.


L. Russel. The Duke of Monmouth and I came together, and you were standing at
the Chimney when I came in; you were there before me. My Lord Howard has made
a long Narrative here of what he knew, I do not know when he made it, or when
he did recollect any thing; it is but very lately, that he did declare and
protest to several people, That he knew nothing against me, nor of any Plot, I
could in the least be questioned for.


L. C. J. If you will have any Witnesses called to that, you shall my Lord.


L. Russel. My Lord Anglesey, and Mr. Edward Howard.


My Lord Anglesey stood up. L.C. J. My Lord Russel, what do you ask my Lord
Anglesey?


L. Russel. To declare what my Lord Howard told him about me, since I was
confined.


L. Anglesey. My Lord, I chanced to be in Town the last Week, and hearing my
Lord of Bedford was in some Distress and Trouble, concerning the Affliction of
his Son, I went to give him a Visit, being my old acquaintance, of some 53
years standing, I believe, for my Lord and I were bred together at Magdalen
College in Oxon. I had not been there but a very little while, and was ready
to go away again, after I had done the good Office I came about, but my Lord
Howard came in, I don't know whether he be here


L. Howard. Yes, here I am, to serve your Lordship.


L. Anglesey. And sat down on the other side of my Lord of Bedford, and he
began to comfort my Lord, and the Arguments he used for his Comfort, were, My
Lord, you are happy in having a Wise Son, and a worthy Person, one that can
never sure be in such a Plot as this, or suspected for it, and that may give
your Lordship reason to expect a very good Issue concerning him. I know nothing
against him, or any body else, of such a barbarous Design; and therefore your
Lordship may be comforted in it. I did not hear this only from my Lord Howards
Mouth, but at my own home upon the Monday after, for I use to go to Totteridge
for fresh Air; I went down on Saturday, this happened to be on Friday, (my
Lord being here, I am glad, for he cannot forget this Discourse,) and when I
came to Town on Monday, I understood that my Lord Howard upon that very Sunday
had been at Church with my Lady Chaworth. My Lady has a Chaplain, it seems,
that preaches there, and does the Offices of the Church, but my Lady came to me
in the Evening. This I have from my Lady --


L. C. J. My Lord, What you have from my Lady is no kind of Evidence at all.


L. Anglesey. I don't know what my Lord is, I am acquainted with none of the
Evidence; nor what has been done. But my Lady Chaworth came to me, and
acquainted me, There was some Suspicion --


Sir Geo. Jeff. I don't think it fit for me to interrupt a person of your
Honor, my Lord, but your Lordship knovvs in what place we stand here, what
you can say of any thing you heard of my Lord Howard, we are vvilling to hear,
but the other is not Evidence. As the Court will not let us offer hear-says,
so neither must we that are for the King permit it.


L. Anglesey. I have told you what happened in my hearing.


Then Mr. Howard stood up. L. C. J. Come Mr. Howard, What do you know?


Mr. Howard. I must desire to say something of my Self and my Family first, My
Lord and I have been very intimate, not only as Relations, but as dear Friends,
My Lord, I have been of a Family known to have great Respect and Duty for the
King, and I think there is no Family in the Nation so numerous, that has
expressed greater Loyalty, upon which account I improved my Interest in my
Lord Howard; I endeavored, upon the great Misunderstanding of the Nation, (if
he be here he knows it,) to persuade him to apply himself to the King, to serve
him in that great difficulty of State, which is known to all the World. I
sometimes found my Lord very forward, and sometimes I softened him, upon which,
partly upon his Permission, and more upon my own Inclination of Duty, I made
several applications to Ministers of State, (and I can name them) That my Lord
Howard had a great desire of serving the King in the best way of Satisfaction,
and particularly in the great Business of his Brother. I wondered there should
be so much sharpness for a matter of Opinion, and I told my Lord so, and we had
several Disputes about it. My Lord, I do say this before I come to the thing*
After this I did partly by his permission, and partly by my own inclination, to
serve the King, because I thought my Lord Howard a Man of Parts, and saw him a
Man that had interest in the Nation, tell my Lord Feversham, that I had
prevailed with a Relation of mine, that may be he might think opposite, that
perhaps might serve the King in this great Difficulty that is emergent, and
particularly that of his Brother. My Lord Feversham did receive it very kindly,
and I writ a Letter to him, to let him know how I had softened my Lord, and that
it was my desire he should speak with my Lord at Oxon. My Lord Feversham gave
me a very kind Account when he came again, but he told me --


L. Chapter Just. Pray apply your self to the matter you are called for.


Mr. Howard. This it may be is to the matter, when you have heard me; for I
think I know where I am, and what I am to say.


L. Chapter J. We must desire you not to go on thus.


Mr. Howard. I must satisfy the World, as well as I can, as to my self, and my
Family, and pray do not interrupt me. After this, my Lord, there never passed a
day, for almost --


L. Chapter J. Pray speak to this matter.


M. Howard. Sir, I am coming to it.


L. Chapter J. Pray Sir, be directed by the Court.


Mr. Howard. Then, now Sir, I will come to the thing. Upon this ground, I had
of my Lords kindness, I applied my self to my Lord in this present Issue, on
the breaking out of this Plot. My Lord I thought certainly as near as I could
discern him, (for he took it upon his Honor, his Faith, and as much as if he
had taken an Oath before a Magistrate,) that he knew nothing of any Man
concerned in this business, and particularly of my Lord Russell, whom he
vindicated with all the honor in the World. My Lord, it is true, was afraid of
his own Person, and as a Friend, and a Relation, I concealed him in my House,
and I did not think it was for such a Conspiracy, but I thought he was
unwilling to go to the Tower for nothing again. So that if my Lord Howard has
the same Soul on Monday that he had a Sunday, this cannot be true that he swears
against my Lord Russel. This I say upon my Reputation, and Honor, and something
I could say more, he added, he thought my Lord Russell did not only unjustly
suffer, but he took God and Men to Witness, He thought him the worthiest
Person in the World. I am very sorry to hear any Man of my Name should be
Guilty of these things.


L. Russel. Call Dr. Burnet. Pray Dr. Burnet, did you hear any thing from my
Lord Howard since the Plot was discovered concerning me?


Dr. Burnet. My Lord Howard was with me, the night after the Plot broke out,
and he did then, as he had done before, with Hands and Eyes lifted up to
Heaven, say he knew nothing of any Plot, nor believed any, and treated it, with
great Scorn and Contempt.


L. Howard. My Lord, may I speak for my self.


Sir Geo. Jeff. No, no my Lord, we don't call you.


L. C. J. Will you please to have any other Witnesses called?


L. Russel. There are some Persons of Quality, that I have been very well
acquainted and conversed with, I desire to know of them: if there was any thing
in my former Carriage, to make them think me like to be Guilty of this. My Lord
Cavendish.


L. Cavendish. I had the Honor to be acquainted with my Lord Russel a long
time. I always thought him a Man of great Honor, and too Prudent and Wary a
Man to be concerned in so Vile and Desperate a design as this, and from which
he would receive so little advantage, I can say nothing more, but that two or
three days since the Discovery of this Plot, upon discourse about Col. Romsey,
my Lord Russel did express something, as if he had a very ill Opinion of the
Man, and therefore it is not likely he would entrust him with such a secret.


L. Russel. Dr. Tillitson, He appears.


L. Chapter Just. What Questions would you ask him my Lord?


L. Russel. He and I, happened to be very conversant. To know whether he did
ever find any thing tending to this in my discourse.


L. C. J. My Lord, calls you as to his Life, and Conversation, and Reputation?


Dr. Tillotson. My Lord, I have been many Years last past acquainted with my
Lord Russel, I always Judged him a Person of great Virtue, and Integrity, and
by all the Conversation and Discourse I ever had with him, I always took him to
be a Person very far from any such wicked Design he stands Charged with.


L Russel. Dr. Burnet. If you please to give some account of my Conversation?


Dr. Burnet. My Lord, I have had the Honor to be known to my Lord Russel
several Years, and he has declared himself, with much Confidence to me, and he
always upon all occasions expressed himself against all Risings, and when he
spoke of some People that would provoke to it, he expressed himself so
determined against that matter, I think no Man could do more.


L. C. J. Will your Lordship call any other Witnesses?


L. Russel. Dr. Cox. Dr. Thomas Cox stood up.


Dr. Cox. My Lord, I did not expect to have been spoken to upon this Account.
Having been very much with my Lord of late, that is for a Month or six Weeks
before this Plot came out, I have had occasion to speak with my Lord in
private, about these Public Matters. But I have always found that my Lord was
against all kind of Risings, and thought it the greatest Folly and Madness,
till things should come in a Parliamentary way. I have had occasion often to
speak with my Lord Russel in private, and having my self been against all kind
of Risings, or any thing that tended to the disorder of the Public; I have
heard him profess Solemnly, he thought it would Ruin the best Cause in the
World to take any of these irregular ways for the preserving of it, and
particularly my Lord has expressed himself occasionally of these two Persons,
my Lord Howard, and Col. Romsey. One of them, Col. Romsey, I saw once at my
Lords House, and he offered to speak a little privately. But my Lord told me he
knew him but a little, I told him he was a Valiant Man, and acted his Part
Valiantly in Portugal. He said he knew him little, and that he had nothing to
do with him but in my Lord Shaftsburys business. He said, for my Lord Howard,
he was a Man of excellent Parts of Luxuriant Parts, but he had the luck not to
be much trusted by any Party. And I never heard him say one word of Indecency,
or Immodesty toward the King.


L. Russel. I would pray the Duke of Somerset, to speak what he knows of me.


D. of Some. I have known my Lord Russel for about two Years, and have had much
Conversation with him, and been often in his Company, and never heard any thing
from him, but what was very Honorable, Loyal and Just.


L. Chapter J. My Lord does say, that he has known my Lord Russel for about two
Years, and has had much Conversation with him, and been much in his Company,
and never heard any thing from him, but what was Honorable, and Loyal, and
Just in his Life.


Foreman of the Jury. The Gent. of the Jury, desire to ask my Lord Howard
something upon the Point, my Lord Anglesey testified, and to know what answer
he makes to my Lord Anglesey.


L. C. Baron. My Lord, What say you to it, that you told his Father he was a
discreet Man, and he needed not to Fear his Engagement in any such thing?


L. Howard. My Lord, if I took it right, my Lord Angleseys Testimony did Branch
it self into two Parts, one of his own knowledge, and the other by Hear say, as
to what he said of his own knowledge, when I waited upon my Lord of Bedford,
and endeavored to comfort him, concerning his Son, I believe I said the words
my Lord Anglesey has given an account of, as near as I can remember, that I
looked upon his Lordship, as a Man of that Honor, that I hoped he might be
secure, that he had not entangled himself, in any thing of that Nature. My
Lord, I can hardly be provoked to make my own defense, least this Noble Lord
should suffer, so willing I am to serve my Lord, who knows I cannot want
affection for him; my Lord, I do confess I did say it; for your Lordship well
knows under what Circumstances we were, I was at that time to out face the
thing, both for my self, and my Party, and I did not intend to come into this
Place, and Act this Part. God knows how it is brought upon me, and with what
unwillingness I do Sustain it, but my Duty to God, the King, and my Country,
requires it, but I must confess, I am very sorry to carry it on thus far. My
Lord, I do confess I did say so, and if I had been to Visit my Lord Pemberton,
I should have said so, There is none of those that know my Lord Russel, but
would speak of my Lord Russel, from those Topics of Honor, Modesty, and
Integrity, his whole Life deserves it. And I must confess, I did frequently
say, there was nothing of Truth in this, and I wish this may be for my Lords
advantage. My Lord, will you spare me one thing more, because that leans hard
upon my Reputation, and if the Jury believe that I ought not to be believed,
for I do think the Religion of an Oath, is not Tied to a Place, but receives
its Obligation from the appeal we therein make to God, and I think, if I called
God and Angels, to Witness to a Falsehood, I ought not to be believed now, But I
will tell you, as to that, your Lordship knows, that every man that was
Committed, was Committed for a design of Murdering the King, now I did lay hold
on that part, for I was to carry my Knife close between the Paring and the
Apple, and I did say, that if I were an Enemy to my Lord Russel, and to the
Duke of Monmouth, and were called to be a Witness, I must have declared in the
presence of God and man, that I did not believe either of them had any design
to Murder the King. I have said this, because I would not walk under the
Character of a Person, that would be Perjured at the expense of so Noble a
Persons Life, and my own Soul.


L. Russel. My Lord Clifford.


L. Chapter Just. What do you please to ask my Lord Clifford?


L. Russel. He has known my Conversation for many Years.


L. Clifford. I always took my Lord, to be a very Worthy Honest Man, I never
saw any thing in his Conversation to make me believe otherwise.


L. Russel. Mr. Gore.


Mr. Luton Gore. I have been acquainted with my Lord several Years, and
conversed much with him, in all the Discourse I had with him, I never heard him
let any thing fall that tended in the least to any Rising, or any thing like
it: I took him to be one of the best Sons, one of the best Fathers, and one of
the best Masters, one of the best Husbands, one of the best Friends, and one of
the best Christians, we had. I know of no Discourse concerning this matter.


L. Russel. Mr. Spencer, and Dr. Fitz Williams.


Mr. Spencer. My Lord, I have known my Lord Russel many Years, I have been many
months with him in his House; I never saw any thing by him, but that he was a
most Virtuous and Prudent Gentleman, and he had Prayers constantly twice a day
in his House.


L. Chapter Just. What, as to the General Conversation of his Life, my Lord asks
you whether it has been sober.


Mr. Spencer. I never saw any thing but very good, very prudent and very
virtuous.


L. Russel. What Company did you see used to come to me.


Mr. Spencer. I never saw any but his near Relations, or his own Family. I have
the honor to be related to the Family. Then Doctor Fitz Williams stood up.


L. Russel If it please you Doctor, you have been at my House several times,
give an account of what you know of me.


Dr. Fitz Williams. I have had the knowledge of my Lord these fourteen years,
from the time he was married to his present Lady, to whose Father, eminent for
Loyalty, I had a Relation by Service; I have had acquaintance with him both at
Stratton and Southampton Buildings, and by all the Conversation I had with him;
I esteemed him a Man of that Virtue, that he could not be guilty of such a
Crime as the Conspiracy he stands charged with.


L. Chapter J. My Lord, does your Lordship call any more Witnesses?


L. Russel. No, my Lord, I will be very short. I shall declare to your Lordship
that I am one that have always had a heart sincerely Loyal and Affectionate to
the King and the Government, the best Government in the World. I pray as
sincerely for the Kings happy and long life as any man alive; and for me to go
about to raise a Rebellion, which I looked upon as so wicked and unpracticable,
is unlikely. Besides, if I had been inclined to it, by all the observation I
made in the Country, there was no tendency to it. What some hotheaded people
have done there, is another thing. A Rebellion cannot be made now as it has been
in former times; We have few great Men. I was always for the Government, I
never desired any thing to be redressed but in a Parliamentary and legal way. I
have been always against Innovations, and all Irregularities whatsoever, and
shall be as long as I live, whether it be sooner or later. Gentlemen, I am now
in your hands eternally, my Honor, my life, and all; and I hope the Heats and
Animosities that are amongst you will not so bias you, as to make you in the
least inclined to find an Innocent Man guilty. I call to witness Heaven and
Earth, I never had a design against the Kings Life in my life, nor never shall
have. I think there is nothing proved against me at all, I am in your hands,
God direct you.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, the Prisoner at the Bar
stands Indicted for High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of the King. The
Overt Act that is laid to prove that Conspiracy and imagination by, is the
assembling in Council to raise Arms against the King, and raise a Rebellion
here. We have proved that to you by Three Witnesses. I shall endeavor, as
clearly as I can, to state the substance of the Evidence to you, of every one
of them, as they have delivered it.

The first Witness, Colonel Romsey comes, and he tells you of a Message he was
sent of to Mr. Sheppards House, to my Lord Russel, with several other persons
who he was told would be there assembled together. And the Message was, to know
what readiness they were in, what Resolutions they were come to concerning the
Rising at Taunton. By this you do perceive that this Conspiracy had made some
progress, and was ripe to be put in action. My Lord Shaftsbury, that had been a
great Contriver in it, he had pursued it so far, as to be ready to rise. This
occasioned the Message from my Lord Shaftsbury to my Lord Russel, and those
noble persons that were met at Mr. Sheppards house, to know what the Resolution
was concerning the business of Taunton, which you have heard explained by an
undertaking of Mr. Trenchards: That the answer was, they were disappointed
there, and they could not then be ready, and that my Lord Shaftsbury must be
content. This Message was delivered in presence of my Lord Russel; the
Messenger had notice my Lord Russel was there; the Answer was given as from
them all, That at present they could not be ready, because of that
disappointment. Col. Romsey went further, and he swears there was a Discourse
concerning the Surprise of the Guards; and the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord Gray
and Sir Thomas Armstrong went to see in what posture they were in, whether it
were feasible to surprise them, and they found them very remiss; and that
account they brought back, as is proved to you by Mr. Sheppard, the other
Witness, That it was a thing very feasible. But to conclude with the substance
of Col. Romseys Evidence, he says, my Lord was privy to it, that he did
discourse among the rest of it, though my Lord was not a man of so great
Discourse as the rest, and did talk of a Rising. He told you there was a Rising
determined to be on the 19 th of November last, which is the substance of Col.
Romseys Evidence.

Gentlemen, the next Witness is Mr. Sheppard, and his Evidence was this: he
swears that about October last, Mr. Ferguson came to him of a Message from the
Duke of Monmouth, to let him know, That he and some other persons of Quality
would be there that night, that accordingly they did meet, and my Lord Russel
was there likewise; that they did desire to be private, and his Servants were
sent away; and that he was the man that did attend them. He swears there was a
Discourse concerning the way and method to seize the Guards; he goes so far, as
to give an account of the Return of the Errand the Duke of Monmouh, my Lord
Gray and Sir Thomas Armstrong went upon, That it was feasible, if they had
Strength to do it. Then he went a little farther, and he told you there was a
Paper read, that in his Evidence does not come up to my Lord Russel, for he did
not say my Lord Russel was by, and I would willingly repeat nothing but what
concerns the Prisoner. Therefore Col. Romsey and Mr. Sheppard agree in, That
there was a Debate among them how to surprise the Guards, and whether that was
feasible, and Mr. Sheppard is positive as to the Return made upon the View.

The next Witness was my Lord Howard; he gives you an account of many things,
and many things that he tells you are by hearsay. But I cannot but observe to
you, that all this hearsay is confirmed by these two positive Witnesses, and
their Oaths agree with him in it. For my Lord Shaftsbury told him of the
Disappointment he had met with from these Noble persons that would not join
with him; and then he went from my Lord Shaftsbury to the Duke of Monmouth to
expostulate with him about it (for my Lord Shaftsbury was then ready to be in
action) and that the Duke said he always told him he would not engage at that
time* This thing is confirmed to you by these two Witnesses. Col. Romsey says,
when he brought the Message from my Lord Shaftsbury, the answer was, They were
not ready, my Lord must be contented.

Next he goes on with a discourse concerning my Lord Shaftsbury, (that does not
immediately come up to the Prisoner at the Bar, but it manifests there was a
Design at that time) he had 10000 brisk Boys as he called them) ready to follow
him upon the holding up of his finger. But it was thought not so prudent to
begin it, unless they could join all their Forces. So you hear in this they
were disappointed: And partly by another accident too my Lord Howard had an
apprehension it might be discovered, that was upon the Proclamation that came
out forbidding Bonfires, to prevent the ordinary Tumults that used to be upon
those occasions. Then my Lord Howard goes on and comes particularly to my Lord
Russel: for upon this disappointment you find my Lord Shaftsbury thought fit to
be gone. But after that, the Design was not laid aside: for you hear they only
told him all along they could not be ready at that time, but the Design went on
still to raise Arms, and then they took upon themselves to consult of the
methods of it; and for the carrying it on with the greater secrecy, they chose
a select Council of Six, which were the Duke of Monmouth, my Lord of Essex, my
Lord Howard, my Lord Russel, Mr. Hambden, and Col. Sidney. That accordingly
they met at Mr Hambdens (there was their first meeting) and their Consultation
there was, how the Insurrection should be made, whether first in London, or
whether in the Country, or whether both in London and in the Country at one
time. They had some Debates among themselves that it was fittest first to be in
the Country; for if the King should send his Guards down to suppress them,
then the City that was then as well disposed to rise, would be without a
Guard, and easily effect their designs here.

Their next meeting was at my Lord Russels own house, and there their Debates
were still about the same matter, how to get in Scotland to their assistance;
and in order to that, they did entrust Col. Sidney one of their Counsel to send
a Messenger into Scotland for some persons to come hither, my L. Melvin, Sir H.
Campbell, and Sir J Cockram. Accordingly Col. Sidneys sends Aar. Smith, (but
this is only what Col. Sidney told my Lord afterward, That he had done it, but
you see the fruit of it.) Accordingly they are come to Town, and Sir H.
Campbell is taken by a Messenger upon his arrival; and he had been but four
days in Town, and he had changed his Lodging three times.

Now, Gentlemen, this is the substance of the Evidence that has been produced
against my L. Russel. My L. Russel has made several Objections, That he was
accidentally at this Meeting at Mr. Sheppards House, and came about other
business; but I must observe to you, that my Lord Russel owned that he came
along with the Duke of Monmouth, and I think he said he went away with him too.
You observe what Mr. Sheppards Evidence was: Mr. Ferguson came to tell him the
Duke of Monmouth would come, and accordingly the Duke of Monmouth did come, and
brought his Companion with him, which was my Lord Russel; and certainly they
that met upon so secret an Affair, would never have brought one that had not
been concerned. Gentlemen, there are other Objections my Lord has made, and
those are in point of Law; but before I come to them, I would observe what he
says to the second Meeting. My Lord does not deny but that he did meet both at
Mr. Hambdens House and my Lords own: I think my Lord said, they did meet only
to discourse of News; and my Lord Howard being a man of excellent Discourse,
they met for his Conversation. Gentlemen, you cannot believe that this designed
Meeting was for nothing, in this close secret Meeting, that they had no
Contrivance amongst them. You have heard the Witness, he swears positively what
the Conversation was; and you see the Fruit of it, Sir Hugh Campbells coming to
Town, and absconding when it is discovered. Now my Lord Russel insists upon it,
That admitting these Facts be proved upon him, they amount to no more than to a
Conspiracy to levy War, and that that is not Treason within the Statute of 25
E. 3. and if it be only within the Statute of the 13 th of this King, then it is
out of time, that directs the Prosecution to be within six months. The Law is
plainly otherwise. The Statute of the 13 th of this King I will not now insist
upon, though I believe, if that be strictly looked into, the Clause that says
the Prosecution shall be within six months, does not refer to Treason, but only
to the other Offenses that are highly punishable by that Statute. For the
Proviso runs thus:

13. Car. 2. Provided always, that no person be prosecuted for any of the
Offenses in this Act mentioned, (other than such as are made and declared to be
High Treason) unless it be by Order of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, under his or their Sign Manual, or by Order of the Council Table of
His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, directed unto the Attorney General for
the time being, or some other of the Counsel learned to His Majesty, His Heirs
or Successors for the time being: Nor shall any person or persons by virtue of
this present Act incur any the Penalties herein before mentioned, unless he or
they be prosecuted within six months next after the Offense committed, and
indicted thereupon within three months after such Prosecution; any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

This word (Nor) is a continuation of the former Sentence, and the Exception of
High Treason will go through all, and except that out of the Temporary
Limitation of Treason: But this is High Treason within 25 Edw. 3. To conspire
to levy War, is an Overt Act to testify the Design of the Death of the King.
And the Error of my Lord Cook has possily led my Lord into this mistake. But
this, Gentlemen, has been determined; it was resolved by all the Judges in the
Case of my Lord Cobham, 1 Jac. A Conspiracy to levy War against the Kings
Person (as this was a Conspiracy to seize the Guards) what does that tend to,
but to seize the King? and that always has been taken to be High Treason. But
there are some things called Levying of War in Law, that are not so directly
against the King; as if a Number of Men go about to levy Men to overthrow all
Enclosures, this by the generality of the Intent, and because of the
Consequences, is accounted Levying War against the King. A Conspiracy therefore
to levy such a War which by construction only is against the King, perhaps that
may not be such an Overt Act as to testify the Imagination of the Death of the
King; but other Conspiracies to raise War against the King have always bin so
taken. It Is the Resolution of the Judges in my L. Dyers Reports, the Case of
Dr. Story; A Conspiracy to invite a foreign Prince to make an Invasion, though
no Invasion follow, is an Overt Act to prove conspiring the Death of the King.
And as it has bin so taken, so it has bin practiced but of late days. In the
Kings Bench I take it, the Indictment against Plunket that was hanged, he was
indicted for Conspiring against the Life of the King, and his Charge went no
farther than for raising of Arms, and inviting the French King in; and he
suffered. This is acknowledged by my L. Cook; for he himself said in the
Paragraph before that out of which this Advice to my L. Russel is extracted,
That a Conspiracy to invite a foreign Prince to invade the Kingdom, is a
Conspiracy against the life of the King. And in the next Paragraph, he says
an Overt Act of one Treason cannot be an Overt Act of another Treason; but
constant Practice is against him in that: For what is more common, than to
indict a man for Imagining the Death of the King, and to assign the Overt Act
in a Conspiracy to raise Arms against the King? and sometimes they go on and
say, Did levy War against the King. Now by my L. Cooks Rule, levying War,
unless the Indictment be particular for that, is not an Overt Act for the
compassing the Death of the King; but the contrary has bin resolved by all the
Judges in the Case of Sir Hen. Vane, and it is the constant Practice to lay it
so in Indictments. It would be a strange construction if this should not be
High Treason. It Is agreed by every body, to take the King Prisoner, to seize
the King, that is a compassing the Death of the King: and to sit in council to
conspire to effect that, that is an Overt Act of the Imagination of the Death
of the King: now no man can distinguish this Case fom that. And this
Consultation amounted to all this; for plainly hither it tended. The
Consultation was to seize upon the Kings Guards, that could have no other stop
but to seize upon the Kings Person, and bring him into their Power. As to the
Killing of the King, I am apt to think that was below the Honor of the Prisoner
at the Bar; but this is equal Treason: If they designed only to bring the King
into their Power, till he had consented to such things as should be moved in
Parliament, it is equally Treason, as if they had agreed directly to assasinate
him. Therefore I think there is nothing for you to consider, but to see that
the Fact be fully proved: and I see nothing that has been said by my L. Russel
that does invalidate our Evidence. He has produced several Witnesses, Persons
of Honor: my L. Anglesy tells you of a Discourse my L. Howard had with my L. of
Bedford; That he told my L. of Bedford that he needed not to fear, for he had a
wife and understanding Son, and could not think he should be guilty of any such
thing as was laid to his Charge. This is brought to invalidate my L. Howards
Testimony. Gentlemen, do but observe, My L. Howard was as deep in as any of
them, and was not then discovered: Is it likely that my L. Howard, that lay
hid, should discover to my L. of Bedford that there was a Conspiracy to raise
Arms, and that he was in it? This would have been an aspersion upon my Lord of
Bedford, that any such thing should have been said.

Mr. Edw. Howard is the next, and he proves, That my L. Howard used solemn
Protestations that he knew nothing of this Conspiracy. I did observe, that
worthy Gentleman in the beginning of his Discourse (for it was pretty long)
said first, That he had been several times tempting my Lord Howard to come
over, and be serviceable to the King, and if he knew any thing, that he would
come and confess it. Why Genmen, Mr. Howard that had come to him upon these
Errands formerly, and had thought he had gained him, I conceive you do not
wonder if my Lord Howard did not reveal himself to him, who presently would
have discovered it; for, for that arrand he came. But if my Lord had had a
design to have come in and saved his Life, he would have made his Submission
voluntarily, and made his Discovery. But my Lord tells nothing till he is
pinched in his Conscience, and confounded with the Guilt (being then in
Custody) and then he tells the whole Truth, that which you have heard this day.

Gentlemen, this has been all that has been objected against the Witnesses
except what is said by Dr. Burnet; and he says that my L. Howard declared to
him, that he believed there was no Plot, and laughed at it. Why Gentlemen, the
Doctor would take it ill to be thought a person fit to be entrusted with the
discovery of this; therefore what he said to him signifies nothing, for it is no
more than this, that he did not discover it to the Doctor.

But the last Objection (which I see there has been a great many Persons of
Honor and Quality called to) is, That it is not likely my Lord Russel should be
guilty of any thing in this kind, being a man of that Honor, Virtue, and so
little blamable in his whole Conversation. I do confess Gentlemen this is a
thing that has weight in it. But consider on the other hand, my Lord Russel is
but a man, and has his humane frailties about him. Men fall by several
temptations; some out of revenge, some by malice fall into such offenses as
these are: my Lord Russel is not of that temper, and therefore may be these are
not the ingredients here. But Gentlemen, there is another great and dangerous
temptation that attends people in his circumstances, whether it be Pride or
Ambition, or the cruel snare of Popularity, being cried up as a Patron of
Liberty. This has been a dangerous temptation to many, and many persons of
Virtue have fallen into it, and it is the only way to tempt persons of Virtue;
and the Devil knew it, for he that tempted the Pattern of Virtue, showed him
all the Kingdoms of the World, and said, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Though he be a person of Virtue, yet it does not
follow, but his Virtue may have some weak part in him. And I am afraid, these
temptations have prevailed upon my Lord. For I cannot give my self any color
of objection to disbelieve all these Witnesses who give in their testimony. I
see no contradiction, no correspondence, no contrivance at all between them.
You have plain Oaths before you, and I hope you will consider the weight of
them, and the great consequence that did attend this Case, the overthrow of the
best Government in the World, and the best and most unspotted Religion, which
must needs have suffered; the greatest Liberty and the greatest Security for
Property that ever was in any Nation, bounded every way by the rules of Law,
and those kept sacred. I hope you will consider the weight of this Evidence,
and consider the consequences such a Conspiracy, if it had taken effect, might
have had. And so I leave it to your consideration upon the Evidence you have
heard.


Sir Geo. Jeff. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jurie, this Cause has
detained your Lordship a long time, by reason of so many Witnesses being
called, and the length of the defense made by the Prisoner at the Bar; and if
it had not been for the length of the time, I would not have injured your
patience by saying any thing, Mr. Solicitor having taken so much pains in it.
It is a duty incumbent upon me, under the circumstances I now stand, to see if
any thing has been omitted that has not been observed to you; and I shall
detain you with very few words.

Gentlemen, you must give me leave to tell you, it is a Case of great
consequence, of great consequence to that Noble Person that now is at the Bar,
as well as to the King: for it is not desired by the King nor by his Counsel,
to have you influenced in this matter by any thing but by the Truth, and what
Evidence you have received. In the next place, you are not to be moved by any
compassion or pity: the Oath you have taken is to go according to your
Evidence; and you are not to be moved by any Insinuations that are offered by
us for the King, nor by any insinuations by the Prisoner at the Bar; but the
Truth according to the Testimony given must be your guide. How far the Law will
affect this Question, that we are not to apply to you for; for that we are to
apply our selves to the Court (they are the Judges in point of Law) who will
take so much care in their directions to you, that you may be very well
satisfied you will not easily be led into error. For the instances that have
been put, I could put several others; But I will take notice only of one thing
that that Noble Person at the Bar seems to Object. Gentlemen, it is not
necessary there should be two Witnesses to the self same Fact, at the self same
time; but if there be two Witnesses tending to the self-same Fact, though it
was at several times, and upon several occasions, they will be in point of Law
two Witnesses which are necessary to convict a Man for High Treason. Gentlemen,
I make no doubt this thing is known to you all, not only by the Judgment of all
the Judges in England, but the Judgment of the Lords in Parliament, when I
doubt not the Prisoner at the Bar did attend in the Case of my Lord Stafford,
wherein one Witness gave an account of a Conspiracy in England, Turbervile of
another in France; and by the Opinion of all my Lords the Judges, approved in
Parliament, that was enough, and he was convicted.

The Question is, whether we have sufficiently proved this matter. Gentlemen, I
must tell you, we take no Gaols, nor bring any prosligate Persons, Persons that
wanted Faith or Credit before this time. I must tell you, that notwithstanding
the fair notice that has been given to the Prisoner at the Bar (that you see
he has taken an advantage of it, he has given an account of a private
Conversation with my Lord Howard before that Noble Person that was Witness
against him was taken) he has not given you in all his Proof hitherto, nay I
say, he has not pretended any thing in the World: wherefore you Gentlemen that
are upon your Oaths, should take it upon your Consciences, that two Men,
against whom there is no Objection, should come to damn their own Souls to take
away the life of this Gentleman; when there is no Quarrel, no Temptation,
wherefore these Gentlemen should come in the face of a Court of Justice, in the
face of such an Auditory, without respect to that infinite Being to whom they
appeal for confirmation of the Truth of their Testimony: and if they had the
Faith of Men or Christians, they must necessarily conclude, that if they did
swear to take away a man's Life that was innocent, God would sink them down
presently into Hell.

Gentlemen, in the next place I must acquaint you, that the first Witness Col.
Romsey, it is apparent he was taken notice of by the Prisoner as a man fit to
be trusted; he was engaged by my Lord Shaftsbury: But says he, would any man
believe, that that man that had received so many Marks of the Kings Favor,
both in advantage to his Estate, his Honor and Person, could be ever
contriving such an Hellish Design as this? Gentlemen, if you will argue from
such uncertain Conjectures, then all Criminals will come off. Who should think
that my Lord of Essex, who had been advanced so much in his Estate and Honor,
should be guilty of such desperate things! which had he not been conscious of,
he would scarcely have brought himself to that untimely end, to avoid the
Methods of public Justice. Col. Romsey tells you my Lord Shaftsbury was
concerned in this Conspiracy. I am sorry to find that there has been so many
of the Nobility of this Land that have Lived so happily under the benign
influence of a gracious Prince, should make so ill returns. Gentlemen, I must
appeal to you whether in your observation you found Col. Romsey to be
overhasty and an over-zealous Witness; he did not come as if he came in spite
to the Prisoner at the Bar: you found how we were forced to pump out every
thing,; but after he had been pressed over and over again, then he came to it:
So that I observe to you, that he was an unwilling Witness.

Gentlemen, give me leave to observe to you, the Prisoner at the Bar, before
such time as Mr. Sheppard came up and gave evidence against him, says he, I
come only by accident, only to taste a parcel of wine. Mr Sheppard when he comes
up, he tells you, there was no such design. Ferguson (that was the person he
kept company with, the Reverend Dean and the rest of the Clergy of the Church
of England, they were not fit to be trusted with it, but this Independent
Person Ferguson) he gives notice of the coming of the persons, and in pursuance
of this notice they all come, they come late in the Evening, not in the posture
and quality they use to go, for you find they had not so much as a Coach. Is it
probable they came to taste Wine? Wherefore did they go up into a room?
Wherefore did they order Mr. Sheppard that none of the Boys should come up, but
that the Master must fetch the Sugar and Wine himself? wherefore you may
perceive the Action they were upon, there were only to be such persons as had
an affection for such a cause. You find pursuant to what Col. Romsey says, that
there was a direction to take a view of the Guards, that Sir Tho. Armstrong
comes back and makes this Report: says he, I have taken notice they are in such
an idle careless posture, that it is not impossible to surprise them. This Mr.
Sheppard he does not come, nor does he appear to you to come here out of any
vindictive humor, to do the Prisoner at the Bar any hurt.

In the next place we have my Lord Howard, he comes and positively tells you
after he had given an account (for you observe there were two parts to be acted
in this horrid Tragedy, there was, first, the Scoundrel sort of People were to
be concerned to take away the Life of the King and the Duke, the Great Persons
were to head the Party in the Rising) they put themselves in proper postures,
each of them consenting to something of the Surprise, in as much as you observe
that Sir Thomas Armstrong and some other Persons might not be trusted. They
come and resolve themselves out of a General Council, and they meet in a
particular Council of Six, looking upon themselves as the Heads of the Party:
And I must tell you many of them (we live not in an age of such obscurity, but
we know them) how fond have they been of the applause of the people! As that
person encouraged himself, yesterday they were Liberatores Patriae that could
Murder the King and the Duke.

My Lord, I must take notice that this noble Lord is known to have an intimacy
with him; you observe with how much tenderness he is pleased to deliver
himself, how carefully he reports the Debates of the particular Consults of the
persons to be entrusted in the management; he tells you that Noble Lord the
Prisoner at the Bar was pitched upon, and Algernoon Sidney, a man Famous about
the Town, for what? To call in Parties from some of his Majesty's other
Dominions, persons we know ripe enough for Rebellion, to assist. Pursuant to
this, you find persons sent of a Message for some to come over, whereof some
are in hold: So that for all dark and obscure sort of matters, nothing can be
better brought to light than this, of taking all matters together, with the
concurring Circumstances of Time and Place.

Gentlemen, I must confess this Noble Lord has given an account by several
Honorable persons of his Conversation; which is a very easy matter. Do you
think if any man had a design to raise a Rebellion against the Crown, that he
would talk of it to the Reverend Divines, and the Noble Lords that are known to
be of Integrity to the Crown? Do you think the Gentleman at the Bar would have
so little concern for his own life, to make this Discourse his ordinary
Conversation? No it must be a particular Consult of Six, that must be entrusted
with this. I tell you, it is not the Divines of the Church of England, but an
Independent Divine, that is to be concerned in this; they must be persons of
their own complexion and humor. For Men will apply themselves to proper
Instruments.

Gentlemen, I would not labor in this case; for far be it from any man to
endeavor to take away the Life of the Innocent. And whereas that Noble Lord
says, he has a virtuous good Lady, he has many Children, he has Virtue and
Honor he puts into the Scale: Gentlemen, I must tell you on the other side,
you have Consciences, Religion; you have a Prince, and a merciful one too;
consider the life of your Prince, the life of his Posterity, the consequences
that would have attended if this Villainy had taken effect. What would have
become of your Lives and Religion? what would have become of that Religion we
have been so fond of preserving? Gentlemen, I must put these things home upon
your Consciences. I know you will remember the horrid Murder of that most pious
Prince, the Martyr King Charles the First. How far the Practices of those
persons have influenced the several Punishments since, is too great a secret
for me to examine. But now, I say, you have the Life of a merciful King, you
have a Religion that every honest man ought to stand by, and I am sure every
loyal man will venture his Life and Fortune for. You have your Wives and
Children. Let not the Greatness of any man corrupt you, but discharge your
Consciences both to God and the King, and to your Posterity.


L. C. J. Gentlemen of the Jury, the Prisoner at the Bar stands indicted before
you of High Treason, in compassing and designing the Death of the King, and in
declaring of it by Overt Acts; endeavoring to raise Insurrections and popular
Commotions in the Kingdom here. To this he has pleaded not Guilty. You have
heard the Evidence that has been against him, it has been at large repeated
by the Kings Counsel, which will take off a great deal of my trouble in
repeating it to you again. I know you cannot but take notice of it, and
remember it, it having been stated twice by two of the Kings Counsel to you;
it is long, and you see what the parties here have proved. There is first of all
Col. Romsey, he does attest a Meeting at Mr. Sheppards House, and you hear to
what purpose he says it was; the Message that he brought, and the Return he
had; it was to enquire concerning a Rising at Taunton; and that he had in
Return to my Lord Shaftsbury was, that Mr. Trenchard had failed them, and my
Lord must be contented, for it could not be at that time. You hear that he does
say, that they did design a Rising; he says, there was a Rising designed in
November, I think, he says the 17 th, upon the day of Qu. Elizabeth's Birth.
You hear he does say, There was at that Meeting some Discourse concerning
inspecting the Kings Guards, and seeing how they kept themselves, and whether
they might be surprised; and this he says was all in order to a Rising. He says
that at this my Lord Russel was present. Mr. Sheppard does say that my Lord
Russel was there: That he came into this Meeting with the Duke of Monmouth, and
he did go away with the Duke of Monmouth, as he believes. He says, there was
some Discourse of a Rising, or Insurrection, that was to be procured within the
Kingdom; but he does not tell you the particulars of any thing, he himself does
not. My Lord Howard afterward does come and tell you of a great Discourse he
had with my Lord Shaftsbury in order to a Rising in the City of London, and my
Lord Shaftsbury did value himself mightily upon 10000 Men he hoped to raise;
and a great deal of Discourse he had with my Lord Shaftsbury. This he does by
way of Inducement to what he says concerning my Lord Russel. The Evidence
against him is some Consults that there were by Six of them, who took upon
them, as he says, to be a Council for the Management of the Insurrection that
was to be procured in this Kingdom. He instances in two that were for this
purpose; the one of them at Mr. Hambdens House, the other at my Lord Russels
House. And he tells you, at these Meetings there was some Discourse of
providing Treasure, and of providing Arms, but they came to no Result in these
things. He tells you, that there was a Design to send for some of the Kingdom
of Scotland, that might join with them in this thing. And this is upon the
matter the substance of the Evidence that has been at large declared to you by
the Kings Counsel, and what you have heard. Now, Gentlemen, I must tell you,
some things it lies upon us to direct you in

My Lord excepts to these Witnesses, because they are concerned by their own
showing in this Design: If there were any, I did direct (some of you might hear
me) yesterday, that that was no sufficient exception against a man's being an
Evidence in the case of Treason, that he himself was concerned in it; they are
the most proper persons to be Evidence, none being able to detect such
Councils* but them. You have heard my Lord Russels Witnesses that he has
brought concerning them, and concerning his own integrity and course of life,
how it has been sober and civil, with a great respect to Religion, as these
Gentlemen do all testify, Now the Question before you will be, whether upon
this whole matter you do believe my Lord Russel had any design upon the Kings
life, to destroy the King, or take away his life, for that is the material part
here. It Is used and given you (by the Kings Counsel,) as an evidence of this,
That he did conspire to raise an Insurrection; and to cause a Rising of the
people, to make as it were a Rebellion within the Nation, and to surprise the
Kings Guards, which say they can have no other end but to seize and destroy the
King; and it is a great evidence (if my Lord Russel did design to seize the
Kings Guards, and make an Insurrection in the Kingdom) of a design for to
surprise the Kings Person. It must be lest to you upon the whole matter: You
have not evidence in this Case as there was in the other matter that was tried
in the morning or yesterday, against the Conspirators to Kill the King at the
Rye. There was a direct evidence of a Consult to Kill the King, that is not
given you in this Case; this is an act of contriving Rebellion and an
Insurrection within the Kingdom, and to seize his Guards, which is urged as an
evidence, and surely is in it self an evidence to seize and destroy the King.

Upon this whole matter this is left to you. If you believe the Prisoner at the
Bar to have conspired the Death of the King, and in order to that to have had
these Consults that these Witnesses speak of, then you must find him Guilty of
this Treason that is laid to his Charge.


Then the Court adjourned till Four of the Clock in the Afternoon, when the
Jury brought the said Lord Russel in Guilty of the said High Treason. Saturday
14th. July, My Lord Russel was brought to the Bar. Cl. of Cr. WIlliam Russel
Esquire hold up thy Hand which he did. Thou have been Indicted for High Treason
against our Sovereign Lord the King, and thereupon have pleaded Not Guilty, and
for thy Trial have put thy self upon the Country, which Country has found thee
Guilty. What can thou say for thy self why Judgment of Death should not pass
upon thee according to the Law?


L. Russel* Mr. Recorder, I should be very glad to hear the Indictment read.


Mr. At. Genesis You may read it.


Cl. of Cr. Will you have it read in Latin or English?


L. Russel. In English.


The Clerk read to the words of Conspiring the Death of the King. L. Russel
Hold, I thought I had not been charged in the Indictment as it is, of
Compassing and Conspiring the Death of the King.


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, my Lord,


L. Russel. But Mr. Recorder, If all that the Witnesses swore against me be
true, I appeal to you and the Court, I appeal to you whether I am Guilty within
the Statute of 25 E. 3. they having sworn a Conspiracy to levy War; but no
intention of Killing the King: And therefore I think truly Judgment ought not
to pass upon me for Conspiring the death of the King, of which there was no
proof by any one Witness.


Mr. At. Genesis That is no Exception.


Mr. Recorder. My Lord, that was an Exception proper (and as I think you did
make it) before the Verdict; whether the Evidence does amount to prove the
Charge, that is proper to be observed to the Jury; for if the Evidence come
short of the Indictment, they cannot find it to be a true Charge; But when the
Jury has found it, their Verdict does pass for truth. We are bound by the
Verdict as well as your Lordship we are to go by what the Jury have found, not
their Evidence.


L. Russel. Without any proof?


Mr. Recorder. The Jury must be governed by their Evidence.


L. Russel. I think it very hard I must be condemned upon a point that there
was not one thing of it sworn, therefore I think I may very legally demand
Arrest of Judgment.


Mr. Recorder. I hope your Lordship will consider it is not the Court can give a
Verdict, it must be the Jury. I believe their is no body in the Court does
delight in giving such Judgments, especially against your Lordship. The Verdict
is found, and the Kings Attorney General on behalf of the King does demand it.


Mr. At. Genesis I do demand Judgment of the Court against the Prisoner.


Proclamation was made for silence while Judgment was giving. Mr. Recorder. My
Lord Russel, your Lordship has been Indicted, and Tried, and found Guilty of
High Treason, the greatest of Crimes, your Quality is great, and your Crime is
great. And I hope and expect that your behavior and preparation in this
Condition will be proportionable. My Lord, it is the Duty of the Witnesses to
give Evidence according to Truth, it is the Duty of the Jury to proceed
according to Evidence. and it is the Duty of the Court to give Evidence
according to the Verdict. It is the Kings pleasure signified by his Attorney
General, to demand Judgment against your Lordship according to this Verdict,
and therefore my Lord I shall not delay it with any further circumlocution. The
Judgment the Law has provided, and is the Duty of the Court to give, is,


That you be carried back again, to the place from whence you came, and from
thence be drawn upon an Hurdle to the place of Execution; where you shall be
hanged by the neck, but cut down alive, your Entrals and Privy Members cut from
your Body, and burnt in your sight, your Head to be severed from your Body, and
your Body divided into four Parts, and disposed at the Kings pleasure. And the
Lord have Mercy upon your Soul. FINIS.

