The TRIAL and Condemnation of the Trustees of the Land-Bank at Exeter
Exchange, for Murdering the Bank of England at Grocers-Hall.
Before Sir I. H. L -- d M -- r, Sir S. L. R -- r, at the Old-Bayly.

Jurors and Witnesses.

Sir W. C.

Sir W. S.

Sir VV. G.

Sir H. F.

Sir I. E.

Sir A. T.

O -- ah S -- ck

G -- H --

I. C.

L. P.

R. L.

T. I.

Counsel against the Murderers, K -- G. Clerk of the Arraigns -- Crier, VV. A
-- d. Mr. B -- coe attending to hear the Trial. Ant. G -- ot coming in
accidentally. R. VV. a Volunteer Witness.

The Indictment.

THe Jurors upon their Oaths do say, That the Trustees of the Land-Bank at
Exeter-Exchange not having the Fear of the Mighty THE before their Eyes, but
moved and seduced by the instigation of Sense and Reason, the Bank of England
at Grocers-Hall, in the Ward of Cheap, London, intending to kill and murder, on
the 10 th day of August 1695. upon the Bank of England aforesaid, (in Peace
from all their Creditors then being) at Grocers-Hall aforesaid, did make an
Assault, and with a certain formidable Weapon, called The Settlement of the
Land-Bank enrolled in Chancery An. Dom. 1695. containing Ten Skins of Vellum,
in length 24 Inches, and in breadth 22 Inches, in both their hands then having,
then and there unto the Bank of E^gland aforesaid, on that part of their Head
where their Brains should lie, with both their Hands aforesaid, one Mortal
VVound, in length three Inches, and in depth two Inches, did give, of which
said wound the Bank of England aforesaid, at Grocers-Hall aforesaid, did
languish until the then next Session of Parliament. And the Jurors aforesaid
upon their Oaths do say, That afterward, to wit, in the said then next Session
of Parliament, the Trustees aforesaid, the sooner to kill and murder the the
said Bank of England, upon the same Bank of England then languishing, at
Grocers-Hall aforesaid, did make a further Assault, and a certain poisoned
Arrow made of Copperas, Galls and Rags, called A drawn Clause for enabling the
Trustees of the Land-Bank to purchase the Reversions of the Annuities, in their
right hand then having, out of their right hand aforesaid, into the H -- se of
C -- ns then sitting did shoot, from whence the same Arrow so shot did rebound
upon Grocers-Hall aforesaid, and the Bank of England aforesaid then and there
languishing upon the same part of the Head did smite: And so the Jurors
aforesaid do say, That the Trustees aforesaid, the last Session of Parliament
aforesaid, to the Bank of England aforesaid, at Grocers-Hall aforesaid, one
other mortal wound did give, of which the said Bank then languished, until the
end of the said Session of Parliament. And the Jurors aforesaid do say, that
before the end of the said Session of Parliament, the Trustees aforesaid, the
sooner to kill and murder the said Bank of England, in and upon the same Bank
of England, at Grocers-Hall aforesaid, did make a further Assault, and another
poisoned Arrow, made of Copperas, Galls and Rags, called A Bill for
Establishing a Land-Bank, in both their hands then having, into the same H --
se of C -- ns then sitting, out of both their hands aforesaid did shoot, which
said Bill did then and there grow into a certain formidable Engine, called An
Act of Parliament. And the Jurors aforesaid do say, That the Trustees
aforesaid, the last Session of Parliament aforesaid, at Grocers-Hall aforesaid,
with the Act of Parliament aforesaid, in both their hands then having, the Bank
of England aforesaid, at Grocers-Hall aforesaid, then and there languishing,
upon the same part of the Head one other mortal wound did give, of which the
Bank of England aforesaid, at Grocers-Hall aforesaid, until the fifth day of
May, 1696. did languish, and then and there languishing died. And so the Jurors
aforesaid do say, That the Trustees of the Land-Bank at Exeter-Exchange
aforesaid, the Bank of England at Grocers-Hall aforesaid, did Kill and Murder
against the Peace. etc. Crier Sir VV. C. To the Book.


Trustees We Challenge him.


Sir VV. C. Bear Witness! I go in dread of my Life.


Counsel I bar Challenges, for there are so many Quirks in the Law about them,
that if they are admitted, I Will quit the Court


Mr. R -- r Gentlemen Murderers! Pray be not so rough in your Behavior, for
you will fright the Jury and Counsel out of Court: Whatever your Resentments
are, let your words be soft: Learn Meekness and Malice (the true
Accomplishments of a Courtier)


Trustees Well, (Mr Crier) Execute your Office


Crier Gentlemen of the Jury, lay all your Hands on the Book together, (All
hands on) You shall all Swear your selves VVitnesses and Jurymen in this
Cause, (All kiss the book)


Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen of the Jury, You are to try this Issue against the
Murderers at the Bar. If you find them Guilty, or that they fled from it,
Enquire what Guineas or Milled Money they have: If neither Guilty nor Fled, say
so and no more, and hear your selves give Evidence.


Cl. of the Arr. You Murderers at the Bar, hearken what I shall say to you. You
stand here Indicted by the Name of Trustees of the Land-Bank at
Exeter-Exchange, For that you, etc. How say you, are you Guilty or not?


Trustees Not Guilty: And we desire our Plea may be Recorded


Cl. of the Arr. It Is Recorded


Trustees Now Mr G -- pray take Notice, that you have Indicted us by the Name
of Trustees of the Land-Bank at Exeter Exchange, and by that Name we have
pleaded, and this Plea is Recorded, and now we are a Corporation upon Record,
to sue and be sued by our common Name


Sir VV. S. G -- ds Bl -- d Mr G -- what Blunders do you make, this was their
first stratagem in the House of Commons, to make themselves a Corporation by
being called by Parliament Trustees of the Land-Bank, in the Clause they
offered for purchasing the Reversions of the Annuities, but we found it out,
and so the Clause was withdrawn, and now you have made a fine mornings work of
it, and be damned to you for an Old Blockheard


Counsel This is the first time I have been called Blockhead in Court since I
been a Common Pleas Attorney; but if they have any Exceptions to the
Indictment, let them take advantage of it after the Trial: I Will go on to the
Evidence, and I believe Mr S -- ck will go through the whole Cause


Mr. R -- r If Mr S -- ck can go through the whole Evidence, you had best set
him a joined stool, and let him stand up in the middle


Crier Mr S -- ck, please to mount the stool ( Up O -- ah!)


Sir VV. C. And I Will stand on the other side of these Gentlemen Murderers, for
I don't like their Challenges


Counsel We will begin with the Settlement; Mr S -- ck, pray give the Court an
Account what you know of The Settlement of the Land-Bank at Exeter-Exchange


Mr S -- ck. Account! I can give no account what it is: I thought you could
give the best Account of that, because you are a Lawyer


Counsel A Lawyer, so I am: I have been a Barrister ever since I was Eight and
Fifty, but I never read that Settlement, nor never will, for it is against the
Prerogative and the Scriveners, and therefore I and three other Conveyancers
have made an Oath never to have any thing to do with it.


Trustees Come Gentlemen, You shall not want your Evidence, here is the
Settlement against the Prerogative and Scriveners


Counsel Let the Court do as they please; but for my part, if you begin to read
it I Will be gone, for I know there is a Trick in it, and they produce it here to
draw us in to be guilty of Misprision, by being privy to it (being, as I say,
against the Prerogative) and I offer my Opinion as Amitia Curie, that you
cannot safely read it


Sir. H. F. Ay, G -- s Bl -- d, I Will hold 3 to 2 it is against the Prerogative


Sir VV. S. G -- s Z -- nd, We will not hear that damned long Settlement, I
remember they brought just such long things in Parchment to Grocers-Hall, to
have us lend Money upon Land in Lancashire, and made us all as mad as Devils


Sir H. F. D -- mn 'em! I would not read it for Five Pounds


Mr. G. H -- I perceive here is like to be a Debate about the Contents of this
settlement, but with submission, if we prove the settlement to be the Cause of
the Death of the Bank of England, it will be sufficient, though we prove not
the Contents of the settlement


Counsel Ay, ay, it is enough. Come, Mr. S -- ck, do you believe in your
Conscience, that the Settlement of the Land-Bank at Exeter-Exchange was the
Cause of the Death of The Bank of England?


Mr, S -- ck. Ay, on my Soul and Conscience do I; for we were at that time in
as good Health and Credit as one would wish, Money was brought in to us all day
long, as cheap as Neck Beef, we gave nothing for it, but little bits of Paper
called Speeds Notes.


Mr. R -- r. In what manner do you apprehend the Land-Bank impaired your Credit?


Mr. S -- ck. Why, every one said, that if that succeeded, it would draw the
Cash from us, because their Bills being Mortgages on Lands, would be esteemed
better Security than our Cashiers Notes, which were given out contrary to Law,
and had no real Security.


Mr. R -- r. Mr. S. -- ck. Consider, we are trying a Murder, and not a
Trespass: The Land Bank might do you an Injury, but you must prove the
Mortality of the Wound,


Mr. S -- ck. Why, Sir, you must know, that at that time our Bank was as bigg
as they could tumble with Expectation of being the sole Bank of England, and
having the Power of giving Laws to the Kingdom, and the Land-Bank Settlement
just then starting out, our Bank took a fright, miscarried of their
Expectation, fell into Fits of the Mother, and never clawed it off to their
dying day.


Counsel. This is full Evidence of the first Wound, Pray, Mr. S -- ck, give the
Court and the Jury an Account of what you know of the second Wound, by the
Clause brought into the House of Commons, for enabling the Trustees of the
Land-Bank at Exeter-Exchange to purchase the Reversions of the Annuities.


Mr S -- ck I don't know any thing of it


Counsel Well, do you believe in your Conscience that this Clause was one
Cause of the Death of the Bank of England?


Mr. S -- ck. Ay, on my Soul and Conscience do I.


Sir W. C. Nay, I am sure of it; for I remember something about a Clause about
something at Exeter-Exchange, and I believe that must be it; and I am sure my
Stock fell 50 l. per Cent. upon it; I am sure I have lost 1000 l. by their
damned Clauses and Settlements, or one thing or other.


Counsel. Well, well, there is the second stroke proved, and now we'll go on to
the Act of Parliament.


Counsel. Come Mr. S -- ck, give the Court --


Mr. S -- ck. Nay, I think I can say the Words my self now, I O -- ah S -- ck
do believe in my Soul and Conscience that the Act of Parliament for
Establishing the Land-Bank was the Cause of the Death of the Bank of England.


Sir W. C. Well sworn S -- ck, Faith.


Counsel. Sworn! he swears as well as if he were served with a Subpoena: And
for all Sir W. S. called me Block-head, you see I understand Evidence, and now
I have nothing to do but to sum it up; which is in short, That the Land-Bank
murdered the Bank of England; for which I pray Judgment.


Trustees. And we pray the Verdict may be given before Judgment.


Counsel. The Verdict is but a Ceremony, with which the Court may dispense.


Mr. R -- r. Nay, Mr. G --, we are Counsel for the Prisoners, and will do them
Justice, therefore I am for the Verdict before Judgment.


Trustees. Thanks for Justice: Then, Mr. G. --, before your Verdict prove the
Bank of England dead.


Mr. S -- ck. I have the Evidence for that about me: Here Is their last Will.


Counsel. This same O -- ah manages Evidence almost as well as I do. Come, read
the Will.


Cl. of the Arr. KNow all our Creditors by these Presents, That we the
Governor and Company of the Bank of England, being weak in Body through the
Wounds received from the Land-Bank at Exeter-Exchange (to whom we lay our
Death) but of as good sense as ever we were, finding our selves impaired in our
Credit and Reputation, and despairing of Recovery, do make this our last Will
and Testament. First, We bequeath our Soul to the Devil, in order to serve the
Public out of our Creditors Money: And as to the Qualities of our Mind, we
dispose thereof as follows, viz. All our Skill in Foreign Exchanges, and our
Probity and Candor in making up the Accounts of the Loss thereof, we give to
all and every of our Directors (except four or five) jointly and severally, to
hold to them and their Successors in Tail-Bank, as Heire-Loomes and indelible
Monuments of their Skill and Probity for ever. All our Obstinacy and Blunders
we give to our present G -- r. All our Oaths, Impudence and Lies, we give unto
our present D -- G -- r, and our D -- r Sir H. F. to hold in joint Partnership
during their Lives, and the Survivor to have the whole. All our shuffling
Tricks we give to our D -- r Sir W. G. All our Cinicalness and Self-conceit we
give to our D -- rs I. W. and G. H. equally to be divided betwixt them, share
and share alike, as Tenants in Common. All our Blindness and Fear we give unto
our D -- r O -- ah S -- ck, and we also give him five Pounds in Money, to buy
him a New Cloth Coat, a New half Beaver Hat, a second hand Periwigg, and an
old black Sword, to solicit with in the Lobby, and also to buy him a pair of
Spectacles to write Letters to Lords with. And as to the residue of our
Temporal Estate (besides the said 5 l.) we dispose thereof as follows:
Imprimis, We devise to our own Members (when they shall have paid in their
whole 100 l. per Cent.) our Fund of 100000 l. per Ann. charged and chargeable,
nevertheless with the sum of 1200000 l. for which it stands Mortgaged by Bank
Bills, in full satisfaction of all their great Expectations from the Probity
and Skill of our Directors, advising them to accept a Redemption thereof by
Parliament whenever they can have it. Item, All our ready Moneys (before any of
our Debts paid) we give to our Executors herein after named, upon trust that
they shall from time to time, until the first day of August, 1696. lend the
same into the E -- r, upon Condition to defeat the Establishment of the Land
Bank: And from and after the said first day of August, then to lend out the
same into the said E -- r upon security of Promises to Establish our Executors
the next Sessions instead of the Land-Bank, and for such other Premiums as our
said Executors can get to themselves for doing thereof. And we do direct our
said Executors to continue the Stock and Pensions already allowed to our fast
Friends they know where And after all our ready Moneys so disposed, we leave
the residue of our Effects for payment of our Bills and Notes, at such days and
hours, and in such manner and proportion, and with such preferences as our said
Executors shall think fit. And we do hereby Constitute our Directors Executors
of this our Will, giving unto each of them Power out of our Cash to discount
their own Talleys, Bills and Notes at Par, and the Bills and Notes of other our
Creditors at the highest Discount they can get for the same: And our Body we
commit to be buried with all privacy, lest our Creditors arrest our Corpse. In
Witness whereof we have hereunto set our Common Seal, the 4 th. day of May,
1696. Trustees. Where was your Bank buried?


M. S -- ck Why Fools! Don't you hear 'twas a private Funeral to conceal the
Body: But here is a Copy of their Epitaph.


Sir W. C. Old S -- ck blows 'em, Faith! He swears the better for being heated
a little.


The Epitaph.

Cl. of the Arr. HEre lies the Body of the Bank of England, who was born in the
Year 1694. and dyed the 5th. day of May, 1696. in the third Year of their Age.
They had Issue Legitimate by their Common Seal 1200000 l. called Bank Bills,
and by their Cashier two Millions of Sons of Whores, called Speeds Notes.
Trustees. Well, we are satisfied the Bank of England is dead, but must (...)
your witness to keep his Stool for one heat more, while we cross-examine him,
to prove the Bank of England Felo de se.


Mr. S -- ck. I don't know what that is.


Trustees. Why, that your Bank murdered themselves; and if so, their Effects
are forfeited, and you as Executors cannot have them.


Mr. R -- r, Mr. G. What do you say to the Law in that point?


Counsel. It Is Crown Law; but it may be so for ought I know, and therefore I
cannot advise the Executors to give any Evidence.


Mr. R -- r, Look you Gentlemen at the Bar, have you any other Evidence here?
for we cannot force Men to swear against themselves, that is to make them all
Felons de se.


Trustees. Yes, here is the Inquisition post mortem taken before the Justices
of the Peace, because the Body could not be found for the Coroner to take an
Inquisition upon view of it; and we pray it may be read.


The Inquisition.

Cl. of the Arr.

London ss. AN Inquisition intended, taken at Grocers-Hall the 5 th. day of
May, 1696. before A, B, C, D, etc. Justices, by E, F, G, H, etc. Jurors,
returned, sworn and impannell'd to enquire into the Cause of the Death of the
Bank of England, who upon their Oaths do say, That on the last day of the
Session of Parliament, in which the said Bank was established, the said Bank
then being in Health, the Directors of the Bank aforesaid, the fear of the Laws
of the Kingdom before their Eyes not having, but moved and seduced by the
instigation of Covetousness and Folly, at Grocers-Hall aforesaid, the day and
year aforesaid, intending to evade the said Act of Parliament, did devise and
frame several unlawful Engines called Cashiers Notes, and with the Engines
aforesaid did draw in several great sums of Clipped Moneys, and certain pieces
of Wood called Talleys, whereby they came indebted above the sum of 1200000 l
in contempt of the said Act of Parliament. And the Jurors aforesaid do say,
that in the Session of Parliament then next following, the Directors of the
Bank aforesaid, the Love of Truth in their Hearts not having, but moved by the
Fear of Punishment, with intent to impose upon the subjects of this Kingdom, at
Grocers-Hall aforesaid, a certain false Libel, called an Advertisement did
devise and frame, in these words following, or to the like effect, viz. The
Directors of the Bank of England do hereby give Notice, that they will lend
Money on all real securities at Interest of 5 l. per Cent. and the same false
Libel into the Gazette did put, And the Jurors before said do say, that the
Directors of the Bank aforesaid their Promise not regarding, the Moneys
aforesaid did not lend, nor have hitherto lent, in decepit of the subjects of
this Kingdom. And the Jurors aforesaid do say, that the Directors of the Bank
aforesaid, in further prosecution of their Covetousness and Folly, being
ignorant and unskilful in Foreign Exchanges, and having no Goods or Effects in
Foreign parts, did undertake and contract for the remitting of great Sums of
Money beyond the Seas. And the Jurors aforesaid do find, that the Bank
aforesaid having by their Cashiers Notes, and remitting of Moneys as aforesaid,
contracted great Debts at home and abroad, out of their further Covetousness
and Folly did deliver a Memorial for procureing an Act for recoining the silver
Moneys of this Kingdom, and reducing the price of Guinea's, in hopes thereby to
recover their losses by their remittances aforesaid; and also fondly fancying
that their said unlawful Engines would have drawn in unto them the Moneys
recoined, and the Guinea's reduced, in the same manner as they did the clipped
Moneys. And the Jurors aforesaid do say, That the recoining the said silver
Moneys did occasion the greatest part of the Moneys then in the subjects hands
to be drawn from them, in order to be recoined, which (contrary to the fond
Conceit of the Directors aforesaid) after the said 4 th. day of May, 1696. did
occasion great Demands to be made upon them at home and from abroad, for
payment of the Bills and Notes, in current Moneys. And the Jurors aforesaid do
say, That the Bank of England aforesaid their form^r Trespasses and Debts
calling to mind and despairing of the Payment and Forgiveness thereof, on the 5
th. day of May, 1696 between she hours of 12 and 1 of the same day at
Grocers-Hall aforesaid, a certain desperate speech (by the mouth of their
Governor) did attempt to utter, and in the attempt thereof then and there
instantly dyed. And so the Jurors aforesaid do say, that the Bank of England
aforesaid, on the 5 th. day of May 1696. between the hours of 12 and 1, of the
same day, at Grocers-Hall aforesaid, of the Payment and Forgiveness of their
former Debts and Trespasses utterly despairing, then and there of Despair dyed.
Trustees. There Is our Evidence: But because your Counsel is not used to Crown
Law, we will be so fair to inform him, that the Executors may traverse the
Inquisition, if they please, being not taken super visum Corporis: Or if he can
prove the Bank of England Non compos mentis at the time when they gave
themselves the strokes, they will not be Felo de se.


Counsel. For your advise of Traversing (which is matter of Law) you may keep
it to your selves, for I know it is as troublesome as Challenging the Jurors: But
for the Evidence I Will try it. Mr. S -- ck, Can you swear the Bank of England or
their Directors to be mad at the times they evaded the Act, printed a Lie to
the Kingdom, and ruined their own Credit by Laws procured by themselves.


Mr. S -- ck. Nay, in my Soul and Conscience I think we were all mad, and
bewitched too, for if you did but see our Hall upon a Pay-day, you would think Hell
were broke loose.


Trustees. Yes, yes, they say you keep Watch and Ward there, to defend your
Cashier from your Creditors, and your Directors from the Devil.


Mr. S -- ck. O ho! I know whereabouts you are, you have read the Letter to Mr.
L -- ck. have you! but did you never read Our Payments defended against it?


Trustees. Yes, yes, Defended Vi and Armis.


Mr. S -- ck. Well, and have NOT I spoke Lattin in my Letter to a Lord, Hic Labor
hoc opus est.


Trustees. Yes, paying your Bills is hard work.


Mr. S -- ck. Hard work! have NOT I made it easy by general Directions to the
Subjects to do as they did before the 4th. of May.


Trustees. Yes, yes, face about Gentlemen as ye were, do as ye did yesterday,
as the Militia Major said to his Men.


Mr. S -- ck. Said to his Men, you Fools you, have NOT I named the Skill and
Probity of the Directors three times in four pages.


Trustees. Yes, yes, Three blew beans in a blew bladder, rattle bladder rattle,
say that nine times in a breath if you can.


Mr. S -- ck. Breath, Fools! have NOT I said Our Hall is well situated?


Trustees. Yes, for a Den of Thieves, as your Predecessors the Bankers of old
made the Temple at Jerusalem: But can you get no one else to write for you?


Mr. B -- coe. An't shall like your Worships, I Will write for you if you please.


R. W. And I an't shall please your Honors.


Crier. Or I, Master S -- ck.


Mr. S -- ck. Where do you all live?


Mr. B -- coe. An't please you, Sir, I live in White-Cross-Alle^, in middle
Moorfields, but I ply in the Lobby in Parliament time.


R. W. I live about Charing Cross, an't please you, but I ply here at the
Old-Bayly in Sessions time, where I meet with a Jobb of Testimony now and then.


Crier. Truly, Sir, I cannot say I live any where, but I am at the Grecian
Coffee-house six hours every day.


Mr. S -- ck. What Trades are you?


Mr. B -- coe. Sir, we Club together, and write Journeywork in Partnership,
like Fiddlers, it is no matter which of us you give the money to.


Trustees. Why you will get a Clap together by mingling your Brains so.


Mr. S -- ck Well, what will you have to write for us, and against the
Land-Bank this Sessions?


Trustees Nay, they can write against No body but themselves.


Crier. Master, don't believe them, we wri^e as strong as mustard, I wrote a
Book against five Gentlemen in their Vindication, I wrote Mr. I. A's Argument
proved to be no Argument, and assigned two Errors in hi^ Settlement. First,
That the Bills do not charge the Land. Secondly, That the Lands can never be
discharged of them. There Is a Dilemma for your Worship, Master S -- ck


R. W. O we are Old Dogs at Dilemma's, we three wrote Mr. I. A's Plagiarism,
(there is a hard word for you) and proved. First, That he stole Mr B -- coe' s
Notions. Secondly That he did not write his own Book. There Is Even and Odd with
a Witness


Mr. B -- coe. And I si^n'd a Bond with condition to be void, if the money were
not paid at the day.


Mr. A -- d. And we write quick, every one takes his part, and we'll run y^ up
100 Pages presently, all the same Style, Sense and Language.


R.W. And there is no Hacks-nest in Town can under write us.


Crier. No! We go as near the Thumb as any Men, I always write in my own Hair
and Brown Paper.


Mr. B -- coe. Then we care not what we say, for we have nothing to loose but
our Ears, and the residue of Mr. A -- d's Hair.


Mr. S -- ck. Well, well, I partly understand the Prizes of these matters; We
have had several things done in Grub-street.


Mr. B -- coe. Come Master, to be short, we'll leave it to your Worship, but I
hope you will consider that I have been at great charge in printing Books, and
breaking open Chests, it cost me eighteen pence to a Blacksmith to come at the
Cash in my Bank.


R. W. Ay, that I Will swear for I had some of the money for advice upon the
Clausum fregit.


Mr. S -- ck. You must deliver your Papers in the Lobby twice a week.


Mr. B -- coe. Yes, yes, your Worship shall see us there every day, if your
Directorship please to put on your Spectacles.


Mr. R -- r. Come Gentlemen, you must not make the Court a Market Overt to sell
your Wares in. Mr. G. have you done?


Counsel. I have done, I Will let it rest here, we have proved the Bank of
England dead, and their Directors mad, and if that be not Evidence enough to
hang (...) Bank men, I don't know what is.


R. W. An please your Worships, if you want Evidence, I Will swear them into the
Plot for you in my Band.


Trustees. Ay, we had rather you would write against us twice, than swear against
us once. Your Hand upon the Bible is as terrible as a Heroes upon his Sword.


Mr. R -- r. Gentlemen of the Jury, do you want any more Evidence?


Sir W. C. No, no. 'Twould be a Disparagement to Mr. S -- ck, to have any one
joined with him! Come honest O -- ah. thou have done enough for one day,
dismount the Stool, and let me come up and give the Verdict.

( up Foreman)
Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen of the Jury are ye agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Cl. of Arr. Who shall say for you?


Jury. Our Foreman upon the stool.


Cl. of Arr. How say you Sir W. C. are these Murderers Guilty, or not Guilty?


Sir W. C. Guilty, guilty, I am sure I am 1000 l. the worse for them, one way
or other.


Cl. of Arr. What Guineas or milled Money do you find they had?


Sir W. C. 200 Thousand Guineas, which we carried to Exeter-Exchange in a Cart
one morning by break of day.


Mr. R -- r. Well, Gentlemen, I have a direction not to spill Blood, but that
your Judgment shall be, and the Court does award, That you shall go from hence
to Exeter-Exchange, (being the place from whence you came) and from thence take
the 200 thousand Guineas which are found upon you, and carry them to
Grocers-Hall, (being the place of Execution) for repa^ing the Bank of England
the 200000 l. they lent, on condition to defeat the Land Bank.


Trustees. If you will give us a Receipt upon the back of what we'll now produce,
you shall have the Money.


Mr. R -- r. What is that? give it to the Cl. of Arr.


Cl. of the Arr. Articles of a League offensive and defensive, made between --
and the Directors of the Bank of England, the day of bringing in the Bill for
Establishing a Land-Bank.


1. THat there shall be provided a flying Squadron of Volunteers (to be
commanded by Sir I. F.) who shall go pickeering in all Coffee-houses and other
public places, to rail against the Land Bank.

II. That in case the power of the Enemy shall prevail to pass the Bill into an
Act, all possible care shall be taken to add such Clauses to the Bill as may
disable the Prosecutors thereof to raise the moneys thereby intended; and if by
any mistake or inadvertency any Clause shall be agreed to, which upon second
thoughts shall be thought to tend toward the raising the said moneys, the same
shall afterward be opposed, expunged or cut out.

III. That all possible care shall be taken, that the Act be so long delayed,
that the Commission may not be Issued soon enough for receiving any
subscriptions in Clipped; money before the 4 th of May, pursuant to the Clause in
the Act for remedying the ill state of the Coin, page 9. and that the
Commission shall by any frivolous Objections be delayed as much as may be to
the 1 st. of August, to streighten the Commissioners in time, and that all
persons expediting the Commission shall be reprimanded and affronted.

IV. That after the Commission Issued, there shall be a Proclamation Issued out
by some body of the -- prohibiting all Officers of Court to subscribe to it.

V. That the said Directors (between the passing the said Act and the 1 st. of
August, 1696.) shall furnish out of their Creditors Money 200000 l. to maintain
the Seige against the Commissioners for taking subscriptions, and shall send
their Oaths of Fidelity to their Members, who took the same, forbidding them to
subscribe to the Land-Bank upon pain of damnation.

A Proclamation Issued out by one of the -- the day of Issuing out the
Commission for taking Subscriptions to the Land-Bank.

SOme Body (by his own procurement) One of the -- To all Auditors, Tellers,
Clerks, and other Officers of the Exchequer: To all Commissioners, Receivers,
Collectors, and other Officers of the Public Revenue: To all Pay-masters of
the Army and Navy, to all Agents of Regiments, and all other Officers, Agents
of Servants, having or receiving any Sallary, Stipend, Fee or Wages, out of the
Receipt of the Exchequer, Greeting. Whereas we are given to understand, that
the Commissioners for taking Subscriptions to the Land-Bank intending to invade
out Exchequer with the sum of Two Millions five hundred sixty four thousand
pounds, and to distress his Majesty, his Army and Navy, by paying the same into
our hands for their use, in order thereunto have entrenched themselves within
two several Garrisons, the one at Mercers-Hall, London; the other at
Exeter-Exchange near the Savoy, where they have provided among themselves
600000 l. and more, and do there daily rendevous, and from thence sally out in
great numbers to forage in all places where they have intelligence of any
ready Moneys: We have thought fit to Issue out this our Proclamation, strictly
charging and requiring you, and we do hereby strictly charge and command you,
That you (...) from within ten miles of the said Garrisons, and all other
places where the Enemies come to forage, that they may be thereby distressed,
and left destitute of Subscriptions. And we do also strictly charge and command
you, that in all places, and on all occasions, ye do endeavor to possess the
Subjects against the said Commissioners, as prejudicial to our designs, and
destructive to our ambition, and that ye do in all things treat and use them as
Enemies against us in open War. And we do hereby strictly charge and command
all Officers extraordinary, who are waiting for or expecting any Offices or
Places under us, or wherein we have any influence, that they be from time to
time aiding and assisting to you in aspersing and affronting the Commissioners
aforesaid. And of this you are not to fail, for fear of loosing your
possessions, and they their expectations. Given, etc. Mr. R -- r Where had you
those Papers?


Trustees. We picked them out of Mr. S -- ck Pocket, while he was kneeling to
one of his Patrons in the Lobby.


Mr. B -- coe Ay, just so they stole my Notions from me, and then turned my
Book into an Almanac to make it ridiculous.


Trustees Ay, just as the Painter clapped a Tail to a Fellow of a Monkey-face,
and then sold him for a Jack-an-apes.


Mr. B -- coe But pray Mr. R -- r Cannot I bring an Indictment of Felony against
them for this?


Mr. R -- r If the value were above a shilling you may, or else it is but petty
Larceny.


R. VV. No (...) the whole Value was but 8 pence, and therefore I have styled
it Plagiarism, which is the punishment in petty Larceny.


Crier Ay, but suppose 'twere done in the Night, (...) with submission it will
be Burglary.


Mr R -- r If the Book had Clasps on I conceive it (...) for the opening the
Clasps in the Night will be such a break^^ as to make it Burglary


Mr. B -- coe Some of them had Covers in the second year will not that do?


R. VV. Is one Witness enough to prove the Burglary?


Mr R. -- r Yes, if it be a good one.


R. VV. Then Mr. B -- coe get Clasps put on one of your Books and let me have
it, and I Will form the Oath for you, and swear it when I have done.


Mr. R -- r What Thieves and Murderers too Gentlemen, Come I must tell you, The
Blood and VVounds --


Trustees Two shillings for your Oath Sir, if you please.


Mr. R -- r What do you banter the Court too, I promise you I shall commit you to
Dr. C -- lains Messengers, to cool your Stomachs for you, since your Brains are
so hot this Morning. I say the Blood and Wounds of the Bank of England, (I know
what I Am going to say) will rise up in Judgment against you, as the blood of
the Horses will against VVhitney when they meet.


Trustees Ay, well remembered, and what is next?


L -- M -- r I Will have the printing of this Trial. That Is next.


Mr. R -- r What reason for that, this is the first word you have offered in
the Case.


L -- d M -- r What a that, why should I be put to speak, are nor you the mouth
of the Court?


Enter A. G -- t. A. G -- t Is Mr. S -- ck here?


Crier Yes.


A. G -- t Here, I have been at your Bank for 5000 l. and your Cashier tells me
the Bills are out, and that I must come to you.


Mr. S -- ck Let Us see the Bills, Why these Bills are out, I wonder that you
being an ancient Practicer, should know the Rules of the Court no better, I
think I have a Copy of them about me, ( and delivers them to Mr. G.) we cannot
pay you any money till we receive this 200 thousand Guineas from those
Land-Bank men.


A. G. What do you tell me of Rules of Court and Land-Bank men, all you and
your Banks are a pack of Cheats. I entered my manor of M -- font, with Dr. C
-- lain three months ago, and can get no money yet, here we pay Taxes and
Polls, and all the money is gone away into Banks, and Sallaries to Officers. I
offered at first to furnish them with a set of Judges for 600 l. a year a
piece; as good as any they have for 1000 l. my Brother should have been one,
and then I lost 1500 l. by one of my familiar Peers, whom I used to take by the
buttons in King James's time, but he gave me the slip to run away with his
Master. If you will chop and change your Revolutions on such suddains, how can
any man get in his Debts ffrst, I am sure I have no place, and I Will tell you
plainly if you don't pay me my money I Will sue you, you and all your Banks, and
your Land-Banks for a pack of Cheats.


Counsel. And who shall pay me?


Cl. of Arr. And me.


Crier. Ay, and me.


Mr. S -- ck I don't know, we never pay any money in Specie, nor divide any
Bills under 50 l. and that is too much for you all. We Will give the Jury a
Dinner and Mr. G. a Supper, and that is all we can do at present.


Counsel Hay, hay, I am finely bubled into a Trial, and called blockhead to
boot.


Cl. of Arr. Bubled! a plague rot 'em all for me, what must I arraign Rogues
for nothing?


Crier Nay, good Master S -- ck, Crying is dry work pray Sir.


Trustees Well Gentlemen, if you have done with us, we'll leave you together,
to print your Trial, and pay your Bills and Fees amongst your selves. And so
your Humble Servants.


The Rules of Court delivered by Mr. S -- ck to Ant. G -- dot.

THe Directors of the Bank of England, for the Instructions of all Practicers
in their Court, do order that these Rules following he skreen'd in Grocers Hall.

1. That no Bill shall be presented to the Cashire, to know whether be will pay
it or not, 'till one month at least after the date. 2. That when the Bill
stands duly presented, the Cashier shall date the day of the presentation. 3.
That any person having a Bill so duly presented and noted, may lawfully move
the Cashier at the Side-Bar to have a day appointed for payment of such part of
the Money as the Cashier shall think fit. 4. That the Cashier shall thereupon
give a day for payment, unless cause be showed to the contrary. 5. That want of
Money, or other opportunities to dispose of it to profit, be allowed as a good
Cause of Non-payment. 6. That no Bill of (...)ing or more shall be capable of
being presented to the Cashier without one Motion made to the Directors, and a
Scire Facias sued out thereupon. 7. That the Cashier accept no Bills of the
Bank in payment ^o Foreign Bills, and that all Merchants who refuse the Bank
Bills in payment of Foreign Bills, shall be summoned to Wh -- Hall as
dis^flected no the Government, for that their Bills (and Notes contrary to Law)
are the only Species of Money in the Kingdom, to be accepted and taken by all
persons but themselves.
The Epilogue.
Vanums and Vacuums in Pulpits may make sounds,
Indefinites will serve to go the Rounds;
But when we'd view them in their naked dress,
Nothing but vain words can vain things express.
I Do appoint Mr. John B -- coe's Printer in Bartholomew-Close to print this
Trial, and that no other Person presume to print the same.

J. H. M -- r.


