THE Trial, Conviction And CONDEMNATION OF Andrew Brommich and William Atkins,
For being Romish Priests, Before the Right Honorable THE Lord Chief Justice
SCROGGS, At Summer Assizes last at Stafford held there for the County of
Stafford; Where they received Sentence of Death accordingly.

Together with The Trial of Charles Kern, at Hereford Assizes last for being a
Romish Priest.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlett, at the Bible in Chancery Lane, 1679.

I do appoint Robert Pawlett to Print the Trials of Andrew Brommich, William
Atkins and Charles Kerne, and that no other person presume to Print the same.

WILLIAM SCROGGS.

THE Trial, Conviction AND CONDEMNATION OF Andrew Brommich.
Upon Wednesday the 13th. of August 1679. at the Assizes held at Stafford for
the said County, Andrew Brommich and William Atkins being both Seminary Priests
were brought to their Trial, and Convicted before the Right Honorable Sr.
William Scroggs Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England and one of his Majesty's
Justices of Assize there.
The Court being sat they proceeded to their Trial thus.

THE Lord Chief Justice having the night before charged the Sheriff to return
a good Jury, and the Court being sat, he enquired of him if he had observed
his directions; The Sheriff acquainted his Lordship that since he had
impannelled the said Jury, he had heard that one (...) Allen of (...) in the
said County, being then returned to serve on the said Jury, had said in
discourse with some of his fellows, that nothing was done against the Popish
Priests above, and therefore he would do nothing against them here, nor find
them guilty: whereupon his Lordship called for the said Allen, and one Randal
Calclough one of his fellows Jury men and another witness upon oath who proving
the words against him, his Lordship discharged him of the Jury, and committed
him to Prison, till he found sureties for his good behavior, and likewise 3
more of the Jury were discharged upon suspicion of being Popishly affected, his
Lordship commanding the Sheriff to return good men in their places, which was
accordingly done, and the Jury Sworn, viz.

Thomas Higgin, John Webb, Edward Ward, Thomas Marshall, John Beech, Randal
Calclough, Richard Trindall, James Beckett, William Smyth, William Pinson,
Daniel Buxton and Richard Cartwright.
Jurors.

Cl. of Arraign. Jailer set up Andrew Brommich to the Bar: Crier make
Proclamation.


Crier. O yes! If any one can inform my Lords the King's Just the King's
Sergeant, the Kings Attorney or this Inquest now to be taken, of any Treasons,
murders, felonies or other misdemeanors committed or done by the Prisoner at
the Bar, let them come forth and they shall be heard.


Cl. of Arr. Andrew Brommich hold up thy hand, these good men that were lately
called and have now appeared, are those which must pass between our Sovereign
Lord the King and you upon your life or death: if you will challenge any of
them you must speak as they come to the book to be sworn, and before they be
sworn. [The prisoner challenging none, the Jury was sworn, ut ante.


Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen of the Jury, look upon the prisoner and hearken to his
cause, You shall understand that he stands indicted by the name of Andrew
Brommich, late of Perry Bar in the County of Stafford Gentleman, for that he
being born within the Kingdom of England, the thirteenth day of January in the
thirtieth year of the Reign of our Sovereigne Lord King Charles the 2d. by the
Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the
Faith, etc. then being a Seminary Priest made, professed and Ordained by the
Authority and Jurisdiction challenged, pretended and derived from the Sea of
Rome, the said thirteenth day of January in the year aforesaid, within this
Kingdom of England, viz. at Perry Bar aforesaid, in the County aforesaid,
Traitorously did come, was and did remain against the form of the Statute in
that case made and provided, and against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the
King, his Crown and Dignity.

Upon this Indictment he has been arraigned, and has pleaded thereunto Not
Guilty, and for his Trial has put himself upon God and his Country, which
Country you are: Your charge is to inquire whether he be guilty of the high
Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty: If you find him Guilty, you
are to inquire what Lands, Goods, or Tenements he had at the time of the
Treason committed, or at any time since; If you find him not guilty, you are to
inquire whether he did fly for the same, and what Lands, Goods or Tenements he
had at the same time of such flight, or at any time since; if you find him not
guilty, nor that he did fly for the same, you are to say so and no more, and
hear your Evidence.


Cl. of Arr. Crier, call Ann Robinson, who being sworn.


L. Chapter Just. Ann Robinson, what can you say against Andrew Brommich.


A. Rob. My Lord, I can say that I received the Sacarment of him according to
the Church of Rome in a wafer.


L. Chapter Just. When? How long ago?


A. Rob. About Christmas last.


L. Chapter Just. What company was there? How many were there in company?


A. Rob. My Lord, I cannot possitively tell how many, but I believe there were
about seven or eight.


L. Chapter Just. Did they all receive at the same time?


Ann. Robinson. Yes, my Lord they did all receive at that time.


L. Chapter Just. Are you a Papist?


A. Rob. No my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. How long were you a Papist?


A. Rob. Several years.


L. Chapter Just. Who first seduced you?


A. Rob. My Lord I cannot tell his name.


Lord Chief Justice. Did you ever receive the Sacrament according to their way
of Mr. Brommich before the time you speak of?


A. Rob. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. How often?


A. Rob. Four times, my Lord, twice at Mr. Birch's, and twice at Mr. Pursal's.


L. Chapter Just. How came you to give her the Sacrament? (to the prisoner.)


Pris. My Lord I never did.


L. Chapter Just. Why, she has sworn you gave it her several times, once in
particular at Christmas last, and 4 times more, twice at Mr. Birch's, and twice
at Mr. Pursall's.


Pris. My Lord, I cannot help it. I desire your Lordship will take notice of
one thing, that I have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and have
not refused any thing which might testify my Loyalty.


L. Chapter Just. That will not serve your turn, you Priests have tricks to evade
that.


Pris. Besides my Lord, I never absconded.


L. Chapter Just. You never absconded, what is that to giving the woman the
Sacrament several times?


Pris. My Lord I desire she may prove it.


L. Chapter Just. She does so.


Pris. My Lord I humbly conceive it was no Sacrament unless I were a Priest.


L. Chapter Just. What an argument is that? You expect we should prove you a Priest
by witnesses, which saw you take orders, but we know so much of your Religion,
that none undertake to give the Sacrament in a wafer, or say Mass, but a
Priest: and you gave the Sacrament to that woman in a wafer, therefore you are
a Priest.


Cl. Arr. Crier, Call another witness, swear Jeoffery Robinson.


L. Chapter Just. What can you say to Mr. Brommich?


Jeoff. Rob. I can say nothing against him.


L. Chapter Just. Did you ever hear him say Mass?


Jeoff. Rob. I cannot tell; I have heard him say something in an unknown
tongue, but I know not what it was.


L. Chapter Just. Was it Latin that he said.


Jeoff. Rob. I cannot tell, I am no scholar.


L. Chapter Just. Had he a Surplice on?


Jeoff. Rob. Yes my Lord he had.


L. Chapter Just. Robinson, are you a Papist?


Jeoff. Rob. Yes my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. I thought so, it is so hard to get the truth out of you.


Cl. Ar. Crier, swear Jane Robinson.


L. Chapter Just. Come what can you say? Did you ever see Brommich give the
Sacrament?


Jane Rob. Not to my knowledge.


L. Chapter Just. Did you ever hear him say Mass?


Jane Rob. I never saw him do any thing; for I only went up and said my
prayers, I took no notice of any thing.


L. Chapter Just. Did you not see Brommich there?


Jane Rob. I cannot tell.


L. Chapter Just. Why, don't you know him?


Jane Rob. No my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. Your husband knows him. You Jeoffery Robinson, do not you know
Mr. Brommich?


Jef. Rob. Not I, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. That Is right like a Papist, did you not but just now say you
heard him say something in an unknown tongue, and saw him in a Surplice, and
yet now you do not know him? you have no more Conscience than what your Priests
allow you. But though your Priests can persuade you to take false Oaths, I
would not have you think they can protect you from the punishment due to them
here or hereafter.


An. Rob. My Lord, they both took the Sacrament with me at the same time from
him.


L. Chapter Just. Look you there, was ever the like impudence seen, come friend,
consider you are upon your Oath, and do not bring your self into the snare of a
Pillory. Come Robinson, I ask you by the Oath you have taken, did you receive
the Sacrament with An. Robinson at the time she speaks of at Mr. Parsall's?


Jeoff. Rob. Yes my Lord.


Lord Chief Just. How hard is the truth to be gotten out of you. But within
this Country, which abounds so with Priests and swarms with Papists, that you
get Popery here like the Itch; if they but rub upon you, you ketch it.


Jane Rob. My Lord, he is a weak man.


L. Chapter Just. Who gave it you.


Jef. Rob. I do not know.


L. Chapter Just. He Will say no more then his wife and Priest will give him leave.


L. Chapter Just. Look you Gentlemen of the Jury, here are 2 Papists that are
witnesses, you are to consider how far they tell the truth, and how far they
conceal it, how they tell their tail so as to serve a turn: for here you see
the man said at first he heard him say somewhat in an unknown tongue, and that
he saw him in a Surplice, after that he denies he knows him, but now you see by
this woman the truth is come out, he has confess't and owned he received the
Sacrament at Pursall's with her. We cannot expect more positive evidence from
such people, Come read the Statute. Anno 27 Eliz. cap. 2.
WHereas diverse persons, called or professed Jesuit, Seminary Priests, and
other Priests, which have been, and from time to time are made in the parts
beyond the Seas, by or according to the Order and rites of the Romish Church,
have of late comen and been sent, and daily do come and are sent into this
Realm of England and other the Queens Majesty's Dominions, of purpose (as it
has appeared) as well by sundry of their own examinations and Confessions, as
diverse other manifest means and proofs, not only to withdraw her Highnesses
Subjects from their due obedienee to her Majesty, but also to stir up and move
sedition, rebellion and open hostility within the same her Highness Realms and
Dominions to the great indangering of the safety of her most Royal person, and
to the utter ruin, desolation and overthrow of the whole Realm, if the same be
not the sooner by some good means foreseen and prevented.

For reformac^ whereof be it ordained, established and enacted by the Queens
most excellent Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same
Parliam^t, That all and every Jesuits, Semininary Priests, and other Priests
whatsoever, made or Ordained out of the Realm of England or other her Highness
Dominions, or within any of her Majesty's Realms or Dominions, by any
Authority, power or Jurisdiction, derived, challenged, or pretended from the Sea of Rome since the feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, in the first
year of her Highness Reign, shall within forty days next after the end of this
present Session of Parliament depart out of this Realm of England, and out of
all other her Highness Realms and Dominions, if the wind, weather, and passage
shall serve for the same, or else so soon after the end of the said forty days
as the wind, weather and passage shall so serve.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall not be
lawful to, or for any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon,
or Religious, or Ecclesiastical person whatsoever, being born within this
Realm, or any other her Highness Dominions, and heretofore since the said feast
of the Nativity of St. John Baptist in the first year of her Majesty's Reign
made, ordained or profess or hereafter to be made, ordained or professed by
any Authority or Jurisdiction derived, challenged or pretended from the Sea of
Rome, by, or of what name, title or degree soever the same shall be called or
known to come into, be, or remain in any part of this Realm or any other her
Highness Dominions, after the end of the same forty days other then in such
special cases, and upon such special occasions only, and for such time only as
is expressed in this Act. And if he do, that then every such offense shall be
taken and adjudged to be High Treason, and every person so offending shall for
his offense be adjudged a Traitor and shall suffer loss, and forfeit as in
case of High Treason.

And every person which after the end of the same forty days, and after such
time of departure as is before limited and appointed, shall wittingly and
willingly receive, relieve, comfort, aid or maintain any such Jesuit, Seminary
Priest, or other Priest, Deacon or Religious, or Ecclesiastical person as is
aforesaid, being at liberty, or out of hold, knowing him to be a Jesuit,
Seminary Priest, or other such Priest, Deacon or Religious, or Ecclesiastical
person as is aforesaid, shall also for such offense be adjudged a Felon without
benefit of Clergy, and suffer death, loss, and forfeit, as in case of one
attainted of Felony.




L. Chapter Just. Come what have you more to say?


Prisoner. I desire that there may be notice taken what Robinson and his said
wife said upon their Examinations before the Justice of Peace.


L. Chapter J. We are to take notice only of what they say here.


Pris. My Lord, they said here they did not know me.


L. Chapter Just. N^ did not Robinson say he heard you say something in an unknown
tongue, that he then saw you in a Surplice? did we talk of any one but you?
Come Jesuit, with your learning, you shall not think to bastle us: I have of
late had occasion to converse with your most learned Priests, and never yet saw
one that had either Learning or Honesty.


L. Chapter J. Have you any Witnesses? have you any more to say?


Pris. No.


L. Chapter J. Then Gentlemen of the Jury, the question you are to try, is whether
^^drew Brommich be a Popish Priest or not: To prove that he is, here is a
woman, one Anne Robinson, that swears she received the Sacrament of him in a
Wafer once at Christmas last, and twice at Mr. Birch's, and twice at Mr.
Pursals, and that he gave it to several others at the same time. There needs
not much to persuade you that he who gives the Sacrament is a Priest, for in
their Church they allow no one but a Priest to give the Sacrament, so there is
one express evidence against him: And now I must satisfy you in one thing,
that you are to give a Verdict not that he is a Priest, but that you believe
him in your Conscience upon the whole Evidence, to be a Priest. To make you do
this here is one Positive Evidence.

The other man, when I came to examine him whether he ever heard the Prisoner
say Mass; he answered, that he heard him say something in an unknown tongue,
and that he was in a Surplice. This is as much as we could expect from one of
their own Religion, who dare say no more than their Priests will give them
leave to do. So Gentlemen I must leave it to you, whether or no you will not
believe the Testimony of this real positive Witness, and the circumstantial
Evidence of the other man: For you see in what dangers we are, I leave it upon
your Consciences whether you will let Priests escape who are the very pests and
dangers of Church and State; you had better be rid of one Priest than three
Felons, so Gentlemen, I leave it to you.


The Jury having staid some time, returned to the Court to give their verdict.

Cl. Arr. Gentlemen of the Jury, have you agreed on your Verdict?


Jury, Yes.


Cl. Arr. Who shall say it for you?


Jury, the Foreman.


Cl. Arr. Jailer, set up Andrew Brommich to the Bar.

Gentlemen, do you find Andrew Brommich Guilty of the High Treason he has been
Arraigned of, or not Guilty.


Jury; Guilty.


L. Chapter J. Gentlemen, you have found a good Verdict, and if I had been one of
you, I should have found the same my self.


Upon Wednesday the thirteenth of August, 1679. At the Assizes held at
Stafford, for the County of Stafford; William Atkins was brought to his Trial
for being a Seminary Priest, before the Right Honorable Sir William Scroggs,
Knight, Lord Chief Justice.
THe Court proceeded to his Trial in like manner as in the former, there being
the same Jury.

Cl. Arr. Jailer, set up William Atkins to the Bar.


Crier, make Proclamation.


Cl. Arr. Gentlemen of the Jury, Look on the Prisoner and hearken to his Cause.
You shall understand that he stands indicted by the Name of William Atkins late
of Wolverhampton in the County of Stafford, Gent. for that he being born within
the Kingdom of England, the fifth day of December, in the thirtieth year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, by the Grace of God of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Then
being a Seminary Priest; made, professed, and ordained by the Authority and
Jurisdiction challenged, pretended, and derived from the Sea of Rome; the said
fifth day of December in the year aforesaid within this Kingdom of England,
viz. at Wolverhampton aforesaid in the County aforesaid, Traitorously did come,
was, and did remain against the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided; and against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and
Dignity.

Upon this Indictment he has been Arraigned, and thereunto pleaded not guilty;
and for his Trial he has put himself upon God and his Country, which Country
you are. Your Charge is to enquire whether he be guilty of the High Treason
whereof he stands indicted or not guilty: If you find him guilty, you are to
enquire what Lands, Goods, or Tenements he had at the time of the High Treason
committed, or at any time since; if you find not guilty, you are to enquire
whether he did flee for the same: If you find he did flee for the same, you are
to enquire what Lands, Goods, or Tenements he had at the time of such flight,
or at any time since; if you find him not guilty nor that he did flee for the
same, you are to say so and no more, and hear your Evidence.


Cl. Arr. Crier, call the Witnesses; call William Jackson, Francis Wilden, Jo.
Jarvis, etc. Swear Jackson, which was done.


L. Chapter J. Come Friend, what can you say concerning Atkins the Prisoner being a
Priest?


Jack. My Lord, I can say nothing at all, I was there when he was apprehended,
and bound over to prosecute him.


Cl. Arr. Crier, Swear Francis Wilden, which was done.


L. Chapter J. What can you say concerning Atkins being a Priest?


W. My Lord, I have seen him at prayers.


L. Chapter J. Was he in a Surplice then?


W. Yes my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Did you ever see him say Mass?


W. I cannot tell.


L. Chapter J. In what language were his prayers?


W. In an unknown Tongue.


L. Chapter J. Were they in Latin?


W. I cannot tell, my Lord, I am not a Scholar good enough to know.


L. Chapter J. Are you a Papist?


W. I have been a Protestant since Christmas.


L. Chapter J. It Is the Principle of a Protestant to tell down right truth, and the
Principle of a Papist is to Equivocate; come speak truth and your Conscience
will be lighter: Did you ever see Atkins deliver the Sacrament in a Wafer,
according to the manner and way of the Church of Rome?


W. My Lord, I never received it of him my self, but I have seen him give it to
others.


L. Chapter J. Where?


W. At Mrs. Stanfords, at Wolverhampton.


L. Chapter J. To how many?


W. To seven or eight at a time.


L. Chapter J. Was he in a Surplice then?


W. Yes my Lord.


L. Chapter J. I do not know whether the Prisoner can hear what the Witness says,
it is fit he should know: The Prisoner being told, he replied he knew not the
Witness.


Cl. Arr. Swear John Jarvis,


Crier, My Lord, he refuses to be sworn.


L. Chapter J. Jarvis, why will you not be sworn?


Jer. My Lord, I was troubled with a Vision the last night.


L. Chapter J. You mistake Friend, Old Men Dream Dreams, it is Young Men see
Visions, and you are an Old Man: Speak the truth, and i will warrant you, you
will not be troubled with Visions any more, this is a trick of the Priests.
Swear him Crier, which was done.


L. Chapter J. Come Jarvis, what can you say?


Jar. My Lord, he is a man that has relieved me and my Children oftentimes
when I was in want.


L. Chapter J. Did you ever hear him say Mass?


Jar. My Lord, I am an ignorant man; I cannot tell: I have heard him say
somewhat in an unknown Tongue.


L. Chapter J. Did you ever Confess to him?


Jar. Yes, my Lord, I did.


L. Chapter J. Did you ever receive the Sacrament of him according to the manner of
the Church of Rome?


Jar. Yes my Lord I have, I must speak the truth.


L. Chapter J. How often?


Jar. A great many times.


L. Chapter J. And had he not his Priests habit on when he gave it you?


Jar. Yes my Lord, he had.


Cl. Arr. Crier, call Joan Wright, who was called but did not appear. Call
Henry Brown, who appeared and was sworn.


L. Chapter J. Come Mr. Brown, what can you say against the Prisoner? Did you ever
receive the Sacrament of him, or hear him say Mass?


Br. My Lord, I was almost turned from the Protestant Religion to that of the
Church of Rome; but I never went further than Confession, and that was to this
man, and then I left them.


L. Chapter J. Indeed you were the wiser.


Cl. Arr. Crier, call Tho. Dudley who was sworn.


L. Chapter J. What can you say against the Prisoner?


Dud. I was a little given that way, and have been at Confession with one
Atkins, and have seen him perform several Rites of the Church of Rome at Well
head, at Ham.


L. Chapter J. Do you believe this to be the man?


Dud. Yes my Lord I do.


L. Chapter J. Have you any more to say!


Dud. No my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Read the Statute. Which was done. Have you Witnesses Atkins, or any
thing to say for your self?


P. No my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Look you Gentlemen of the Jury, Here is as full and as positive an
Evidence as can be against the Prisoner: The two first Witnesses, Wilden and
Jarvis, are positive. Wilden swears he heard him say his Prayers in an unknown
Tongue; and further says, that he gave the Sacrament to seven or eight
according to the manner of the Church of Rome in a Wafer, at Mrs. Stamford's
House in Wolverhampton. Jarvis the other Witness, swears that he has been at
Confession with him, and has oftentimes received the Sacrament of him. Here
are two other honest men, that speak very full as to Circumstances; so that in
the whole you cannot have a more clear Evidence: And Gentlemen, I must tell
you, it is to these sorts of men we owe all the troubles and hazards we are in,
the fear of the Kings Life, the Subversion of our Government, and the loss of
our Religion. It is notorious by what they have done, that they are departed
from the meekness and simplicity of Christ's Doctrine, and would bring in a
Religion of Blood and Tyranny amongst us. As if God almighty were some
Omnipotent Mischief, that delighted and would be served with the Sacrifices of
humane blood. I need not say more to you, the matter's plain; I think you need
not stir from the Bar, but do as you will.

The Jury having considered of the Evidence some time, gave in their Verdict.


Cl. Arr. Gentlemen of the Jury are you agreed of your Verdict?


Jury, yes.


Cl. Arr. Who shall say for you?


Jury, The Foreman.


Cl. Arr. Jailer, set up William Atkins, (which was done.) Gentlemen of the
Jury look on the Prisoner, What say you, Is he guilty of the High Treason
whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury, Guilty.


Cl. Arr. What Lands, Goods, or Tenements had he?


Jury, None to our knowledge.


Cl. Arr. Look to him Jailer, he is found guilty of High Treason.

The Sentence. You the Prisoners at the Bar shall be conveyed from (...) to the
Place from whence you came, and from thence that you be drawn to the Place of
Execution upon Hurdles, that there you be severally hanged by the Neck, that
you be cut down alive, that your Privy Members be cut off and your Bowels taken
out and burnt in your view; that your Heads be severed from your Bodies, that
your Bodies be divided into Quarters, and those Quarters be disposed at the
Kings Pleasure: And the God of infinite mercy be merciful to your Souls.


On Monday the fourth day of August, at Hereford; Charles Kerne was brought to
the Bar, and being Arraigned, he pleaded not Guilty to the Indictment: Then the
Court (after the usual formalities performed) proceeded to the Trial of him, as
follows.
Cl. Arr. GEntlemen of the Jury, Look upon the Prisoner and hearken to his
Cause: You shall understand that he stands Indicted by the Name of Charles
Kerne, late of the Parish of Webly in the County of Hereford, Gent. For that he
being born within the Kingdom of England, the twenty ninth day of April in the
thirty first year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second,
by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc. Then being a Seminary Priest, made, professed, and ordained
by the Authority and Jurisdiction challenged, pretended, and derived from the Sea of Rome, the said twenty ninth day of April in the year aforesaid, within
this Kingdom of England, (viz.) at Webly aforesaid in the County aforesaid,
Traitorously did come, was, and did remain against the form of the Statute in
that case made and provided; and against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the
King, his Crown and Dignity.

Upon this Indictment he has been Arraigned, and thereunto Pleaded Not Guilty;
and for his Trial has put himself upon God and his Country, which Country you
are. Your charge is to enquire whether he be Guilty of the High Treason whereof
he stands indicted or not Guilty: If you find him Guilty, you are to enquire
what Lands, Goods, or Tenements he had at the time of the Treason Committed, or
at any time since; if you find him not Guilty, you are to enquire whether he
did flee for the same: If you find he did flee for the same, you are to enquire
what Lands, Tenements, or Goods, he had at the time of such flight, or at any
time since; if you find him not Guilty, nor that he did flee for the same, you
are to say so and no more, and hear your Evidence.


Cl. Arr. Call Edward Biddolph, who was sworn.


L. Chapter J. Give the Jury Pen, Ink, and Paper.


L. Chapter J. Biddolph, do you know Mr. Kerne?


Bid. I do not know him now: I did know such a man about six years ago, I have
seen him once or twice at Mr. Somersets at Bollingham about six years ago.


L Chapter J. How long is it ago since you saw him last?


Bid. About a year.


L. Chapter J. Had you any discourse with him?


Bid. No, I never had any.


L. Chapter J. Look on the Prisoner, can you say that is the man?


Bid. No my Lord, I cannot.


L. Chapter J. Can you say you ever saw or knew him?


Bid. I cannot.


L. Chapter J. Set him down. Call another Witness.


Cl. Arr. Swear Margaret Edwards, which was done.


L. Chapter J. Do you know Mr. Kerne?


Edwards. Yes, my Lord, I do.


L. Chapter J. How long have you known him?


Edwards. Five or six years.


L. Chapter J. Where did you know him?


Edwards. At Sarnffield, at Mrs. Monington's.


L. Chapter J. Were you a Servant there?


Edwards. No, I went thither about business.


L. Chapter J. Where did you first see him?


Edwards. At Mr. Wigmore's of Lucton.


L. Chapter J. Had you any discourse with him there?


Edwards. No.


L. Chapter J. How came you to see him at Mrs. Monington's?


Edwards. My Lord, one James Harris's Wife being very sick, I was desired by
him to go to Mrs. Anne Monington to seek some Remedy for her: He desired me the
rather, for that she being a Papist, and I of the same Religion; he believed
for that reason she would be the more kind to her.


L. Chapter J. Were you a Papist then?


Edwards. Yes my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Well, what said Mrs. Monington to you?


Edwards. My Lord, She told me she was glad that they had sent me, for that she
did not care to discourse the distempers of a Woman to a Man.


L. Chapter J. Well go on.


Edwards. My Lord, after she had discoursed to me concerning the sick woman,
she desired me to go with her, which I did; and she brought me into the
Chapel, where I saw Mr. Kerne in his Robes.


L. Chapter J. Were there any more in the Room besides him?


Edwards. Yes, my Lord, four or five: He was in his Robes and Surplice, and was
at the Altar, and gave the Sacrament to the rest, but I did not receive it.


L. Chapter J. What did you see him do?


Edwards. I saw him give the Sacrament.


L. Chapter J. What did he say?


Edwards. He said Corpus Christi, or some such words.


L. Chapter J. Did you see him deliver the Wafers?


Edwards. Yes my Lord.


L. Chapter J. To how many?


Edwards. To four.


L. Chapter J. You swear positively to four: Did they Confess to him?


Edwards. Yes I believe they did.


L. Chapter J. Did you ever see him since?


Edwards. No my Lord, I never saw him between that and this.


L. Chapter J. Did you ever receive the Sacrament before, and of whom?


Edwards. Yes I received several times: The first time was of Mr. Duffres, next
of Mr. Kemble, then of Mr. Rowenhill, Mr. Standish, Mr. Morgan, Mr. Trindal; I
have received from Mr. Draycot at Mr. Berrington's, I have received at Mr.
Blounts, but the last time was from Mr. Jennings at Mr. Wigmore's House.


Pris. My Lord, I desire she may be asked whether she came to Mrs. Monington's
of her own accord, or was sent for Physic?


Edw. I was sent.


P. Did the Man send you or his Wife?


Edwards. The Man.


P. Have a care what you say, Harris's Wife is here to trapan you.


L. Chapter J. Give good words, you begin to Triumph too soon. Woman, was it Harris
or his Wife sent you?


Edwards. It was Harris himself that desired me to go, because I might have
more favor, being a Papist.


P. Where did that Harris live?


Edwards. At Lempster.


P. I am satisfied, 'twas a mistake, I thought it had been Harris of Lawton she
had meant.


L. Chapter J. Will you ask her any thing else?


P. I desire to know the time when she saw me at Mrs, Monington's.


Edwards. It was in last May was Twelvemonth, the twenty ninth day to the best
of my memory.


L. Chapter J. Do you take it to be certain, or do you believe it only that it was
that day?


Edwards. My Lord, I am certain it was that very day, for the woman died that
day, and that day is writ on the Gravestone.


P. I desire to know of her whether she was ever asked upon her Oath, whether
she was ever at Mrs. Monington's since that time.


Edwards. I was not there since, nor ever asked the question to the best of my
knowledge.


L. Chapter J. What a question is that?


P. It Is very remarkable, for she was asked by a Jury-man last Assizes, it was
not upon the Trial, but before the Grand Jury, and she denied then that she was
ever at Mrs. Monington's in her life.


Edwards. I have been there above twenty times.


P. Call Roger Hyet.


L. Chapter J. By and by your defense will be proper, in the mean time, what will
you ask her more?


P. I desire to ask her what discourse she had with Mary Jones, the other
Witness, for she has been instructing her what to say; and that they may be
examined asunder, (which was granted.)


L. Chapter J. What discourse had you with the other woman?


Edwards. My Lord, She told me that she had never in all her life been before a
Judge or Justice of Peace, and that she was afraid of coming before one, for
she did not know how to behave her self.


L. Chapter J. Did you tell her what she shouly say?


Edw. No my Lord.


L. Chapter J. What did you say to her?


Edwards. I told her that she would hear her Name called, and then she must
answer, and I bid her have a care that she spoke what she knew, and no more or
less than the truth.


L. Chapter J. Did she tell you what she could say?


Edwards. She did.


L. Chapter J. What?


Edwards. That she lived at Mr. Somerset's where Mr. Kerne usually was, and
that several people used to come thither and go up stairs into the Chamber; and
she went once to hearken, and she heard Mr. Kerne say something in Latin, which
she said was Mass.


P. Here is a material question to ask this Witness.

I desire to know where this woman saw me first.


Edwards. At Mr. Wigmore's of Lucton, as they told me it was him, for I did not
know his Name.


P. I would know if the man she saw at Mrs. Monington's, was the same Person
she saw at Lucton?


Edwards. To the best of my knowledge it was.


P. I never was at Lucton in all my life.


L. Chapter J. Call the other woman, you shall now see how these women agree.


Cl. Arr. Call Mary Jones. Crier, swear her, (which was done.)


P. I desire they may be examined apart.


L. Chapter J. Let the other woman go out.


L. Chapter J. When was the first time you saw Margaret Edwards?


Jones. Yesterday, and again to day.


L. Chapter J. Did she tell you and instruct you what you should say against the
Prisoner?


Jones. No my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Did you tell her what you could say against him?


Jones. No.


L. Chapter J. Did not you tell her that you lived at Mr. Somerset's, and that
several people used to come thither and go up stairs into the Chamber, and that
once you went up to hearken, and heard Mr. Kerne say Mass?


Jones. She did say so to me, but I did not answer her any thing.


L. Chapter J. Did she ask where you saw Mr. Kerne?


Jones. Yes.


L. Chapter J. Where, at Bollingham?


Jones. I did tell her that I saw him at Bollingham, and that I heard him say
somewhat aloud, I think it was Latin.


L. Chapter J. How you answer? I asked you but just now, whether you told her that
you saw Mr. Kerne at Mr. Somerset's House, and that you went up to hearken, and
heard him say somewhat in Latin? And you then said you did not, and now you say
you did.


Jones. She spoke to me first about it, and I did but answer.


L. Chapter J. What, did she ask you what you could say against Mr. Kerne?


Jones. Yes.


L. Chapter J. And what did you tell her you could say?


Jones. I told her, that one Sunday morning several people came to Bollingham
out of the Town and out of the Country, and went up after him, and he said
somewhat aloud that I did not understand.


L. Chapter J. Did you not tell Margaret Edwards that you heard him say Mass?


Jones. No my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Call Margaret Edwards again. Margaret Edwards, Did Mary Jones tell
you that she heard Mr. Kerne say Mass?


Edwards. Yes my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Now, Mary Jones, what say you? Did not you tell her that you heard
the Prisoner say Mass?


Jones. No, I am sure I did not, for I never heard the word before, nor do not
know what it means.


L. Chapter J. The one Witness says she did not name Mass, for she did not
understand what it was; the other says she did, so they contradict one another
in that.


L. Chapter J. Mary Jones, when did you see Mr. Kerne?


Jones. Seven or eight years ago.


L. Chapter J. Where?


Jones. At Mr. Somerset's at Bollingham, he lived there half a year.


L. Chapter J. What did you see him do?


Jones. One Sunday morning I was busy a washing the Rooms, and I saw several
people follow him into the Chamber.


J. Chapter J. Did you see him do any thing?


Jones. No, I heard him say somewhat aloud which I did not understand.


L. Chapter J. How near were you to him?


Jones. There was only a wall between.


L. Chapter J. Did you ever see him give a Wafer, Marry, or Christen?


Jonss. No my Lord, there was a Child Christened in the House.


L. Chapter J. Who Christened it?


Jones. I cannot tell. There was no one there but my Master and Mistress, Mr.
Latchet and his Wife, and Mr. Kerne: I was in the next Room, and I heard words
spoken by the voice of Mr. Kerne.


L. Chapter J. What can you say more?


Jones. I washed a Surplice.


L. Chapter J. Whose was it, the Prisoners?


Jones. I cannot tell, because I did not see it on his back.


P. How could you know a voice?


Jones. Very easily, there was but a Wall between.


P. Was there no Room between?


Jones. No, there was not.


L. Chapter J. The Woman speaks sensibly, if you have done asking questions, you
had best call your Witnesses.


Pris. Call Mr. Hyet.


L. Chapter J. Mr. Hyet, you cannot be sworn, but you must speak the truth as much
as if you were: Well, what can you say?


Hyet. I asked Margaret Edwards if she had been at Mrs. Monington's: she said
she had; I asked her if she knew Mr. Kerne? She said she did not.


L. Chapter J. Was she upon her Oath when you asked her this?


Hyet. No my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Have you any more Witnesses?


Pris. Call Mr. Weston's Maid.


L. Chapter J. What can you say?


West. M. I saw those two women talking together, and that woman instructed the
other what she should say.


L. Chapter J. What say you to this?


Edw. and Jones. My Lord, we did not.


L. Chapter J. Look you, they both deny it on their Oaths.


L. Chapter J. How often between the first time and the twenty ninth of May was
Twelvemonth, did you see Mr. Kerne?


Edwards. Twice or thrice in Weobly.


L. Chapter J. What can you say for your self?


Pris. My Lord, I am very happy that I receive my Trial before your Lordship.


L. Chapter J. Come, setting aside your Apologies, tell what you have to say; if
you have any more witnesses, call them.


Pris. My Lord, here are several Witnesses who will prove that that woman was
never at Mrs. Monington's.


L. Chapter J. That Is very improbable; but call whom you will.


Pris. My Lord, here is Mrs. Monington, the Person she pretends showed her up,
will swear she never saw the woman in her life; and upon my Salvation I never
saw either of them before.


L. Chapter J. Mrs. Monington, the Law will not allow you to be sworn, but I
presume that a Person of your Quality will speak the truth, as much as if you
were upon your Oath. Do you know Margaret Edwards?


Mrs. Mon. My Lord, I do not.


L. Chapter J. Woman, tell Mrs. Monington from whom you came.


Edwards. I came from James Harris of Lempster.


L. Chapter J. Mrs. Monington, do you know James Harris of Lempster?


Mrs. Mon. My Lord, I do not.


L. Chapter J. Do you remember that about May was Twelvemonth this woman came to
you for Physic for a woman that was sick?


Mrs. Mon. A great many people come to me on that errand, so that it is
impossible for me to remember any particular person.


L. Chapter J. Did you ever take up that woman to hear Mass?


Mrs. Mon. That I am sure I did not, for I never took up any Stranger in my
life.


L. Chapter J. Did Mrs. Mon. know you by Face or by Name?


Edwards. I had been at the house several times, but this time I was carried up
to Mrs. Monington by Mary Lewis her Maid: Mrs. Monington told me that she was
very glad that I was sent, for she said she would not give the man so just an
account because he was a man.


L. Chapter J. Mrs. Mon. do you remember this?


Mrs. Mon. This is frequent.


Edwards. Then she told me that I must put a Plaster of Diapalma to the woman's
back, and give her a drink of Malt with Raisins, etc.


Mrs. Mon. As for the Plaster, it is possibly I may prescribe it, but the Drink
is no Receipt of mine.


Edwards. My Lord, the maid when I came in, was making a Cheese in the Dairy,
and I asked for Mrs. Monington, and she told me she was within, and straightway
brought me up to her: Mrs. Monington in a little time fell into discourse with
me about Religion; and understanding what I was, desired me to go into the
Chamber with her.


L. Chapter J. What kind of Chapel was it?


Edwards. I will give an account of it as well as I can remember: When we came
up stairs, we turned in at a door on the right hand the Altar stood just before
the door; it was richly adorned, the Altar-Cloth was white, and a fine Crucisix
on the Altar.


Mrs. Mon. What were the Cushions of?


Edwards. As I remember they were Needle Work.


L. Chapter J. What was the Chapel adorned with?


Edwards. With abundance of pictures: I think the window was on the left hand
of the Altar.


Mrs. Mon. She has failed in the first description, for we go not off the
Stairs into the Chapel, as she says; neither is it adorned in the manner as
she says it is, nor is there any Needle Work.

Here is a maid that I deliver all my medicines to, that perhaps can give a
better account whether this woman were at my house, than I can.


L. Chapter J. Call the maid. You wait on Mrs. Monington, did you ever see that
woman?


Maid. No.


L. Chapter J. I Will show you how you shall remember her: She came to Mrs. Monington
on the behalf of one Harris's wife, and asked if she were within, and you
carried her to your Mistress.


Edwards. My Lord, I was there several times besides this, for I carried the
Child Mr. Thomas Monington thither several times.


L. Chapter J. Do you remember this?


Mrs. Mon. I do not remember that she ever brought the Child to me, but another.


Edw. My Lord, I always lay with him, and tended him, and carried him abroad.


L. Chapter J. If you have any thing more to say, speak. What say you for your self?


Pris. I hope your Lordship will sum up the Evidence.


L. Chapter J. That I will: I will tell the Jury all I can remember on both sides;
I will not shed innocent blood, neither will I help the Guilty; for I, by the
duty of my place, am Counsel for the Prisoner in all things fit and legal.


Pris. I desire the Statute may be read.


L. Chapter J. Let it be read. What Statute do you mean, that of 27 Eliz?


Pris. Yes my Lord. Then the Statute was read.


Pris. Now Gentlemen, I desire you to take into consideration whether my Blood
shall be drawn by the Evidence of a woman, that says she saw me give a Wafer;
or on that Evidence of the other, who says she heard me read she knows not what
through a wall: My Lord, it is an oppression that Statutes should be construed
otherwise than they are intended. I hope my Lord, that the Statute will not
take hold of a man for saying Mass, for many say Masses that are not in order.


L. Chapter J. It is one of the greatest Evidence to prove a man to be a Priest
that can be, for we cannot think of bringing witnesses who saw you take Orders:
Do any say Mass but Priests? Is it lawful for any one but a Priest to say Mass?


Pris. That of Bread and Wine they do not, but the other they do.


L. Chapter J. Do any Bury or Christen but Priests?


Pris. Yes they do in extremis; and, my Lord, I do acknowledge that Tread
Prayers sometimes, and sometimes others did it.

And I desire your Lordship and the Jury will take notice, that I have taken
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.


L. Chapter J. Is that all you have to say?


Pris. Yes, my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Then Gentlemen of the Jury, The matter you are to try is, whether
Charles Kerne the Prisoner at the Bar, be a Popish Priest: An Englishman I
suppose he does not deny himself to be; the question is then if he be a Romish
Priest? If so, he is guilty of High Treason by the Statute of 27 of Eliz. This
was a Law made for the preservation of the Queen, for the preservation of our
Religion, and for the preservation of all Protestants. The Witnesses are
Margaret Edwards and Mary Jones: Margaret says, the first time that she saw the
Prisoner was at Mr. Wigmore's, who told her it was Mr. Kerne; and she says that
she has seen him several times since; twice or thrice at Weobley, and the last
time was the twenty ninth of May was Twelvemonth at Mrs. Monington's, where she
saw him deliver the Wafer, which is the Sacrament, to four persons that were
there, but she her self did not receive it; and then she gives you an account
of the reason of her coming then to Mrs. Monington's, which was at the request
of one Harris whose Wife was sick, to seek some Remedy from Mrs. Monington for
the sick woman: She tells you how the maid brought her up to her Mistress, how
she acquainted her with her errand, what advice Mrs. Monington gave her for the
sick woman, and how that Mrs. Monington understanding what Religion she was of,
took her into the Chapel, whereof she gives you a description. It Is very
probable she may go on such an Errand, and yet Mrs. Monington not know her; but
Mrs. Monington cannot positively say, but believes she was never there: Mr.
Kerne, I suppose, will not deny but that he who gives the Wafer is a Priest.


Pris. There is blessed Bread which others may give.


L. Chapter J. When you give such Bread, do you not say Accipe Corpus Christi?


Pris. We use no such words. (But it appeared upon his own repeating of the
Latin words they used upon the giving the Sacrament, that those were part of
the words.)


L. Chapter J. The Prisoner made an offer to prove some disagreement between the
Witnesses; it is true, they did differ in some small things, as the saying the
word Mass, but from hence can no great matter be inferred against the Evidence;
so here is one positive Evidence.

There must indeed be two Witnesses; now the question will be about the second
woman's Testimony: She says she knew Mr. Kerne about eight years ago, when she
lived at Mr. Somersets, and that Mr. Kerne lived in the house about half a
year: She tells you that she has seen several persons come thither, and
amongst the rest she says, that one Sunday morning several Persons came thither
and went up with Mr. Kerne, and that she was so curious as to hearken, and did
hear Mr. Kerne say something in an unknown Tongue: Kerne objects that she could
not know it was his voice, but for that, I think men are easily distinguished
by their voices, but that I must leave to your consideration.

But now the main question will be, what it was she heard him say? Mr. Kerne
says that in times of straitness, Persons that are not Priests may read
Prayers, and so perhaps he may be then Reading the Collects.

But then again: She says there was a Child Christened in the House, and no one
there but Mr. Somerset and his Wife, Mr. Latchet and his Wife, and Mr. Kerne,
to do it: She did not see him Christen it, and it is true likewise what he says,
that in their Church they allow others, as Midwives, to Christen in extremis;
not that he confesses he did Christen.


L. Chapter J. Call Mary Jones again. Mary Jones, was it a sickly Child?


Jones. No, my Lord.


L. Chapter J. Then that is answered: So that if you believe that he did Christen
the Child, there are two Witnesses against him: I must leave it with you as a
tender point on both sides; I would not shed innocent Blood, neither would I
willingly let a Popish Priest escape: There is one positive Witness, and if you
believe upon the woman's hearing his voice, that he did say Mass, or did
Christen, for I must confess she says she did not see him Christen, then you
must find him Guilty: So I leave it to you upon the whole matter.


The Jury returned and were called over. William Barret, etc.

Cl. Arr. Jailer, Set up Charles Kerne.

Gentlemen, Are you Agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Cl. Who shall say for you?


Jury. The Foreman.


Cl. Look upon the Prisoner: What say you, Is Charles Kerne Guilty of the High
Treason whereof he stands Indicted, or Not Guilty?

Foreman, Not Guilty.


FINIS.
There is lately Printed The Lord Chief Justice Scroggs his Speech, in the
King's Bench, the first day of this Michaelmas Term, 1679. Occasioned by the
many Libellous Pamphlets which are Published against Law, to the scandal of the
Government and Public Justice.

Together with what was declared at the same time on the same Occasion, in open
Court, by Mr. Justice Jones, and Mr. Justice Dolbin. Sold by Robert Pawlett at
the Bible in Chancery Lane.


