THE TRIAL OF Slingsby Bethel Esquire UPON AN INDICTMENT PREFERRED BY Robert Mason
AGAINST HIM, Of which, he was found GUILTY. AT THE General Quarter Sessions of
the Peace, FOR THE Town and Borough OF SOUTHWARK, AT THE Bridge-House.

Holden and kept before the Right Honorable Sir Patience Ward, Lord Mayor of
the City of London, Sir Thomas Allen, Sir William Hooker, Sir Thomas
Bloudworth, Sir James Edwards, and Justice Pyrs, on Wednesday, October 5. 1681.

London: Printed for R. Harbottle. 1681.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
THat you may have a full Sense and Understanding of the following Indictment,
and what what ensued thereupon, it is necessary to acquaint you with all the
Circumstances of the last Pole, upon the Election of Members to serve in
Parliament for the Town and Bourough of Southwark, from whence the pretense for
this Indictment was taken.

The Pole began on Thursday the tenth of February 1680. and continued until
Tuesday following, full five days.

The Candidates were Sir Richard How, and Mr. Peter Rich, on one part; Slingsby
Bethel, and Edward Smith, Esquire on the other part.

The place of Pole was the Old Artillery-House in Southwark, which is Ascended
out of the Artillery Ground, by six or eight large Stone steps, with two half
Spaces, the uppermost at the entrance into the House, being Banistered about,
is so Capacious, as will hold a hundred persons or more.

The method of Poling was by filling the House, from the doors that open upon
the half Space, then shutting them, until they within were all Poled, and let
out at a back door, and so filling the House again.

Upon the first half Space, was planted one Sam Sams, a known Hectoring
Carr-man, and two water men of the largest size, fetched from Lambeth, or there
abouts.

These men obstructed coming up to the Pole-House, all such as they knew, or
suspected were Friends to Bethel and Smith, to the hurting some; discouraging
others, and causing many to go away.

This rudeness was several times complained of to Mr. Bethel, who kept in the
Pole-House, but being pressed to endeavor to reform this disorder, at last,
and on the fourth day of the Pole, he went along with those that fetched him,
but found then upon the forementioned steps, no more in that Hectoring posture
as was represented to him, than Sam Sams, and Robert Mason.

Mr. Bethel aapplying himself first to Mason, asked him in a mild and Civil
manner if he had a right to Pole? and upon his denial that he had, desired him
to withdraw, and not disturb the Peace, and so took him by the Arm (he having a
wide Camlet Coat over his Red Coat) and led him gently down, who followed
without resistance (or any such Dialogue, as is falsely suggested to have passed
betwixt them,) and went quietly away.

After this Mr. Bethel asked Sam Sams the same Question as he had done his
Companion Mason, who answering that he had a right to Pole, took him by the
hand, and led him in at the back door to Pole, at which How and Rich seemed
displeased, though Rich did cunningly speak to him, to Pole for Bethel and
Smith, intending (as may well be supposed) that he should thereby defend
himself, against Bethel and Smiths Complaint, of his rude and disorderly
Carriage; but the Dull Fellow, not apprehending the meaning of it, Poled for
(...), How and Rich.

And now this being all the ground there was for an Indictment, one that pulls
another by the Sleeve to speak with him, may as well be Indicted for so doing,
as Mr. Bethel was for what he did.

Having this occasion to take notice of the manner and way of Poling in
Southwark, I cannot but upon the whole observe, That the Inhabitants thereof
lie (at the times of Poling) under great oppression, in the expense of five or
six days, when fewer hours might serve the turn, could the Bailiff be prevailed
with, to follow the example of London, (where double the number of True
Electors in Southwark, are Poled in four hours) by having several Writers and
Pole-Books, especially the Artillery House being so convenient for the purpose,
as nothing can be more, and the benefit in putting this in practice, is backed
with these Cogent Reasons.

First, Because the Industrious sort of Inhabitants will hereby save the
attendance of four or five days.

Secondly, Because the doors of the Pole-House standing open, and the people
understanding, that every one in three or four hours will be dispatched, it
will prevent Quarrelling and Rudeness in coming to the Pole, and discourage
Factious Persons, from sending for Hectoring Fellows, to espouse a particular
Party, in opposition to all others, as was done the last Pole.

Thirdly, The Candidates will hereby be prevented, in Raking the Prisons,
Hospitals, Almes-Houses, and Streets, for Beggars, and the adjacent
Neighborhood for necessitous persons, to the swelling the number of Electors
to above double of what they really are, as was done the two last Poles; the
first having Poled near fourthousand, and the latter above three thousand;
whereas there are not in all above eighteen or nineteen hundred in the
Bourough, that have a right to Pole, whereof we found the last Pole, by
Examination of the Church-Books, no more to appear than thirteen hundred, that
paid to the Poor, the rest being abated by Widows, Aged, Sick and Absent
Persons: of which number of thirteen hundred, How had five hundred eighty six,
Rich five hundred eighty three, Bethel seven hundred and three, and Smith seven
hundred and sixteen; so that though by the Pole at large, How and Rich had near
three hundred more than Bethel and Smith, these two latter, upon a true
account, had near one hundred and thirty more than the two former, as may be
observed by the above mentioned Numbers.

Fourthly, Because so long as this method of Poling is continued, the Borough
of Southwark will never be truly represented in Parliament; the Candidates
that live upon the place, being always able to make their Numbers by illegal
Polers, as great as they please.

Anciently, and in the memory of some living, none were admitted to the
Election, but such as by their Taxes appeared to be the most Substantial
Inhabitants, which was acquiesced in without Poling; but of late that way is
not only by the Bailiff, increased to all that pay to the Poor, (against which
none can object) but even to all that will but say they are Housekeepers,
under which notion it is, that the true Electors are abused.

This Fraud has been complained of to two Parliaments, but both Dissolved
before business came to Hearing, otherwise it is more than probable it would
have been Reformed.

The last Election, Bethel and Smith, being sensible that there was no Poling
for them against all the Beggars in the Town, they with many Inhabitants,
propounded to the Bailiff, to Pole by the Poors Books, and to convince him of
the reasonableness thereof, delivered him the Opinions of two Sergeants at Law,
and one Bencher, under their own hands, that none had right to Pole, save such
as at least paid to the Poor, and also enforced this Opinion, by the Votes of
the Commons in Parliament, in the Case of other Buroughs, fully to the same
effect: But though the Bailiff confessed it was but reasonable it should be so,
yet he would not be prevailed with, to do that which he owned to be reasonable;
from whence it is, that the Borough has not had in the two last Parliaments
Representatives, which have been duly Chosen by true Electors. And thus much
may suffice at present, to show the irregular, and unjust way of Election of
Members to serve in Parliament, for the Town and Borough of Southwark.

THE TRIAL OF Slingsby Bethel Esquire On Wednesday the fifth of October 1681. at
the Bridge-house in Southwark, before the Right Honorable Sir Patience Ward
Lord Mayor, etc.
The Court being sat, the Jury were called as follows, whose Names are
desired to be mentioned with their distinctions, because there are several
others in Southwark of the same Names.
JURYMEN.
Edward Collingwood Brazier, alias Tinker. Francis Waker Comb-maker. Zebulon
Newington Chandler, alias Salter. William Head. Woollen-Draper Humphrey Roberts
John Allyn Baker. John Morgan Grocer William Morice Francis Ferrey Richard
Frankling Thomas Wade Butcher, and private Informer for the Custom-House.
Edward Kemp Ale-Draper.
Being Sworn, the Indictment was Read. The Indictment at the General Quarter
Sessions of the Peace, of our Sovereign Lord the King, for the Town and
Borough of Southwark, in the County of Surrey, at the Bridge-House within the
Town and Borough aforesaid, to wit the twenty ninth day of June, in the Thirty
Third Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, King of
England, etc. THE Jurors for our Sovereign Lord the King, upon their Oath do
present, That Slingsby Bethel, late of the Parish of St. Olaves Southwark,
within the Town and Borough aforesaid, in the County of Surrey, Esquire, on
the twelfth day of March, in the Three and Thirtieth Year of the King, with
Force and Arms, at the Parish aforesaid, and within the Town and Borough
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, in and upon one Robert Mason, at that time
one of the Kings Watermen, in the Peace of God, and of our Lord the King, then
and there standing, did Assault and make a Battery, and the said Robert Mason,
then and there most griveously, and dangerously did Beat, Wound, and evil
Entreat, so that his life was greatly dispaired of, and other Innormities that
then and there he offered to, and brought on the said Robert Mason: and that
the same Slingsby Bethel, then and there (to wit) the same twelfth day of
March, in the Thirty Third Year aforesaid, in the Parish aforesaid, in the Town
and Borough aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, in the presence and hearing of
very many of the Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the King, then and there to the
said Robert Mason, he spoke, uttered, and with a loud Voice, declared and
published these provoking, threatening and approbious words (to wit) Syrrah,
pointing at the said Robert Mason, I (meaning himself Slingsby Bethel:) will
have your Coat, (a certain Cloth Coat of a Red Color; with which the said
Robert Mason, then and there was covered, and adorned with a certain Badge of
our said Lord the King upon the said Coat,) plucked off your back, to the great
terror, disturbance and trouble of Diverse, of our Sovereign Lords liege People
and Subjects, being then and there present, to the evil example of all others
offending in the like Case, as also against the Peace, Crown and Dignity of our
Sovereign Lord the King, etc.

Councellor Peasely. MY Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, Slingsby Bethel
Esquire Stands Indicted, for that he the said Slingsby Bethel, made an Assault and
Battery on Robert Mason: as also for Menacing and Threatening Words; saying, to
him, the said Robert Mason, Sirrah I will have your Coat plucked off your Back,
to the great terror and damage of the said Robert Mason, etc, to which
Indictment he has Pleaded not Guilty.


Mulloy, My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I am Council for the King
against Slingsby Bethel, Esquire who upon the twelfth day of March last, in the
Thirty Third Year of the King, did Assault Robert Mason, one of the Kings
Watermen, and did injuriously beat and strike the said Robert Mason, did give
several opprobious words, saying he would have his Coat plucked off his Back,
etc. To which he Pleads not Guilty.


Holt. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I am Council for the King
against Slignsby Bethel, Esquire You understand the Issue you are to Try, it has
been opened: the question is, Whether Mr. Slingsby Bethel be Guilty of this
Battery, and the matter contained in the Indictment, and the Agravating words
therein, or no. The occasion was, that in March last, there was an an Election
for two Burgesses, to be chosen to serve in Parliament, for this Borough; this
Robert Mason was desired to come from Lambeth, to see whether any of that
Parish came to Pole, which had no Right so to do. The Competitors were Sir
Richard How, Captain Rich, Slingsby Bethel, and Edw. Smith, Esquiers, Mr.
Slingsby Bethel, showed at his entrance into the Borough what Inclination and
Temper he came with, for his Followers, and such as came with him, came with
their God-Damme's, and several execrable Oaths against those that Voted against
him; after the Election began, and the Pole demanded, truly then Mr. Bethel
Acted his part, and took occasion to go off from the place where he was, and
strike several Persons that were Acting against him, particularly this Robert
Mason, finding him to be against him, took his Cane, and knocked him over the
Pate, and afterward knowing him to be Kings Waterman, said he deserved to have
his Coat plucked over his Ears; were the affront against him as a single
person, it were not of so bad Consequence, but we are to take notice of the
Solemnity of the occasion of the Meeting, now consider the occasion, it was for
the choosing of Parliament men, and had it not been for the prudence of the
Waterman, in forbearing to strike again, God knows the effects, and what an
uproar it might have occasioned: but he prudently refrained, and took his
Course in a Legal way, and according to Law has preferred this Indictment
against Mr. Slingsby Bethel. Now though the said Mr. Bethel be so great a man,
and a person of value, lately Sheriff of the City of London, and he Robert
Mason, appearing to be but a poor Waterman, yet I don't question, he will find
an English Jury to do him right.


Kings Council. Call Mr. Robert Mason, Arthur Adams, Tho. Walbrooke, Griffin
Meade, Tho. Smyth, Alexander Dory, (...) Lawrence.


Councellor Holt. Mason, What can you say on the Kings, and your own behalf
concerning this Matter.


Robert Mason. I was standing upon the steps by the door in the Artillery
Ground, and Mr. Bethel came and gave me diverse blows, on the stairs, knocked me
with his Cane, and followed me down beating of me, and said, Sirrah, I will
have your Coat plucked over your Ears, and I answered, So you would my Masters
too, if you could.


Counselor Thompson. By whose Solicitation came you there?


Mason. I was desired to be there.


Thompson. What did he strike you also with his Fist?


Mason. Yes.


Thompson. Where did he hurt you with all his blows?


Mason. On the Breast.


Thompson. How many blows?


Mason. He gave me twenty blows at least, I can swear safely, but how many more
I know not.


Thompson. Did not you, before Mr. Bethel came there, Interrupt the peoples
coming to Pole, and what did Mr. Bethel say?


Mason. He asked what I did there, and bid me go down.


Justice Pyrs. Did Mr. Bethel single you out from the rest of the Company.


Mason, Yes he did.


Kings Council. Call Adams. Adams, What can you say? did you see Mr. Bethel
strike Mason, and what words did he say?


Adams, First Witness. There was a Tumult at the stairs, and they called to me,
being Constable, and when I came, Mr. Bethel, and Mason were together, and a
great company followed them, I said Sirs pray keep the Peace, and I saw Mr.
Bethel gave him two or three shugs, and said, Sirrah, I will have your Coat off
your Back, and Mason answered, I, and so you would my Masters too, if you could.


Holt. Adams, Tell the Court what do you think would have been the Consequence
if Mason had struck again.


Adams. It would have been of a sad Consequence.


Holt. What was Mr. Bethels behavior, when he entered into the Borough? Did
you see him come into the Borough?


Adams. They came in and cried no Abhorrers, no Abhorrers.


Thompson. Did you hear Mr. Bethel say so?


Adams. No, Did you hear him Swear?


Adams, No.


Thompson. Who was it that swore?


Holt, He that rid first.


Thompson, Mason said Mr. Bethel gave him twenty blows, did you see it?


Adams. I was not there all the while, I did not see it.


Third Witness. Thomas Walbrooke, what can you say to the case in hand?


Walbrooke. I stood by the stairs when Mr. Bethel passed by, I saw Mr. Bethel
thrust him down the stairs, and I said, Robert take care what you do: Mr.
Bethel said, Sirrah come down; Mason said, I will come when I see my own time,
I do no body any hurt: Mr. Bethel answered, I command you to come down; and his
answer was, I will when I see my own time.


Thompson. Did you see any blow given by Mr. Bethel?


Walbrooke. No, I saw none, I will not swear to any blows, but I saw two or three
pushes in the breast, he pushed him back.


Thompson. And how many blows were given, ten or twenty, or how many?


Walbrooke. I will not answer any thing concerning that.


Thompson. Upon the Oath you have taken, being (I think) you are an Honest man,
had the Waterman this Coat on at that time? Or had he not a Campain Coat over
it?


Walbrooke. He had that Coat, but I don't remember any other.


Kings Council. Call Griffith Meade. Give an account of what you can of this
matter.


Griffith Mead. I saw a great number of People come to the Place, and saw Mr.
Bethel give him a push, and that was all.


Thompson. What words did you hear?


Meade. No words.


Thompson. How was this man Clothed? Was he clothed with this Coat, or had he
not a Campane Coat over it?


Meade. I cannot tell.


Thompson. Upon the Oath you have taken, how many blows did you see given,
because they say Twenty?


Meade. No blows at all, but a little push.

Call Thomas Smith, he Appeared. What do you know?


Smith. As Robert Mason and my self stood together, Mr. Bethel came round the
burying Place, and he brought a great Multitude of Persons with him, and bid
Mason come down the steps; Mason Answered, I will come down when I see my time.
Mr. Bethel said, If you will not come down, I will have your Coat plucked off
your back; afterward, many words passed, which I cannot remember, and Mr.
Bethel pusht him on the breast.


Second Council. Mr. Smith Pray give the Court an Account of the behavior of
the men that followed Mr. Bethel, did you not see Mr. Bethel give Robert Mason
a push when he was in the Artillery Ground?


Smith. I saw none.


Holt. What do you think the Consequence had been, if Mason had struck again?


Smith. Had he given any blows again, I do believe a hundred and a hundred had
been Slain.


Thompson. Smith, pray give an Account of the behavior of the men that came
with Mr. Bethel, and what Coat Mason wore, and whether he had not a Campane
Coat on it?


Smith. Sir I know not that, but he had the same Coat then on his back, which
he has on now?


Thompson. Why what made you think, if Mason had struck Mr. Bethel, that it
would have made such a great disturbance?


Smith. Because he was the Kings Servant.

Call Alexander Dory. Dory, Give the Court an account of the Matter in
Question, did you see Mr. Bethel give Mason any blows?


Dory. Sir, Mr. Bethel gave him some pushes in the breast, and said, He would
have his Coat off his back.


Thompson. Had he the same Coat on as now he has?


Dory. I saw the same, and no other.


Mulley. Call Lawrence, he appeared. Lawrence give the Court and Jury an
Account of what you know of the Quarrel between Mr. Bethel, and Robert Mason;
Did you see Mr. Bethel give him any blows? and give an account of the behavior
of Mr. Bethel and his Company, when they came into the Borough.


Thompson. This Indictment is for an Assault and Battery, if you can give any
account of that do, but not of the behavior of those that came with Mr.
Bethel; that is not the Matter at this time.


Holt. I Answer, Sir it is not, but we ask the question, to make out the
behavior of Mr. Bethel and his company, and shall leave it to the Jury, what
Judgment to make of it.


Lawrence. I saw the persons that came with Mr. Bethel, Hectoring and Swearing
at a strange rate, and the persons which rid before cried, Hollow, Hollow.


Thompson. I Appeal to Mr. Holt, What if John an Oaks or Tom a Styles Swear
and Hector, etc. shall Mr. Bethel Answer for that, in a matter that falls out
long afterward, as this did?


Lawrence. I saw their behavior, as I have said, and when Mr. Bethel came to
Robert Mason, he stood with his hands behind him, Mr. Bethel bid him come down,
he said no, he would not; then said Mr. Bethel, I will pluck your Coat off your
back; and Mason Answered, I and so you would my Masters too, if you could.


Lord Mayor. Did Mr. Bethel Swear when he came into the Borrough?


Lawrence. No.


Lord Mayor. Who did Swear?


Laur. He that Rid first.


Mr. Thompson. May it please your Lordship,

I am of Council for Mr. Bethel the Defendant, who has been, and stands
Indicted for making an Assault and Battery upon Robert Mason, and for speaking
many menacing and threatening Words, as that he would pull his Coat over his
Ears, etc. And for giving several blows; unto which, we have Pleaded Not
Guilty. They have produced several Witnesses, and Robert Mason himself, (who is
so thorow-stitch in the Case) that he swears so, as no one can believe him, for
his own Witnesses do not; for they do not Swear, nor pretend to Swear like him,
being not able to stretch at that rate; he is desperately mistaken, to speak
the best of him.

For this Mason Swears Mr. Bethel gave him Twenty blows at least, but how many
more he cannot say; see how this will look, when we shall prove (by Substantial
and Credible Men) that not one blow was given, or push either; but suppose he
were pusht, yet his Evidence agree not one with another; for some swear to one
push, some to more; but Mr. Mason swears to the full number of Twenty blows at
least, and that positively, but how many more he does not remember. But suppose
it were so, yet the matter is not so much, but what may be justified by the
occasion given, and what would be a good Plea in Law, in an Action, will be the
same upon Pleading not Guilty, in this Case.

May it please your Lordship,

The occasion of Mr. Bethels coming here, was this, being about the Choosing of
Parliament men for this Borough, the Competitors were Sir Richard How, Mr.
Rich, Mr. Bethel, and Mr. Smith; there was a House wherein they appointed to
Pole, called the Artillery-House: When they came to take the Pole at this
place, where there is a pair of stairs which leads to the door, the manner of
taking the Pole was thus, first to fill the House, by that door to the stairs,
and after they had Voted to put them out at the other door; this being the
occasion of the Battery (however agravated) will to all that know it, or shall
take the matter into consideration, seem a very shameful thing, to ground an
Indictment upon. But this Mason, a very officious man, who had no Right to
Pole, (as himself confesses) and who might have spared the trouble (for any
Authority he had) of coming there, and it might have been better he had stayed
at home, by what he has Sworn, this man and one Sam Sams, a Hectoring Carr-man,
were set upon the stairs; and their business was not (as they now pretend) to
take notice who were fit to Pole, but to understand who were for Mr. Bethel,
and Mr. Smyth, and those they did abuse, and push them down the steps, which
Mr. Bethel being informed of, came out of the House, and spoke Civilly to them,
and said, Friends what have you to do here, if you have not a Right to Pole
come down from the place, which Mason refusing, the Defendant took him gently
by the hand and led him down the steps, giving neither blow nor push: we Shall
call Witnesses to prove this, -- Now for A Gentleman that stood as one of the
Competitors for a Parliament Man at that time in that place, he might do this
to a Person that had nothing to do there, nay they themselves say there ought
not to be any Interruption at an Election, and that the Interruption was from
themselves and that occasioned the mighty Battery they make so much of. We
shall call our Witnesses, and shall make this matter appear to be our Case, and
then though Mason has spoken of Twenty Blows, if believed, as there is but
little Reason for it, it will be sufficiently Justified by the Witness we shall
Produce, and the Evidence we shall give in this matter.

Call Mr. Nath. Travers Constable, Mr. Benjamin Tarrant, Mr. George Hampton,
Mr. Mark Clark, Mr. Thomas Weeks, Mr. Benjamin Gerrard.


Thomson. Let us begin with Mr. Traverse. Mr Traverse, What Account can you
give of the matter?


Traverse. May it please your Lordship,

I Remember it as if it were but just now; I was called out of the House to
come to this Door, hearing the People were in a very great Disturbance, I came
to this Robert Mason, And said, What do you there to make this Disturbance?
Have you a Right to Poll? He answered, It may be I may. I told him, If he would
not be civil, I should take a Course to Indict him.


Thomson. And what was he doing?


Traverse. He was Throwing People from both sides with his Elbows, in this time
A Report being carried to Sheriff Bethel, of a Persons Leg broken, and a man
like to be Killed, Sheriff Bethel came to the Steps and took him just by the
Arm thus -- Showing the manner -- and said, Pray Friend, what have thou to do
here? have thou a Right to Poll? at first he said he had, afterward he said
no; then said Sheriff Bethel, Pray go about your Business: Mr. Bethel gave no
Blow, nor did so much as show any Passion, or Angry Countenance. And said no
more. But others said, Mason was a Rude Person, and that he Deserved to have
his Coat Plucked over his Ears.


Thompson. Did you not hear Mr. Bethel say so?


Travers. -- No, but it was said by some of the Company.


Thompson. I ask one Question more, Mason said he had Twenty Blows, what say
you to that?


Traverse. He had not one upon the Oath that I have taken.


Thompson. Had he this Coat on or no.


Traverse. Truly I know not, I cannot tell, but he had a Badge, whereby he
Discovered himself to be some Gentleman's Servant.


Thompson. Was Sams there?


Holt. Mr. Thompson, is that a fair Question?


Thompson. I did it purposely to try your Observation, you would call to what
others did long before the Battery, I must not ask if one was there at the time
of the Battery.


Holt. Did you not see Mr. Bethel on the Artillery Ground, was not Mason Pusht
there.


Travers. I tell you, Sir, there was not one blow given.


Holt. Then you did not see the quarrel on the Ground?


Travers. I tell you, there was no quarrel on the Ground; I stood on the Steps
when Sheriff Bethel came, and the Sheriff, when he was half way the Steps,
seeing the Water-mans posture he was in, said, Friend, have you any thing to do
to Poll; if you have not, why do you make a Disturbance? He answered, It may be
I have, and it may be not: Pray Friend, said Sheriff Bethel, if you have not,
come down: I went from thence about the Ground, and did not see the least blow
given, or any appearance of Passion.


Thompson. Before Mr. Bethel came, how did this Man behave himself, did he not
shout and behave himself rudely?


Holt. Let him speak of himself, let not Words be put into his Mouth.


Thompson. Had he a Red-Coat on?


Travers. I cannot say it.


Thompson. Mr. Tarrant, what can you say?


Tarrant. I was on the Ground when the Sheriff came, I was at some distance;
but upon the Oath I have taken, I saw Mr. Bethel and the Waterman coming
together; but I saw no blow, and I am sure there was not one blow given.


Mr. Weeks,Give an account of what you know.


Weeks. My Lord, I saw Sheriff Bethel when he came into the Ground, and went
up the Steps, I made haste after him, and was there all the while, and there
was nothing like a blow; but all he did was to this purpose: Pray Friend, (said
he) if you have no right to Poll, go your way, what have you to do here? and I
followed after him into the Artillery Ground, and there was nothing of a blow,
or any thing like it.


Thompson. You were there all the while?


Weeks. Yes, I was.


Thompson. Yet Mason says, there were twenty blows given.


Weeks. Upon the Oath I have taken, there was none, nor any thing like it.


Holt. Mr. Weeks, do you live in London, or do you live in the Borough?


Weeks. Sir, I live in London.


Holt. What is this Witness to the purpose then?


Thompson. May not a Man live in London, and be a good Evidence here?
Notwithstanding, call Mr. Gerrad.

Mr. Gerrad, what can you say?


Gerrad. My Lord, I was in the Ground before Mr. S. B. came out of the
Polling-House, and I saw this Waterman and Sam. Sams thrusting of People down,
that seemed to be for Mr. B. and Smyth, crying How and Rich.


Weeks. My Lord, my memory failed in this point; but upon the Oath I have
taken, what that Gentleman swears, it is true.


Thompson. Pray, Sir, (as you seem a sober Man) were any blows struck by Mr.
Bethel?


Gerrad. I went with Sheriff Bethel there at that time, and he asked the
Waterman what he had to do there? I cannot well tell what answer he made: But
Mr. Sheriff said, if you have no right to Poll, pray go about your business;
upon the Oath I have taken, he did not strike one blow, no more than he does
now standing in this Court before your Lordship.


Lord Mayor. Was there any pushing, or thrusting, by Mr. Bethel?


Gerrad. Upon my Oath, my Lord, not any.


Thompson. And you say you were there all the while, and saw no disturbance
given by Mr. Bethel?


Gerrad. I am sure there was not.


Thompson. Had he this Coat on or no, or had he not a Campaign Coat on?


Gerrad. To the best of my remembrance he had a Campaign Coat on, and I believe
he had.


Thompson. Mr. Hatfield, pray give an account of what you know of this matter.


Hatfield. There were two Men which I saw in Red Coats, which pusht down the
People that came to Poll for Mr. Bethel, before Mr. Bethel came; and had not
Mr. Bethel come to appease the Tumult, I do believe there had been much
mischief done by them and Sams, etc.


Thompson. Upon the Oath you have taken, were there any blows given?


Hatfield. No, Sir, there were none.


Thompson. Were there any blows given by Mr. Bethel?


Hatfield. No, Sir, not one: for Mr. Bethel being informed of the incivility of
Mason and Sams, Mr. Bethel came Civilly to them, and entreated them to come
down, and bid them be gone, and not make a Disturbance.


Mulloy. Call Lawrence again, to show that Mason did not make the Disturbance.


Lawrence. I saw Robert Mason, and the Party with him, behave themselves very
Civil; and the Disturbance that was, proceeded from the other Party.


Thompson. This is the same Man we had but now, he is called to Witness again;
a pretty way of multiplying Witnesses: I appeal to Mr. Mason himself, whether
this be not the same Man you called once before?


Thompson. My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I think the Case is plain,
and needs no Arguments: I shall only take notice how careful these men are (as
they pretend) to keep the King's Peace. The matter you see, in short, is, Mr.
Bethel (who stood for a Parliament Man of this place, and at the same time bore
an Eminent Character, (as Sheriff of the City of London) upon Information given
of the Disturbance made by this Mason, and of the unfairness of their
proceedings, only came Civilly, and took him by the Arm, persuading him to come
away, and make no Disturbance. And this is the truth of the Case, and the
mighty Battery they pretend to. Now suppose, that when People are in such a
Crowd, and upon such an occasion, there were some pushes, (as is the utmost
here pretended) could this be a sufficient matter to ground an Indictment upon?
No, Gentlemen, no: This Indictment, and the Design of it is to raise a dust,
and (if possible) to cast Reflections on Mr. Bethel, but it is more than they
can do in point of Law, by any matter here proved, if Masons Witnesses do swear
true; yet you see how Mason behaves himself, crying How and Rich, striking down
all that came between Sam. Sams and him; so they broke the Peace, and raised
the Disturbance themselves. And in that case any Man (and why not Mr. Bethel?)
might have taken him, and carried him before a Magistrate, and have justified
it. But now, for the Credit of the thing; you see none swears it but Mason
himself; but even he swears to that Impossibility, so over-reaches the matter
through the excess of his Passion in swearing, that no one can believe him; if
he had sworn modestly, as the rest did, to two or three pushes, it might have
been Credited; but to twenty blows, no one can believe it; neither does any one
of his own Witnesses swear like him, or of so much as one blow given: So there
is not one word Mason says can be Credited.

Then, my Lord, admit it be so; yet you saw M. Bethel was not the Person that
first began this Disturbance; now if the other Party had been Indicted and
Tried, (as indeed it had been much more fit they should) we could have proved
much against them. --

And as to the Fact and manner of what Mr. Bethel did, it was no more than
coming in a civil manner, asking whether he had a right to Poll? when he said
no, he took him civilly by the Arm and led him down; and this is a Justifiable
assault, being the Nature of the thing required a necessity of somewhat of
Action in it. I appeal to you of the Jury, whether here be any Cause for this
Indictment, or color of Reason for you to find it?


Holt. Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard the Evidence on both sides, and
the question is, Whether, in your Consciences, you can dis-believe Eight
Witnesses, that swear positively to the Battery, and believe those Witnesses
that did not see it? if you acquit Mr. Bethel, you must necessarily Convict
Eight Persons of Perjury: But if you do not find for Mr. Bethel, the other
Witnesses cannot be Convicted of Perjury; for how can Men swear, (though they
were there all the time) that they did not see? possibly they may be very
honest Men, and present at the time, and yet not see Bethel strike, and so not
swear to it: But our Witnesses swear very true; I hope you will be guided by
Sense and Conscience, and not by Spectators humors, and apprehensions, that
come here and hiss in a Court of Justice: Now Eight Witnesses swearing it, I do
appeal to the Court, whether in matters of this Nature, one Witness for the
Affirmative, be not more valid than many of the Negative?

They take notice of the impossibility, and why, because they swear (as they
say) at an extravagant rate, that Mr. Bethel gave him Twenty blows.

Gentlemen, If Mr. Bethel will beat a Man extravagantly, it is not
extravagancie to swear it: Now Mason's Evidence is confirmed by all the rest
produced, and no Contradiction: If one swear to ten, and another to two, and
another to three, is this inconsistent? No, Gentlemen, it is Evident those Men
swear Cautiously and Fearfully, for if otherwise, they could Swear to as many
as Twenty, as Mason has done: Who is the best Judge, he that felt the blows,
or they that Swear there was not one given? He that felt them, I am sure.

Gentlemen, It was in a Crowd, it is possible they may not see all; yet their
Evidence is a concurring Circumstance.

Next I come to the point of Law, how a Man that is a Candidate at an Election,
can beat any Man that stands in his way; I do not understand that to be Law: if
any Man had beaten Mr. Bethel, he might have beaten him again in his own
Defense; but there was no such thing. Mr. Bethel saw no Disturbance himself,
but was informed of it, and so became too Officious; though he was Sheriff of
London, yet he was not an Officer there; for he was not a Constable there; and
it was a Constables Office, and he only could have seized him, and not a
Constable neither, unless he had seen the Kings Peace broken.

And as to what Mr. Thompson says, that it is impossible that such an Election
should be carried on without some bustle; It Is true, in a Crowd Men Justling
one another, and by accident strike another down, it is no Battery; But is it
necessary for Mr. Bethel to thump a a Man on the Breast? Is it necessary for
Mr. Bethel to beat a Man with his Cane? Is it necessary for Mr. Bethel to give
a Man Twenty blows? Is it necessary for Mr. Bethel to pluck a Man's Coat off his
Back? Is it necessary to an Election? It is not necessary, and so being not
necessary, is not by Law Justifiable. Gentlemen, as Mr. Thompson says, it is a
Case of Example; I say so too; and it is fit Persons that will do such things,
should be made an Example.

Justice Pyrs afterward summed up the Evidence, and told the Jury, (as Mr.
Holt the Counselor for the King had before well observed) that they were to
have regard to the Positive Affirmative Evidence, Mason having sworn positively
to several blows that were struck by Mr. Bethel, and that Eight Witnesses had
sworn in the Affirmative; and that though there were Seven Witnesses produced
by Mr. Bethel, which were on the Negative part; yet they were to observe, that
the Law did not allow of those Negative Evidences: But for that so mamany had
Sworn in the Affirmative, that they saw a thing done, and as many Swear that
they saw it not; he could not tell what to say, but to leave it to the Jury;
saying, that one Affirmative was better than Forty Negative Oaths.

So the Jury went out, and in a very short time were pleased to find the
Indictment, and brought Mr. Bethel in Guilty.

Then Mr. Bethel's Counsel moved in Arrest of Judgment, for that no Indictment
lay for the Words, and the Court for that Reason stayed the Judgment, as to
that part of the Indictment, and gave Judgment only as to the Assault and
Battery, and Fined Mr. Bethel Five Marks. Upon which the Counsel for the King
moved to have him taken into Custody, until he paid the Fine, which he
presently paid, and so was Discharged.

THE Crowd was so exceeding great, that I could not take this Trial so exactly
as otherwise I should have done, but the Defects are only to the prejudice of
Mr. Bethel.


POSTSCRIPT.
HAving as a Preface to this Trial, shown the occasion of the Indictment, I
shall here make some Observations upon the Prosecution of it.

And first, As to Mason, those that know him best, think it as improbable (his
Estate considered) that he should be at the Charge of three Counsel in this
business, as it is that a man of his bulk and temper should tamely receive
Twenty blows with a stick, without returning one; or be pursued with blows in
the presence of five hundred men, at least, without having it taken notice of
by any one besides himself, or especially, that his Partner and Companion, Sam.
Sams, who stood close by him, should not see one blow given, as he has
affirmed to one Mr. Farthing, his Southwark Neighbor, he did not; adding, that
he would not forswear himself for all the world. But the Plaintiff was not thus
alone more than ordinarily concerned; for his Counsel were the same, otherwise
at the opening of the Cause, they would not impertinently, and from the matter,
have inferred Mr. Bethel's quarrelsome and rude intentions, from the Company
that came first into the Borough with him, whom they rendered to be none but
debauched God Dammee's, though when it was put upon them to declare who they
were that swore at that rate, they could not instance in any, save one, whom
they described by his riding first, as not daring to name him: And were it
true, that such a person was in the Company, it was as uncharitable a
Synechdoche, to condemn a considerable number of grave and sober Citizens, who
never were known to be guilty of Swearing or Cursing, for the fault of one man,
as it was indecent in them to describe reproachfully a Person of great Quality,
because they durst not name him: But to make amends for this, in the Case of a
fellow Commoner, after a Fine of five Marks was laid upon Mr. Bethel, the same
Counsel moved to have him taken into Custody, until he paid the Money,
insinuating thereby, that otherwise he might run away, and defraud the Baliff
of his Fine.

Mr. Recorder not being at the Court, he who in his absence gave Directions to
the Jury, told them, That they had Mason's positive Oath, that One Affirmative
was better than Forty Negative Oaths, and therefore they must either find
Bethel Guilty, or they would make Mason perjured. Which passing for Law with
the Jury, they brought him in Guilty of the Assault and Battery.

The Bench being now to set the Fine, my Lord Mayor and Sir Thomas Allen
(considering the nature of the Action) thought 3 s. 4 d. enough, but the rest
were for several higher Sums, yet at last all centred in Five Marks. And thus
the whole matter is left to the Reader, to make what Judgment and Conclusions
he pleases upon it.

FINIS.

