A LETTER From the AUTHOR of the ARGUMENT AGAINST A Standing Army, To the
AUTHOR of the Balancing Letter.

A False Balance is an Abomination to the Lord, but a Just Weight is his
Delight,

Prove. xi. I. Vendidit hic auro patriam, Dominumque potentem Imposuit, Leges
fixit pretio, atque refixit.

Virgil. AEn. L. 6. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1697.

A LETTER from the Author of the Argument against a STANDING ARMY, to the
Author of the Balancing Letter.
SIR,
THO the Journy-men Scriblers with all their Scurrility cannot provoke me to
give them an Answer, yet when I see my self levelled at in such soft Language
and Gentleman-like Behavior, I am the more afraid; Timeo Danaos, and dona
ferentes.

You have been pleased in your last Paragraph to own the Matter to be so nice
and important, that it ought to be severely examined, without false Colors and
popular Rhetoric; and you are pleased to give your self the Character of one
zealous for Liberty, a great Adventurer for it, and to have great Stake in it.
If you are the Gentleman I guess you to be, I believe your Stake is now
considerable; but you being a great Adventurer in getting it, it is not worth
magnifying your self for it: which gives me occasion to say. I am not of a
desperate Fortune, and what Stake I have being provided for me by my Ancestors,
I am more afraid of losing it than if it were my own Acquisition. And after
this short Preface, I will proceed to examine into the matter without false
Colors or popular Rhetoric.

I think your Letter has showed these three things.

1. What you would have. 2. How long you would have it. 3. For what Reasons.
1st. I perceive you would have us believe we have an Honorable Peace to the
wonder of the World, and that nothing can hurt us but A nimosities and
Jealousies amongst our selves: And secondly, you would have a Land Force to
maintain this Peace. Now, Sir, I must beg your Pardon if my Faith differs from
yours; for I cannot believe we have an Honorable Peace, in case we are obliged
to keep up a Standing Force to maintain it. Peace is a Cessation of the
Exercise of the use of Arms, that we may with Safety turn our Swords into
Plough-shares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks; and the Prayers of the Church
commanded by his Majesty for Thanksgiving for this Peace, have taken in that
very Text: And if this our Peace will not answer this Character, it is not such
a Peace as you would have us believe we are blessed with. But since we have not
such a Peace (for you know better than I) I will go on for Argument-sake with
yours, to supply this Imperfection in it. You are pleased to say, Page 3. when
you seem to prepare us to consider of the Necessity of a Land Force, You are
far from the thought of a STANDING ARMY. Now I Will tell you, Sir, what I
apprehend a STANDING ARMY to be; Horse and Foot raised under Commission granted
by the King, with Swords and Pistols, Pikes and Muskets, Powder and Ball to
kill Men. If you by your Land Force mean none of all these, I am very
impertinent in differing with you. But till you are pleased to distinguish your
Land Force from this Description, I believe all Men will think you mean the
same by a LAND FORCE, as I do by a STANDING ARMY; which if you do, then you
have declared your Thoughts against it, and made your self guilty of the most
apparent Contradiction that ever I saw wrote in so good a Style.

The next thing you show is, How long you would have these LAND FORCES
continue, and that is from Year to Year: which puts me in mind of a Covenant
used in conveying Lands in Holland, whereby the Seller warrants the Land to the
Purchaser for a Year and a Day, which according to their Law, is for ever; and
so, I suppose, when you say from Year to Year, you mean in secula seculorum, as
will appear by and by.

The third thing is, for what Reasons you would have this. And, first, you
abhor to give his Majesty a Jealousy of his People, as if he were not safe
amongst them without Guards: But you say the Case at present is, Whether,
considering the Circumstances that we and our Neighbors are now in, it may not
be prudent and necessary for us to keep up a reasonable Force from Year to
Year; and so you seem to lay a great stress upon the Fashion of other
Countries. You say, Page 4. The whole World, more particularly our Neighbors,
have now got into the mistaken Notion of keeping up a mighty Force; and the
most powerful of these happens to be our next Neighbor, who will very probably
keep up great Armies, and we may appear too inviting if we are in an unguarded
Condition.

Now, Sir, as to the Fashion of other Countries. I remember that God having
declared Laws to the Israelites, commanded them to keep them, and not to follow
or hanker after the Fashions of other Nations, either in Worship or Government.
And if we are in the Fashion of our Neighbors in having an Army, we must have
their fashioned Government too. It is the Fashion of the F. K. to have a
STANDING ARMY, and it is the Fashion of his Subjects to be Slaves under that
STANDING ARMY. I observe Men that are addicted to Fashions, follow them in
every thing. Now to be Freemen under a STANDING ARMY is not the Fashion of our
Neighbors. And I am afraid we shall never think our selves completely in the
Fashion till we have got Wooden Shoes too.

But I see, Sir, you are not so much a Fop as to be in the Fashion for fashion
sake, but that you think there is a necessity for it; for you are afraid of
being invaded by our Neighbors, the next and greatest of whom will probably
keep up great Armies. And here by the way before I forget it, I would put you
in mind of your Tenure from Year to Year; for I think by this Argument you
would have our Land Force to continue as long as the French King is in a
mistaken notion of keeping up great Armies, so that from Year to Year is
already become a Phrase for ever. For my part I should be unwilling to stay for
any thing I wish for till the French King disbands his Army. Therefore, Sir,
don't draw Men into your Proposals by sowing Pillows under them, by soft
Language, of a Land Force, not Standing Army; from Year to Year, under the
Consideration of Parliament. Let us have plain words, and then your Proposals,
according to your own Reasons, must be for a Standing Army in England, as long
as the French King, or any of his Successors, keep up a Standing Army in
France: you had as good open your Matter fairly at first, for every thing else
is but flourish till you come to the Point.

Now, Sir, I confess I give as little credit to the Words and Leagues of
Princes as you do, and depend more upon their Interest than Integrity for the
performance of them, and therefore am not for leading them into Temptations to
attack us, and would always have a Defense suitable to our Danger. Nature has
armed all Creatures with Weapons to oppose those that assault them, and the
Policy of Man has found out several Artificial ones for himself. Now the sole
Debate between us is, In whose Hands these Weapons should be put.

Of this matter I have discoursed from the 18th to the 26th Page of my
Argument, which you neither can or do pretend to answer, and therefore I refer
you thither again: Indeed in your 9th, 10th and 11th Pages you tell us, That
Regular and Disciplined Troops are far superior to the best and strongest
Militia in the World, admitting this Condition, that there are no Regular or
Disciplined Troops in that Militia. But I will make bold to tell you, that a
Militia may be as well Disciplined as any Army; nay our own Army, if they were
Disbanded, will most of them be sent to the Militia; and I suppose calling them
by a new Name will not make them worse Soldiers. Now as to your Instances in
History, I shall only make this small Objection to them all, That you are
mistaken in every particular. For the Persian Army was made up of Standing
Troops, kept up in the several Provinces of the Empire, and not of Militia, as
you falsely insinuate: and with these Armies they conquered easily the several
Principalities which made up their vast Empire, and were defended by Standing
Armies; but when they came to fight with the Greek Militia, all their mighty
Armies came to nothing. Of this we have the Instances of Xenophon, who with ten
Thousand Greeks marched three. Thousand Miles through their Country in spite
of a numerous Army observing him. Afterward of Agesilaus, who with a small
Spartan Militia had put an end to the Persian Empire, if the Factions of Greece
had not called him home. The mighty Army of Xerxes was destroyed by a Greek
Militia. Nay the better part of Alexander's Army was made up of a Militia taken
out of the several Cities of Greece.

The Instance you give of the Romans, makes as much against you; for they found
more difficulty in conquering a few little Commonwealths about them, who fought
by Militias, than Asia, Egypt, and all the Arbitrary Governments they
conquered, who fought against them with standing Armies. Who will deny that
Caesar's Conquests over the Gallick Militia, were greater than Pompey's over
the Asiatick standing Armies? And whereas you say, Page 11th, That nothing
stood before the Roman Armies whilst they were kept under Discipline; but when
all their Order was broke, and they became a Militia, the Northern Nations in
Europe, as well as the Sarazens in the East, overrun the Roman Empire; I must
take leave to say, the just contrary to this is true: for whilst they sought by
a Militia, they conquered the whole World; but afterward in the time of the
Emperors, when they kept up Standing Armies of three hundred and sixty
thousand Men, as Tacitus reckons them, they were overrun by every Barbarous
Nation that invaded them.

Your Instance of Hannibal is nothing to the purpose, for the Carthaginians did
not beat the Romans, but Hannibal the Roman Generals: He got no Victory but by
his own single Conduct; and when the Romans fought against any other General,
they were seldom unsuccessful.

The Turks also met with much more trouble in sub duing the Hungarian and
Epirot Militias, than all their Empire besides. Scanderbeg with a small Militia
came off constantly successful in two and twenty Battles against their numerous
Standing Armies. Huniades and his Son Mathias, fought always with Militias
against the Turkish Standing Armies, and performed such Actions as Posterity
can hardly believe, and I am sure were never equaled by any other Force.

And whereas you say, the Preservation of England in Queen Elizabeth's time was
by accident, and we must not always expect to live upon Miracles: I don't find
but that Excellent Princess, and her Court, were of another Opinion. We don't
find her, or her Creatures, after the Spaniards were defeated, to use this Cant
to the Parliament. Gentlemen, you see what a Danger you have lately escaped, we
were preserved by Providence and Chance, but I hope you will not always expect
Miracles: It is necessary to keep up a Standing Force, for I cannot depend upon
the Defense of my People. She scorned such Trash, and would have cag'd any evil
Counselor who durst give her such Advice: She thought her self safe in the
Affection of her People, though this Gentleman, at above a hundred Years
distance, tells her the contrary.

But you seem very apprehensive of being surprised without notice; and mention,
Page 5th, the late Attempts from la Hogue and Calais; and that if in a time of
War and Jealousy we were so near being fatally overrun, without warning or
intelligence, it is much more possible to see such Designs laid in times of
Sloth and Quiet, when we are under no Fears, and may have no notice of it. Sir,
I have no better Opinion of our Intelligence during the War, than you have.
However the business of la Hogue was the Talk of the Exchange, and in all the
public Prints, besides the Gazette, two Months before it happened: And as to
that of Calais, His Majesty, by his extraordinary Care, surprised the Enemy
with seventy Sail on their Coasts, which they never expected. And that our
Notice should be more difficult in Peace than War, I cannot understand, since
in the latter all Ports are shut, and Merchants stopped; and in the former the
Ports are open, Travelers abroad, Merchants at Sea, and an Ambassador at their
Court.

Page the 8th, you give a great Character of Arbitrary Government, where Men
are ruined that fail in performing what is expected from them, in keeping the
Secrets that are enjoined them, by which the Prince can execute things in other
manner than can be conceived by those that live in free Governments. I am sure
if Impunity of those who fail in performing their Duty, and in keeping our
Secrets, be the Character of a free Government, we are free with a witness. But
I cannot see why the punishing of them should be inconsistent with a free
Government.

And after all, you seem to apprehend as ill Consequences from a STANDING ARMY
as I do, as Page the 14th, where speaking of the Dangers of it, you say, This
is a large Field, and History is so full of Instances of this kind, that it
will be easy to open copiously on the Subject. From the Praetorian be gathered
to give a very frightful Representation of a STANDING ARMY. And afterward,
Page the 15th, I do not deny but several Inconveniences may be apprehended from
a STANDING FORCE, and therefore I should not go about to persuade you to it, if
the thing did not seem indispensibly necessary. Now I suppose by indispensible
Necessity you mean, you are sure without this Army that our Neighbors will
invade us, and that it is impossible our Fleets or Militia, however managed,
can be able to defend us: whether there is such a necessity or not, I refer you
to my Argument; and if there is not, you have given up the Question: For you,
in effect, admit a certain Slavery on one side, and if there is but contingent
Ruin on the other, it is easy to determine of which side the Balance lies. But
you say that the Parliament shall overlook it; but will you be Security the
Army shall not overlook the Parliament? O but that cannot be if they are kept up
from Year to Year! Caesar with all his Genius could not work his Army to it in
less than ten Years.

Sir, If that be the exact time of corrupting an Army, pray consider that ours
has been kept up nine Years already. But I am as far from any Jealousy of His
present Majesty as you are, and yet I am not afraid to say, that Army which can
do no hurt, can do no good.

It is impossible to consider of a STANDING FORCE which shall be sufficient to
oppose a Foreign Power, without considering it at the same time sufficient to
suppress the Subject at home: for they must beat those who you suppose can beat
us; and I must confess I am unwilling to depend on their good Will.

Sir, Page 15. you seem to think me a Jealous, Melancholy and Timorous Man,
overrun with the Spleen; but I fancy my self as free from all this without a
Place, as perhaps you are with one. Come don't fear your Stake, I dare give you
Land Security that you will come off a Winner.

And as for the Gallant Gentlemen of the Army, whom you fear will be Losers, I
shall be as ready as you to recompense them for their Bravery. But to suppose
our Fleets to be surprised and betrayed, our Militia to be recreant, and all
our Intelligence, Fidelity and Courage to be lodged in a Standing Army, I must
confess is out of my power.

In Page the 8th you say, You cannot see some Men grow all on a sudden such
wonderful Patriots, so jealous of the Prerogative, such Zealots for public
Liberty, without remembering what their Behavior was in the late Reigns. Now I
must own to you, I am better pleased to see this, than to see some Men who were
such wonderful Patriots, etc. in the last Reigns, act the same part now as much
as in them lies, as the others are said to have done formerly.

Before I have done I must take notice of one Passage in your 10th Page. You
say, Whenever the fatal time comes that this Nation grows weary of Liberty, and
has neither the Virtue, the Wisdom, nor the Force to preserve its Constitution,
it will deliver up all, let all the Laws possible, and all the Bars imaginable
be put in the way to it. It is no more possible to make a Government immortal,
than to make a Man immortal. When I join this to the sensible Impressions you
seem to have of the Danger of a Standing Army in the next Line, and yet an
indispensible Necessity of keeping one, methinks you give broad Hints that you
think our time is come. But I doubt not there is Virtue enough yet in England
to preserve our Constitution, though a wiser Head than yours designed its Ruin.

I will conclude in telling you we have a happy Government, where the King has
all the Power necessary to execute the Laws. All Title arises upon an equal
distribution of Power; and he that gets an over-balance of Power (for you and I
are balancing) takes away the Title from the rest, and leaves them a Possession
without a Right, which is a Tenure at the Will of the Lord.

Now Sir, if a Parliament should subject all the Lands of England to this
Tenure, I make no doubt your Stake and mine would be as safe during His
Majesty's Reign, as in our own Possession; and yet if you will promise me to
bring in a Bill to that purpose, I am contented that all I have said about a
standing Army shall go for nothing.

Sir, In hopes you will keep up your Correspondence, I conclude my self

Your most humble Servant.

FINIS.

