THE TRIAL OF EDWARD COLEMAN, Gent. FOR Conspiring the Death OF THE KING, AND
THE Subversion of the Government OF ENGLAND, AND THE Protestant Religion: Who
upon Full Evidence was found Guilty of HIGH TREASON, And received SENTENCE
accordingly, on Thursday November the 28th 1678.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery Lane near
Fleet Street, 1678.

November 28. 1678.
I Do appoint Robert Pawlet to Print the TRIAL of Edward Coleman: And that no
other Person presume to Print the same.

WILLIAM SCROGGS.

THE TRIAL OF Edward Coleman, Gent.
ON Wednesday the Twenty Seventh day of November 1678. Mr. Coleman (having been
Arraigned the Saturday before for High Treason) was brought to the Kings Bench
Bar, to receive his Trial, and the Court proceeded thereupon, as follows.

Court. Crier, make Proclamation.


Proclamation for Silence.

Crier. O Yes! Our Sovereign Lord the King does strictly Charge and Command all
manner of Persons to keep Silence, upon pain of Imprisonmen^.

If any one can inform our Sovereign Lord the King, the King's Sergeant, or the
King's Attorney General, or this Inquest now to be taken, of any Treason,
Murder, Felony, or any other Misdemeanour committed or done by the Prisoner at
the Bar, let them come forth, and they shall be heard, for the Prisoner stands
at the Bar upon his Deliverance.


Court. Crier, make an O yes.


Crier. O yes! You Good Men that are impannelled to enquire between our
Sovereign Lord the King, and Edward Coleman Prisoner at the Bar, answer to your
names.


Court. Edward Coleman, Hold up thy hand.

These Good men that are now called, and here appear, are those which are to
pass between you and our Sovereign Lord the King, upon your Life or Death, if
you challenge any of them, you must speak as they come to the Book to be sworn,
and before they are sworn.


The Prisoner Challenging none, the Court proceeded, and the Jury were sworn,
viz.

JURY.
Sir Reginald Foster, Baronet. Sir Charles Lee. Edward Wilford, Esquire. John
Bathurst, Esquire. Joshua Galliard, Esquire. John Bifield, Esquire. Simon
Middleton, Esquire, Henry Johnson, Esquire. Charles Vmfrevile, Esquire. Thomas
Johnson, Esquire. Thomas Eaglesfield, Esquire. William Bohee, Esquire.
Court. Crier, make an O yes.


Crier. O yes! Our Sovereign Lord the King does strictly charge and command all
manner of Persons to keep Silence upon pain of Imprisonment.


Court. Edward Coleman, Hold up thy hand.

You Gentlemen of the Jury that are now sworn, look upon the Prisoner, and
hearken to his Charge.

You shall understand, that the Prisoner stands Indicted by the name of Edward
Coleman late of the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster in the County of
Middlesex, Gent. for that he as a false Traitor against our most Illustrious,
Serene, and most Excellent Prince Charles, by the Grace of God of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. and his Natural
Lord; having not the Fear of God in his Heart, nor duly weighing his
Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, his
cordial Love and true Duty, and natural Obedience, (which true and lawful
Subjects of our said Lord the King ought to bear toward him, and by Law ought
to have) altogether withdrawing, and Devising, and with all his strength
intending, the Peace and common Tranquillity of this Kingdom of England to
Disturb, and the true Worship of God within the Kingdom of England practiced,
and by Law Established, to overthrow, and Sedition and Rebellion within this
Realm of England to move, stir up, and procure, and the cordial Love and true
Duty and Allegiance, which true and lawful Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the
King toward their Sovereign bear, and by Law ought to have, altogether to
Withdraw, Forsake, and Extinguish; and our said Sovereign Lord the King to
Death and final Destruction to bring and put, the Twenty Ninth day of September
in the Seven and Twentieth year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord Charles
the Second, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the
Faith, etc. at the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, Falsely, Maliciously, and Traitorously proposed, Compassed, Imagined
and Intended, to stir up, and raise Sedition and Rebellion within the Kingdom
of England, and to procure and cause a miserable Destruction among the Subjects
of our said Lord the King, and wholly to Deprive, Depose, Deject, and
Disinherit our said Sovereign Lord the King, of his Royal State, Title, Power,
and Rule of his Kingdom of England, and to bring and put our said Sovereign
Lord the King to final Death* and Destruction, and to overthrow and change the
Government of the Kingdom of England, and to alter the sincere and true
Religion of God, in this Kingdom by Law established; and wholly to subvert and
destroy the state of the whole Kingdom, being in the universal parts thereof
well Established and Ordained, and to levy War against our said Sovereign Lord
the King, within his Realm of England: And to accomplish and fulfill these his
most wicked Treasons, and Traiterous Designs and Imaginations aforesaid, the
said Edward Coleman afterward, that is to say, the Nine and twentieth day of
September in the Twenty seventh year of the Reign of our said Lord the King, at
the Parish of St Margarets Westminster aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex
aforesaid, Falsely, Deceitfully, and Traitorously Composed, Contrived, and Writ
two Letters, to be sent to one Monsieur le Chese, then Servant and Confessor of
Lewis the French King, to Desire, Procure, and Obtain, for the said Edward
Coleman and other False Traitors against our said Sovereign Lord the King, the
Aid, Assistance, and Adherence of the said French King, to alter the true
Religion in this Kingdom Established, to the Superstition of the Church of
Rome, and to subvert the Government of this Kingdom of England: And afterward,
(that is to say) the said Nine and twentieth day of September in the year
aforesaid, at the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster in the County of
Middlesex aforesaid, the said Edward Coleman Falsely, Traitorously, and
Maliciously Composed and Writ two other Letters, to be sent to the said
Monsieur le Chese, then Servant and Confessor to the said French King, to the
Intent that he the said Monsieur le Chese should Entreat, Procure, and Obtain
for the said Edward Coleman and other False Traitors against our Sovereign Lord
the King, Aid, Assistance, and Adherence of the said French King, to alter the
true Religion in this Kingdom of England Established, to the Superstition of
the Church of Rome, and to subvert the Government of this Kingdom of England:
And that the said Edward Coleman, in further Prosecution of his Treason and
Traiterous Imaginations and Intentions, as aforesaid, afterward, viz. the
Twenty ninth day of September in the Seven and twentieth year of the Reign of
our said Sovereign Lord King Charles of England, etc. the said several Letters,
from the said Parish of St. Margarets Westminster, in the County of Middlesex
aforesaid, Falsely, Maliciously and Traitorously, did send to the said Monsieur
le Chese, into Parts beyond the Seas, there to be delivered to him: And that
the said Edward Coleman, afterward, viz. the first day of December, in the
seven and twentieth year of our said Sovereign Lord the King, at the said
Parish of St. Margarets Westminster, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, did
receive from the said Monsieur le Chese, one Letter, in Answer to one of the
said Letters first mentioned, and written by him the said Edward Coleman, to
the said Monsieur le Chese, which said Letter in Answer, as aforesaid, Falsely,
Maliciously, and Traitorously received, the day and year aforesaid, at the
Parish of St. Margarets Westminster aforesaid, the said Edward Coleman did
falsely, traitorously and maliciously read over and Peruse; And that the said
Edward Coleman, the Letter so as aforesaid, by him in Answer to the said
Letter, received into his Custody and Possession, the Day and Year last
mentioned, at the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster aforesaid, in the County
of Middlesex aforesaid, did Falsely, Maliciously, and Traitorously Detain,
Conceal, and Keep. By which Letter the said Monsieur le Chese, the Day and Year
last mentioned, at the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster in the County of
Middlesex aforesaid, did signify and promise to the said Edward Coleman, to
obtain for the said Edward Coleman, and other false Traitors against our
Sovereign Lord the King, Aid, Assistance and Adherence from the said French
King, and that the said Edward Coleman afterward, Viz. the tenth day of
December in the seven and twentieth year of the Reign of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, at the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster, in the County of
Middlesex aforesaid, his wicked Treasons and Traitorous Designs and Proposals
as aforesaid did tell and declare to one, Mounsieur Revigni, Envoy
extraordinary from the French King to our most Serene and Sovereign Lord King
Charles, etc. in the County aforesaid residing, and did falsely, maliciously and
traitorously move and excite the said Envoy extraordinary to partake in his
Treason; and the sooner to fulfill and complete his Traitorous Designs, and
wicked imaginations and intentions, the said Edward Coleman afterward, Viz. the
tenth day of December in the seven and twentieth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord King Charles, the Second of England, etc. aforesaid at the
Parish of St. Margarets Westminster, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, did
advisedly, maliciously, deceitfully, and traitorously compose and write three
other Letters to be sent to one Sir William Throckmorton Knight. then a Subject of
our said Sovereign Lord the King of this Kingdom of England, and residing in
France, in parts beyond the Seas, Viz. at the Parish of St. Margarets
Westminster, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, to solicit the said
Monsieur Le Chese to procure and obtain of the said French King, Aid,
Assistance, and Adherance, as aforesaid, and the said Letters last mentioned
afterward, Viz. the day and year last named as aforesaid from the said Parish
of St. Margarets Westminster, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, did falsely
and t^aiterously send, and cause to be delivered to the said Sir William
Throckmorton in France aforesaid, against his true Allegiance, and against the
Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, his Crown and Dignity, and
against the Form of the Statute in that Case made and Provided.


Court. Upon this Indictment he has been arraigned, and has pleaded thereunto
not guilty; and for his Trial he puts himself upon God and his Country; Which
Country you are.

Your Charge is to enquire, whether he be guilty of the High Treason whereof he
stands indicted, or not guilty. If you find him guilty, you are to enquire what
Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements he had at the time, when the High
Treason was committed, or at any time since; If you find him not guilty, you
are to say so, and no more, and hear your Evidence.


Crier. If any one will give Evidence on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the
King, against Edward Coleman the Prisoner at the Bar, let him come forth, and
he shall be heard; for the Prisoner now stands at the Bar upon his Deliverance.


Mr. Recorder. May it please you my Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury; Mr.
Edward Coleman, now the prisoner at the Bar, stands indicted for High Treason,
and the Indictment sets forth, that the said Edward Coleman, endeavoring to
subvert the Protestant Religion, and to change and alter the same; And likewise
to stir up Rebellion and Sedition amongst the Kings Liege people, and also to
kill the King; did on the 29th. of September in the twenty seventh year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King, at the Parish of St. Margarets
Westminster in this County, compose and write two several Letters to one
Mounsieur Le Chese, that was then servant and Confessor to the French King, and
this was to procure the French Kings aid and assistance to him and other
Traitors, to alter the Religion practiced, and by Law established here in
England, to the Romish Superstition. The Indictment sets forth likewise, that
on the same day, he did write and compose two other Letters to the same
Gentleman, that was servant and Confessor to the said King, to prevail with him
to procure the French Kings assistance to alter the Religion in this Kingdom
established to the Romish Religion. The Indictment sets further forth, that he
caused these two Letters to be sent beyond the Seas. And it also sets forth
that on the tenth of December, the same month he did receive a Letter from the
Gentleman, that was the Confessor, in answer to one of the former Letters, and
in that Letter aid and assistance from the French King was promised; and that
he did traitorously conceal that Letter. My Lord, the Indictment sets out
further, that on the tenth day of the same month, he did reveal his Treasons
and traitorous Conspiracies to one Mounsieur Revigni, who was Envoy from the
French king to his Majesty of Great Britain. And his Indictment declares, he
afterward did write three Letters more to Sir William Throckmorton, then
residing in France, to procure the French Kings assistance to the alteration of
the Religion practiced here in England. Of these several Offenses he stands
hereindicted.

To this he has pleaded not guilty. If we prove these, or either of them in
the Indictment, you ought to find him guilty.


Serj. Maynard. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury;
This is a Cause of great Concernment. Gentlemen, the Prisoner at the Bar stands
indicted for no less than for an intention and endeavor to murder the King;
For an endeavor and attempt to change the Government of the Nation, so well
settled and instituted, and to bring us all to ruin and slaughter of one
another, and for an endeavor to alter the Protestant Religion, and to
introduce instead of it, the Romish Superstition, and Popery.

This is the Charge (in general) of the Indictment. We will proceed unto
particulars, whereby it may appear, and whereupon he indeavoureth to accomplish
his ends. One or two Letters written to Mounsieur Le Chese (he is a Foreigner,
and we have nothing to say to him, being Confessor to the French King) it was
to excite and stir him up to procure aid and assistance (and you know what aid
and assistance means) from a Foreign Prince, Arms, and other Levies. We charge
him with it, that he did receive this Letter, I and received an answer with a
promise, that he should have assistance. He writ other Letters to Sir William
Throckmorton, who traitorously conspired with him, and had intelligence from
time to time from him. This is the Charge in the Indictment; To which he has
pleaded, not guilty. We will go on in our Evidence: I shall, but more
generally, open our method, that we intend to take. For it may seem strange,
and is not reasonably to be imagined, that a private Gentleman, as the Prisoner
at the Bar is, should have such vast and great designs as this, to alter
Religion, destroy the Government, I, and destroy the Subjects too in a great
measure. But it is not himself alone, but he imploys himself for Foreign
assistance, great Confederacies and Combinations with the Subjects of that
King, many of whom he did pervert.

In the course of the Evidence I shall not open the particulars, (Mr. Attorney,
I think, will do that by and by) those that we have occasion to speak of, and
shall in proof mention to you, will be these.

Le Chese, the French Kings present Confessor we have mentioned: before him
there was one Father Ferryer, with whom he held Correspondence. That Ferryer
being removed by death, the Prisoner had an employment here amongst us, by
which he gave to Le Chese instructions how to proceed. This Gentleman is the
great Contriver and Plotter, which gives him instructions how to proceed. He
does give him an account by way of Narrative, how all things had stood upon
former treaties and negotiations, how businesses were contrived, and how far
they were gone; this he diligently and accurately gives an account of. This (my
Lord) does discover and delineate what had been done before until 1674. My
Lord, there was likewise Sir William Throckmorton and some others, that are
Englishmen too, there are none of them, but what were first Protestants, but
when they once renounced their Religion, no wonder they should renounce their
Nation, and their Prince too. He was gone beyond the Seas, several Letters past
between them, and all to promote and encourage, and accomplish this design. My
Lord, there is likewise a consult of Jesuits used too, where, in express words
they designed to murder the King, or contrived, and advised upon it.

My Lord, there were four Irish men (I open but the heads of things) sent to
Windsor to murder the King, this Gentleman received and disbursed money about
this business, and one Ashby a Jesuit here had instructions from him to
prosecute the design, and to treat with a Physician to poison the King, This
the Prisoner approved of, and contributed to it. There were Commissions (as I
take it) delivered from Ferryer; or by his hand, that came from Foreign
powers. Sir Henry Titchburn was another that received and delivered
Commissions. Pompone the French Gentleman, he maintains intelligence with him
about this business, the Titular Archbishop of Dublin.

There Is Cardinal Norfolk, by him he had accession to the Pope.

There was likewise the Popes Nuncio (I do not open the transactions of these
Iustructions) these particulars will be made out, not only by Witness Viva
Voce, and not single only, but by Letters of this Mr. Colemans own writing. But
I offer that to the consideration of the Jury.

Mr. Oats was the first Man, that we hear of, that discovered this Treason; he
was the single man that discovered so many active Agents in so great a Treason,
as this was, and it needed to be well seconded, but, he being found to be but
single, the boldness and courage of these Complotters in it grew great
thereupon. We know what followed; the damnable murder of that Gentleman, in
Execution of his Office, so Hellishly contrived, and the endeavors that were
used to hide it, every body knows: How many Stories were told to hide that
abominable Murder, how many lies there were about it, but it could not be
suppressed. The Nation is awakened out of sleep, and it concerns us now to look
about us. But all this while, Mr. Coleman thought himself safe, walked in the
Fields, goes abroad, Jealousy increasing, and he himself still secure.

The Letters that are produced go but to some part of the year 75: from 75 unto
78 all lies in the dark, we have no certain Proof of it; but we apprehend he
had Intelligence until 78; That there were the same persons continuing here,
and his Company increasing here: But this I speak but as probable, (but very
exceeding probable) that there was other passages of Intelligence between this
Person and other Confederates.

It seems (my Lord) that this Coleman was aware that he was concerned; but God
blinded and infatuated him, and took away his reason. It Is no question but he
carried away some of those Papers; those that were left behind, and are
produced, he forgot and neglected; and by that (my Lord) those which are
produced, are evidence against him at this time. Surely he thought we were in
such a condition, that had eyes and could not see, and ears that could not
hear, and understandings without understanding: for he was bold, and walked
abroad, and that until this prosecution was made upon him, he endeavored to
murder the King, change the Government, make an alteration of Religion, and
destruction of Protestants, as well as the Protestant Religion; And it will be
proved by some Letters, when they were rejected by the Duke, that he sent them
in the Dukes name. And by this no man will doubt but he is a great Traitor.


Attorn. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, The
Kings Sergeant has opened the general parts of our Evidence; and we have
reason to foresee that our Evidence will be very long, and will take up much of
your time; and therefore I shall spend no more time in opening of it than is
just necessary. And indeed (my Lord) Mr. Coleman himself has saved me much of
the labor, which otherwise I should have bestowed; for he has left such
Elegant and copious Narratives of the whole Design under his own hand, that the
reading of them will be better than any new one I can make.

But (my Lord) some short account I shall give you, such as may show you the
course of our Evidence, and will make our Evidence, when it comes to be given,
to be more intelligible.

My Lord, It will appear, that there has been for many years last past, a more
than ordinary design and industry to bring in the Popish, and extirpate the
Protestant Religion.

I doubt not but this Design, in some measure, has been contriving ever since
the Reformation, by the Jesuits, or some of their Emissaries, but has often
received interruption; so that they have proceeded sometimes more coldly,
sometimes more hotly: And I do think, at no time since the Reformation, that
ever this Design was carried on with greater industry, nor with fairer hopes of
success, than for these last years.

My Lord, You will hear from our Witnesses, that the first Onset, which was to
be made upon us, was by whole Troops of Jesuits and Priests, who were sent
hither from the Seminaries abroad, where they had been trained up in all the
subtilty and skill that was fit to work upon the People.

My Lord, you will hear how active they have been, and what insinuations they
used for the perverting of particular persons. After some time spent in such
attempts, they quickly grew weary of that course; though they got some
Proselytes, they were but few. Some Bodies, in whom there was a predisposition
of humors, were infected, but their Numbers were not great. They at last
resolve to take a more expeditious way; for in truth, (my Lord) they could not
far prevail by the former. And I wish with all my heart, that the Bodies of
Protestants may be as much out of danger of the violence of their hands, as
their Understandings will be of the force of their Arguments. But (my Lord)
when this way would not take, they began then to consider they must throw at
all at once. No doubt but they would have been glad, that the People of England
had had but one Neck; but they knew the People of England had but one Head, and
therefore they were resolved to strike at that.

My Lord, you will find, that there was a Summons of the principal Jesuits, of
the most able Head-pieces, who were to meet in April or May last, to consult of
very great things, of a most Diabolical Nature, no less than how to take away
the life of the King our Sovereign

My Lord, you will find (as is usually practiced in such horrid Conspiracies)
to make all secure, that there was an Oath of Secrecy taken, and that upon the
Sacrament. You will find Agreements made, that this most wicked and horrible
Design should be attempted. You will find two Villains were found among them,
who undertook to do this execrable work; and you will hear of the rewards they
were to have: Money in case they did succeed, and Masses good store in case
they perished; so that their Bodies were provided for in case they survived,
and their Souls if they died. My Lord, What was the reason they did not effect
their Design, but either that these Villains wanted opportunity, or their
hearts failed them, when they came to put in execution this wicked Design; or,
perhaps (which is most probable) it was the Providence of God, which overruled
them, that this bloody Design did not take its effect.

But these Gentlemen were not content with one Essay, they quickly thought of
another; and there were four Irish-men prepared (men of very mean Fortunes, and
desperate conditions) and they were to make the attempt no longer since, than
when the King was last at Windsor.

My Lord, I perceive by the Proofs, that these last Assassinates went down
thither; but it came to pass (for some of the Reasons aforesaid) that that
Attempt failed likewise.

My Lord, These Gentlemen, those wise Heads, who had met here in Consultation,
did then, and long before, consider with themselves, that so great a Cause as
this, was not to be put upon the hazard of some few hands; they therefore
prepared Forces, Aids, and Assistances, both at home and abroad, to second this
wicked Design; if it had succeeded as to the Person of the King, and if that
failed, then by their Foreign and Domestic Aids and Assistances, to begin and
accomplish the whole Work of subverting our Government and Religion. And here
we must needs confess, as to the former part of this Plot, which we have
mentioned, I mean the attempt upon the Kings Person, Mr.Coleman was not the
Contriver, nor to be the Executioner; But yet your Lordship knows, in all
Treasons there is no Accessory, but every man is a Principal. And thus much we
have against him, even as to this part of the Design, which will involve him in
the whole guilt of it, that Mr. Coleman consented to it, though his hand were
not to do it. Mr. Coleman encouraged a Messenger to carry Money down as a
Reward of these Murderers, that were at Windsor; of this we have proof against
him, which is sufficient. My Lord, Mr. Coleman, as a man of greater abilities,
is reserved for greater Employments, and such wherein, I confess, all his
Abilities were little enough. There were Negotiations to be made with Men
abroad, Money to be procured, partly at home from Friends here, and partly
abroad from those, that wished them well: And in all these Negotiations Mr.
Coleman had a mighty hand; and you will perceive by and by what a great
progress he made in them. This Conspiracy went so far, as you will hear it
proved, That there were General Officers named and appointed, that should
Command their new Catholic Army, and many were Engaged, if not Listed. There
were not only in England, but in Ireland likewise, where Arms and all other
Necessaries were provided, and whither great Sums of Money were returned to
serve upon occasion. But one thing there is, my Lord, that comes nearest Mr.
Coleman; As there were Military Officers named, so likewise the great Civil
Places and Offices of the Kingdom were to be disposed of; I will not nameto
whom at this time, more than what is pertinent to the present business.

This Gentleman, such were his great Abilities, the trust and reliance that his
Party had upon him, that no less an Office would serve his turn than that of
Principal Secretary of State; and he had a Commission, that came to him from
the Superiors of the Jesuits, to enable him to execute that great Office. My
Lord, it seems strange, that so great an Office should be conferred by no
greater a man than the Superior of the Jesuits. But if the Pope can depose
Kings, and dispose of Kingdoms, no wonder if the Superior of the Jesuits can,
by a Power delegated from him, make Secretaries. It is not certain what the
Date of this Commission was, nor the very time when he received it: but I
believe he was so earnest and forward in this Plot, that he began to execute
his Office long before he had his Commission for it; for I find by his Letters,
which are of a more early Date, that he had proceeded so far as to treat with
Father Ferrier, who was the French Kings Confessor, before he had actually
received this Commission. You will understand by the Letters, which we shall
produce, what he had to do with him, and what with the other Confessor, that
succeeded Father Le Chese. There were two small matters they treated of, no
less than the Dissolving the Parliament, and the Extirpation of the Protestant
Religion. Nay, you will find, and you will hear enough, when the Letters come
to be read, that Mr. Coleman made many strokes at the Parliament, he had no
good opinion of them. And we cannot blame him; for without all peradventure
they had made, and I hope ever will, make strong resistance against such
Designs as these. But a great mind he had to be rid of them; and he had hopes
of great Sums of Money from abroad, if it had been to be done that way. And it
is very remarkable (and shows the vanity of the Man) he had such an opinion of
the success of these Negotiations, that he had penned a Declaration prepared by
him, and writ with his own hand, to be published in Print, up on the
Dissolution of the Parliament, to justify that Action with many specious and
plausible Reasons. As he did this without any direction, so he takes upon him
to write a Declaration, as in the Name of the King, without the least shadow of
any command to do it, so he prepares a Letter also in the name of the Duke; and
I would not affirm, unless I could prove it, and that from his own Confession,
(being examined before the Lords upon Oath) that he had no manner of Authority
from the Duke to prepare such a Letter; and when it was written, and brought to
the Duke, it was rejected, and the Writer justly blamed for his presumption. By
this you will perceive the forwardness of this Man. And you must of necessity
take notice, that in his Letters he took upon himself to manage Affairs, as
authorized by the greatest Persons in the Kingdom, yet without the least shadow
of proof that he was by them empowered to do it.

My Lord, you shall find, Mr. Coleman thought himself above all; and such was
his own overweening opinion of his Wit and Policy, that he thought himself the
sole and supreme Director of all the Affairs of the Catholics. You will
likewise perceive that he held Intelligence with Cardinal Norfolk, with Father
Sheldon, and the Popes Internuntio at Brussels. And I cannot but observe out of
the Proofs, that as we shall find Mr. Coleman very ambitious and forward in all
great Affairs, so he had a little too much Eye to the Reward; he looked too
much asquint upon the matter of Money: his great endeavors were not so much
out of Conscience, or out of Zeal to his Religion, as out of temporal Interest;
to him Gain was instead of Godliness. And by his Letters to the French
Confessor Monsieur Le Chese, it will be proved, that he got much Money from the
Catholics here, and some from abroad, but still he wanted Money. What to do?
(I do not mean the greater sum of two hundred thousand pounds to procure the
Dissolution of the Parliament, but some twenty thousand pounds only) To be
expended by him in secret Service. I do not know what account he would have
given of it, if he had been entrusted with it. But that he earnestly thirsted
after Money, appears by most of his Letters.

My Lord, you will observe, besides his Intelligences, that he had with Father
Le Chese, and several others, one that deserves to be named, and that is his
Negotiation with Sir William Frogmorton, who was sent over into France, and
there resided a long time to promote these Designs. He is dead; therefore I
will not say so much of him, as I would say against him, if he was here to be
tried. But, my Lord, I find in his Letters such Treasonable, such Impious
expressions against the King, such undutiful Characters of him, that no good
Subject would write, and no good Subject would receive and conceal, as Mr.
Coleman has done. My Lord, it may pass for a wonder, how we come to be Masters
of all these Papers; it has in part been told you already.

There was an information given of the general Design, nay of some of the
particulars against the Kings Life. And without all peradventure, Mr. Coleman
knew of this Discovery; and he knew that he had Papers, that could speak too
much, and he had time and opportunity enough to have made them away, and I make
no question, but he did make many away. We are not able to prove the
continuance of his correspondence, so as to make it clearly out; but we suppose
that continued until the day he was seized. And there is this to be proved,
that Letters came for him, though we cannot say any were delivered to him,
after he was in Prison. But without all peradventure, the Man had too much to
do, too many Papers to conceal: Then, you will say, he might have burnt them all,
(for many would burn as well as a few:) But then he had lost much of the Honor
of a great Statesman; many a fine Sentence, and many a deep Intrigue had been
lost to all Posterity. I believe that we owe this Discovery to something of Mr.
Coleman's Vanity; he would not lose the Glory of managing these important
Negotiations about so great a Design: He thought 'twas no small Reputation to
be entrusted with the Secrets of Foreign Ministers. If this was not his
reason, God (I believe) took away from him that clearness of Judgment, and
strength of Memory, which he had upon other occasions.

My Lord, I shall no longer detain you from reading the Papers themselves. But
I cannot but account this Kingdom happy, that these Papers are preserved. For
(my Lord) We are to deal with a sort of men, that have that prodigious
confidence, that their words and deeds (though proved by never so unsuspected
Testimony) they will still deny. But (my Lord) no denial of this Plot will
prevail, for Mr. Coleman himself has, with his own hand, recorded this
Conspiracy; and we can prove his hand, not only by his own Servants, and
Relations, but by his own Confession. So that (my Lord) I doubt not, that if
there be any of their own Party that hear this Trial, they themselves will be
satisfied with the truth of these things. And I believe we have an advantage in
this case, which they will not allow us, in another matter; namely, that we
shall be for this once permitted to believe our own Senses. Our Evidence
consists of two parts; one is, Witnesses Viva voce, which we desire (with the
favor of the Court) to begin with; and when that is done, we shall read
several Letters, or Negotiations, in writing, and so submit the whole to your
Lordships direction.


Pris. I beg leave that a poor ignorant Man, that is so heavily charged, that
it seems a little unequal to consider the reason, why a Prisoner, in such a
case as this is, is not allowed Counsel; but your Lordship is supposed to be
Counsel for him. But I think it very hard I cannot be admitted Counsel; and I
humbly hope your Lordship will not suffer me to be lost by things that my self
cannot answer. I deny the Conclusion, but the Premises are too strong and
artificial.


L. C. Just. You cannot deny the Premises, but that you have done these
things; but you deny the Conclusion that you are a Traitor.


Pris. I can safely and honestly.


L. C. Just. You would make a better Secretary of State, than a Logician; for
they never deny the Conclusion.


Pris. I grant it your Lordship: You see the advantage great men have of me,
that do not pretend to Logic.


L. C. Just. The labor lies upon their hands; the Proof belongs to them to
make out these Intrigues of yours; therefore you need not have Counsel, because
the Proof must be plain upon you, and then it will be in vain to deny the
Conclusion.


Pris. I hope (my Lord) if there be any Point of Law, that I am not skilled in,
that your Lordship will be pleased not to take the advantage over me. Another
thing seems most dreadful, that is, the violent prejudices that seem to be
against every man in England, that is confessed to be a Roman Catholic. It is
possible that a Roman Catholic may be very innocent of these crimes. If one of
those Innocent Roman Catholics should come to this Bar, he lies under such
disadvantages already, and his Prejudices so greatly byasseth humane Nature,
that unless your Lordship will lean extremely much on the other side, Justice
will hardly stand upright, and lie upon a Level. But to satisfy your Lordship,
I do not think it any service to destroy any of the Kings Subjects, unless it
be in a very plain case.


L. C. Just. You need not make any preparations for us in this matter, you
shall have a fair, just, and legal Trial; if Condemned, it will be apparent you
ought to be so; and without a fair Proof, there shall be no Condemnation.
Therefore you shall find, we will not do to you, as you do to us, blow up at
adventure, kill people because they are not of your persuasion; our Religion
teaches us another Doctrine, and you shall find it clearly to your advantage.
We seek no man's blood, but our own safety. But you are brought here from the
necessity of things, which your selves have made; and from your own actions you
shall be condemned, or acquitted.


Pris. It is supposed upon Evidence, that the Examinations that have been of me
in Prison, are like to be Evidence against me now; I have nothing to say
against it: But give me leave to say at this time, that when I was in Prison, I
was upon my ingenuity charged; I promised I would confess all I knew. And I
only say this, That what I said in Prison is true, and am ready at any time to
Swear and Evidence, that that is all the truth.


L. C. Just. It is all true that you say: but did you tell all that was true?


Pris. I know no more, than what I declared to the Two Houses.


L. C. Just. Mr. Coleman, I Will tell you when you will be apt to gain credit in
this matter: You say, that you told all things that you knew, the Truth, and
the whole Truth. Can Mankind be persuaded, that you, that had this Negotiation
in 74. and 75. left off just then, at that time when your Letters were found
according to their Dates? Do you believe, there was no Negotiation after 75.
because we have not found them? Have you spoke one word to that? Have you
confessed, or produced those Papers and Weekly Intelligence? When you answer
that, you may have credit; without that, it is impossible: For I cannot give
credit to one word you say, unless you give an account of the subsequent
Negotiation.


Pris. After that time (as I said to the House of Commons) I did give over
Corresponding. I did offer to take all Oaths and Tests in the World, that I
never had one Letter for at least two years; yea, (that I may keep my self
within compass) I think it was for three or four. Now I have acknowledged to
the House of Commons, I have had a cursory Correspondence, which I never
regarded or valued; but as the Letters came, I burnt them, or made use of them
as common Paper. I say, that for the general Correspondence I have had for two
or three years, they have had every one of them Letters, that I know of.


Attor. Genesis Whether you had or no, you shall have the fairest Trial that can
be. And we cannot blame the Gentleman, for he is more used to greater Affairs,
than these Matters or Forms of Law. But (my Lord) I desire to go unto
Evidence, and when that is done, he shall be heard, as long as he pleases,
without any interruption. If he desire it, before I give my Evidence, let him
have Pen, Ink, and Paper (with your Lordships leave.)


L. C. Just. Help him to Pen, Ink, and Paper.


Record. Then we desire to go on in our Evidence. We desire that Mr. Oats may
not be interrupted.


Court. He shall not be interrupted.


Attorn. Genesis The first thing we will inquire, what account he can give of the
Prisoner at the Bar, whether he was any way privy to the murder of the King?


Lord Chapter Just. Mr. Oats, we leave it to your self to take your own way, and
your own method: only this we say, here is a Gentleman stands at the Bar for his
life; And on the other side, the King is concerned for His life: you are to
speak the truth and the whole truth; for there is no reason in the world that
you should add any one thing that is false. I would not have a tittle added
for any advantage, or consequences that may fall, when a man's blood and life
lies at stake: Let him be condemned by truth: you have taken an Oath, and you
being a Minister, know the great regard you ought to have of the sacredness of
an Oath; and that to take a man's life away by a false Oath is murder, I need
not teach you that. But that Mr. Coleman may be satisfied in the Trial, and all
people else be satisfied, there is nothing required or expected, but downright
plain truth, and without any arts either to conceal, or expatiate, to make
things larger then in truth they are; he must be condemned by plain Evidence of
Fact.


Mr. Oats. My Lord, Mr. Coleman in the Month of November last, did entertain
in his own House John Keins, which John Keins was a Father Confessor to certain
persons that were Converted, amongst which I was one. My Lord, I went and
visited this John Keins at Mr. Coleman's House then in Stable-yard. Mr. Coleman
inquiring of John Keins who I was? He said, I was one that designed to go over
upon business to St. Omers. My Lord, Mr. Coleman told me then he should trouble
me with a Letter or two to St. Omers, but he told me he would leave them with
one Fenwick that was Procurator for the Society of Jesuits in London. I went on
Monday Morning and took Coach, went to Dover, and had his Packet with me,
which Packet when I came to St. Omers I opened. The outside sheet of this
Paper was a Letter of news which was called Mr. Coleman's Letter, and at the
bottom of this Letter there was this Recommendation, Pray Recommend me to my
Kinsman Playford. In this Letter of news there were expressions of the King,
calling him Tyrant, and that the Marriage between the Prince of Orange and the
Lady Mary the Duke of York's Eldest Daughter would prove the Traytour's and
Tyrant's ruin.


Lord Chapter Just. In what language was it written?


Mr. Oats. In plain English words at length.


Lord Chapter Just. Directed to whom?


Mr. Oats. It was directed to the Rectour of St. Omers, to give him
intelligence how affairs went in England.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you break it open?


Mr. Oats I was at the opening of it, and saw it and read it. There was a
Letter to Father Lechees, which was superscribed by the same hand that the
treasonable Letter of news was written, and the same hand that the
recommendation to Playford was written in. When this Letter was open there was
a Seal fixed, a flying Seal and no man's Name to it.


Lord Chapter Just. What was the Contents of that Letter to Lechees?


Mr. Oats. My Lord, to give you an account of the import of this Letter, it
was writ in Latin, and in it there were thanks given to Father Lechees for the
Ten Thousand Pounds which was given for the propagation of the Catholic
Religion, and that it should be employed for no other intent and purpose but
that for which it was sent, now that was to cut off the King of England; those
words were not in that Letter, but Lechees Letter, to which this was an Answer
I saw and read: It was dated the Month of August, and as near as I remember
there was this instruction in it, That the Ten Thousand Pound should be
employed for no other intent and purpose but to cut off the King of England. I
do not swear the words, but that is the sense and substance, I believe I may
swear the words.


Lord Chapter Just. To whom was that directed?


Mr. Oats. To one Strange that was then Provincial of the Society in London,
which Mr. Coleman answered.


Lord Chapter Just. How came Mr. Coleman to answer it?


Mr. Oats. Strange having run a Reed into his Finger, had wounded his Hand,
and Secretary Mico was ill, so he got Mr. Coleman to write an Answer unto it.


Lord Chapter Just. Did he write it as from himself?


Mr. Oats. Yes, by order of the Provincial.


Lord Chapter Just. What was the substance of that Answer?


Mr. Oats. That thanks was given to him in the Name of the whole Society for
the Ten Thousand Pound which was paid and received here, and that it should be
employed to the intent for which it was received. It was superscribed from Mr.
Coleman.


Lord Chapter Just. Was it subscribed Coleman?


Mr. Oats. It was not subscribed; I did not see him write it, but I really
believe it was by the same hand. I went and delivered this Letter.


Lord Chapter Just. I understood you because of the accident of his Hand he had
employed Mr. Coleman to write this for him.


Mr. Oats. He did write this Letter then, the Body of the Letter was written
by Mr. Coleman. I did not see him write it, but I shall give an account how I
can prove he wrote it. I delivered this Letter to Lechees his own hand. When I
opened the Letter he asked me how a Gentleman (naming a French name) did do.


Lord Chapter Just. When you carried this Letter, you carried it to Lechees, and
delivered it to him; then he asked you of the Gentleman of the French name,
whom meant he by that name?


Mr. Oats. I understood it to be Mr. Coleman.


Lord Chapter Just. Did he know him by some French name? What said you?


Mr. Oats. I could say little to this.


Lord Chapter Just. Could you guess whom he meant?


Mr. Oats. He told me he was sometime Secretary to the Duchess of York, which
I understood to be Mr. Coleman. I stuck at it, and when he said he was sometime
Secretary to the Duchess of York, I spoke in Latin to him, and asked whether
he meant Mr. Coleman, and his Answer I cannot remember. He sends an Answer to
this Letter. I brought it to St. Omers, and there it was enclosed in the Letter
from the Society to Coleman; wherein the Society expressly told him this Letter
was delivered and acknowledged. I saw the Letter at St. Omers, and the Letter
was sent to him. Mr. Coleman did acknowledge the Receipt of this Letter from
Lechees in the same hand with that of the News Letter, and so it was understood
by all, I saw it.


Lord Chapter Just. How came you to see it?


Mr. Oats. I by a Patent from them was of the Consult.


Lord Chapter Just. You saw the Letter of the same hand which the News Letter was
of with Mr. Coleman's name subscribed?


Mr. Oats. The contents of the Letter did own the Letter from Lechees was
received; this Letter was presumed to be the Handwriting of Mr. Coleman, and
it was understood to be Mr. Coleman's Letter.


Lord Chapter Just. You say the Letter was thanks for the Ten Thousand Pound; what
was the other Contents?


Mr. Oats. That all endeavors should be used to cut off the Protestant
Religion Root and Branch.


Lord Chapter Just. You say you delivered this Letter, from whom had you it?


Mr. Oats. From Fenwick, it was left in his hand, and he accompanied me from
Groves to the Coach, and gave it to me.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you hear him speak to Mr. Coleman to write for him?


Mr. Oats. Strange told me he had spoke to him.


Lord Chapter Just. He does suppose it was Mr. Coleman's hand because it was just
the same hand that the News Letter was. Are you sure the Letter was of his hand?


Mr. Oats. It was taken for his hand.


Just. Wild. Had he such a Kinsman there?


Mr. Oats. Yes he has confessed it.


Attorn. Genesis We desire your Lordship he may give an account of the Consult
here in May last, and how far Mr. Coleman was privy to the murdering of the
King.


Mr. Oats. In the Month of April Old-Stile, in the Month of May New-Stile,
there was a Consult held, it was begun at the White Horse Tavern, it did not
continue there. After that there they had consulted to send one Father Carry to
be Agent and Procurator for Rome, they did adjourn themselves to several Clubs
in Companies; some met at Wild-House, and some at Harcourt's Lodging in
Dukes-Street; some met at Ireland's Lodging in Russel Street; and some in
Fenwick's Lodging in Drury Lane. They were ordered to meet by virtue of a Brief
from Rome, sent by the Father General of the Society: They went on to these
Resolves, That Pickering and Groves should go on and continue in attempting to
Assassinate the King's Person by Shooting, or other means. Groves was to have
Fifteen Hundred Pounds. Pickering being a Religious man was to have Thirty
Thousand Masses, which at Twelve Pence a Mass amounted much what to that money.
This Resolve of the Jesuits was communicated to Mr. Coleman in my hearing at
Wild-House. My Lord, this was not only so, but in several Letters he did
mention it; and in one Letter (I think I was gone a few miles out of London) he
sent to me by a Messenger, and did desire the Duke might be trappan'd into this
Plot to Murder the King.


Lord. Chapter Just. How did he desire it?


Mr. Oats. In a Letter, that all means should be used for the drawing in the
Duke. This Letter was written to one Ireland. I saw the Letter and read it.


Lord Chapter Just. How do you know it was his Letter?


Mr. Oats. Because of the Instructions, which I saw Mr. Coleman take a Copy of
and write, which was the same hand with the News Letter, and what else I have
mentioned, the Subscription was, Recommend me to Father Lechees, and it was the
same hand whereof I now speak.


Lord Chapter Just. What was the substance of the Letter?


Mr. Oats. Nothing but Complement, and Recommendation, and that all means
might be used for the trappanning the Duke of York (as near as I can remember
that was the word.)


Just. Wild. You did say positively that Mr. Coleman did consent and agree to
what was consulted by the Jesuits, which was to kill the King, and Pickering
and Groves were the two persons designed to do it. Did you hear him consent to
it?


Mr. Oats. I heard him say at Wild-House, he thought it was well contrived.


Recor. Do the Gentlemen of the Jury hear what he says?


Lord. Chapter Just. Gentlemen of the Jury, do you hear what he says?


Jury. Yes.


Attorn. Genesis What do you know of any Rebellion to have been raised in Ireland?
and what was to be done with the Duke of Ormond?


Mr. Oats. In the Month of August there was a Consult with the Jesuits, and
with the Benedictine Monks at the Savoy. In this Month of August there was a
Letter writ from Archbishop Talbot, the Titular Archbishop of Dublin; wherein
he gave an account of a Legate from the Pope, an Italian Bishop, (the Bishop of
Cassay I think) who asserted the Pope's Right to the Kingdom of Ireland. In
this Letter (to mention in special) there were Four Jesuits had contrived to
dispatch the Duke of Ormond (these were his words) To find the most expedient
way for his death, and Fogarthy was to be sent to do it by Poison, if these
Four good Fathers did not hit of their Design. My Lord, Fogarthy was present.
And when the Consult was almost at a period, Mr. Coleman came to the Savoy to
the Consult, and was mighty forward to have Father Fogarthy sent to Ireland to
dispatch the Duke by Poison. This Letter did specify they were there ready to
rise in Rebellion against the King for the Pope.


Attorney General. Do you know any thing of Arms?


Mr. Oats. There were 40000 Black Bills, I am not so skillful in Arms to know
what they meant (Military Men know what they are) that were provided to be sent
into Ireland; but they were ready for the use of the Catholic Party.


Lord Chapter Just. Who were they provided by?


Mr. Oats. I do not know.


Lord Chapter Just. How do you know they were provided?


Mr. Oats. That Letter does not mention who they were provided by, but another
Letter mentioned they were provided by those that were Commission Officers for
the aid and help of the Pope; the Popish Commissioners they were provided by,
and they had them ready in Ireland.


Lord Chapter Just. Who wrote this Letter?


Mr. Oats. It came from Talbot, I might forget the day of the Month because my
Information is so large, but it was the former part of the Year, I think either
January or February, (77) (78) last January or February.


Lord Chapter Just. Was this Consult but in August last?


Mr. Oats. I am forced to run back from that Consult to this; Mr. Coleman was
privy, and was the main Agent, and did in the Month of August last past say to
Fenwick, he had found a way to transmit the 200000 li. for the carrying on of
this Rebellion in Ireland.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you hear him say so?


Mr. Oats. I did, a Week before.


Lord Chapter Just. You say he was very forward to send Fogarthy into Ireland to
kill the Duke of Ormond.


Mr. Oats. Yes that I say; and that he had found a way to transmit 200000 li.
to carry on the Rebellion in Ireland.


Court. Who was by besides Fenwick?


Mr. Oats. My self and no body else.


Court. Where was it said?


Mr. Oats. In Fenwick's Chamber in Drury Lane.


Attorn. Genesis Do you know any thing of transmitting the money to Windsor, or
persuading any to be sent thither, and the time when?


Mr. Oats. In the Month of August there were four Russians procured by Dr.
Fogarthy. These Four were not nominated in the Consult with the Benedictine
Convent, but (My Lord) these four Ruffians without names were accepted of by
them.


Court. Who proposed them?


Mr. Oats. Fogarthy. These four Irish men were sent that night to Windsor. How
they went I know not, but the next day there was a provision of 80 li. ordered
to them by the Rector of London, which is a Jesuit, one Will. Harcourt in the
name of the Provincial, because he acted in his name and authority, the
Provincial being then beyond the Seas, visiting his Colleges in Flanders.


Lord Chapter Just. Did he order the 80 li.


Mr. Oats. Mr. Coleman came to this Harcourt's House, then lying in Duke's-
Street, and Harcourt was not within; but he was directed to come to Wild-House,
and at Wild-House he found Harcourt.


Lord Chapter Just. How do you know that?


Mr. Oats. He said he had been at his House, and was not within, finding him
at Wild-House, he asked what care was taken for those four Gentlemen that went
last night to Windsor? he said there was 80 li. ordered.


Lord Chapter Just. Who said so?


Mr. Oats. Harcourt. And there was the Messenger that was to carry it, I think
the most part of this 80 li. was in Guineys: Mr. Coleman gave the Messenger a
Guiney to be nimble, and to expedite his Journey.


L. Chief. Just. How know you they were Guinies?


Mr. Oats, I saw the money upon the Table before Harcourt, not in his hand.


L. Chief. Just. Were the Four Irish men there?


Mr. Oats, No, they were gone before I came.


L. Chief. Just. Who was to carry it after them, what was his name?


Mr. Oats, I never saw him before or since; the Money was upon the Table: when
Mr. Coleman came in, he gave the messenger a Guiney to expedite the business.


Recorder, You say Mr. Coleman inquired what Care was taken for those Ruffians
that were to Assassinate the King; pray, Mr. Oats, tell my Lord and the Jury
what you can say concerning Mr. Colemans discourse with one Ashby.


Mr. Oats, In the Month of July, one Ashby, who was sometimes Rector of St.
Omers, being ill of the Gout was ordered to go to the Bath; this Ashby being in
London, Mr. Coleman came to attend him; this Ashby brought with him Treasonable
Instructions in order to expedite the King by Poison, provided Pickering and
Groves did not do the Work: Ten thousand pound should be proposed to Sir George
Wakeman to Poison the King, in case Pistol and Stab did not take effect, and
opportunity was to be taken at the Kings taking Physic. I could give other
Evidence but will not, because of other things which are not fit to be known
yet.


L. Chief. Just. Who wrote this Letter?


Mr. Oats, It was under the hand of White the Provincial beyond the Seas, whom
Ashby left; it was in the name of Memorials to empower Ashby and the rest of
the Consulters at London to propound Ten thousand pound to Sir George Wakeman
to take the opportunity to Poison the King. These Instructions were seen and
read by Mr. Coleman, by him Copied out, and transmitted to several Conspirators
of the Kings death, in this Kingdom of England, that were privy to this Plot.


Recorder, Know you of any Commission? We have hitherto spoken altogether of
the work of others; now we come to his own work a little nearer.


L. Chief Just. Who saw Mr. Coleman read these Instructions? what said he?


Mr. Oats, He said he thought it was too little, I heard him say so.


L. Chief Just. Did you see him take a Copy of these Instructions?


Mr. Oats, Yes, and he said he did believe Sir George Wakeman would scarce
take it, and thought it necessary the other Five thousand pound should be added
to it, that they might be sure to have it done.


L. Chief Just. Where was it he said this?


Mr. Oats, It was in the Provincials Chamber, which Ashby had taken for his
convenience at London, until he went down to the Bath, it was at Wild-house, at
Mr. Sandersons house.


L. Chief Just. Ashby was employed by his Instructions to acquaint the Consult
of the Jesuits, that there should be Ten thousand pound advanced, if Doctor
Wakeman would Poison the King, now Asbby comes and acquaints him with it. Why
should Coleman take Copies?


Mr. Oats, Because he was to send Copies to several Conspirators in the
Kingdom of England.


L. Chief Just. To what purpose should Mr. Coleman take a Copy of these
Instructions?


Mr. Oats, The reason is plain, they were then a gathering a Contribution
about the Kingdom, and these Instructions were sent that they might be
encouraged, because they saw there was encouragement from beyond Seas to assist
them. And another Reason was, because now they were assured by this their
business would quickly be dispatched, and by this means some Thousands of
pounds were gathered in the Kingdom of England.


L. Chief Just. To whom was Mr. Coleman to send them?


Mr. Oats, I know not any of the Persons, but Mr. Coleman did say he had sent
his Suffrages (which was a Canting word for Instructions) to the Principal
Gentry of the Catholics of the Kingdom of England.


L. Chief Just. How know you this, that Mr. Coleman did take a Copy of these
Instructions for that purpose as you say?


Mr. Oats, Because he said so.


L. Chief Just. Did any body ask him why he took them?


Mr. Oats, Says Ashby, you had best make haste and Communicate these things.
Mr. Coleman answered, I will make haste with my Copies, that I may dispatch
them away this night?


Recorder, Was he not to be one of the Principal Secretaries of State?.


Mr. Oats, In the Month of May last New Style, April the Old Style, I think
within a day after our Consult, I was at Mr. Langhorn's Chamber, he had several
Commissions, which he called Patents: among his Commissions I saw one from the
General of the Society of Jesus, Joannes Paulus D'Ol^^a, by virtue of a Brief
from the Pope by whom he was enabled.


L. Chief Just. Did you know his hand?


Mr. Oats, I believe I have seen it Forty times, I have seen Forty things
under his hand, and this agreed with them, but I never did see him write in my
life, we all took it to be his hand, and we all knew the hand and Seal.


L. Chief Just. What Inscription was upon the Seal?


Mr. Oats, I.. S. with a Cross, in English it had the Characters of I. H. S.
This Commission to Mr. Coleman in the Month of July, I saw in Fenwicks
presence, and at his Chamber in Drury Lane, where then Mr. Coleman did
acknowledge the Receipt of this Patent, opened it and said* It was a very good
exchange.


L. Chief Just. What was the Commission for?


Mr. Oats, It was to be Secretary of State. I saw the Commission, and heard
him own the Receipt of it.


Just. Wild, What other Commissions were there at Mr. Langhorns Chamber?


Mr. Oats, A great many, I cannot remember, there was a Commission for my Lord
Arundel of Warder, the Lord Powis, and several other persons. But this belongs
not to the Prisoner at the Bar: I mention his Commission.


L. Chief Just. Were you acquainted with Mr. Langhorn?


Mr. Oats, Yes, I Will tell your Lordship how I was acquainted. I was in Spain,
he had there two Sons; to show them special favor and kindness (being mere
strangers at the College) I did use to transmit some Letters for them to the
Kingdom of England in my Packet. When I came out of Spain, I did receive
Recommendations from them to their Father, and in great civility he received
me. This was in November that I came to his house. He lived in Shear-lane or
thereabouts. I understood that his Wife was a zealous Protestant; therefore he
desired me not to come any more to his house, but for the future to come to his
Chamber in the Temple.


L. Chief. Just. Had you ever seen Mr. Langhorn in London before?


Mr. Oats, I never saw him till Nov. (77.) to my knowledge. I was several
times in his company at his chamber, and he brought me there to show me some
kindness upon the account of his Sons. It was at the Temple, for his Wife being
a Protestant was not willing any Jesuits should come to the house. I was to
carry him a summary of all the results and particulars of the Consult at the
White Horse and Wild House. The Provincial ordered me to do it, he knowing me,
being in that affair often employed.


L. Chief Just. Was it the second time you saw him that you saw the Commissions?


Mr. Oats, I saw him several times in the month of November.


L. Chief Just. When did you see the Commissions?


Mr. Oats, In the month of April old style, May new style.


L. Chief Just. How came he to show you the Commissions?


Mr. Oats, I hearing of their being come, had a curiosity to see them, and he
knew me to be privy to the concerns.


L. Chief Just. How did you know he had the Commissions?


Mr. Oats, By Letters.


L. Chief Just. From whom?


Mr. Oats, From those of the Society at Rome, wherein one Harcourt one of the
Fathers was certified, that the Commissions were come to Langhorn, and were in
his hand, I saw the Letters at St. Omers before they came to Harcourt, we read
the Letters there before they came to England, I had power to open them.


L. Chief Just. Did you open the Letters?


Mr. Oats, Yes?


L. Chief Just. When saw you the Letters at St. Omers?


Mr. Oats, I saw the Letters at St. Omers in the month of January; then they
came from Rome; and after I received summons to be at this Consult in the month
of April; and accordingly we came over.


L. Chief Just. What time did you come over?


Mr. Oats, In the month of April.


L. Chief Just. What time went you to Langhorns chamber? I cannot reconcile
the months together.


Just. Dolben. Did you not say you came to Langhorn in November?


Mr. Oats. Yes, before I went to St. Omers.


Just. Wild. How many came over with you?


Mr. Oats. I cannot tell how many came over together; there were nine of us
all Jesuits.


L. Chief Just. Did not you say you went to Langhorn in November?


Mr. Oats, That was before I went to St. Omers.


Attorn. Genesis Tell how many Priests or Jesuits were lately in England, that you
know of, at one time?


Mr. Oats. There was, and have been to my knowledge in the Kingdom of England,
Secular Priests eightscore, and Jesuits fourscore, and by name in the
Catalogue, I think three hundred and odd.


L. Chief Just. How long had you been in England before you were at Mr.
Langhorn's Chamber?


Mr. Oats. Not long; because I had Letters in my Packet from his Sons, as soon
as I had rested a little, I went to him.


L. Chief Just. What said Mr. Langhorn to you about the Commissions in his
chamber?


Mr. Oats. Not a word; but seemed glad.


L. Chief Just. Did you see them open upon his Table? or did you ask to see
them?


Mr. Oats. They did not lie open upon the Table, but the Commissions were
before him; I asked to see them. Mr. Langhorn (said I) I hear you have received
the Commissions from Rome; he said, he had. Shall I have the honor to see some
of them? He said, I might; he thought he might trust me; and so he might,
because that very day I gave him an account of the Consult.


L. Chief Just. When was it you gave him an account of the Consult?


Mr. Oats. In the morning.


L. Chief Just. You say you were twice there that day.


Mr. Oats. I was there the whole Forenoon.


L. Chief Just. That day you saw the Commissions.


Mr. Oats. I had been there several times the same day, and meeting him at
last, he asked me how often I was there before, I said said twice or thrice;
but that day was the last time ever I saw him; I have not seen him since to my
knowledge.


L. Chief Just. Was that the first time that you saw him after you came from
Spain?


Mr. Oats. I saw him thrice in November, then I went to St. Omers, the first
time I saw him after I came from thence I saw the Commissions.


Attorn. Genesis What were the Names of those men that came over from St. Omers
besides your self?


Mr. Oats. As near as I can remember, the Rector of Liege was one; Father
Warren; Sir Thomas Preston; the Rector of Watton; one Francis Williams; Sir
John Warner Baronet; one Father Charges; one Pool, a Monk; I think I made the
ninth.


Attorn. Genesis If the Prisoner at the Bar be minded, he may ask him any Question.


Prisoner, I am mighty glad to see that Gentleman Sir Thomas Dolman in the
Court, for I think he was upon my Examination before the Council, and this man
that gives now in Evidence against me, there told the King, he never saw me
before; and he is extremely well acquainted with me now, and has a World of
Intimacy. Mr. Oats at that time gave such an Account of my Concern in this
matter, that I had orders to go to Newgate, I never saw Mr. Oats since I was
born, but at that time.


L. Chief Just. You shall have as fair a Search, and Examination in this matter
for your Life as can be, therefore Mr. Oats answer to what Mr. Coleman says.


Mr. Oats. My Lord, when Mr. Coleman was upon his Examination before the
Council Board, he says, I said there that I never saw him before in my Life: I
then said I would not swear that I had seen him before in my Life, because my
sight was bad by Candlelight, and Candlelight alters the sight much, but when
I heard him speak I could have sworn it was he, but it was not then my
Business. I cannot see a great way by Candlelight.


L. Chief. Just. The Stress of the Objection lies not upon seeing so much, but
how come you that you laid no more to Mr. Coleman's charge at that time?


Mr. Oats. I did design to lay no more to his Charge then, than was matter for
Information. For Prisoners may supplant Evidence when they know it, and bring
Persons to such Circumstances, as Time, and Place. My Lord, I was not bound to
give in more than a general Information against Mr. Coleman; Mr. Coleman did
deny he had Correspondence with Father Le Chese at any time, I did then say he
had given him an account of several transactions. And (my Lord) then was I so
weak, being up two nights, and having been taking Prisoners, upon my Salvation,
I could scarce stand upon my Legs.


L. Chief Just. What was the Information you gave at that time to the Council
against Mr. Coleman?


Mr. Oats. The Information I gave at that time (as near as I can remember, but
I would not trust to my memory) was for writing of News-Letters, in which I did
then excuse the Treasonable Reflections, and called them Base Reflections at the
Council Board; the King was sensible, and so was the Council. I was so wearied
and tired (being all that Afternoon before the Council, and Sunday night, and
sitting up night after night) that the King was willing to discharge me. But if
I had been urged, I should have made a larger Information.


L. Chief Just. The thing you accused him of was his own Letter.


Pris. He does not believe it was my Letter.


L. C. Just. You here charge Mr. Coleman to be the man that gave a Guinny to
expedite the business at Windsor, etc. at the time when you were Examined at
the Council Table, you gave a particular account of attempting to take away the
Kings life at Windsor, and raising twenty thousand pounds and all those great
Transactions; why did you not charge Mr. Coleman to be the man that gave the
Guinny to the Messenger to expedite the business, when the 80 pounds was sent?
that he found out a way of transmitting 200000 pounds to carry on the Design?
he consulted the killing the King, and approved of it very well. And of the
Instructions for 10000 pounds, and said it was too little for to poison the
king. When you were to give an account to the Council of the particular
Contrivance of the Murder of the King at Windsor, with a Reward, you did
mention one Reward of 10000 pounds to Dr. Wakeman, and would you omit the
Guinny to expedite the Messenger, and that he said that 10000l. was too little;
would you omit all this?


Mr. Oats. I being so tired and weak that I was not able to stand upon my
Legs, and I remember the Council apprehended me to be so weak that one of the
Lords of the Council said, that if there were any occasion further to examine
Mr. Coleman, that Mr. Oats should be ready again, and bid me retire.


L. C. Just. You was by when the Council were ready to let Mr. Coleman go
almost at large.


Mr. Oats. No; I never apprehended that, for if I did, I should have given a
further Account.


L. C. Just. What was done to Mr. Coleman at that time? was he sent away
Prisoner?


Mr. Oats. Yes, at that time to the Messengers house, and within two days
after he was sent to Newgate, and his Papers were seized.


L. C. Just. Why did you not name Coleman at that time?


Mr. Oats. Because I had spent a great deal of time in accusing other Jesuits.


Just. Wild. What time was there betwixt the first time you were at the Council
before you told of this matter concerning the King?


Mr. Oats. When I was first at the Board (which was on Saturday night) I made
Information, which began between six and seven, and lasted almost to ten. I did
then give a general Account of the Affairs to the Council without the King.
Then I went and took Prisoners, and before Sunday night, I said, I thought if
Mr. Colemans Papers were searched into, they would find matter enough against
him in those Papers to hang him; I spoke those words, or words to the like
purpose. After that Mr. Colemans Papers were searched, Mr. Coleman was not to
be found; but he surrendered himself the next day. So that on Sunday I was
commanded to give His Majesty a general Information, as I had given to the
Council on Saturday; and the next day again, I took Prisoners that night five,
and next night four.


Just. Wild. How long was it betwixt the time that you were examined, and spoke
only as to the Letters, to that time you told to the King and Council or both
of them, concerning this matter you swear now?


Mr. Oats. My Lord, I never told it to the King and Council, but I told it to
the Houses of Parliament.


L. Chief Just. How long was it between the one and the other?


Mr. Oats. I cannot tell exactly the time; it was when the Parliament first
sat.


L. C. J. How came you ( Mr. Coleman being so desperate a man as he was;
endeavoring the killing of the King) to omit your Information of it to the
Council and to the King at both times?


Mr. Oats. I spoke little of the Persons till the persons came face to face.


L. Chief Just. Why did you not accuse all thosse Jesuits by name?


M. Oats. We took a Catalogue of their names, but those I did accuse
positively and expressly we took up.


L. Chief Just. Did you not accuse Sir George Wakeman by name, and that he
accepted his Reward?


Mr. Oats. Yes, then I did accuse him by name.


L. Chief Just. Why did you not accuse Mr. Coleman by name?


Mr. Oats. For want of Memory; being disturbed and wearied in sitting up two
nights, I could not give that good account of Mr. Coleman which I did
afterward, when I consulted my Papers; and when I saw Mr. Coleman was secured,
I had no need to give a farther Account.


L. Chief Just. How long was it between the first charging Mr. Coleman, and
your acquainting the Parliament with it?


Mr. Oats. From Monday the 30th of September, until the Parliament sat.


L. Chief Just. Mr. Coleman, will you ask him any thing?


Prisoner. Pray ask Mr. Oats, whether he was not as near to me as this
Gentleman is, because he speaks of his eyes being bad?


Mr.Oats. I had the disadvantage of a Candle upon my eyes; Mr. Coleman stood
more in the dark.


Prisoner. He names several times that he met with me in this place and that
place, a third and fourth place about business.


Mr. Oats. He was altered much by his Perriwig in several Meetings, and had
several Perriwiggs, and a Perriwigg does disguise a man very much; but when I
heard him speak, then I knew him to be Mr. Coleman.


L. Chief Just. Did you hear him speak? How were the Questions asked? Were they
thus? Was that the Person? Or, how often had you seen Mr. Coleman?


Mr. Oats. When the Question was asked by my Lord Chancellor, Mr. Coleman,
when were you last in France? He said at such a time. Did you see Father le
Chese? He said he gave him an accidental visit, My Lord Chancellor asked him
whether or no he had a Pass? He said, No. Then he told him, that was a fault
for going out of the Kingdom without a Pass. Have you a Kinsman whose name is
Playford at S. Omers? He said he had one ten years old, (who is in truth
sixteen) That question I desired might be asked. Then the King bade me go on.


L. Chapter Just Did the King, or Council, or Lord Chancellor ask you whether you
knew Mr. Coleman, or no?


Mr. Oats. They did not ask me.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Oats, answer the question in short, and without confounding
it with length. Were you demanded if you knew M. Coleman?


Mr. Oats. Not to my knowledge.


L. Chapter Just. Did you ever see him? or how often?


Pris. He said, he did not know me.


L. Chapter Just. You seemed, when I asked you before, to admit, as if you had been
asked this question, how often you had seen him, and gave me no answer, because
you were doubtful whether it was the man, by reason of the inconveniency of the
light, and your bad fight.


Mr. Oats. I must leave it to the King what answer I made Mr. Coleman, he
wonders I should give an account of so many intimacies, when I said I did not
know him at the Council Table.


Pris. It is very strange Mr. Oats should swear now, that he was so well
acquainted with me, and had been so often in my company; when upon his
accusation at the Council Table, he said nothing of me more than the sending of
one Letter, which he thought was my hand.


Mr. Oats. I did not say that.


Pris. And he did seem to say there, he never saw me before in his life.


L. Chapter Just. Was he asked whether he was acquainted with you? (for those words
are to the same purpose).


Pris. I cannot answer directly, I do not say he was asked if he was acquainted
with me, but I say this, that he did declare he did not know me.


L. Chapter Just. Can you prove that?


Pris. I appeal to Sir Tho. Dolman, who is ^ow in Court, and was then present
at the Council Table.


L. Chapter Just. Sir Thomas, you are not upon your Oath, but are to speak on the
behalf of the Prisoner: what did he say?


Sir Tho. Dolman. That he did not well know him.


L. Chapter Just. Did he add, that he did not well know him by the Candle light?
But Mr. Oats, when you heard his voice, you said you knew him; why did you not
come then, and say you did well know him?


Mr. Oats. Because I was not asked.


L. Chapter Just. But, Sir Thomas, did he say he did not well know him after M.
Coleman spoke? Was Mr. Coleman examined before Mr. Oats spoke?


Sir Tho. Doleman. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Oats, you say you were with him at the Savoy and Wild-house,
pray, Sir Thomas, did he say he did not know him, or had seen Mr. Coleman there?


Sir Tho. Dolman. He did not know him as he stood there.


L. Chapter Just. Knowing, or not knowing is not the present question; but did he
make an answer to the knowing, or not knowing him?


Just. Dolben. Did he say he did not well know Mr. Coleman, or that he did not
well know that man?


Sir Tho. Dolman He said he had no acquaintance with that man (to the best of
my remembrance.)


L. Chapter Just. Sir Robert Southwell, you were present at Mr. Oats his
Examination before the Council; in what manner did he accuse Mr. Coleman then?


Sir Robert Southwell. The question is so particular, I cannot give the Court
satisfaction; but other material things then said are now omitted by Mr. Oats;
for he did declare against Sir George Wakeman, that five thousand pounds was
added, in all fifteen thousand pounds, and that Mr. Coleman paid five of the
fifteen to Sir George in hand.


L. Chapter Just. This answers much of the Objection upon him. The Court has asked
Mr. Oats how he should come now to charge you with all these matters of
poisoning and killing the King, and yet he mentioned you so slightly at the
Council Table; but it is said by Sir Robert Southwell he did charge you with
five thousand pounds (for poisoning the King) to be added to the ten thousand
pounds, and he charged you expressly with it at the Council Table.


Pris. The Charge was so slight against me by Mr. Oats, that the Council were
not of his Opinion: For the first order was to go to Newgate, and Sir Robert
Southwell came with directions to the Messenger not to execute the Order. I
humbly ask whether it was a reasonable thing to conceive that the Council
should extenuate the punishment, if Mr. Oats came with such an amazing account
to the Council,


Sir Rob. South. Mr. Oats gave so large and general an Information to the
Council, that it could not easily be fixed. Mr. Coleman came voluntarily in
upon Monday morning. The Warrant was sent out on Sunday night for Mr. Coleman
and his Papers: His Papers were found and seized; but Mr. Coleman was not found
at that time, nor all Night, but came on Monday morning voluntarily, and
offered himself at Sir Joseph Williamson's House, hearing there was a Warrant
against him: By reason of so many Prisoners that were then under Examination,
he was not heard till the Afternoon, and then he did with great Indignation and
Contempt hear these vile things, as thinking himself innocent.


Pris. If I thought my self guilty, I should have charged my self: I hope his
Majesty upon what has been said, will be so far satisfied as to discharge me.


Sir Rob. South. Mr. Coleman then made so good a discourse for himself, that
though the Lords had filled up a blank Warrant to send him to Newgate, that was
respited, and he was only committed to a Messenger. I did say to the Messenger,
be very civil to Mr. Coleman for things are under Examination, but you must
keep him safely. Says the Messenger, pray let me have a special Warrant, that
does dispense with the Warrant I had to carry him to Newgate, and such a
Warrant he had. The King went away on Tuesday morning to Newmarket, and
appointed a particular Committee to examine the Papers brought of Mr. Coleman
and others.

His Papers were found in a Deal box, and several of these Papers and
Declarations sounded so strangely to the Lords, that they were amazed; and
presently they signed a Warrant for Mr. Coleman's going to Newgate.


L. Chapter Just. Did Mr. Oats give a round Charge against Mr. Coleman?


Sir Rob. South. He had a great deal to do, he was to repeat in the Afternoon
on Sunday when the King was present, all he had said to the Lords on Saturday.

He did say of Mr. Coleman, that he had corresponded very wickedly and basely
with the French King's Confessor, and did believe if Mr. Coleman's Papers were
searched, there would be found in them that which would cost him his Neck. And
did declare that the fifteen thousand pounds was accepted for the murder of
the King, and that five thousand pounds was actually paid by Mr. Coleman to Sir
George Wakeman. But Mr. Oats at the same time did also declare that he did not
see the money paid, he did not see this particular action of Sir George Wakeman,
because at that time he had the Stone and could not be present.


Mr. Oats. I was not present at that Consult, where the fifteen thousand pounds
was accepted; but I had an account of it from those that were present.


L. Chapter Just. It appears plainly by this Testimony, that he did charge you Mr.
Coleman home, that fifteen thousand pounds was to be paid for poisoning the
King; and that it was generally said among them (though he did not see it paid)
that it came by your hands, viz. five thousand pounds of it, which answers your
objection as if he had not charged you, when you see he did charge you home
then for being one of the Conspirators, in having a hand in paying of (...) for
poisoning the King: he charges you now no otherwise than in that manner: He
does not charge you no^ as if there were new things started, but with the very
conspiracy of having a hand in paying the money for murdering the King.

What consultation was that you had at the Savoy, in the Month of August?


Mr. Oats. It was about the business of the four Irish Ruffians proposed to the
Consult.


The end of Mr. Oats's Examination.

Mr. Bedlow.

Solicit. Genesis We call him to give an account what he knows of the Prisoners
being privy to the conspiracy of murdering the King, (particularly to that)
Mr. Bedlow, pray acquaint my Lord and the Jury what you know, I desire to know
particularly as it concerns Mr. Coleman, and nothing but Mr. Coleman.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Attorney pray keep to that Question close.


Attorn. Genesis I have two short questions to ask him: The first is what he has
seen or heard touching any Commission to Mr. Coleman, what say you?


Mr. Bedlow. In particular I know not of any Commission directed to Mr.
Coleman, I do not know any thing of it but what Sir Henry Tichbourn told me,
that he had a Commission; and he brought a Commission for Mr. Coleman and the
rest of the Lords, from the principal Jesuits at Rome, by Order of the Pope.


Attorn. Genesis A Commission for what?


Mr. Bedlow. To be principal Secretary of State: the Title of it I do not know
because I did not see it, but to be Principal Secretary of State, that was the
Effect.


Attorn. Genesis I desire to know what discourse you had with Mr. Coleman about
that design.


Mr. Bedlow. If your Lordship please, I shall be short in the Narrative.


L. Chapter Just. Make use of your Notes to help your memory, but let not your
testimony be merely to read them.


Mr. Bedlow. I carried over to Monsieur Le Chese (the French Kings Confessor) a
large packet of Letters, April (75) from Mr. Coleman, which Letters I saw Mr.
Coleman deliver to Father Harcourt, at his House in Dukes-Street.


Council. And Harcourt gave them to you?


Mr. Bedlow. Yes; which Letters were directed to be delivered to Monsieur le
Chese, and I did carry them to le Chese, and brought him an answer from le
Chese, and other English Monks at Paris? I did not understand what was in it,
because it was a Language I do not well understand, it was about carrying on
the Plot; at a Consultation there were present two French Abbots and several
English Monks at Paris; what I heard them say, was about carrying on the Plot
to subvert the Government of England, to destroy the King and the Lords of the
Council. The King was principally to be destroyed, and the Government subverted
as well as the Protestant Religion.


Court. When was this? when you were to receive the Answer?


Mr. Bedlow. It was upon the Consultation: there was a Packet of Letters from
Mr. Coleman, they did not know I understood French, or if they did, they had
tried me so long I believe they would have trusted me.


L. Chapter Just. The Letter that le Chese wrote, to whom was it directed?


Mr. Bedlow. It was directed to Mr. Coleman, the Packet was directed to
Harcourt, and within that le Chese wrote an answer and directed it to Mr.
Coleman, particularly to Mr. Coleman.


L. Chapter Just. How do you know?


Mr. Bedlow. The Superscription was this [in French] A Monsieur Monsieur
Coleman; to Mr. Coleman, with other Letters directed to Father Harcourt.


L. Chapter Just. He says plainly the Letter was yours, You gave Harcourt a Packet
of Letters to be delivered to le Chese, Harcourt delivered them to him, and he
did carry them to le Chese, and heard them talk about this Plot: That le Chese
wrote a Letter to you (particularly by name) enclosed in a Letter to Harcourt,
that answer he brought back.


Recorder. Do you know any thing concerning any money Mr. Coleman said he had
received? the Sums, and for what?


Mr. Bedlow. It was to carry on the design to subvert the Government of
England, to free England from Damnation and Ignorance, and free all Catholieks
from hard Tyranny and Oppression of Heretics.


Attorn. Gener. What words did you hear Mr. Coleman express, what he would do
for the Catholic Cause?


Mr. Bedlow. May 24, or 25, (77) I was at Mr. Coleman's with Mr. Harcourt, and
received another Packet from Mr. Harcourt, and he had it from Mr. Coleman.


L. Chapter Just. You say Mr. Coleman did give this Packet to Harcourt?


Mr. Bedlow. Yes, and Harcourt delivered it to me to carry it to Paris to the
English Monks. I was to go by Doway to see if they were not gone to Paris
before me.


L. Chapter Just. And what did they say when you delivered the Letters to the
English Monks?


Mr. Bedlow. They told me how much reward I deserved from the Pope and the
Church, both here, and in the world to come. I overtook three, and that night I
went to Paris with them; and upon the Consultation (1677) I believe they sent
the Bishop of Tornes the substance of those Letters, and not having a final
answer what assistance the Catholic Party in England might expect from them,
they were resolved to neglect their design no longer than that Summer, having
all things ready to begin in England.


Recorder. What did you hear Mr. Coleman say?


Mr. Bedlow. That he would adventure any thing to bring in the Popish Religion:
After the Consultation, I delivered the Letters to le Fair, and he brought
them to Harcourt, he delivered the Packet of Letters to Harcourt, who was not
well, but yet went and delivered them to Mr. Coleman, and I went as far as Mr.
Coleman's House, but did not go in, but stayed over the way; but Harcourt went
in, and after he had spoke with Mr. Coleman, he gave me a beck to come to him;
and I heard Mr. Coleman say, if he had a hundred lives, and a Sea of Blood to
carry on the Cause, he would spend it all to further the Cause of the Church of
Rome, and to establish the Church of Rome in England: and if there was an
hundred Heretical Kings to be deposed, he would see them all destroyed.


L. Chapter Just. Where was this?


Mr. Bedlow. At his own House.


L. Chapter Just. Where?


Mr. Bedlow. Behind Westminster Abbey.


L. Chapter Just. In what Room?


Mr. Bedlow. At the Foot of the Staircase.


L. Chapter Just. Where were you then?


Mr. Bedlow. There, I was called in by Harcourt, and was as near to him, as to
my Lord Duras. (My Lord being hard by Mr. Bedlow in Court.)


Pris. Did I ever see you in my life?


Mr. Bedlow. You may ask that question; but in the Stone-Gallery in
Somerset House, when you came from a Consult, where were great persons, which I
am not to name here; that would make the bottom of your Plot tremble: you saw
me then.


Attorn. Gener. We did before acquaint you with something of the substance of
the Letters; we shall now acquaint you with something of the manner of finding
them. Your Lordship has heard Mr. Oats has been examined before the Council,
and there it was said. Mr. Coleman's Papers would make such a discovery (if
they were looked into) as would be enough to hang him. I remember he said the
Lords of the Council were pleased to order the Papers to be seized; the
execution of their Warrant they committed to one Bradly, who was a Messenger
that attended the King and Council; and I desire he may be called: He did find
and seize as many Papers as Mr. Coleman was pleased to leave, and they are
those Papers which we now bring before you. The Papers seized he put up in a
deal Box, and four or five several Bags, and brings them to the Council; the
Clerks of the Council are here attending the Court: they will tell you these
Papers now produced were Papers found in those bags: Mr. Bradly will tell you
the Papers seized in the bags and box were brought to them, and they will swear
they were the Papers and bags that were brought.


Record. Mr. Bradly, give my Lord and the Jury an account whether you went to
Mr. Coleman, whether you seized his Papers, and what Papers you saw, and how
you disposed of them after they were seized.


Mr. Bradly. The 29th. of September being Sunday Evening at Six of the Clock, I
received a Warrant from the Council Board to apprehend Mr. Coleman, and to
seize his Papers, and to bring them to the Council Board: He being not at home,
I spoke with his Wife, and told her I came to search her House, I had a Warrant
so to do, She told me I was welcome; I dedesir'd her to send for her Husband: I
found in several parts of the House a great many Papers; I put them up in
several Bags: I found some in a private corner in a Deal Box.


L. Chapter Just. What kind of Corner?


Mr. Bradly. In Mr. Coleman's Chamber, not in his own Study, but in another
place behind the Chimney; the Box was tacked together with a Nail: I lifted it
up; and saw they were Letters, I put it down again as it was, and gave it into
the custody of one that was with me, to look to it: Then I came to his own
Study where his 'Scritore was, and put up all I could find in several Baggs,
and Sealed them, and brought them to the Council Chamger.


Attorn. Genesis Did you put up any other Papers among them then what you found at
Mr. Coleman's House?


Mr. Bradly. I did not, (upon my Oath,) I had them all at Mr. Coleman's House.


Attorn. General. Did you bring them all to the Clerks of the Council?


Mr. Bradly. Yes, Before I came out I tied them all up, and sealed them with my
own Seal, and was constantly with them.


At. Genesis Now we will give your Lordship an account how these things were
received, that were there found. Sir Robert Southwell, look upon the large
Letter, and tell my Lord and the Jury whether that were among the Papers
brought by this Messenger.


Sir Robert Southwel. My Lord, I did not see this Letter in several days after
the papers brought me from Bradly; when he came in with Three great Baggs, and
a Box of Letters on Sunday night; Said I, which are Mr. Coleman's principal
papers? Said he, those that are in the large speckled cloth Bagg; for these we
took first in the Scritore: These I took, and meddled not with the other, I
presume other Clerks of the Council can give a particular account where this
paper was found.


At. Genesis Sir Thomas Doleman, look upon the Letter whether you can remember any
thing of it.


Sir Th. Doleman. I remember I found it in a Deal Box among Mr. Coleman's
papers, those that Bradly brought.


Court. That Is plain enough.


At. Genesis That we may not often prove what we shall often make use of, I would
prove it fully once for all, that all these papers were of his Handwriting;
This we can prove by two sorts of Evidences; his own Confession, and the
Witness of Two persons; one that was his Servant; and the other a Sub-Secretary,
that did write very many things for him. Mr. Boatman, look upon these papers;
Tell my Lord and the Jury whose Hand it is: Are you acquainted with Mr.
Coleman's Hand? What relation had you to him?


Boatman. I was his Gentleman that waited on him in his Chamber Five Years:
This is very like his Hand.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you believe it is his hand?


Boatman. I believe it is.


Lord Chapter Just. Little proof will serve the turn, because they were taken in
his possession.


At. Genesis I desire to prove it fully; look upon all the Papers, turn all the
Leaves, see if they be not all one hand, and whether you believe all to be Mr.
Coleman's hand Writing or not.


Boatman. I believe it to be all his hand.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you know when the last Packet of Letters came up, that were
sent to Mr. Coleman, from beyond the Seas?


Boatman. Two or three days after he was taken Prisoner.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you know where they are bestowed? Did you receive Monsieur
Le Chese's Letters for Mr. Coleman?


Boatman. Yes.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you ever Write any for him to Le Chese?


Boatman. No.


At. Genesis Inform the Court whether he kept any Book to make Entry of Letters he
sent or received?


Boatman. Yes, there was a large Book my Master did enter his Letters in, and
his News.


At. Genesis What is become of that Book?


Boatman. I know not.


At. Genesis When did you see that Book last upon your Oath?


Boatman. On Saturday.


At. Genesis How long before he was sent to Prison?


Boat. Two days, because the next day was Sunday, which he did not make use of
it: on Monday my Master was in Prison, and I did not mind the Book.


L. Chapter Just. Were there any Entries of Letters in that Book within Two Years
last past?


Boatman. I cannot be positive.


At. Genesis Did he not usually write and receive Letters from beyond Sea? Till
that time had he not Negotiation as usually?


Boatman. He had usually News every Post from beyond the Seas.


Prisoner. There Is Letters from the Hague, Brussels, France and Rome; they are
all with the Council, which were all the Letters I received.


At. Genesis We have another Witness: Cattaway, are you acquainted with Coleman's
Handwriting? Do you believe it to be his Handwriting?


Witness. I believe it is, they are his Handwriting.


At. Genesis It will appear, if there were no other proof in this Cause, his own
papers are as good as an hundred Witnesses to condemn him; Therefore I desire
to prove them fully by his own Confession.


Sir Phil. Lloyd a Witness. These are the Papers I received from Sir Thomas
Doleman; I found them (as he says,) in a Deal Box: Among his Papers I found
this Letter. Mr. Coleman has owned this was his Handwriting* it is all one
Letter.


At. Genesis It Is all the same Hand, and he acknowledged it to be his.


Mr. Recorder. I desire Mr. Astrey may read it so that the Jury may hear it.

Mr. Astrey Clerk of the Crown reads the Letter.

The 29th. of September (1675.) It is subscribed thus; Your most humble and
most obedient Servant, but no name.


Mr. COLEMANS Long Letter.
SInce Father St. German has been so kind to me, as to recommend me to your
Reverence so advantagiously, as to encourage you to accept of my
Correspondency; I will own to him, that he has done me a Favor without
Consulting me, greater than I could have been capable of if he had advised with
me; because I could not then have had the Confidence to have permitted him to
ask it on my behalf. And I am so sensible of the Honor you are pleased to do
me, that though I cannot deserve it; yet to show at least the sense I have of
it, I will deal as freely and openly with you this first time, as if I had had
the honor of your Acquaintance all my life; and shall make no Apology for so
doing, but only tell you that I know your Character perfectly well, though I am
not so happy as to know your Person; and that I have an Opportunity of putting
this Letter into the hands of Father St. German^s Nephew (for whose Integrity
and Prudence he has undertaken) without any sort of hazard.

In order then Sir to the plainness I profess, I will tell you what has
formerly passed between your Reverence's Predecessor, Father Ferryer and my
self. About three years ago, when the King my Master sent a Troop of Horse
Guards into his most Christian Majesty's Service, under the Command of my Lord
Durass; he sent with it an Officer called Sir William Throckmorton, with whom I
had a particular Intimacy, and who had then very newly embraced the Catholic
Religion: To him did I constantly Write, and by him address my self to Father
Ferryer. The first thing of great Importance I presumed to offer him (not to
trouble you with lesser matters, or what passed here before, and immediately
after the Fatal Revocation of the Kings Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
(to which we owe all our Miseries and hazards,) was in July, August, and
September 1673. when I constantly inculcated the great danger Catholic
Religion, and his most Christian Majesty's Interest would be in at our next
Sessions of Parliament, which was then to be in October following; at which I
plainly foresaw that the King my Master would be forced to something in
prejudice to his Alliance with France, which I saw so evidently and
particularly that we should make Peace with Holland, that I urged all the
Arguments I could, which to me were Demonstrations, to convince your Court of
that mischief; and pressed all I could to persuade his most Christian Majesty
to use his utmost endeavor to prevent that session of our Parliament, and
proposed Expedients how to do it: But I was answered so often and so
positively, that his most Christian Majesty was so well assured by his
Ambassador here, our Ambassador there, the Lord Arlington, and even the King
himself; that he had no such apprehensions at all, but was fully satisfied of
the contrary, and looked upon what I offered as a very zealous mistake, that I
was forced to give over arguing, though not believing as I did; but confidently
appealed to time and success to prove who took their measures rightest. When it
happened what I foresaw came to pass, the good Father was a little surprised,
to see all the great men mistaken, and a little one in the right; and was
pleased by Sir William Throckmorton to desire the continuance of my
correspondence, which I was mighty willing to comply with, knowing the Interest
of our King, and in a more particular manner of my more immediate Master the
Duke, and his most Christian Majesty, to be so inseparably united, that it was
impossible to divide them, without destroying them all: Upon this I showed that
our Parliament in the circumstances it was managed, by the timorous Councels of
our Ministers, who then governed, would never be useful either to England,
France, or Catholic Religion, but that we should as certainly be forced from
our Neutrality at their next meeting, as we had been from our Active Alliance
with France the last year: That a Peace in the Circumstances we were in, was
much more to be desired then the continuance of the War; and that the
Dissolution of our Parliament would certainly procure a Peace; for that the
Confederates did more depend upon the power they had in our Parliament, then
upon any thing else in the World; and were more encouraged from them to the
continuing of the War; so that if they were Dissolved, their measures would be
all broken, and they consequently in a manner necessitated to a Peace.

The good Father minding this Discourse somewhat more then the Court of France
thought fit to do my former; urged it so home to the King, that his Majesty was
pleased to give him Orders to signify to his R. H. my Master, that his Majesty
was fully satisfied of his R. Hs. good intention toward him, and that he
esteemed both their interests but as one and the same; that my Lord Arlington
and the Parliament were both to be looked upon as very unuseful to their
interest: That if his R. H. would endeavor to dissolve this Parliament, his
most Christian Majesty would assist him with his Power and Purse, to have a
new one as should be for their purpose. This, and a great many more
expressions of kindness and confidence Father Ferryer was pleased to
communicate to Sir William Throckmorton, and Commanded them to send them to his
R. H. and withal to beg his R. H. to propose to his most Christian Majesty,
what he thought necessary for his own concern, and the advantage of Religion,
and his Majesty would certainly do all he could to advance both or either of
them. This Sir William Throckmorton sent to me by an Express, who left Paris
the 2d of June 1674 Stilo novo: I no sooner had it, but I communicated it to
his R. H. To which his R. H. commanded me to answer, as I did on the 29th. of
the same month: That his R. H. was very sensible of his most Christian
Majesty's friendship, and that he would labor to cultivate it with all the
good Offices he was capable of doing for his Majesty; that he was fully
convinced that their Interests were both one that my Lord Arlington and the
Parliament were not only unuseful, but very dangerous both to England and
France; That therefore it was necessary that they should do all they could to
Dissolve it. And that his R. H's. opinion was, that if his most Christian
Majesty would Write his thoughts freely to the King of England upon this
Subject, and make the same proffer to his Majesty of his Purse to Dissolve this
Parliament, which he had made to his R H. to call another, he did believe it
very possible for him to succeed with the assistance we should be able to give
him here; and that if this Parliament were Dissolved, there would be no great
difficulty of getting a new one, which would be more useful: The Constitutions
of our Parliaments being such, that a new one can never hurt the Crown, nor an
old one do it good.

His R. H. being pleased to own these Propositions, which were but only
general, I thought it reasonable to be more particular, and come closer to the
point, we might go the faster about the work, and come to some issue before the
time was too far spent.

I laid this for my Maxim: The Dissolution of our Parliament will certainly
procure a Peace; which proposition was granted by every body I Conversed
withal, even by Monsieur Rouvigny himself, with whom I took liberty of
discoursing so far, but durst not say any thing of the Intelligence I had with
Father Ferryer. Next; that a Sum of Money certain, would certainly procure a
Dissolution; this some doubted, but I am sure I never did; for I knew perfectly
well that the King had frequent Disputes with himself at that time, whether he
should dissolve or continue them; and he several times declared that the
Arguments were so strong on both sides, that he could not tell to which to
incline, but was carried at last to the continuance of them by this one
Argument: If I try them once more, they may possibly give me Money; if they do,
I have gained my point: if they do not, I can dissolve them then, and be where
I am now; so that I have a possibility at least of getting Money for their
Continuance, against nothing on the other side: But if we could have turned
this Argument, and said; Sir, their Dissolution will certainly procure you
Money, when you have only a bare possibility of getting any by their
Continuance, and have shown how far that bare possibility was from being a
foundation to build any reasonable hope upon, which I am sure his Majesty was
sensible of; and how much 300000l. sterling. certain (which was the sum we
proposed) was better than a bare possibility (without any reason to hope that
that could ever be compassed) of having half so much more (which was the most
he designed to ask) upon some vile dishonorable terms; and a thousand other
hazards, which he had great reason to be afraid of: If I say we had had power
to have argued this, I am most confidently assured we could have compassed it,
for Logic in our Court built upon Money, has more powerful Charms, then any
other sort of reasoning. But to secure his most Christian Majesty from any
hazard, as to that point I proposed his Majesty should offer that sum upon that
condition, and if the condition were not performed, the Money should never be
due; if it were, and that a Peace would certainly follow thereupon, (which no
body doubted) his Majesty would gain his Ends, and save all the vast expenses
of the next Campaign, by which he could not hope to better his Condition, or
put himself into more advantageous Circumstances of Treaty then he was then in;
but might very probably be in a much worse considering the mighty opposition he
was like to meet with, and the uncertain Chances of War. But admitting that his
Majesty could by his great strength and Conduct maintain himself in as good a
Condition to Treat the next year as he was then in, (which was as much as could
then reasonably be hoped for*) he should have saved by this Proposal, as much
as all the men he must needs lose, and all the charges he should be at in a
year, would be valued to amount to more then 300000l. sterling. and so much more
in case his Condition should decay, as it should be worse then it was when this
was made; and the Condition of his R. H. and of the Catholic Religion here
(which dep^nds very much upon the success of His most Christian Majesty,)
^^^ivered from a great many frights and real hazards. F. Ferryer seem^d to
(...) sensible of the Benefit all parties would gain by this Proposal; But yet
it was unfortunately delayed by an unhappy and tedious fit of sickness, which
kept him so long from the King in the France Comte and made him so unable to
wait on His Majesty after he did return to Paris: But so soon as be could
compass it, he was pleased to acquaint his Majesty with (...), and wrote to the
Duke himself; and did me the Honor to write unto me also on the 15th. of
September 1674. and sent his Letter by Sir William Throckmorton, who came
express upon that Errand; In these Letters he gave his R. H. fresh assurance of
his most Christian Majesty's friendship, and of his Zeal and Readiness to
comply with every thing His R. H. had, or should think fit to propose in favor
of Religion, or the business of Money; And that he had commanded Monsieur
Rouvigny as to the latter, to Treat and deal with his R. H. and to receive and
observe his Orders and Directions, but desired that he might not at all be
concerned as to the former, but that his R. H. would cause what Proposition he
should think fit to be made about Religion, to be offered either to Father
Ferryer, or Monsieur Pompone.

These Letters came to us about the middle of September, and his R. H. expected
daily when Monsieur Rouvigny should speak to him about the Subject of that
Letter; but he took no notice at all of any thing till the 29th. of September,
the evening before the King and Duke went to Newmarket for a fortnight, and
then only said, that he had Commands from his Master to give his R. H. the most
firm assurance of his Friendship imaginable, or something to that purpose,
making his R. H. a general Complement, but made no mention of any particular
Orders relating to Father Ferryer's Letter. The Duke wondering at this
proceeding, and being obliged to stay a good part of October at Newmarket; and
soon after his coming back-hearing of the Death of Father Ferryer, he gave over
all further prosecuting of the former Project. But I believe I saw Monsieur
Rouvigny's policy all along, who was vvilling to save his Masters Money, upon
assurance that we would do all we could to stave off the Parliament for our own
sakes, that we would struggle as hard without money as with it; and we having
by that time, upon our own Interest, prevailed to get the Parliament Prorogued
to the 13th. of April, he thought that Prorogation being to a day so high in
the Spring, would put the Confederates so far beyond their Measures, as that
it might procure a Peace, and be as useful to France, as a Dissolution: upon
these Reasons I suppose he went. I had several discourses with him; and did
open my self so far to him as to say, I could vvish his Master would give us
leave to offer to our Master 300000l. for the Dissolution of the Parliament;
and showed him that a Peace would most certainly follow a Dissolution (which
he agreed with me in) and that we desired not the Money from his Master to
excite our wills, or to make us more industrious to use our utmost powers to
procure a Dissolution, but to strengthen our Power and Credit with the King,
and to render us more capable to succeed with his Majesty, as most certainly
we should have done, had we been fortified with such an Argument.

To this Purpose I pressed Mounsieur Pompone frequently by Sir Will.
Throckmorton, who returned hence again into France on the Tenth of November,
the day our Parliament should have met, but was Prorogued. Mounsieur Pompone
(as I was informed by Sir William) did seem to approve the thing; but yet had
Two Objections against it: First, That the Sum we proposed, was Great; and
could be very ill spared in the circumstances his Most Christian Majesty was
in. To which we Answered, That if by his Expending that Sum, he could procure a
Dissolution of our Parliament, and thereby a Peace, which every body agreed
would necessarily follow; his Most Christian Majesty would gain his Ends, and
save Five or Ten Times a greater Sum, and so be a good Husband by his Expense;
and if we did not procure a Dissolution, he should not be at that Expense at
all; for that we Desired him only to promise upon that Condition, which we were
content to be Obliged to perform first. The Second Objection was, The Duke did
not move, nor appear in it Himself. To that we Answered, That he did not indeed
to Mounsieur Pompone, because he had found so ill an effect of the Negotiation
with Father Ferryer, when it came into Mounsieur Rouvigny's hands; but that he
had concerned himself in it to Father Ferryer.

Yet I continued to prosecute and press the Dissolution of the Parliament,
detesting all Prorogations as only so much loss of time, and a means of
strengthening all those who depend upon it in Opposition to the Crown, the
Interest of France, and Catholic Religion, in the Opinion they had taken, That
our King durst not part with his Parliament; apprehending that another would be
much Worse. Second, That he could not live long without a Parliament, therefore
they must suddenly Meet; and the longer he kept them Off, the greater his
Necessity would grow; and consequently their power to make him do what they
listed, would increase accordingly: And therefore, if they could but maintain
themselves a while, the day would certainly come in a short time, in which they
should be able to work their Wills. Such Discourses as these kept the
Confederates and our Malcontents in heart, and made them weather on the War
in spite of all our Prorogations: Therefore I pressed (as I have said) a
Dissolution until February last, when our Circumstances were so totally
Changed, that we were forced to change our Councels too, and be as much for the
Parliaments Sitting, as we were before against it.

Our Change was thus; Before that time, the Lord Arlington was the only
Minister in Credit, who thought himself out of all danger of the Parliament; he
having been Accused before them and Justified, and therefore was Zealous for
their sitting; and to increase his Reputation with them, and to become a
perfect Favorite, he sets himself all he could, to Persecute the Catholic
Religion, and to oppose the French: To show his Zeal against the first, he
revived some old dormant Orders for prohibiting Roman Catholics to appear
before the King, and put them in Execution at his first coming into his Office
of Lord Chamberlain: And to make sure work with the second, as he thought;
prevailed with the King to give him and the Earl of Ossory, (who married two
Sisters of Mine Here Odyke's) leave to go over into Holland with the said
Here, to make a Visit, as they pretended, to their Relations; But indeed, and
in truth, to propose the Lady Mary (Eldest Daughter of his R. H.) as a Match
for the Prince of Orange; not only without the consent, but against the good
likeing of his R. H.: in so much, that the Lord Arlingtons Creatures were
forced to excuse him, with a Distinction, that the said Lady was not to be
looked upon as the Dukes Daughter, but as the Kings, and a Child of the State
was, and so the Duke's consent not much to be Considered in the disposal of
her, but only the Interest of State. By this he intended to render himself the
Darling of Parliament and Protestants, who looked upon themselves as secured in
their Religion by such an Alliance, and designed further to draw us into a
Close Conjunction with Holland, and the Enemies of France. The Lord Arlington
set forth upon this Errand the Tenth of November 1674. and returned not till
the Sixth of January following; During his absence, the L. Treasurer, L.
Keeper, and the Duke of Lauderdale, who were the only Ministers of any
considerable Credit with the King, and who all pretended to be entirely United
to the Duke, declaimed Loudly, and with great Violence, against the said Lord,
and his Actions in Holland; and did hope, in his absence, to have totally
Supplanted him, and to have routed him out of the Kings Favor; and after that,
thought they might easily enough have dealt with the Parliament. But none of
them had Courage enough to speak against the Parliament, till they could get
rid of him; for fear they should not succeed, and that the Parliament would Sit
in spite of them, and come to hear that they had used their endeavors against
it; which would have been so Unpardonable a Crime with our Omnipotent
Parliament, that no Power could have been able to have Saved them from
Punishment: but they finding at his Return, that they could not prevail against
him, by such Means and Arts as they had then tried, resolved upon New Councels;
which were to outrun him in his own Course; which accordingly they undertook,
and became as fierce Apostles, and as zealous for Protestant Religion, and
against Popery, as ever my L. Arlington had been before them; and in pursuance
thereof, persuaded the King to issue out those severe Orders and Proclamations
against Catholics, which came out in February last; by which, they did as much
as in them lay, to extirpate all Catholics, and Catholic Religion, out of the
Kingdom; which Councels, were in my poor opinion so Detestable, being levelled
(as they must needs be) so directly against the Duke, by People which he had
Advanced, and who had professed so much Duty and Service to him, that we were
put upon new Thoughts how to save his R. H. now from the Deceits and Snares of
those men, upon whom we formerly depended. We saw well enough, that their
design was to make themselves as grateful as they could to the Parliament, if
it must Sit; they thinking nothing so acceptable to them, as the persecution of
Popery; and yet they were so obnoxious to the Parliaments displeasure in
general, that they would have been glad of any Expedient to have kept it off;
though they durst not engage against it openly themselves, but thought this
Device of theirs might serve for their purposes, hoping the Duke would be so
alarmed at their proceedings, and by his being left by every body, that he
would be much more afraid of the Parliament than ever, and would use his utmost
power to prevent its Sitting: which they doubted not but he would endeavor;
and they were ready enough to work underhand too for him (for their own sakes,
not his) in order thereunto, but durst not appear openly; and to encourage the
Duke the more to endeavor the Dissolution of the Parliament, their Creatures
used to say up and down, That this Rigor against the Catholics, was in favor
of the Duke, and to make a Dissolution of the Parliament more easy, (which they
knew he coveted) by obviating one great Objection which was commonly made
against it, which was, That if the Parliament should be Dissolved, it would be
said, That it was done in favor of Popery; which Clamor they had prevented
beforehand by the Severity they had used against it.

As soon as we saw these Tricks put upon us, we plainly saw what men we had to
deal withal, and what we had to trust to, if we were wholly at their mercy: but
yet durst not seem so dissatisfied as we really were, but rather magnified the
Contrivance, as a Device of great Cunning and Skill: all this we did, purely to
hold them in a belief, that we would endeavor to Dissolve the Parliament, and
that they might rely upon his R. H. for that which we knew they longed for, and
were afraid they might do some other way, if they discovered that we were
resolved we would not: At length, when we saw the Sessions secured, we
declared, that we were for the Parliaments meeting; as indeed we were, from the
moment we saw our selves handled by all the Kings Ministers at such a rate,
that we had Reason to believe, they would Sacrifice France, Religion, and his
R. H. too, to their own Interest, if occasion served; and that they were lead
to believe, that that was the only way they had to save themselves at that
time: for we saw no Expedient fit to stop them in their Carreir of persecution,
and those other destructive Counsels, but the Parliament; which had set it self
a long time to dislike every thing the Ministers had done, and had appeared
violently against Popery, whilst the Court seemed to favor it; and therefore
we were Confident, that the Ministers having turned their Faces, the Parliament
would do so too, and still be against them; and be as little for Persecution
then, as they had been for Popery before. This I undertook to manage for the
Duke and the King of France's Interest; and assured Mounsieur Rouvigny (which I
am sure he will testify, if occasion serves) that that Sessions should do
neither of them any hurt; for that I was sure I had power enough to prevent
mischief, though I durst not engage for any good they would do; because I had
but very few assistances to carry on the work, and vvanted those helps, which
others had of making friends: The Dutch and Spaniard spared no pains or expense
of money to animate as many as they could against France; Our Lord Treasurer,
Lord Keeper, all the Bishops, and such as called themselves Old Cavaliers, (who
were all then as one man) were not less industrious against Popery, and had
the Purse at their Girdle too; which is an Excellent Instrument to gain
Friends with; and all United against the Duke, as Patron both of France and
Catholic Religion. To deal with all this Force, we had no Money, but what
came from a few private hands; and those so mean ones too, that I dare venture
to say, that I spent more my particular self out of my own Fortune, and upon my
single Credit, than all the whole Body of Catholics in England besides; which
was so inconsiderable, in comparison of what our Adversaries commanded, and we
verily believe did bestow in making their Party, that it is not worth
mentioning: Yet notwithstanding all this, we saw that by the help of the
Nonconformists, as Presbyterians, Independents, and other Sects, (who were as
much afraid of Persecution as our selves) and of the Enemies of the Ministers,
and particularly of the Treasurer; who by that time had supplanted the Earl of
Arlington, and was grown sole manager of all Affairs himself, we should be
very able to prevent what they designed against us, and so render the Sessions
ineffectual to their Ends, though we might not be able to compass our own;
which were, to make some brisk step in Favor of his R. H. to show the King,
that his Majesty's Affairs in Parliament were not Obstructed, by reason of any
Aversion they had to his R. H's Person, or apprehensions they had of him, or
his Religion; But from Faction and Ambition in some, and from a real
dissatisfaction in others, that we have not had such fruits and good Effects of
those great sums of Money which have been formerly given as was expected. If we
could then have made but one such step, the King would certainly have restored
his R. H. to all his Comissions; upon which he would have been much greater
than ever yet he was in his whole Life, or could probably ever have been by any
other Course in the World, than what he had taken of becoming Catholic, etc.
And we were so very near gaining this Point, that I did humbly beg his R. H. to
give me leave to put the Parliament upon making an Address to the King, that
his Majesty would be pleased to put the Fleet into the hands of his R. H. as
the only Person likely to give a good Account of so important a Charge as that
was to the Kingdom; And showed his R. H. such Reasons to persuade him that we
could carry it, that he agreed with me in it, that he believed we could. Yet
others telling him how great a Damage it would be to him, if he should miss in
such an undertaking (which for my part I could not then see, nor do I yet) he
was prevailed upon not to venture, though he was persuaded he could carry it. I
did Communicate this Design of mine to Mounsieur Rouvigny, who agreed with me,
that it would be the greatest advantage immaginable to his Master, to have the
Dukes Power and Credit so far Advanced as this would certainly do, if we could
compass it: I showed him all the Difficulty we were like to meet with, and what
helps we should have; but that we should want one very matterial one, Money, to
carry on the Work as we ought; and therefore I do Confess, I did shamefully beg
his Masters Help, and would willingly have been in everlasting Disgrace with
all the World, if I had not with that assistance of twenty Thousand Pound
Sterling, (which perhaps is not the tenth part of what was spent on the other
side) made it evident to the Duke, that he could not have missed it. Mounsieur
Rouvigny used to tell me, That if he could be sure of succeeding in that
Design, his Master would give a very much larger Sum; but that he was not in a
Condition to throw away money upon Uncertainties. I Answered, That nothing of
that nature could be so infallibly sure, as not to be subject to some
possibilities of Failing; but that I durst venture to undertake to make it
evident, that there was as great an assurance of succeeding in it, as any
Husbandman can have of a Crop in Harvest, who sovvs his Ground in its due
Season; and yet it would be counted a very imprudent piece of vvariness in any
body, to scruple the venturing so much Seed in its proper time, because it is
possible it may be totally lost, and no benefit of it found in Harvest; He that
minds the Winds and the Rains at that rate, shall neither Sovv nor Reap. I
take our Case to be much the same as it was the last Sessions: If we can
advance the Duke's Interest one step forward, we shall put him out of the reach
of Chance for ever; For he makes such a Figure already, that Cautious Men do
not care to Act against him, nor always without him, because they do not see
that he is much out-powred by his Enemies; Yet is he not at such a Pitch, as to
be quite out of danger, or free from opposition: But if he could gain any
considerable new addition of Power, all would come over to him as to the only
steady Center of our Government, and no body would contend with him further.
Then would Catholics be at Rest, and his Most Christian Majesty's Interest
secured with us in England, beyond all apprehensions whatsoever.

In order to this, we have two great Designs to Attempt this next Sessions.
First, that which we were about before, viz. To put the Parliament upon making
it their humble Request to the King, that the Fleet may be put into his R. H's
Care. Secondly, to get an Act for general liberty of Conscience. If we carry
these two, or either of them, we shall in effect do what we list afterward;
and truly, we think we do not undertake these great Points very unreasonably,
but that we have good Cards for our Game; Not but that we expect great
Opposition, and have great Reason to beg all the Assistance we can possibly
get; and therefore, if his Most Christian Majesty would stand by us a little in
this Conjuncture, and help us with such a sum as 20000. l. sterling (which is
no very great matter to venture upon such an undertaking as this) I would be
content to be Sacrificed to the utmost Malice of my Enemies, if I did not
Succeed. I have proposed This several times to Monsieur Rouvigny, who seemed
always of my Opinion; and has often told me, that he has writ into France upon
this Subject, and has desired me to do the like: But I know not whether he will
be as Zealous in that point as a Catholic would be; because our prevailing in
these things would give the greatest Blow to the Protestant Religion here, that
ever it received since Birth; which perhaps he would not be very glad to see;
especially when he believes there is another way of doing his Masters Business
well enough without it; which is by a Dissolution of the Parliament; upon which
I know he mightily depends, and Concludes, that if that comes to be Dissolved,
it will be as much as he needs care for; proceeding perhaps upon the same manner
of Discourse which we had this time twelve months. But with submission to his
better judgment, I do think that our Case is extremely much altered to what it
was, in Relation to a Dissolution; for then the Body of our Governing Ministers
(all but the Earl of Arlington) were entirely United to the Duke; and would
have Governed his Way, if they had been free from all Fear and Control, as
they had been, if the Parliament had been Removed. But they having since that
time Engaged in quite different Counsels, and Embark't themselves and
Interests upon other Bottoms, having declared themselves against Popery, etc.
To Dissolve the Parliament simply, and without any other step made, will be to
leave them to Govern what way they list, which we have Reason to suspect will
be to the prejudice of France and Catholic Religion. And their late
Declarations and Actions have Demonstrated to us, that they take that for the
most Popular way for themselves, and likeliest to keep them in absolute Power;
whereas, if the Duke should once get above them (after the Tricks they have
played with him) they are not sure he will Totally forget the Usage he has had
at their hands: Therefore it Imports us now to Advance our Interest a little
further, by some such Project as I have Named, before we Dissolve the
Parliament; Or else perhaps, we shall but Change Masters (a Parliament for
Ministers) and continue still in the same Slavery and Bondage as before. But
one such step as I have proposed, being well made; we may safely see them
Dissolved, and not fear the Ministers; but shall be Established, and stand Firm
without any Opposition; for every body will then come over to us, and Worship
the Rising Sun.

I have here given you the History of three years, as short as I could, though
I am afraid it will seem very long and troublesome to your Reverence, among the
multitude of affairs you are concerned in: I have also shown you the present
State of our Case, which may (by God's Providence and good Conduct) be made of
such advantage to Gods Church; that for my part, I can scarce believe my self
awake, or the thing real, when I think on a Prince in such an age as we live
in, converted to such a Degree of Zeal and Piety, as not to regard any thing in
the World in comparison of God Almighty's Glory, the Salvation of his own Soul,
and the Conversion of our poor Kingdom; which has been a long time oppressed,
and miserably harrast with Heresy and Schism. I doubt not but your Reverence
will consider our Case, and take it to heart, and afford us what help you can;
both with the King of Heaven, by your holy Prayers, and with his Most Christian
Majesty, by that great Credit which you most justly have with him. And if ever
his Majesty's affairs (or your own) can ever want the service of so
inconsiderable a Creature as my self, you shall never find any body readyer to
obey your Commands, or faithfuller in the Execution of them, to the best of his
power, than

Your most Humble and Obedient Servant


At. Genesis That I may make things clear as much as possible; you see, Here Is a
Letter prepared to be sent, writ with Mr. Coleman's own hand, to Mounsieur Le
Chese: This Letter bears date the twenty nineth of September. We have an Answer
to it from Paris, October twenty third, whereby Mounsieur Le Chese owns the
receipt of this; And in this answer, is expressed Thanks to Mr. Coleman for his
long Letter. Sir. Robert, Pray tell how you came by this Letter.


Sir. Rob. Southwell, I found this Letter in Mr. Colemans Canvas Bag; after we
had once looked over the Letters, we found it: Sr. Phillip Lloyd Examined it;
And we looked over those Papers very exactly: Because the House of Commons were
very much concerned, and thought those Papers were not thoroughly Examined, I
reviewed them again. This Letter was found on Sunday following, after the
Papers were seized.


Mr. At. Sir Rob. Southwell, I pray read the Letter in French first to the
Court, (Sir. Rob. having read the Letter in French) Mr. Attorney desired him to
read it in English. Sir. Rob. read it it in English; The Letter was dated Paris
twenty third October 1675. and subscribed, Your most humble and obedient
servant, DCL at the bottom.


The LETTER.
From PARIS, 23. October 1675. SIR,
THE Letter which you gave your self the trouble to write to me, came to my
hands but the last night I read it with great satisfaction; and I assure you,
that its length did not make it seem tedious. I should be very glad on my part
to assist in seconding your good intentions; I will consider of the Means to
effect it; and when I am better informed than I am as yet, I will give you an
Account: to the end I may hold Intelligence with you, as you did with my
Predecessor. I desire you to believe that I will never fail as to my good
will, for the service of your Master, whom I Honor as much as he deserves, and
that it is with great truth that I am

Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant D. L. C.


At. Genesis We made mention of a Declaration: by his long Narrative it plainly
appears, that Mr Coleman would have had another Parliament. And the reason why
he was pleased to publish a Declaration, was, thereby to show the Reasons for
its Dissolution. Sir Philip Floyd, did you find this Writing among Mr Coleman's
Papers?


Sir P. F. I did find it among his Papers.


At. Genesis Pray read the Declaration.


Clerk of the Crown reads the Declaration.

The Declaration which Mr. Coleman prepared, thereby showing his Reasons for
the Dissolution of the Parliament.
WE having taken into our Serious Consideration the heats and animosities which
have of late appeared among many of our very Loyal and Loving Subjects of this
Kingdom, and the many fears and jealousies which some of them seem to lie
under, of having their Liberties and Properties invaded, or their Religion
altered; and withal, carefully reflecting upon our own Government since our
happy Restoration, and the end and aim of it, which has always been the ease
and security of our People in all their Rights, and Advancement of the beauty
and splendor of the true Protestant Religion established in the Church of
England; of both which we have given most signal Testimonies, even to the
stripping our Self of many Royal Prerogatives which our Predecessors enjoyed,
and were our undoubted due; as the Court of Wards, Purveyances, and other
things of great value; and denying to our Self many advantages, which we might
reasonably and legally have taken by the Forfeitures made in the times of
Rebellion, and the great Revenues due to the Church at our Return, which no
particular person had any right to: instead of which, we consented to an Act of
Oblivion of all those Barbarous usages which our Royal Father and our Self had
met withal, much more full and gracious than almost any of our Subjects, who
were generally become in some measure or other obnoxious to the Laws, had
confidence to ask; and freely renounced all our Title to the Profit which we
might have made by the Church Lands, in favor of our Bishops and other
Ecclesiastical Ministers, out of our zeal to the glory of our Protestant
Church; which Clemency to wards all, and some even high Offenders, and zeal for
Religion, we have to this day constantly continued to exercise. Considering all
this, we cannot but be sensibly afflicted to see, that the frowardness of some
few Tumultuous heads should be able to infect our Loyal and good people with
apprehensions destructive of their own, and the general quiet of our Kingdom;
and more especially, their perverseness should be powerful enough to distract
our very Parliament, and such a Parliament, as has given as such Testimonies of
its Loyalty, Wisdom, and Bounty, and to which we have given as many Marks of
our affection and esteem, so as to make them mis-conster all our endeavors for
to preserve our People in ease and prosperity, and against all reason and
evidence to represent them to our Subjects as Arguments of fear and disquiet;
and under these specious pretenses of securing Property and Religion, to demand
unreasonable things, manifestly destructive of what they would be thought to
aim at; and from our frequent Condescentions, out of our mere grace, to grant
them what we conceived might give them satisfaction, though to the actual
prejudice of our Royal Prerogative, to make them presume to propose to advance
such extravagancies into Laws, as they themselves have formerly declared
detestable; of which we cannot forbear to give our truly Loyal Subjects some
instances, to undeceive our innocent and well-minded people, who have many of
them of late been too easily misled, by the factious endeavors of some
turbulent Spirits. For example, we having judged it necessary to declare War
against the States of Holland, during a recess of Parliament, which we could
not defer longer, without loosing an advantage which then presented it self,
nor have done sooner, without exposing our Honor to a potent Enemy without due
preparation, we thought it prudent to unite all our Subjects at home, and did
believe a general Indulgence of tender Consciences the most proper expedient to
effect it; and therefore did by our Authority in Ecclesiastics, which we
thought sufficient to warrant what we did, suspend penal Laws against
Dissenters in Religion, upon Conditions expressed in our Declaration, out of
Reason of State, as well as to gratify our own nature, which always we confess
abhorred rigor, especially in Religion, when tenderness might be as useful.
After we had engaged in the War, we Prorogued our Parliament from April to
October, being confident we should be able by that time to show our People such
success of our Arms, as should make them cheerfully contribute to our charge.
At October we could have shown them success even beyond our own hopes, or what
they could possibly expect; our Enemies having lost by that time, near 100
strong Towns and Forts taken in effect by us, we holding them busy at Sea,
whilst our Allies possessed themselves of their Lands, with little or no
resistance; and of which, the great advantage would most visibly have been
ours, had not the fewds we now complain of, which have been since unhappily
started, and factiously improved by some few, dis-united our people, distracted
our Counsels, and rendered our late endeavors vain and fruitless; so that we
had no reason to doubt of our peoples ready and liberal concurrence to our
Assistance in that Conjuncture. Yet our Enemies proposing to us at that time a
Treaty for Peace, which we were always ready to accept upon Honorable Terms;
and considering with our self that in case that Treaty succeeded, a far less
sum of Money would serve our occasions, than otherwise would be necessary: We
out of our tender regard to the ease of our People, Prorogued our Parliament
again to February, to attend the success of our Treaty, rather than to demand
so much Money in October, as would be fit to carry on the War. But we soon
finding that our Enemies did not intend us any just Satisfaction, saw a
necessity of prosecuting the War, which we designed to do most vigourously; and
in order to it, resolved to press our Parliament to supply us as speedily as
may be, to enable us to put our Fleet to Sea early in the Spring, which would
after their Meeting grow on apace. And being informed that many Members were
dead during the long Recess, we Issued out our Writs for new Elections, that
our House of Commons might be full at the first opening of the Sessions, to
prevent any delay in our Public Affairs, or dislike in our people, as might
possibly have risen from the want of so great a number of their
Representatives, if any thing of moment should be concluded before it had been
supplied. Having governed our Actions all along with such careful respect to
the ease of our Subjects, we at the Meeting of our Parliament in February 1672.
expected from them some suitable expressions of their sense of our Favors; but
quite contrary, found our Self alarmed with Clamorous Complaints from several
Cabals against all our Proceedings, frighting many of our good Subjects into
strange Conceits of what they must look for, by their Seditious and false
Constructions of what we had so Heartily and Sincerely done for their good; and
surprised with a Vote of our House of Commons, against our Writs of Elections,
which we intended for their satisfactions, against many Presidents of ours, or
without any color of Law of their side, denying our Power to Issue out such
Writs, Addressing to us to Issue out others: which we consented to do at their
Request choosing rather to yield to our Subjects in that point, than to be
forced to submit to our Enemies in others; hoping that our Parliament being
sensibly touched with that our extraordinary condescension, would go on
consider the Public concern of the Kingdom, without any further to do: But We
found another use made of Our so easy compliance, which served to encourage
them to ask more; so that soon after We found Our Declaration for Indulging
tender Consciences Arraigned, Voted illegal; though We cannot to this day
understand the consistences of that Vote, with Our undoubted Supremacy in all
Ecclesiastics, Recognizing by so many Acts of Parliament, and required to be
Sworn to, by all Our Subjects, and Addresses made to Us one after another to
recall it, which We condescended to also; from hence they proceeded to Us to
weaken Our Self in an Actual War, and to render many of Our Subjects, of whose
Loyalty and Ability We were well satisfied, incapable to serve Us, when We
wanted Officers and Soldiers, and had reason to invite as many Experienced Men
as We could to engage in Our Arms, rather than to incapacitate or discourage
any; yet this also We gratified them in, to gain their Assistance against Our
Enemies, who grew high by these Our Differences, rather than expose Our
Country to their Power and Fury; hoping that in time Our People would be
confounded to see Our Concessions, and be ashamed of their Errors in making
such Demands. But finding the unfortunate Effects of Our divisions the
following Summer, We found Our Parliament more extravagant at the next meeting
than ever, addressing to Us to hinder the Consummation of Our Dear Brother's
Marriage, contrary to the Law of God, which forbids any to separate any,
whom he has joined, against Our Faith and Honor engaged in the Solemn Treaty,
obstinately persisting in that Address, after We had acquainted them, That the
Marriage was then actually ratifyed, and that We had acted in it by Our
Ambassador; so that We were forced to separate them for a while, hoping they
would bethink themselves better at their meeting in January. Instead of being
more moderate or ready to consider Our wants toward the War; they Voted as
they had done before, not to assist Us still, till their Religion were
effectually secured against Popery, Aggrievances redressed, and all obnoxious
Men removed from Us; which We had reason to take for an absolute denial of all
Aid; considering the indefiniteness of what was to proceed, and the Moral
impossibility of effecting it in their senses: for when will they say their
Religion is effectually secured from Popery, if it were in danger then, by
reason of the insolency of Papists. When Our House of Commons, which is made up
of Members from every Corner of Our Kingdom, with Invitations publicly Posted
up to all Men to accuse them, has not yet in so many years as they have
complained of them, been able to charge one single Member of that Communion,
with so much as a Misdemeanour. Or what Security could they possibly expect
against that Body of Men, or their Religion, more than We had given them? or
how can we hope to live so perfectly, that study and pains may not make a
Collection of Grievances, as considerable as that which was lately presented to
Us, than which We could not have wished for a better Vindication of Our
Government? or when shall We be sure that all obnoxious Men are removed from
Us, when Common same thinks fit to call them so; which is to every body,
without any proof, sufficient to render any man obnoxious, who is Popishly
affected, or any thing else that is ill, though they have never so often or
lately complied with their own Tests and Marks of Distinction and
Discriminations. Finding Our People thus unhappily disordered, We saw it
impossible to prosecute the War any longer; and therefore did by their Advice
make a Peace upon such Conditions as we could get; hoping that being gratified
in that Darling Point, they would at least have paid Our Debts, and enabled Us
to have Built some Ships for the future Security of Our Honor, and their own
Properties; but they being tran^^orted with their success in asking, were
resolved to go on still that way, and would needs have Us put upon the removing
of Our Judges from those Charges, which they have always hitherto held at the
Will and Pleasure of the Crown, out of Our Power to alter the ancient Laws of
trying of Peers, and to make it a Praemunire in Our Subjects (in a case
supposed) not to fight against Our Self; nay, some had the heart to ask, that
the Hereditary Succession of Our Crown (which is the Foundation of all Our
Laws) should be changed into a sort of Election, they requiring the Heir to be
qualified with certain Conditions, to make him capable of Succeeding, and
Out-doing that Popish Doctrine, which We have so long, and so loudly with good
reason decryed, That Heresy incapacitates Kings to Reign. They would have had,
That the Heir of the Crown, marrying a Papist, though he continued never so
Orthodox himself, should forfeit his right of Inheritance; not understanding
this Paradoxical way of securing Religion by destroying it, as this would have
done that of the Church of England, which always taught Obedience to their
Natural Kings, as an indispensable Duty in all good Christians, let the
Religion or Deportment of their Prince be what it will; and not knowing how
soon that Impediment, which was supposed as sufficient to keep out an Heir,
might be thought as fit to remove a Possessor: And comparing that Bill which
would have it a Praemunire in a Sheriff not to raise the Posse Comitatus,
against Our Commission in a Case there supposed, though We Our Self should
assist that Our Commission in Our Person: for not being excepted, is employed
with the other made by this very Parliament in the 14th year of Our Reign,
which all Our Subjects, or at least many of them, were obliged to Swear ( viz.)
That the Doctrine of taking up Arms by the King's Authority against His Person,
was detestable; and We soon found that the Design was levelled against the good
Protestant Religion of Our good Church, which its Enemies had a mind to
Blemish, by sliding in slily those damnable Doctrines, by such an Authority as
that of Our Parliament, into the Profession of Our Faith or Practices, and so
expose Our whole Religion to the Scorn and Reproach of themselves, and all the
World: We therefore thought it Our duty to be so watchful as to prevent the
Enemies sowing such mischievous Tares as these, in the wholesome Field of Our
Church of England, and to guard the unspotted Spouse of Our Blessed Lord, from
that foul Accusation, with which she justly charges other Churches, of teaching
their Children Loyalty, with so many Reserves and Conditions, that they shall
never want a distinction to justify Rebellion, nor a Text of Scripture, as
good as Curse ye Meroz, to encourage them to be Traitors: whereas Our truly
Reformed Church knows no such Subtilties; but teaches according to the
simplicity of Christianity, To submit to every Ordinance of Man for God's sake,
according to the natural signification of the words, without equivocation or
Artificial turns. In order to which, having thought to dissolve that Body,
which We have these many years so tenderly Cherished, and which We are sure
consists generally of most Dutiful and Loyal Members, We were forced to
Prorogue Our Parliament till November next, hoping thereby to cure those
Disorders, which have been sown amongst the Best and Loyallest Subjects, by a
few malicious Incendiaries. But understanding since, that such who have sowed
that Seditious seed, are as industriously careful to water it by their Cabals,
and Emissaries, instructed on purpose to poison Our People with discourses in
public places, in hopes of a great Crop of Confusion, their beloved fruit, the
next Sessions; We have found it absolutely necessary to Dissolve Our
Parliament, though with great reluctance and violence to Our inclination: But
remembering the days of Our Royal Father, and the progress of Affairs then, how
from a Cry against Popery, the people went on to complain of Grievances, and
against Evil Counselors, and His Majesty's Prerogative; until they advanced
into a formal Rebellion; which brought forth the most dire and fatal Effects,
that ever were yet heard of amongst any men, Christians or others; and withal,
finding so great a resemblance between the Procedings then and now, that they
seem both Broth of the same brains: and being Confirmed in that Conceit, by
observing the Actions of many now, who had a great share in the management of
the former Rebellion, and their zeal for Religion, who by their lives give us
too much reason to suspect they have none at all; We thought it not safe to
dally too long, as Our Royal Father did, with submissions and condescentions,
endeavoring to cure men infected, without removing them from the Air where
they got the disease, and in which it still rages and increases daily. For fear
of meeting with no better success than He found, in suffering his Parliament to
Challenge Power they had nothing to do with, till they had bewitched the people
into fond desires of such things as quickly destroyed both King and Country,
which in Us would be an intolerable Error, having been warned so lately by the
most Execrable Murder of Our Royal Father, and the inhumane Usage, which We
Our Self in Our Royal Person and Family have suffered, and Our Loyal Subjects
have endured by such practices; And least this Our great Care of this Our
Kingdoms Quiet, and Our own Honor and Safety should, as Our best Actions have
hitherto been; be wrested to some sinister Sense, and Arguments be made from it
to scare Our Good People into any apprehensions of an Arbitrary Government,
either in Church or State; We do hereby solemnly declare and faithfully engage
Our Royal Word; That We will in no case either Ecclesiastical or Civil,
violate or alter the known Laws of Our Kingdom; or invade any man's Property
or Liberty, without due course of Law. But that We will with Our utmost
Endeavors, preserve the true Protestant Religion, and Redress all such things
as shall indifferently, and without passion, be judged Grievances by Our next
Parliament; which We do by God's blessing intend to Call before the end of
February next. In the mean time, We do strictly Charge and Command all manner
of persons whatsoever, to forbear to talk seditiously, slightly or irreverently
of Our Dissolving of the Parliament, of this Our Declaration, or of Our Person
or Government, as they will answer it at their perils; We being resolved to
prosecute all Offenders in that kind with the utmost rigor and severity of the
Law. And to the end that such Licentious persons, if any shall be so impudent
and obstinate as to disobey this Our Royal Command, may be detected, and
brought to due Punishment, We have Ordered Our Lord Treasurer to make speedy
payment of Twenty pounds to any person or persons, who shall discover or bring
any such seditious, slight or irreverent Talker before any of Our Principal
Secretaries of State.

Record. I would have the Jury should know the Declaration ends, To one of his
Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, whereof he hoped to be one.


At. Genesis This is written in the name of the King; for Mr. Coleman thought
himself now Secretary of State, and he penns the Declaration for the King to
give an Account, why the Parliament was Dissolved.


Serj. Maynard. The long Letter, it appears, was to dissolve the Parliament;
and to make it Cock-sure, he provides a Declaration to show the Reason of it:
It was done in order to bring in Popery; that may appear by the subsequent
proof.


At. Genesis I have other Evidence to offer to your Lordship, which is, That Mr.
Coleman was not only so bold as to prepare a Declaration for the King, but
also out of his own further ingenuity, prepares a Letter (contrary to the
Duke's knowledge) for the Duke, which before several Lords he confessed; and Sir
Philip Floyd is here ready to justify it.


Sir Phil. Floyd. I did attend a Committee of the House of Lords to Newgate,
who examined Mr. Coleman, and told him of the Letter Mr. Attorney mentions;
he then confessed, That it was prepared without the Order and Privity of the
Duke; and when he was so bold as to show it the Duke, the Duke was very Angry
and rejected it.


L. Chief Just. He has been a very forward undertaker on the behalf of the
Duke.


Mr. At. Genesis I desire the Letter may be read.


The Copy of the Letter written to Monsieur Le Chese, the French King's
Confessor, which Mr. Coleman confessed he himself wrote, and counterfeited in
the Duke's Name.
Clerk of the Crown reads the Letter.

THE 2d. of June last past, his most Christian Majesty offered me most
generously his Friendship, and the use of his Purse to the assistance against
the designs of my Enemies and his; and protested unto me, That his Interest and
mine were so clearly linckt together, that those that opposed the one, should
be looked upon as Enemies to the other; and told me moreover his Opinion of my
Lord Arlington, and the Parliament; which is, That he is of opinion that
neither the one nor the other, is in his Interest or mine: and thereupon he
desired me to make such Propositions as I should think fit in this Conjuncture.

All was Transacted by the means of Father Ferrier, who made use of Sir William
Throgmorton, who is an honest man and of truth, who was then at Paris, and has
held Correspondence with Coleman, one of my Family, in whom I have great
Confidence.

I was much satisfied to see his most Christian Majesty altogether of my
opinion, so I made him Answer the 29th of June, by the same means he made use
of to write to me, that is, by Coleman, who addressed himself to Father Ferrier,
( by the forementioned Knight) and entirely agreed to his most Christian
Majesty, as well to what had respect to the Union of our Interests, as the
unusefulness of my Lord Arlington, and the Parliament, in order to the Service
of the King my Brother, and his most Christian Majesty; and that it was
necessary to make use of our joint and utmost Credits, to prevent the Success
of those evil designs, resolved on by the Lord Arlington and the Parliament,
against his most Christian Majesty and my Self; which of my side I promise
really to perform; of which, since that time, I have given reasonable good
proof.

Moreover I made some Proposals, which I thought necessary to bring to pass
what We were obliged to undertake, assuring him, That nothing could so firmly
establish Our Interest with the King my Brother, as that very same Offer of the
help of his Purse, by which means, I had much reason to hope I should be
enabled to persuade to the Dissolving of the Parliament, and to make void the
Designs of my Lord Arlington, who works incessantly to advance the Interest of
the Prince of Orange and the Hollanders, and to lessen that of the King your
Master, notwithstanding all the Protestations he has made to this hour, to
render him service.

But as that, which was proposed, was at a stand by reason of the sickness of
Father Ferrier, so our affairs succeeded not according to our designs, only
Father Ferrier wrote to me the ^^th of the last M^^^h That (...) and that they
had been very well liked of; but as they contained things that had regard to
the Catholic Religion, and to the offer and use of his Purse, he gave me to
understand he did not desire I should treat with Monsieur Revigny upon the
First, but as to the last, and had the same time acquainted me, that Monsieur
Revigny had order to grant me what soever the conjuncture of our Affairs did
require; and have expected the effects of it to this very hour: but nothing
being done in it, and seeing on the other hand that my Lord Arlington and
several others endeavored by a thousand deceits to break the good
Intelligence, which is between the King my Brother, his most Christian
Majesty, and my Self, to the end they might deceive Us all Three, I have
thought fit to advertise you of all that is past, and desire of you your
Assistance and Friendship to prevent the Rogueries of those, who have no other
design than to betray the Concerns of France and England also, and who by their
pretended service, are the occasion they succeed not.

As to any thing more, I refer you to Sir William Throgmorton, and Coleman,
whom I have Commanded to give an account of the whole state of Our Affair, and
of the true Condition of England, with many others, and principally my Lord
Arlington's endeavors, to represent to you quite otherwise than it is.

The Two First I mentioned to you are Firm to my Interest, so that you may
treat with them without any apprehension.


Serj. Maynard. Gentlemen of the Jury, pray observe that he takes upon him to
prepare a Letter, And that in the Duke's Name, but contrary to the Duke's
Knowledge or Privacy; for when he had so much boldness as to tell him of it,
the Duke was Angry and rejected it. But in it we may see what kind of passages
there are, he takes very much upon him in this matter, And Mr. Coleman must
keep the Secret too.


At. General. My Lord, I have but one Paper more to read, and I have kept it
till the last; because if we had proved nothing by Witness, or not read any
thing but this, This one Letter is sufficient to maintain the Charge against
him* It plainly appears to whom it was directed, and at what time. It begins
thus, ( I sent your Reverence a tedious long Letter on our 29th of September,)
I only mention this, to show about what time it was sent. There are some
Clauses in it will speak better than I can; Sir Tho. Doleman and Sir Phillip
Floyd swear who has confessed and owned it to be his hand writing, (...). I
desire the Letter may be read.


Clerk of the Crown reads the Letter.

SIR,
I Sent your Reverence a tedious long Letter on our 29th of September, to
inform you of the progress of Affairs for these 2. or 3. last years; I having
now again the opportunity of a very sure hand to convey this by, I have sent
you a Cipher, because our Parliament now drawing on, I may possibly have
occasion to send you something which you may be willing enough to know, and may
be necessary for us that you should, when we may want the convenience of a
Messenger. When any thing occurs of more concern other then which may not be
fit to be trusted even to a Cipher alone, I will, to make such a thing more
secure, write in Lemmon between the Lines of a Letter, which shall have nothing
in it visible, but what I care not who sees, but dried by a warm fire, shall
discover what is written; so that if the Letter comes to your hands, and upon
drying it, any thing appears more then did before, you may be sure no body has
seen it by the way. I will not trouble you with that way of writing, but upon
special occasions, and then I will give you a hint to direct you to look for
it, by concluding my visible Letter with something of fire or burning, by which
mark you may please to know, that there is something underneath, and how my
Letter is to be used to find it out.

We have here a mighty Work upon our Hands, no less than the Conversion of
three Kingdoms, and by that perhaps the utter subduing of a Pestilent Heresy,
which has domineered over great part of this Northern World a long time; there
were never such hopes of success since the Death of our Queen Mary, as now in
our days. When God has given us a Prince, who is become (may I say a Miracle)
zealous of being the Author and Instrument of so glorious a Work; but the
opposition we are sure to meet with, is also like to be great: So that it
imports us to get all the aid and assistance we can, for the Harvest is great,
and the Laborers but few. That which we rely upon most, next to God Almighty's
Providence, and the favor of my Master the Duke, is the mighty mind of His
most Christian Majesty, whose generous Soul inclines him to great undertakings,
which being managed by your Reverence's exemplary piety and prudence, will
certainly make him look upon this as most suitable to himself, and best becoming
his power and thoughts; so that I hope you will pardon me if I be very
troublesome to you upon this occasion, from whom I expect the greatest help we
can hope for. I must confess I think His Christian Majesty's Temporal Interest
is so much attracted to that of his R. H. (which can never be considerable, but
upon the growth and advancement of the Catholic Religion) that his Ministers
cannot give him better advice, even in a Politic sense, abstracting from the
considerations of the next World, that of our Blessed Lord, to seek first the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, that all other Things may be
added unto him. That I know His most Christian Majesty has more powerful
motives suggested to him by his own Devotion, and your Reverences zeal for
God's Glory, to engage him to afford us the best help he can in our present
circumstances. But we are a little unhappy in this, that we cannot press His
Majesty by his present Minister here upon these latter Arguments (which are
most strong) but only upon the first, Mr. Rouvigny's sense and ours differing
very much upon them, though we agree perfectly upon the rest: And indeed,
though he be a very able Man as to his Master's service in things where
Religion is not concerned; yet I believe it were much more happy (considering
the posture he is now in) that his temper were of such a sort, that we might
deal clearly with him throughout, and not be forced to stop short in a
Discourse of consequence, and leave the most material part out, because we know
it will shock his particular Opinion, and so perhaps meet with dislike and
opposition, though never so necessary to the main concern. I am afraid we shall
find too much reason for this Complaint in this next Session of Parliament: for
had we had one here from His most Christian Majesty, who had taken the whole
business to heart, and who would have represented the state of our Case truly,
as it is, to his Master, I do not doubt but His most Christian Majesty would
have engaged himself further in the affair than at present I fear he has done,
and by his approbation have given such Counsels as have been offered to his R.
H. by those few Catholics who have access to him, and who are bent to serve
him and advance the Catholic Religion with all their might, and might have
more credit with his R. H. than I fear they have found, and have assisted them
also with his Purse as far as 10000 Crowns, or some such sum (which to him is
very inconsiderable, but would have been to them of greater use than can be
imagined) toward gaining others to help them, or at least not to oppose them.
If we had been so happy as to have had His most Christian Majesty with us to
this degree, I would have answered with my life for such success this Sessions,
as would have put the Interest of the Catholic Religion, his R. H. and His
most Christian Majesty out of all danger, for the time to come. But wanting
those helps of recommending those necessary Counsels, which have been given his
R. H. in such manner as to make him think them worth his accepting, and fit to
govern himself by, and of those advantages, which a little Money well managed,
would have gained us. I am afraid we shall not be much better at the end of
this Sessions than we are now; I pray God we do not lose ground. By my next,
which will be e're long, I shall be able to tell your Reverence more
particularly, what we are like to expect. In the mean time I most humbly beg
your Holy Prayers for all our undertakings, and that you will be pleased to
honor me so far as to esteem me what I am entirely, and without any reserve.

Mon tres Reverend Pere le votre R. Le plus humble plus obeisant Serviteur.


[Several other Letters were read, but because of prolixity they are omitted,
these being most material.]

Attorn. Genesis I have done with my Evidence, we need no more proof against him.


Prisoner. My Lord, I would, if your Lordship please, very fain ask of Mr.
Oats (because he was pleased to say he was present with me in May or April)
whether he knows the particular days of the Months.

[ Here Mr. Oats ( who being tired, withdrew to rest himself) was called, and
the Prisoner was asked, whether he would speak with Bedloe, but he desired not
to speak with him.]


Mr. Oats. The Consult that was held in May New-stile, is April Old-stile, it
was within a day or two, or three of the Consult.


Pris. Where was the Consult?


Oats. It was begun at the White-Horse Tavern, then they did adjourn it to
several Clubs and Companies, and you came two or three days after the Consult
to the Provincial's Chamber, we then desiring to go out of Town.


Pris. Was you there, and who else?


Oats. There was the Provincial, and Micho, and Strange the Old Provincial,
and Keins your Companion.


Pris. What day of August was that at the Savoy?


Oats. I cannot Swear the particular day of the Month, I cannot so far charge
my memory.

The Result at the Consult in May was, that Pickering and Groves should go on
in their attempt, to assassinate the Person of His Majesty by Shooting, or
otherwise. Mr. Coleman knew of this, and said, it was a good design.


L. Chief Just. Who was there? was Mr. Coleman with them at the Consultation?


Oats. No my Lord, but two or three days after the Consultation he was at
Wild-House, and there he expressed that he approved of it.


L. Chief Just. Did he consent to it?


Oats. He did consent to it.


Just. Wild. Did he use no Words about it?


Oats. He did show his Approbation of it. But in those Instructions that were
brought to Ashby, he did say it was a very good proposition, but he thought the
Reward was too little.


L. Chief Just. Did he use any words to declare his assent?


Oats. Two things lie couched in the Question, whether your Lordship means the
Consult, or the Instructions, he did approve of.


L. Chief Just. How long after the Consultation was it that he approved of it?


Oats. It was two or three days before he did give his approbation.


Just. Wild. What words did he say?


Oats. He did express his consent, but to say the very words I cannot tell.


L. Chief Just. Will you ask him any more?


Pris. I would know the day in August?


L. Chief Just. He says he does not remember the day.


Oats. I believe, I will not be positive in it, it was about the 21th day of
August.


Just. Wild, and Just. Jones. Was it in August Old-stile?


Oats. Yes.


Pris. I can prove I was in Warwickshire at that time. That day he guesseth,
the 21th of August, I can make it appear I was Fourscore Miles off.


L. Chief Just. You will do well to prove you was there when the Guinny was
given. Will you ask him any more?


Pris. No.


L. Chief Just. You may say as you will, but Mr. Oats does charge, that
expressly in August (according to the English Style) you were at this
Wild-House, and that he saw fourscore Pounds prepared. You Mr. Coleman asked
the Question, what preparations were made for the Men going to Windsor? It was
answered, fourscore Pounds are prepared: And your self gave a Guinny for
expedition. It is a hard matter to press a Man to tell the precise day of the
Month, but positively he does say it was in August.


Pris. I was Two and Twenty or Three and Twenty days in August in Warwickshire.


L.Chief Just. What have you now more to say?


Pris. My Lord, I never saw Mr. Oats but in the Council Chamger, I never saw
him in Rome, in other Parts I never saw the Face of him, or knew him in my
whole life; nor did I see the other till now in Court, as I hope to be saved.
And then, my Lord, as to their testimony, neither of them Swear the self-same
Fact.


L. Chapter Just. No man shall be guilty, if denial shall make him innocent; They
swear to the Fact of killing the King both of them, and that is enough. If one
says you have a Plot to poison that is killing the King; and the other swears
a Plot to shoot, or stab him, that is to the killing of the King also: Then
there is your own Undertaking, in your Letter, under your Hand.


Pris. For Treason (with submission to your Lordship) I hope there is none in
that, though there are very extravagant Expressions in it, I hope some
Expressions explain it, that it was not my design to kill the King.


L. Chapter Just. No, your Design was for the Conversion of three Kingdoms, and
subduing of that Heresy that had reigned so long in this Northern part of the
World: And for effecting whereof, there were never more hopes since our Queen
Mary' s time till now, and therefore pressing the King of France to use his
Power, Aid, and Assistance, and does this signify nothing?


Pris. Does Aid and Assistance signify more than Money? The word Aid in French
is Power; they are promiscuous words.


L. Chapter Just. You are Charged to have had a Correspondency and Agency with
Foreign Power to subvert our Religion, and bring in Foreign Authority and Power
upon us, which must be the necessary consequence: How can this be proved
plainer than by your Letters, to press the French King that he would use his
Power.


Pris. Consider the Contexture and Connection of things, whether the whole
series be not to make the King and the Duke (as far as I thought in my power)
as great as could be.


L. Chapter Just. How well or ill you excuse the fault, that is not the Question;
they relate to the Duke most of them, little to the King. You were carrying on
such a Design, that you intended to put the Duke in the Head of, in such method
and ways as the Duke himself would not approve, but rejected.


Pris. Do not think I would throw any thing upon the Duke, though I might (in
the beginning of it) possibly make use of the Dukes Name, it is possible (they
say I did) but can any imagine the people will lay down Money 200000l. or
20000l. with me upon the Dukes Name, and not know whether the Duke be in it;
and consequently no body will imagine the Duke would ever employ any sum to
this Kings prejudice or disservice while he lived. I take it for granted (which
sure none in the world will deny) that the Law was ever made immediately
subject to the King or Duke, and consequently to the Duke, I cannot think this
will ever be expounded by the Law of England, or the Jury, to be Treason.


L. Chapter Just. What a kind of way and talking is this? You have such a swimming
way of melting words, that it is a troublesome thing for a man to collect matter
out of them. You give your self up to be a great Negotiator in the altering of
Kingdoms, you would be great with mighty men for that purpose; and your long
Discourses and great Abilities might have been spared. The thing these Letters
do seem to import, is this, That your Design was to bring in Popery into
England, and to promote the interest of the French King in this place, for
which you hoped to have a Pension (that is plain.) The Dukes Name is often
mentioned, that is true; sometimes it appears it is against his will, and
sometimes he might know of it, and be told that the consequence was not great.
Now say you these Sums of Money and all that was done, it did relate to the
King or Duke, and it was to advance their interest, and you thought it was the
way to do it. How can this advance them unless it were done to do them service;
and if they do not consent to it, and how can this be Treason, what kind of
stuff is this? You do seem to be a mighty Agent, might not you for a color use
the Duke of York's Name to drive on the Catholic Cause, which you was driven
to by the Priests mightily, and think to get 200000l. advance money, and a
Pension for your self, and make your self somebody for the present, and
Secretary of State for the future? If you will make any defense for your self,
or call in Witnesses, we will hear them; say what you can; for these vain
inconsequential discourses signify nothing.


Pris. I have Witnesses to prove I was in Warwickshire.


L. Chapter Just. ( to Boatman a Witness.) Where was Mr. Coleman in Aug. last?


Boatm. In Warwickshire.


L. Chapter Just. How long?


Boatm. All August, to my best remembrance.


L. Chapter Just. Can you say that he was in Warwickshire all August? that he was
not at London?


Boatm. I am not certain what time of the Month he was in London.


L. Chapter Just. That he was there in August, may be very true; I do not ask how
long he was in Warwickshire, but was he no where else? (To which the Witness
could make no positive answer.)


Pris. I was at the Lord Denby's, and at Mr. Francis Fisher's; I was there at
least twenty days.


L. Chapter Just. Have you any more Witnesses?


Pris. Ans. None.


L. Chapter Just. If you have a mind to say any thing more, say what you can.


Pris. I can say nothing more than what I have said. Positively I say (and upon
my Salvation) I never saw these Witnesses, Oats but once, and Bedlow never
before.


Sir Francis Winnington, his Majesty's Solicitor General, sums up the
Evidence, as follows.
May it please Your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
THE Cause before you (I dare adventure to say) is a Cause of as great a
Nature, and includes as great Crimes, as ever came to this Bar.

It is not a Cause of a particular Treason, but' it is a Treason that runs to the
whole, the King, the Government, and the Protestant Religion, all are
comprehended in it.

The defense the Prisoner has made is so very short, and of so slight a Nature,
that I shall contract my self very much in what I had to say, and only state to
the Court, and Jury, the principal things I rely upon.

The first Crime laid in the Indictment, is the design of killing and
destroying the Royal Person of his Majesty. The second, the subverting of the
Government, and in doing that, the destruction of the Protestant Religion.

And these Treasons have been punctually proved, as well by two Witnesses, as
by Letters under Mr. Colemans own Hand, whereby he corresponded with Monsieur
Le Chese, the French Kings Confessor, as also by the Answers which were sent by
Monsieur Le Chese to Mr. Coleman.

As to the Proofs made by the Witnesses, the substance of them is this. Mr.
Oats swears, that in April last Old Style, and May New Style, there was a
General Consult or Meeting of the Jesuits, at the White-Horse-Tavern in the
Strand; and afterward they divided themselves into several Companies, or
Clubs; and in those Consults they conspired the Death of the King, and
contrived how to effect it. The manner of it was thus, (as Mr. Oats positively
swears) That Grove and Pickering were employed to murder the King; and their
design was to Pistol him in St. James' s Park. Grove was to have Fifteen
hundred Pounds in Money, and Pickering [(being a Priest) was to have Thirty
thousand Masses, which was computed to be of equal value to Fifteen hundred
Pounds, according to the usual price in the Church of] Rome. And this
Conspiracy and Contrivance Mr. Coleman was privy to* and did well approve of
the same, as Mr. Oats affirms upon his Oath. So that here is a plain Treason
proved upon the Prisoner, by his assenting to the Fact to be done, the Law not
allowing any Accessaries in Treason. And this in Law makes the Prisoner as
guilty as any of the Assassinates, who designed to kill the King with their own
Hands.

If this design should fail, Mr. Oats swears, that the Conspirators intended a
farther attempt upon the Royal Person of the King, when be should be at
Windsor; and four Irish Assassinates were provided by Doctor Fogarty, whose
Names he would not tell, and fourscore Guinneys were provided by Father
Harcourt ( a Jesuit) to maintain the Assassinates at Windsor, till they should
have effected their wicked design.

While the Conspiracy was thus in agitation, Mr. Coleman, the Prisoner, went to
visit Harcourt the Jesuit at his House in Town; but finding him not at home,
and being informed that he was at Wild-house, Mr. Coleman went thither and
found him there; and Mr. Coleman asking what Provision Harcourt had made for
the Gentlemen at Windsor; Harcourt replied, that there were fourscore Guinneys,
which then lay upon the Table, which were to be sent to them; and said, that
the Person who was in the Room was to carry them. To which Mr. Coleman replied,
he liked it very well; and gave a Guinney out of his own Pocket to the
Messenger who was to carry the Money to Windsor, to encourage him to expedite
the Business. But in case the design of killing his Majesty at Windsor should
be any ways prevented, then there was a further Conspiracy, to destroy the King
by Poison. Mr. Oats swears, that in July last, Ashby ( a Jesuit) brought
instructions to London from Flanders, that in case Pickering and Grove could
not kill the King at London, nor the four Irish Assassinates at Windsor, then
Ten thousand Pounds was to be proposed to Sir George Wakeman to poison the
King. But it did appear by the Letters that passed between White the Provincial
(here in London) and Ashby, that Mr. Coleman said, he thought ten thousand
Pounds was too little; and therefore thought it necessary to offer five
thousand Pounds more, which afterward was assented to by the Jesuits abroad.
And Mr. Oats swears, he saw Letters from the Provincial at London, to the
Jesuits at St. Omer, signifying, that Sir George Wakeman had accepted of the
Proposition, and received five thousand Pounds of the Money. By which
Testimony, of Mr. Oats, it plainly appears, that Mr. Coleman, the Prisoner at
the Bar, was privy to the Conspiracy, and aiding and abetting to the wicked and
damnable design of murdering the King.

The second Witness is Mr. Bedlow, who swears that he was employed by Harcourt,
the Jesuit, to carry Pacquets of Letters to Monsieur Le Chese, the French Kings
Confessor; and further says, he was at a Consult in France, where the Plot was
discoursed on for killing the King; and did bring back an answer from Le Chese
to Harcourt in London, and swears particularly, that on the 24th or 25th of
May, 1677. he was at Colemans House with Father Harcourt, and some other
Persons, where Mr. Coleman, discoursing of the great design in hand, said these
Words following. That if he had a Sea of Blood, and an hundred Lives, he would
lose them all to carry on the design; and if to effect this, it were necessary
to destroy an hundred Heretic Kings, he would do it. So that here is another
positive Oath to an Act of Treason committed by Mr. Coleman, in relation to the
murdering the King.

The other part of the Evidence consists of Papers and Letters, which generally
relate to prove the latter part of the Indictment; to wit, The Extirpation of
the Protestant Religion, and introducing of Popery, and the subverting of the
Government. And this appears by a Letter written by Mr. Coleman, dated 29.
Septem 75. and sent to Monsieur Le Chese, the French [ Kings Confessor; wherein
he gives him an account of the Transactions of several years before, and of the
Correspondence between Mr. Coleman and Monsieur Ferrier, Predecessor to Le
Chese; wherein he does also assert, that the true way to carry on the Interest
of France, and the promoting of the Popish Religion here in England, was, to
get this Parliament dissolved; which (says he) had been long since effected, if
three hundred thousand Pounds could have been obtained from the French King;
and that things yet were in such a posture, that if he had but Twenty thousand
Pounds sent him from France, he would he content to be a Sacrifice to the
utmost malice of his Enemies, if the Protestant Religion did not receive] such
a blow as it could not subsist. And the receipt of this Letter was acknowledged
by Monsieur Le Chese, in an answer which he wrote to Mr. Coleman, dated from
Paris Oct. 23. 75. in which he gives him thanks for his good Service, in order
to the promoting the Popish Religion.

Several other Letters have been produced and read, which were written by Mr.
Coleman to Monsieur Ferrier and others, and more particularly one Letter dated
August 21. 74. written by Coleman to the Popes Internuntio at Brussels, wherein
he says the Design prospered so well, that he doubted not but in a little time
the business would be managed, to the utter ruin of the Protestant Party.

And by other Letters he writes to the French Kings Confessor that the
assistance of his most Christian Majesty is necessary, and desires Money from
the French King to carry on the Design.

But there is one Letter, without Date, more Bloody than all the rest, which
was written to Monsieur Le Chese in some short time after the long Letter of
September 29. 1675. wherein, amongst many other things, Coleman expresses
himself thus. We have a mighty Work upon our Hands, no less than the Conversion
of three Kingdoms, and the utter subduing of a Pestilent Heresy, which has
for some time domineered over this Northern part of the World; and we never had
so great hopes of it since our Q. Mary's days. And in the Conclusion of the
Letter he implores Monsieur Le Chese to get all the aid and assistance he can
from France, and that next to God Almighty, they did rely upon the mighty mind
of his most Christian Majesty, and therefore did hope le Chese would procure
Money and Asistance from him.

Now any Man that considers the Contents of these Letters, must needs agree,
that the latter part of the Indictment, to wit, the Treason of endeavoring the
Subverting the Government and the Protestant Religion, is fully proved upon Mr.
Coleman, the Prisoner at the Bar; and that these Letters were written by him,
and the Answers received he does not deny. But all he has to say for himself,
is that it was to make the King of England great; whereas the contrary is most
manifest, because the Jesuits who love Force and Tyranny, always adhere to
those Princes that are greatest in Strength and Power. For it appears in
History, that when the House of Austria were in their greatness, and like to
arrive to the Universal Monarchy in these parts of the World, the Jesuits all
adhered to that House; But since the French King has grown more mighty in
Power and Greatness, they declined the Interest of the Austrian Family, and do
now promote the Councels of France, thinking that now that King will become the
Universal Monarch.

I shall therefore now conclude the Evidence, only observing to the Jury, that
the several Treasons in the Indictment are fully proved. The first as to the
destruction of the Royal Person of the King, by two Witnesses, Mr. Oats, and
Mr. Bedlow; the other part of it, viz. the subversion of the Government, and
extirpation of the Protestant Religion, by the several Letters which have been
before remembered, which have not been denied by the Prisoner to be his.
Therefore I hope Gentlemen, when you meet with Offenders that are guilty of
such stupendous Crimes, you will do Justice upon them, which will be a great
Comfort and Satisfaction to the King and all his good Protestant Subjects.

Serj. Pembert. Gentlemen, You hear the Crime is of the highest nature, it is
the subversion of three Kingdoms and the subduing of that Religion which he
defames by the name of Pestilent Heresy. It concerns us all to look about us,
and all the Kingdom, when there shall be a Design managed in this manner, to
destroy our King, and to take away our Religion, and to enslave us all to the
Pope, and make us all truckle to the Priests.

It is wonderful it is capable (at this day) of so great Evidence, there is
Digitus Dei in it, or else it would be impossible such a thing should be made
so manifest: All the rest that is said in the Indictment are but Circumstances
that declare it: There is a strong Evidence of many matters of Fact in this
Design, which declare the Intention hatched in his Breast for many years
together: Here has been a Design to kill the King, and he does not only
consent to it, but commend it; what can be said to his giving the Money to him
that was to pay the fourscore pieces of Gold to those Ruffians sent to Windsor?
and adding 5000 l. to the 10000l. for the Doctor that was to poison the King?
He denies all.

No question but a Man that has had a Heart to design such Contrivances, will
have the Face to deny it publicly: It Is a thing to be acted in the dark, but
there is both Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow plainly prove it upon him, that he
consented to the acting the Kings death What Is the Sense of his Letters, but to
show his design, and to beg the Assistance of France to them in their
necessities? the whole Current is to destroy our Religion. I think you
Gentlemen of the Jury have had such Evidence as will satisfy any Man.


Pris. I deny all Mr. Oats his Testimony, for his saying to the Council he did
not know me because he could not see me, when I was as near as the next
Gentleman but one, but knew me when I spoke, and I spoke to almost all the
matters asked. He accuses me of a thing in August, but names not the day: Now
if there be one Error in his Testimony it weakens all the rest. I went out of
Town the 10th of August, it was the latter end I came home, about the middle of
Bartholomew Fair, the last day of August.


L. Chapter Just. Have you any Witness to prove that?


Pris. I cannot say I have a Witness.


L. Chapter Just. Then you say nothing.


Pris People cannot speak to a day, to a thing they neither imagined or thought
of.


L. Chapter Just. I ask your Servant, do you know when Mr. Coleman went out of Town?


Coleman's Serve. In August, I cannot say particularly the day.


L. Chapter Just. Do you know when he came home?


Serve. I cannot remember.


Just. Wild. Where was you the last Bartholomew day?


Serve. I was in Town.


Just. Wild. Where was your Master?


Serve. I do not remember.


L. Chapter Just. You say you went out of Town the 10th, and came home the last of
August; you say it is impossible that he should say right, but yet you do not
prove it.


Pris. I have no more to say, but I entered down all my Expenses every day in a
Book, which Book will show where I was.


L. Chapter Just. Where is your Book?


Pris. At my Lodging in Vere-Street by Covent Garden: in a Trunck that came by
the Carrier, that will show when they were sent.


L. Chapter Just. If the Cause did turn upon that matter, I would be well content
to sit until the Book was brought, but I doubt the Cause will not stand upon
that Foot, but if that were the Case it would do you little good.

Observe what I say to the Jury.


My Lord Chief Justice his Speech to the Jury upon his summing up of the
Evidence.
Gentlemen of the Jury; My Care at this time shall be to contract this very
long Evidence, and to bring it within a short compass, that you may have
nothing before you to consider of, as near as I can, but what is really
material to the Acquitting or Condemning of Mr. Coleman.

The things he is Accused of are of two sorts; the one is, to subvert the
Protestant Religion and to introduce Popery: the other was to destroy and kill
the King. The Evidence likewise was of two sorts; The one by Letters of his own
hand writing, and the other by Witnesses Viva voce. The former he seems to
confess, the other totally to deny.

For that he confesses, he does not seem to insist upon it, that the Letters
were not his, he seems to admit they were; And he rather makes his Defense by
expounding what the meaning of these Letters were, than by denying himself to
be the Author.

I would have you take me right, when I say he does admit; he does not admit
the Construction, that the Kings Council here makes upon them: but he admits
that these Letters were his. He admits it so far, that he does not deny them.
So that you are to Examine what these Letters import in themselves, and what
Consequences are naturally to be deduced from them.

That which is plainly intended, is to bring in the Roman Catholic, and to
subvert the Protestant Religion. That which is by Consequence intended, was the
Killing the King, as being the most likely means to introduce That, which as
it is apparent by his Letters, was designed to be brought in.

For the First part of the Evidence. All his Great long Letter that he wrote,
was to give the present Confessor of the French King an Account of what had
passed between him and his predecessor; By which Agency, you may see that Mr.
Coleman was In with the former Confessor.

And when he comes to give an Account of the three years Transactions to this
present Confessor, and to begin a Correspondence with him, About what is it?
Why, the substance of the Heads of the long Letter comes to this. It was to
bring in the Catholic as he called it, (that is) the Romish Catholic
Religion, and to establish that here; and to advance an Interest for the French
King, be that Interest what it will.

It Is true, his Letters do not express what sort of Interest, neither will I
determine: but they say it was to promote the French Kings Interest, which Mr.
Coleman would expound in some such sort, as may consist with the King of
Englands, and the Duke of York's Interest. But this is certain, it was to
subvert our Religion, as it is now by Law established. This was the great end
thereof, it cannot be denied: To promote the Interest (I say) of the French
King, and to gain to himself a Pention as a reward of his service, is the
Contents of his First long Letter, and one or two more concerning that Pention.

His last Letters expound more plainly what was mea^t by the French Kings
Interest. We are (says he) about a great work, no less than the Conversion of
three Kingdoms, and the total and utter subversion and subduing of that
pestilent Heresy (that is the Protestant Religion) which has reigned so long
in this Northern part of the World; and, for the doing of which, there never
was such great hopes since our Queen Mary's Days, as at this time.

Now this plainly shows, that our Religion was to be subverted, Popery
established, and the three Kingdoms to be converted; that is indeed, to be
brought to confusion.

For I say, that when our Religion is to be subverted, the Nation is to be
subverted and destroyed, that is most apparent: For there could be no hope of
subverting or destroying the Protestant Religion, but by a Subversion, not
Conversion of the three Kingdoms.

How was it to be done otherwise? Why, I would have brought this Religion in
(says he) by dissolving of the Parliament. I would have brought it in by an
Edict and Proclamation of Liberty of Conscience. In these ways I would have
brought it in.

Mr. Coleman knows it is not fit for him to own the introducing of his Religion
by the Murder of the King, or by a Foreign Force. The one was too black and the
other too bloody, to be owned. And few people (especially the English) will be
brought to save their Lives (as he may do his) by confession of so bloody and
barbarous a thing, as an intention to Kill the King, or of Levying a War; which
though it be not a Particular, is a General Murder. I say, it was not
convenient for Mr. Coleman, when he seem^ to speak something for himself, to
give such an Account, how he would have done it; Therefore he tells us, he
would have done it by the dissolving of the Parliament and by Toleration of
Religion. Now I would very fain know of any man in the World, whether this was
not a very fine and artificial covering of his design for the Subversion of our
Religion?

Pray, how can any man think, that the Dissolving of the Parliament could have
such a mighty influence to that purpose? It is true, he might imagine it might
in some sort contribute toward it: Yet it is so doubtful, that he himself
mistrusts it. For he is sometimes for the Dissolving of the Parliament, and
other times not, as appears by his own papers: For which we are not beholding
to him, so much as for any one, more than what were found by accident, and
produced to the King and Council. But in truth, why should Mr. Coleman believe
that another Parliament (if this Parliament were Dissolved) should comply with
Popery? That is to say, That there should be great hopes of bringing in of
Popery by a new Parliament? Unless he can give me a good reason for this, I
shall hold it as insignificant and as unlikely to have that effect, as his
other way by a General Toleration.

And therefore next, Upon what ground does he presume this? I do assure you,
that man does not understand the inclinations of the English people, or knows
their Tempers, that thinks, if they were left to themselves and had their
Liberty, they would turn Papists.

It Is true, there are some amongst us that have so little Wit as to turn
Fanatics, but there is hardly any, but have much more wit than to turn
Papists. These are therefore the Counterfeit pretentions of Mr. Coleman.

Now if not by these means, In what way truly did he intend to bring in Popery?
Why his own Letters plainly convict him of one step toward it, in endeavoring
with Foreign powers to bring in that Religion, and to Subvert ours. And for the
other way of doing it, by killing the King; I leave it to you whether there
were any more probable way than that indeed to do it.

And could he think, that the French King would not have thought himself
cozened of his Money, if he had not given him hopes that he would use the most
probable Methods that he could, to effect his Design?

Therefore there must be more in it; for he that was so earnest for that
Religion, would not have stuck at any Violence to bring it in; he would not
have stuck at blood. For we know their Doctrines and their Practices, and we
know well, with what zeal the Priests push them forward to venture their own
Lives, and to take away other men's, that differ from them, to bring in their
Religion, and to set up themselves. For indeed in the Kingdoms and Countries
where Popery reigns, the Priests have Dominion over men's Consciences, and power
over their purses. And they use all Arts imaginable of making Proselites, and
take special Care, that those in their Communion, shall know no more than the
Priests shall give them leave to understand. And for this Reason they prohibit
the use of all Books without their License. This blind Obedience begets blind
Ignorance, and this is a great subtilty of theirs to keep them in it, that they
may perfectly submit to them,

What cannot they Command, when they have made others slaves in their
understandings, and that they must know no more, then what they give them leave
to know? But in England it is not so Mr. Coleman; and therein you would have
found a great disappointment. For if Liberty of Conscience had been tolerated
here, That the Consequence of it would have been Popery, I deny.

Nothing is more unlikely, for though in the short Reign of Queen Mary, Popery
came in for some time, which was but for a little time, and then the people
were not so well grounded in the Protestant Religion, nor in the principles of
it: But now they are, Insomuch, that scarce a Cobbler but is able to baffle any
Roman Priest that ever I saw or met with.

And Thanks be to God we have a Preaching Ministry, and the free use of the
Scriptures allowed amongst us, which they are not permitted to have.

And after this I wonder, that a man, who has been bred up in the Protestant
Religion (as I have Reason to believe that you Mr. Coleman have been) for (if I
am not misinformed) your Father was a Minister in Suffolk. For such a one to
depart from it, is an Evidence against you, to prove the Indictment. I must
make a Difference between Us, and Those who have been always educated that way,
and so are under the prepossession of their Education, which is a difficult
thing to be overcome.

And I do assure you, there are but two things, that I know of, can make one do
it, Interest, or gross Ignorance.

No man of understanding, but for By-ends, would have left his Religion to be a
Papist. And for you Mr. Coleman, who are a man of Reason and Subtilty, I must
tell you (to bring this to your self) upon this account, that it could not be
Conscience, I cannot think it to be Conscience. Your Pention was your
Conscience, and your Secretaries place your Bait.

For such men (I say) as have been bred up in the Protestant Religion, and left
it, I can hardly presume that they do it out of Conscience, unless they do it
upon a mighty search, not leaning upon their own understanding and abilities,
nor hearing of one side alone.

Conscience is a tender thing, Conscience will tremble when it leaves the
Religion it has been bred in, and its sincerity is shown by being fearful,
least it should be in the wrong. No man may pretend to Conscience truly, that
takes not all Courses imaginable to know the Right, before he lets his Religion
slip from him.

Have we so soon forgot our Reverence to the late King, and the pious advice he
left us? A King that was truly A DEFENDER of the FAITH, not only by his Title,
but by his Abilities and Writings. A King, who understood the Protestant
Religion so well, that he was able to defend it against any of the Cardinals of
Rome. And when he knew it so thoroughly, and died so eminently for it, I will
leave this Characteristical Note, That whosoever after that, departs from His
Judgment, had need have a very good one of his own, to bear him out.

I do acknowledge, Many of the Popish Priests formerly, were learned men, and
may be so still, beyond the Seas: but I could never yet meet with any here,
that had other Learning or Ability but Artificial only, to delude weak Women,
and weaker Men.

They have indeed, ways of Conversion, and Conviction, by Enlightening our
Understandings with a Faggot, and by the powerful and irresistible Arguments of
a Dagger: But there are such wicked Soloecisms in their Religion, that they
seem to have left them neither Natural Sense, nor Natural Conscience. Not
Natural Sense by their Absurdity, in so an unreasonable a belief, as of the
Wine turned into Blood: Not Natural Conscience, by their Cruelty, who make the
Protestants Blood as Wine, and these Priests thirst after it.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum?

Mr. Coleman, in one of his Letters, speaks of rooting out our Religion, and
our Party; And he is in the Right, for they can never root out the Protestant
Religion, but they must kill the Protestants. But let him and them know, if
ever they shall endeavor to bring Popery in, by destroying of the King, they
shall find, that the Papists will thereby bring destruction upon themselves, so
that not a man of them would escape.

Ne Catulus quidem relinquendus.

Our Execution shall be as quick as their Gunpowder, but more effectual. And so
Gentlemen, I shall leave it to you, to consider, what his Letters prove him
guilty of directly, and what by Consequence; What he plainly would have done,
and then, how he would have done it; And whether you think his Fiery Zeal had
so much Cold Blood in it, as to spare any others?

For the other part of the Evidence, which is by the Testimony of the present
Witnesses, You have heard them. -- I will not detain you longer now the day is
going out.

Mr. J. Jones. You must Find the Prisoner Guilty, or bring in two Persons
Perjured.


L. C. J. Gentlemen, If your Consultation shall be long, then you must lie by
it all night, and We Will take your Verdict to Morrow Morning. If it will not be
long, I am content to stay a while.


Jury. My Lord, We shall be short.


J. Wyld. We do not speak to you to make more haste, or less, but to take a
full Consultation, and your own time; There is the Death of a Man at the Stake,
and make not too much haste, We do not speak it on that Account.


The Jury went from the Bar, and returned.

Court. Are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Court. Who shall Speak for you?


Jury. The Foreman.


Court. Edward Coleman, hold up thy hand.


Court. Is Edward Coleman Guilty of the High Treason, whereof he stands
Indicted, or not Guilty?


Jury. Guilty, my Lord.


Court. What Goods Chattels, etc.


Prisoner. You were pleased to say to the Jury, that they must either bring me
in Guilty, or two persons perjured: I am a Dying man, and upon my Death, and
expectation of Salvation, declare, That I never saw these two Gentlemen,
excepting Mr. Oats, but once in all my Life, and that was at the Council Table.


L. C. J. Mr. Coleman, Your own papers are enough to condemn you.


Court. Capt. Richardson, You must bring Mr. Coleman hither again to morrow
morning, to receive his Sentence.


The Day following, being November the 28th. Mr. Coleman was brought to the
Bar, to receive his Sentence, and the Court proceeded thereupon, as follows.
L. C. J. ASk him what he can say for himself; Make Silence Crier.


Court. Edward Coleman, Hold up thy hand, Thou have been Indicted of High
Treason, thou have thereunto Pleaded, Not Guilty; thou have put thy Self upon
God and thy Country, which Country; has found thee Guilty; What can thou
say for thy Self, wherefore Judgment of Death should not be given against thee,
and an Execution Awarded according to Law?


Mr. Coleman. May it please you, my Lord, I have this to say for my self; As
for my Papers, I humbly Hope, (setting aside oral Testimony) that I should not
have been found guilty of any crime in them, but what the Act of Grace would
have pardoned, and I hope, I shall have the benefit of that: The Evidence
against me, namely Oral, I do humbly beg, that you would be pleased, to give me
a little time to show you, how impossible it is, that those Testimonies should
be true; For that Testimony of Mr. Oats in August, my Man, that is now either
in the Court or Hall, has gotten a Book that is able to make it appear, that I
was out of Town, from the 15th of August to the 31 of August late at night.


L. C. J. That will not do, Mr. Coleman.


Coleman. I do humbly offer this, for this Reason; because Mr. Oats, in all
his other Evidences, was so punctual, as to distinguish between Old Style and
New, he never mist the Month, hardly the Week, and often times put the very
Day; for his Testimony that he gave against me, was, that it was the 21 of
August.


L. C. J. He thought so, but he was not possitive, but only as to the Month.


Coleman. He was certain it was the latter end of August, and that about
Bartholomewtide.


L. C. J. He conceived so, he thought so.


Coleman. Now if I was always out of Town from the 15 Day of August, to the 31
late at night, it is then Impossible, My Lord, That that should be a true
Testimony, your Lordship was pleased to observe, that it would much enervate
any man's Testimony, if to the whole he could be proved false in any one thing;
I have further in this matter to say, besides my man's Testimony, the King has
since I have been seized on, seized on my Papers and my book of Accounts where
I used punctually to set down where I spent my money; and if it does not appear
by that book that I was all those days and times, and several other days in
August, to be out of Town, I desire no favor. You cannot suppose my Lord, nor
the world believe, that I prepared that book for this purpose in this matter;
and I can make it appear by others, if I had time; but I only offer this to
your Lordship, that seeing Mr. Oats did name so many particulars and
circumstances, it is very strange that he should fail in a particular of such
Importance as about killing the King; and no man living of common sense would
think or believe that I should speak about such a thing in company that I did
not well know, and this to be done frequently and oftentimes as he asserts it,
when Oats seemed to the King and Council (and I believe the King himself
remembers it) when I was examined, that he did not know me, that he knew
nothing of me, so that here is two things against this witness that can hardly
happen again.

My Circumstances are extraordinary, and it is a great providence, and I think
your Lordship and the whole world will look upon it as such, if for any Crimes
that are in my Papers, if there be any mercy to be showed me by the Kings
Gracious Act of Pardon, I humbly beg that I may have it.


L. C. J. None.


Col. If none I do humbly submit; but I do humbly hope with submission, that
those Papers would not have been found Treasonable Papers.


L. C. J. Those Letters of yours Mr. Coleman, were since the Act of Pardon,
your Papers bear date 1674.1675. and there has been no Act since. But as for
what you say concerning Mr. Oats, you say it in vain now Mr. Coleman, for the
Jury has given in their Verdict, and it is not now to be said, for after that
Rate we shall have no End of any man's Trial; but for your satisfaction Mr.
Coleman, to the best of my remembrance, Mr. Oats was positive only as to the
month of August, he thought it might be about the 21st. day or about
Bartholomew-Fair time; but he was absolute in nothing but the month.


Col. He was punctual in all his other evidences, but in this he was not, and
when I was examined at the Council Table, he said he knew little of me.


L.C.J. He charged you positively for having held Conspiracy to poison the
King; and that there was Ten Thousand Pounds to be paid for it, and afterward
there was Five Thousand Pound more to be added; and he positively charges you
to be the person that amongst all the Conspirators was reputed to pay the Five
Thousand Pound.


Col. He said it after such a fashion.


L. C. J. He said it after such a fashion that Sir Robert Southwell and Sir
Thomas Doleman satisfied us that he did the thing, and that plainly to his
understanding; and what say you he said?


Col. That he did not know me.


L. C. J. Neither of them say so, that he said he did not know you, they deny
it.


Col. He said so upon my death.


L. C. J. It Is in vain to dispute it further, there must be an End.


Crier, make O yes, Our Sovereign Lord the King does straightly Charge and
Command all persons to keep silence while Judgment is given upon the Prisoner
Convict, upon pain of Imprisonment.


L. C. J. You are found guilty Mr. Coleman of High Treason, and the Crimes are
several that you are found Guilty of. You are found Guilty of Conspiring the
death of the King; you are likewise found Guilty of endeavoring to subvert the
Protestant Religion as it is by Law Established, and to bring in Popery, and
this by the aid and assistance of Foreign Powers. And I would not have you Mr.
Coleman in your last apprehension of things, to go out of the World with a
mistake if I could help it, That is, I would not have you think, that though
you only seem to disavow the matter of the death of the King, that therefore
you should think your self an Innocent man. You are not Innocent I am sure, for
it is apparent by that which cannot deceive, that you are guilty of Contriving
and Conspiring the Destruction of the Protestant Religion, and to bring in
Popery, and that by the aid and assistance of Foreign Powers, and this no man
can free you in the least from. And know, that if it should be true, that you
would disavow, that you had not an actual hand in the Contrivance of the Kings
death (which two witnesses have sworn positively against you): yet he that will
subvert the Protestant Religion here, and bring in consequentially a Foreign
Authority, does an act in derogation of the Crown, and in Diminution of the
Kings Title and Sovereign Power; and endeavors to bring a Foreign Dominion
both over our Consciences and Estates And if any man shall endeavor to subvert
our Religion to bring in that, though he did not actually contrive to do it by
the Death of the King, or it may be not by the death of any one man, yet
whatsoever follows upon that contrivance, he is guilty of; Insomuch, it is
greatly to be feared, that though you meant only to bring it in by the way of
Dissolving of Parliaments, or by Liberty of Conscience, and such kind of
innocent ways as you thought, yet if so be those means should not have proved
Effectual, and worse should have been taken (though by others of your
Confederates) for to go through with the work, as we have great reason to
believe there would, you are guilty of all that blood that would have followed.
But still you say you did not design that thing; but to tell you, he that does
a sinful and unlawful Act, must answer, and is liable both to God and man for
all the consequences that attend it, therefore I say you ought not to think
your self innocent. It Is possible you may be penitent, and nothing remains but
that. And as I think in your Church you allow of a thing called Attrition, if
you cannot with our Church, have Contrition, which is a sorrow proceeding from
Love, Pray make use of Attrition, which is a sorrow arising from Fear. For you
may assure your self, there are but a few moments betwixt you and a vast
Eternity, where will be no dallying, no arts to be used, therefore think on all
the good you can do in this little space of time that is left you, all is
little enough to wipe off (besides your private and secret offenses) even your
public ones. I do know that Confession is very much owned in your Church, and
you do well in it; but as your offense is public, so should your Confession
be; and it will do you more service then all your Auricular Confessions. Were I
in your case, there should be nothing at the bottom of my heart that I would
not disclose; Perchance you may be deluded with the fond hopes of having your
sentence respited. Trust not to it Mr. Coleman, you may be flattered to stop
your mouth, till they have stopped your breath, and I doubt you will find that to
be the event. I think it becomes you as a man, and as a Christian, to do all
that is now in your power, since you cannot be white, to make your self as
clean as you can, and to fit your self for another world, where you will see
how vain all resolutions of obstinacy of concealment, and all that sort of
bravery which perhaps may be instil'd by some men, will prove. They will not
then serve to lessen but they will add to your fault. It concerns Us no farther
than for your own good, and Do as God shall direct you, for the truth is, There
are persuasions and inducements in your Church to such kind of Resolutions and
such kind of Actions, which you are led into by false Principles and false
Doctrines (and so you will find when you come once to experiment it, as shortly
you will) that hardly the Religion of a Turk would own. But when Christians by
any violent bloody Act attempt to propagate Religion, they abuse both their
Disciples and Religion too, and change that way that Christ Himself taught us
to follow him by. 'Twas not by blood or violence; By no single man's undertaking
to disturb and to alter Governments; To make hurly burlies, and all the
mischiefs that attend such things as these are.

For a Church to persuade men even to the Committing of the highest Violences,
under a pretense of doing God good service, looks not (in my Opinion) like
Religion, but Design; like an Engine, not a Holy institution; Artificial as a
Clock, which follows not the Sun but the Setter; Goes not according to the
Bible but the Priest, whose Interpretations serve their particular ends, and
those private advantages which True Religion would scorn, and Natural Religion
it self would not endure. I have Mr. Coleman said thus much to you as you are a
Christian, and as I am one, and I do it out of great Charity and Compassion,
and with great sense and sorrow that you should be mislead to these great
offenses under pretense of Religion. But seeing you have but a little time, I
would have you make use of it to your best advantage; for I tell you, that
though death may be talked of at a distance in a brave Heroic way, yet when a
man once comes to the minute, death is a very serious thing; then you will
consider how trifling all Plots and Contrivances are, and to how little purpose
is all your concealments. I only offer these things to your thoughts, and
perhaps they may better go down at such a time as this is then at another; and
if they have no effect upon you, I hope they will have some as to my own
particular, in that I have done my good will. I do remember you once more, that
in this matter you be not deluded with any fantastic hopes and expectations of
a Pardon, for the Truth is Mr. Coleman, you will be deceived; therefore set
your heart at Rest, for we are at this time in such disorders, and the people
so continually Alarmed either with secret Murders, or some Outrages and
Violences that are this day on foot, that though the King, who is full of mercy
almost to a fault, yet if he should be inclined that way, I verily believe both
Houses would interpose between that and you. I speak this to shake off all vain
hopes from you; for I tell you I verily believe they would not you should have
any Twigg to hold by to deceive you; so that now you may look upon it, there is
nothing will save you, for you will assuredly dy-as now you live, and that very
suddenly. In which I having discharged my Conscience to you as a Christian, I
will now proceed to pronounce Sentence against you, and do my duty as a Judge.

You shall return to Prison, from thence be drawn to the place of Execution,
where you shall be hanged by the Neck, and be cut down alive, your bowels burnt
before your face, and your Quarters severed, and your Body disposed of as the
King thinks fit; and so the Lord have mercy upon your Soul.


Coleman. My Lord, I humbly thank your Lordship, and I do admire your Charity,
that you would be pleased to give me this admirable Council, and I will follow
it as well as I can, and I beg your Lordship to hear me what I am going to say,
your Lordship, most Christian like, has observed wisely, that Confession is
extremely necessary to a dying man, and I do so too; but that Confession your
Lordship I suppose means, is of a guilty evil Conscience in any of these points
that I am condemned for, Of maliciously contriving, etc. if I thought I had any
such guilt, I should assuredly think my self damned now I am going out of the
world by concealing them, in spite of all Pardons or Indulgencies, or any act
that the Pope or the Church of Rome could do for me, as I believe any one
Article of Faith. Therefore pray hear the words of a dying man, I have made a
Resolution, I thank God, not to tell a lie, no not a single lie, not to save my
life. I hope God will not so far leave me as to let me do it; and I do renounce
all manner of mercy that God can show me, if I have not told the House of
Commons, or offered it to the House of Commons, all that I know in my whole
heart toward this business; and I never in all my life either made any
proposition, or received any proposition, or knew or heard directly or
indirectly of any proposition toward the supplanting or invading the Kings
Life, Crown or Dignity, or to make any Invasion or Disturbance to introduce any
New Government, or to bring in Popery by any Violence or Force in the world; if
I have, my Lord, been mistaken in my method, as I will not say but I might have
been; for if two men differ, one must be mistaken; therefore possibly I might
be of an Opinion, that Popery might come in if Liberty of Conscience had been
granted, and perhaps all Christians are bound to wish all People of that
Religion that they profess themselves; if they are in earnest, I will not
dispute those ills that your Lordship may imagine to be in the Church of Rome;
if I thought there was any in them I would be sure to be none of it. I have no
design my Lord at all in Religion but to be Saved; and I had no manner of
Invitation to invite me to the Church of Rome, no not one, but to be Saved; if
I am out of the way, I am out of the way, as to the next world as well as this;
I have nothing but a sincere Conscience, and I desire to follow it as I ought.
I do confess I am guilty of many Crimes, and I am afraid all of us are guilty
in some measure, of some failings and infirmities; but in matters of this
Nature that I now stand condemned for, though I do not at all complain of the
Court; for I do confess I have had all the fair play imaginable; and I have
nothing at all to say against it; but I say as to any one act of mine, so far
as acts require Intention to make them acts, as all humane Acts do, I am as
Innocent of any Crime that I now stand charged as guilty of, as when I was
first born.


L. C. J. That is not possible.


Coleman. With submission, I do not say Innocent as to any Crime in going
against any Act of Parliament, then it is a Crime to hear Mass, or to do any
Act that they prohibit; but for Intending and Endeavoring to bring in that
Religion by the Aid and Assistance of the King of France, I never intended nor
meant by that Aid and Assistance, any Force in the world, but such Aids and
Assistances as might procure us Liberty of Conscience. My Lord, if in what I
have said no body believes me, I must be content; if any do believe me, then I
have wiped off those scandalous Thoughts and abominable Crimes, that, etc. and
then I have paid a little Debt to Truth.


L. C. J. One word more and I have done, I am sorry Mr. Coleman, that I have
not Charity enough to believe the words of a dying man; for I will tell you
what sticks with me very much, I cannot be persuaded, and no body can, but that
your Correspondence and Negotiations did continue longer than the Letters that
we have found, that is after 1675. Now if you had come and shown us your Books
and Letters, which would have spoke for themselves, I should have thought then
that you had dealt plainly and sincerely, and it would have been a mighty
Motive to have believed the rest; for certainly your Correspondence held even
to the time of your apprehension, and you have not discovered so much as one
Paper, but what was found unknown to you, and against your will.


Coleman. Upon the words of a dying man, and upon the expectation I have of
Salvation, I tell your Lordship, that there is not a Book nor Paper in the
World, that I have laid aside voluntary.


L. C. J. No, perhaps you have burnt them.


Coleman. Not, by the Living God.


L. C. J. I hope Mr. Coleman you will not say no manner of way.


Coleman. For my Correspondence these two last years past, I have given an
account of every Letter; but those that were common Letters, and those Books
that were in my House, what became of them I know not; they were common Letters
that I use to write every day, a Common Journal what past at home and abroad,
my men they writ them out of that Book.


L. C. J. What became of those Letters?


Coleman. I had no Letters about this business, but what I have declared to the
House of Commons, That is, Letters from St. Germans, which I owned to the House
of Commons; and I had no methodical Correspondence, and I never valued them nor
regarded them, but as they came, I destroyed them.


L. C. J. I remember the last Letter that is given in evidence against you,
discovers what mighty hopes there was, that the time was now come wherein that
pestilent Heresy, that has domineered in this Northern part of the World,
should be Extirpated; and that there never was greater hopes of it since OUR
Queen Mary's Reign. Pray Mr. Coleman, was that the concluding Letter in this
affair?


Coleman. Give me leave to say it upon my dying, I have not one Letter, etc.


L. C. J. What though you burnt your Letters, you may recollect the Contents.


Coleman. I had none since.


L. C. J. Between God and your Conscience be it, I have other apprehensions;
and you deserve your Sentence upon you for your offenses, that visibly appear
out of your own Papers, that you have not, and cannot deny.


Coleman. I am satisfied. But seeing my time is but short, may I not be
permitted to have some immediate Friends, and my poor Wife to have her freedom
to speak with me, and stay with me that little time that I have, that I might
speak something to her in order to her living and my dying.


L. C. J. You say well, and it is a hard Case to deny it; but I tell you what
hardens my heart, the Insolences of your Party, the Roman Catholics I mean,
that they every day offer, which is indeed a proof of their Plot, that they are
so bold and Impudent, and such secret Murders Committed by them, as would
harden any man's heart to do the Common favors of Justice and Charity, that to
mankind is usually done: they are so bold and insolent, that I think it is not
to be endured in a Protestant Kingdom; but for my own parlicular, I think it is
a very hard thing for to deny a man the Company of his Wife, and his Friends,
so it be done with Caution and Prudence; Remember that the Plot is on foot, and
I do not know what Arts the Priests have, and what Tricks they use; and
therefore have a care that no Papers nor any such thing, be sent from him.


Coleman. I do not design it I am sure.


L. C. J. But for the Company of his Wife and his near Friends, or any thing in
that kind, that may be for his Eternal good, and as much for his present
satisfaction that he can receive now in the condition that be is in, let him
have it, but do it with Care and Caution.


Cap. Richardson. What, for them to be private alone?


L. C. J. His Wife, only she, God forbid else.

Nor shall you not be denied any Protestant Minister.


Coleman. But shall not my Cousin Coleman have Liberty to come to me.


L. C. J. Yes, with Mr. Richardson.


Col. Or his Servant; Because it is a great Trouble for him to attend always.


L. C. J. If it be his Servant, or any he shall appoint, it is all one, Mr.
Richardsson, use him as Reasonably as may be, considering the Condition he is
in.


Court. Have a care of your Prisoner.


On Tuesday the Third of December following, (being the Day of his Execution)
Mr. Coleman was Drawn on a Sledge from Newgate to Tyburn; and being come
thither, he declared, That he had been a Roman Catholic for many years; and
that he thanked God* he died in that Religion. And he said, he did not think
that Religion at all prejudicial to the King and Government. The Sheriff told
him if he had any thing to say by way of Confession or Con^^^^ion, he mig^^
proceed, otherwise it was not Seasonable for him to go (...) Expressions. And
being asked if he knew any thing of the (...) of Sir Edmondbury Godfry, he
declared upon the (...) he knew not any thing of it; for that he was (...).
Then after some private Prayers and Ejaculations to (...) ^he Sentence was
Executed, he was hanged by the Neck, Cut (...) alive, his Bowels burnt, and
himself (...).

FINIS.

