THE Tinners Greivances; OR A TRUE NARRATIVE SHOWING The REASONS of The
Continual Fall of the Price of TIN: AND LIKEWISE The many Hardships the Tinners
have a long Time Labored under.

Together with their present Deplorable Condition.

By an Adventuring Tinner.

Ad Reges Potestas omnium pertinet:
Ad Singulos Proprietas. Seneca.
LONDON: Printed for the Author, Anno Domini 1697.

The PREFACE, To the whole Body of TINNERS.
I. The Lords of the Soil and Bounders of Tin Grounds. II. The Adventuring
Tinners. III. The Spalliards or Mine Workers.
Gentlemen,
LOng Experience has taught us, That to lie in the Ditch with only Crying, God
help! is not the way to redress our Greivances: And I doubt not but you will
Join with me in opinion, That for the more Reguler Exhibiting our Complaints,
Three things chiefly (with all Caution) ought to be premised.

I. That we wander not out of our Accustomed Road: Least we thereby give our
Enemies Occasion, and ground to call all our Liberties, and Privileges in
question, which we and our Predecessors have enjoyed for so many Ages:

Therefore (with all submission) Leave it to your serious Considerations, how,
and whom to Petition for Releif in our present Case.

II. That it is no less necessary, The universal Assent of the whole Body of
Tinners may Concur in this undertaking:

Least it be Objected: That it was promoted only by the Precipitate Act of a
few, who understood not his Majesty's, and the Tinners Interests: And thereby
some specious pretenses may be formed to dissent: and render all our endeavors
Ineffectual.

III. And Lastly, That the Spalliards or Mineworkers of every Tin Parish do
Elect any Number (not Exceeding four) of the most Intelligent in Tin affairs of
their said parish (whom they may trust, and Authorize) to Transact any thing
(Relating to this matter) on their behalfs:

Least by the Appearance of so vast numbers, they hinder the proceedings: and
render themselves also Obnoxious to the Government.

Now the most Expedient Method (that I could think of) to proceed in this
matter Accordingly, is:

That the Representatives (so Elected) and such other Gentlemen to whom I shall
present these following greivances (either themselves or Agents) whom I hereby
request to Communicate the same to such others, whom they know Concerned, (who
may possibly miss my knowledge or Conveniences of waiting on) would first meet
in their Respective Coynage Towns, the Second day of the next ensuing Coynage,
there to Consider of, and Appoint a general Convention of such a Competent
Number (as they may think needful) to assist in this Enterprise, where due
measures may be taken (with all Caution and deliberation) for Releif of the
present sufferers.

Who may then and there be pleased to Add or omit any thing in the Following
Narrative (though all true in fact) as they in their better Judgments may think
most material to the purpose.

I have likewise presumed to present you the form of a Petition to the King,
which with the rest I humbly refer to your Correction:

Hoping It may meet with your favorable Censure, being (I must Confess) first
prompted hereunto by our worthy and good Conntryman Mr. John Praed, though I have
ever been inclined (and now taught by my own sufferings and oppressions) to
Sympathize with, and Comiserate my afflicted Neighbors: And wherein I have
erred, do Confide and depend That your goodness will Construe It (as really it
is) Error Amoris, non Amor Erroris, An Error of Love, and not a Love of Error,
which will farther engage my weak endeavors to serve you to my utmost power,
who am

Your Fellow Sufferer and Ready Servant Tho. Tresilian.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of the whole Body of
Tinners, within the Counties of Cornwall and Devon.
Humbly Shows,
THAT for many Years last past, your said Petitioners have labored under great
difficulties; and many Inconveniences, in Adventuring for Tin, even to the
wasting of our Estates, and ruin of our Families, who have been distinguished
from others of your Majesty's Subjects only by our Sufferings: as more at large
Appears in a Narrative hereunto Annexed (though we have always practiced
(under all Governments) That Passive Obedience, which others have only talked
of.

Therefore humbly pray; That your Majesty would be graciously pleased to grant
us the like freedom with other of your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, in the
disposal of our goods; And that we may stand on an equal foot with all other
Tradesmen, which will enable us to Carry on our deserted Adventures with
Alacrity; To the Advancement of your Majesty's Revenue; and the Support of our
Languishing Families: And your Petitioners shall ever pray (as in duty bound)
for your Majesty's long and happy Reign over us.

THE TINNERS GREIVANCES.
OF all the Products this Island affords, there is no Commodity more Staple,
Lasting, and Advantageous than Tin, (Peculiar only to the two Counties of
Cornwall, and Devon.) nor among the many Temptations that most Kings, and
Princes are Exposed unto, This is none of the least, to Receive false
Representations of things on the Account of Profit and Advantage from Persons,
who (for the most part make use of such pretenses to promote some low, or mean
Interest of their own, without Considering the whole, or the Circumstances
which might Complete the truth of such Relations, by means of which
Suggestions, most of the Kings of England who (being sensible of the Revenue
accrewing to them by the labor of the Tinners, and being willing to Encourage
their Endeavors) have been always so misled, That the only thing prescribed
to Advantage them, and advance the said Revenue, has always proved
destructive to the one, and the greatest Oppression Imaginable to the other;
who seem of all Men to be born Salves, And what would most Evidently appear
prejudicial, to any other Native Subjects, or Tradesmen in England, must be
thought none to them, (but being as it were) not only Cursed to harder labor
than ever the Gibeonites Underwent, It must be Entailed on them too, to
posterity, without a Competent Allowance of either Food, or Raiment.

Now the Endeavors of this Paper shall be to Undeceive, and rightly to inform
all such, who have looked into this Affair through wrong and false Optics; by
showing them the true Reasons;

First of the Continual fall of the price of Tin.

Secondly the many Inconveniences from time to time Imposed on the Tinners, to
their great discouragements; who merit much better.

And lastly, the Deplorable Condition they are now Reduced unto.

First then I shall tell you (negatively) That the fall of the price of Tin
proceeds not from the great Quantities made, as some vainly Imagine, (or rather
pretend) which will Evidently appear by Comparing the Reign of King Charles the
first (of Blessed memory) with succeeding Times: for in his said Reign, the
Quantities of Tin were very Inconsiderable, Comparatively, with the succeeding
days of the Common wealth, and Cromwell; as may be most demonstrable.

First if it be Considered, That none others were Employed on the search of
that Commodity at that time: but such who were wholly bred to that Employ. And
Secondly, by the great increase of Blowing or Melting Houses that have been
Erected since that time. And yet notwithstanding the small quantities then
made, the Price was but forty Odd Shillings, when under the Preemption of the
last Farmers: But as soon as the Tinners were Released from that Bondage, the
price did presently rise to three Pounds, The Advancement of which encouraged
most sort of Tradesmen to leave their own Callings, and put themselves to digg,
and search for Tin, and yet the more the Tin, the better the Price still grew.
The number of hands still increasing the Quantities Proportionably.

Then it was that Old Works that were turned Idle many years before (which
could not (by reason of the great depths, and other Charges) pay the Wages
perhaps of a hundred men, were now wrought again with Advantage; and employed
three or four times so many.

Secondly, I must likewise tell you, that It proceeds not from the Cheapness of
the Commodity beyond the Seas neither, (France only Excepted) the Reason I
shall tell you anon) for I have been Informed by a Person of great worth and
Honor, That the Turkey Company made of a hundred of Tin sold at Turkey Eighty
Dollers, and by the return of Commodities it yielded Twenty four Pounds the
hundred Sterling: And though this may not be Common, It Sufficiently Shows the
Necessity they lie under for that Commodity, who would give that Price, rather
than be without it: But I have often heard the Old Mr. Seyntaubyn (of our
County) declare, that he made 17l. or 18l. Sterling Commonly, of every hundred
of Tin he sent into those parts; who frequently Adventured his own Tin.

(These things being premised) It rests now to declare, what the Reasons of the
fall of the price may be: And these I find to be chiefly three.

The first is the Constitution of the Tinners:

In having but two free Markets a year to dispose of his Goods, which, with
it is Ill Consequences, are the great Grievances the Tinners have a long time
labored under: and I doubt not, but plainly to demonstrate, that it is as
destructive to his Majesty's Revenue; as fatal to the Tinners to be thus
Confined, which will be most Obvious to the meanest Capacity, If they did but
Suppose, Any other Tradesmen in England were under the like prohibition, As for
Instance, If the Pewterers, Cloathiers, Tanners, Shooemakers, or, Husbandmen
themselves were confined to two, or four Times a year only to sell their Goods:
Consider, I pray, how Prodigious would the Quantities then appear? How soon
would the Emptor take Notice of the Indigency of the Poor Mechanics? and work
on their Necessities, who have weekly Occasion for what they have earned, and
for want thereof, must buy all their Provisions, and Clothes, on Trust, and
Credit; to the utter Ruin of themselves, Families, and Commodity it self.

Besides Consider farther, I pray) against which there can be no Rising up: And
that is from ten or twelve years Experience: And you know, Non est disputandum
degustu, There Is no disputing against one's Sense, and Common Experience) that
the Tin never did rise to a value: but when the Tinners were left at liberty to
sell their Tin; as soon as melted, and Cold, and had the Hammer in the House;
at which Time the price of Tin always advanced, till it came from three
Pounds, to six Pounds odd money a hundred.

But as soon as the Old Constitution returned, and the Tinners again Confined
to two free Markets, as in King Charles the Second, and in King James's Reigns,
The Price still abated, till it came again to forty odd Shillings a hundred,
which has discouraged most men (who are not under an Obligation) to Adventure,
and search for Tin, And yet the small quantities of it at home, nor the high
Estimate of it abroad can prevail with the Merchant to Advance the Price, or
ever will (I fear) till there be an utter desertion of that Employment, and the
Pewterer and other Tradesmen who have a dependency on that Commodity, be turned
Idle for want of that Metal, To work, and the whole Revenue arising to his
Majesty thereby be likewise lost.

But while the Tinners were at liberty, and the price of Tin was up (as I told
you) It did not only persuade more Laborers about that Concern, but our
Merchants then (and not till then) became Adventuring Tinners; on which depends
the Second Reason, I promised to Show you, for the fall of the price which is
viz.

II. The Running, and Embezling of the King's Duties, which Enables, and
Capacitates such Merchants, to undersell all others who pay it.

Heretofore, the Londoners, and others sent, and kept their Factors in
Cornwall, whose sole business it was to Execute their Merchants Orders, Instead
of which, they now send their Commissions to our Merchants, who (as I told you)
are not only become Adventuring Tinners: But also are Interessed in most of the
Blowing Houses, Factors, and Merchants too (as well as their Employers) who are
the only persons that beat down the Price, both at home, and abroad (I mean in
all our Neighboring Countries, where they have a free Trade: but Especially in
France, by underselling the Londoners their Benefactors, which I shall
demonstrate; and the Case is truly and plainly thus.

Suppose the Londoner writes his Factor in the Country, to buy him Twenty Tunn
of Tin this Coynage, at the Price Current. In all probability before the
Coynage comes, he has Engrossed Thirty Tunns in his hands, by furnishing the
Indigent Tinners before hand, with money, at one or two Shillings a hundred,
under the Price Current, which is Common; as it was well Observed by Judge
Doderige in his History of the Ancient, and Moddern Estate of the Duke of
Cornwall Dedicated to King James the First in 1630. Pa. 95. viz. (says he) The
Spalliards, or Mineworkers, who in Respect of their Poor Estate, are Eaten out
by the hard and Usurious Contracts for Tin, which they are driven to make with
the Merchant, or Regrator: for those poor Laborers being not able to sustain
themselves and Families, until the Time of Coynage, and Marts of Tin shall
come, (which are half yearly) they are by Necessity Compelled for a small Sum
of money, to enter into Bonds with the said Regrators of Tin, to deliver them
at the next ensuing Coinage Tin, in value much more, then the money they had
Received from them) who still practice the same thing to this day; and by their
long and continued Experience, have Enlarged their Power so far, as to Subject
the more Substantial Adventurers now, as they did the Poor Spalliards
heretofore, by which means both their Conditions are now become most grievous
and Deplorable; It being hereby wholly in the Merchants Breasts, to make the
Price what they please: (But to return from whence I have degressed) The
Cornish Factor sends away the 20 Tuns to London, the other 10 Tuns he keeps for
his own use, and sends it (perhaps) for France, where in all Probability, it
arrives long before the other can possibly reach London, who has no Occasion
to stay for the Coinage, which (you see) comes not only Cheaper to him than to
the Londoners: but the Freight much Less too, It being but cross the Channel:
and the Kings Duties seldom, or never paid by them: for the Tin being (as it
were) Comprised all in their own hands, as Tinners, Blowers, Factors, and
Merchants, have all the liberty and Freedom Imaginable, to do what they please
with it, who (Instead of Carrying it to Coinage Towns,) cannot miss
Opportunities to Carry it in a Night somewhere by the Sea Coast, where their
Ship (being once Cleared of the Harbor) may return the Night after, and with
their Boat take it on Board; There being none but his own Servants Employed
about it from first to last: Nor no piece, nor parcel found wanting at the
Coinage, there being no Attendance at the Blowing Houses: nor any Officer there
to take an Account of the same.

Now when the Londoner has Occasion to send his Tin to France, for which he
has paid the uttermost penny, besides Freight to London, Commission Money to
his Factor: and the Kings duties, (which he can hardly Run) He finds the Market
there already supplied Cheaper, then he can possibly afford it, which causes
him to lie there oftentimes on Charge, and demurrage, to his great Amazment and
dissatisfaction, not knowing how it comes to pass he is thus undersold and
abused.

The Third and last Reason (which with the former, are both the true effects,
and Natural Ofsprings of the first, the Common Parent, of all the Mischeifs,
and Inconveniences that have so long Attended the Tinners) Is the
Opportunities given; and Advantages taken by the Merchants, in meeting every
Coinage where they Contrive, and Resolve what Price to give.

The Londoner, after his bad Market, writes again to his Factor in Cornwall, and
limits him now perhaps to less than he gave the last Coinage, which still
proves the same, and would, did they buy it for Twenty Shillings the hundred:
These fresh Orders are Communicated to the rest of the Profession, who all meet
Quarterly (as I told you) and lay their heads together to Combine and make the
price, who get as much by their said usurous Contracts; as they do by their
Commissions, who have all gotten to themselves great Estates, by these
Practices, to the great abuse of the Londoners, The defrauding his Majesty of
his Revenue; and the utter Ruin of the poor Tinners, by undervaluing a
Commodity of such worth, and Excellency, all over Europe.

Ob. But here it may be demanded is there not an absolute necessity for a Say
Master to Tare the Tin and prevent the debasing of so good a Commodity: And how
can that be done without bringing it to the Coinage Towns as usual.

An. To this it may be answered, That it is as much the Tinners Interest as the
Merchants (to whom it is Ordinarily warranted by them) to preserve that Metal
pure, and free from being Adulterated, which may be done at the Blowing Houses
with far less Expense, and greater Convenience for both, than at the Coinage
Towns: for whereas the best Say Master has no Infallible Rule to Judge, how
much dross may be Contained in one Block, by which means he often distastes and
abuses, either the Merchant, or Tinners; so here they will meet with a Cheaper,
and more Infallible Remedy to Reconcile them both: for there may be in every
Blowing House (as formerly there has been) a Melting Kettle, to Remelt all
such Tin as the Say Master Judges not Merchantable: And then it will be past
all dispute to the Satisfaction of both.

The Adventuring Tinners are now so Impoverished, as they can Employ no more
men then will only preserve their Rights in such works, wherein (perhaps) they
have Expended the greatest part of their Estates, to Cut Oddits, or Aqueducts
to unwater the same: And those they do employ, are only for Three or Six Months
at most, in Summer.

The poor Miners wages being fallen from thirty, to fourteen, or fifteen
Shillings a month, which is all he has to maintain himself a Wife, and five,
or six Children (perhaps) all the year: The Wife, nor Girls getting very
little, or nothing, (Except in weeding Season or Harvest) there being no
Clothing Trade, or any other to Employ them in that part of the County; so that
they may be divided into two sorts.

The first as soon as Employments sail them, and the works are Shut up, do
immediately take up the Trade of Begging.

The latter who are ashamed to beg, lie under the Temptation of Stealing, or
even almost Starving: for I have Ordinarily seen such save Sheep, and Bullocks
that have dyed in the Feilds by Accident, tho poor, and Lean, or at least so
much of them as they could make use of while fresh, their Substance, nor Credit
now, being able to purchase so much Salt, as would be necessary to preserve it
longer; And I am persuaded a great many Families in the Neighborhood I live,
do not make use of any other Flesh at their own Tables four times in the year,
Their ordinary food in winter being Potatoes and Barly-bread (as course as
Horse-bread) with gruel thickn'd oftener with barley meal, than oat-meal. And in
Summer the same sort of bread and milk only; and could they have their fill of
this they would seem very well pleased.

And I have farther observed, in twenty or thirty years last past (by reason of
the cold and hunger their youth suffer, having not rags enough to cover them)
Men are so reduced, from well grown Persons to be now (Comparatively) mere
Pigmies in Stature, and strength, which is lamentable to behold.

Neither can I omit discovering an other Calamity that lies hard on the
Tinners, which proceeds from their Stannery Courts (a thing designed and
intended by most the Kings of England, for their ease, and Advantage: as may be
seen by the Imunities, and privileges granted them by their Charters, which is
now become none of the least of the burdens they labor under) In which said
Courts they Observe neither bounds, nor limits to restrain the avaritious
appetites of their Attorneys, who are now grown to that pass, as to extend a
Suit by delatory practices (wherein they contrive one with the other) that the
charge of a Trial in that Court, ordinarily amounts unto more then will obtain
a decree in Chancery.

And if they appeal in equity; the Warrants, Orders, and delays, before a
definitive Sentence can be obtained, are generally so chargeable, that it were
better for them to lose their rights, then contend for it.

For Remedy whereof, it is heartily wished, and humbly proposed: That the Costs
of all Trials; not only in the Stannaries, but in all other inferior Courts;
might be ascertained, by an Act of Parliament not to exceed such a Sum, as
they in their most sage Judgments; might think Convenient: which would be, a
means to expedite the execution of Justice, without delay: and not only redress
the present greivances of the Tinners: But be also an unspeakable case to that
whole County in general.

Their privileges likewise granted them, in liew of their Coinage duties, of
four shillings a hundred, were (amongst others) to be free of all Fairs, and
markets, from any Toll, tax, or such like impossitions; which now they are
denied, and deprived of: And then let it be considered, how unequal, and unjust
it is to continue the poor Tinners still to their burdens, without their
privileges, And to the payment of that, for which they do not enjoy the
Consideration.

And though some men were pleased to represent the Tinners of Cornwall, as
dangerous, I shall make bold to vindicate them so far, as not to deserve such
Treatment, who have sufficiently approved themselves to be men of Resolute
Loyalty, as well as of undaunted Spirits, when backed by a Legal Authority: and
then only, who have always practiced that passive Obedience (under all
Governments) which others have only preached, and talked of: as may appear more
at large, by a Letter of thanks sent them, and the Gentlemen of that County by
King Charles the First, (of Blessed memory) from Sudley Castle, which though well
known to most of that County, yet for the Information of others, who may be
strangers thereunto, I have here transcribed, and is as follows.

To the Inhabitants of the County of Cornwall A Letter of Thanks from King
Charles the First (of Blessed memory) dated Sep. the 10th. 1643. from Sudley
Castle.
CAROLUS REX.

WE are so highly Sensible of the Extraordinary merits of our County of
Cornwall, of their Zeal for the defense of our Person, and the Just Rights of
our Crown, in a time, when we could Contribute so little to our own Defense, or
to their Assistance, In a time when not only no reward Appeared: but great and
probable dangers were threatened to Obedience, and Loyalty: of their great, and
Eminent Courage, and Patience, in their Indefatigable Prosecution of their
great work, against so potent an Enemy, backed with so strong, rich, and
Populous Cities, and so plentifully furnish^ with Men, ^rms, Money, and
Ammunition, and Provisions of all kinds: and of the Wonderful Success, with
which it has pleased Almighty God (who with the loss of some Eminent Persons
who shall never be forgotten by us to reward their Loyalty, and Patience) by
many strange Victories over their, and our Enemies, in despite of all humane
Probabilities, and all Imaginable disadvantages. That as we cannot but desire
to publish to all the world, and perpetuate to all times, the memory of their
merits and of our Acceptance of the same: And to that end, we do hereby render
our. Royal thanks to that our County in the most public, and lasting manner we
can devise, Commanding Copies hereof to be printed, and published, and one of
them to be read in every Church and Chapel therein; And to be kept for ever as
a Record in the same. That as long as the History of of those times, and of
this Nation shall Continue, The memory of how much that County has meritted
from us, and our Crown, may be derived with it to Posterity.

Given at our Camp at Sudley Castle, the 10th. of. September 1643.

Who (not knowing how to gratify such signal Services better) granted to the
Inhabitants of that County a free trade in all parts, where the English have
any Commerce. And though they have been opposed by the East Indian and African
Companies, yet I persuade my self they would be content to be restrained from
Interrupting them in their trade, by Confining themselves to Export the
Products of their own County only, as Tin, Fish, and Wool Cloth: And I question
very much, whether the Mob, in any other part of the Kingdom, would have
endured half their Sufferings with such Submissive Patience.

And this I can boldly farther avouch for them, that in the whole County of
Cornwall, I never met with one Laboring Tinner that was either Papist, or
Popishly Inclined: But all Generally though Rustic, and Illiterate, have as
great Aversions to that persuasion as any protestant Divine in England: And,
therefore do persuade my self, that Mr. Crosby his Papers were written out
Book, as well of them; as of some others of that County.

Now I foresee there are some People that may raise some Objections against the
Tinners freedom, and Common privilege of other Subjects: and they in all
likelihood may be either.

First those Merchants whose Practices I have detected.

Or Secondly, those Attourneys who have preyed on them so long, and have been
sure to go away with the profit of all such matters, and Concerns, as happen to
be Controverted among them.

Or Lastly such who reap particular Advantages by needless Offices, out of the
Coinage duties.

Therefore If any Objectors chance to appear, It will be necessary to enquire,
what were the Motives that prompted them hereunto (viz.)

Whether a private Interest, or a public good: If the former, and it be put
into the Scale against a Common benefit, (I hope) it will appear so frivolous,
as need not require much time to answer.

If the latter.

It must then necessarily relate, either to his Majesty; or the Tinners.

If to his Majesty.

It must be then touching his Prerogative, or his Revenue.

Ob. If his Prerogative, the Objection then must be, That the Kings of England
have Anciently had (by virtue of their Prerogative) a right of Preemption of
all the Tin, before the Tinners had freedom to dispose, or the Merchant to buy
the same.

Therefore it must be brought Quarterly to the Coinage Towns in Order to his
Acceptance, or Refusal.

An. For Answer (I say) That the Kings Prerogative, and Right of Preemption of
the Tin is not here denied, or intended to be so, Neither does it follow, that
the Tinners must therefore keep their Goods a whole Quarter of a year, and
bring it to the Coinage Towns only for that purpose.

But first (I pray) Observe the very word Emption does presuppose, and Imply a
Contract, and there is (you know) a Correlation between the Contractor, and
Contractee: for the Law of Nations requires a voluntary and mutual Consent both
of the Buyer, and Seller, and therefore as the King cannot Impose a price on
their Tin against the Tinners will, so neither, is he (on the other hand)
obliged to bargain with every Individual Tinner, every Quarter of a year: for
the Tinners being Incorporated by several Charters granted them by the Kings of
England, have power to send their Representatives (by the direction of the Lord
Warden) to their Parliament or Convocation, who may be qualified, and have
power to treat and bargain for all the Tin, when ever his Majesty is pleased to
signify, that it is his Pleasure, and Intention so to do, or any other who have
a mind to farm, it under him) whose Laws and Constitutions being then Promulg'd
will be as binding on the whole Body of Tinners of that County, as if the same
were Established by the General Parliament of the Realm.

And therefore in Case of such a bargain, the Tinners will be still Content to
bring their Tin to the Coinage Towns, and Receive their money Quarterly for it
as Accustomed.

But here I cannot omit discovering another great piece of hardship, and
Injustice done them, by the Mayors of the four Coinage Towns, who are now
usually such Enemies to the Tinners, as I have already declared: Yet assume a
Right to themselves, of Nominating, and Chosing Members, or Convocators to
serve in the Tinners Parliament, (who are to make Laws, and Constitutions to
bind the whole body of Tinners) without their Privity, or Approbation; only
because the Writs are directed to them (and the Tinners unhappiness have been
such, to have all their Records burned in the Time of the Late unhappy Civil
Wars) which is as much, as if the Sherifs of Counties, should take up the like
freedom to Chose Knights, and Burgesses to serve in the Parliaments of the
Realm without the Consent of the Freeholders, then which nothing can be more
Arbitrary, or be nearer of Kin to French Slavery.

For Remedy whereof it is humbly Proposed, That our Honorable Lord Warden, for
the Time being, may for the future, direct his Writs (for the Choice of
Convocators) to his Steward of the Stanneries, to Require the head Baylif of
each Jurisdiction, to Summon at least 40 or 50 of the most knowing, and
Substantialest Tinners to be and Attend at the next Law Court, of which the
first 25 (or a less number) that Appear may (Representing the whole body of
Tinners) Serve as the Grand Jury or Homage for that said Stannery, who may
Elect and nominate Convocators for the said Jurisdiction: and present them
under their hands to the said Steward, in order to be returned to our said Lord
Warden, as they have of late been by the four Mayors of the Stanneries
Corporations.

If it Relates to his Majesty's Revenue, It must be then made appear, how it
may be prejudicial thereunto: for (on the Contrary) it shall be so far from
diminishing the same, as the Tinners will be Obliged to Augment it Considerably.

As First the Kings duties shall be paid Merchant weight, which is now at the
Kings Beam Sixscore and two.

Secondly all Embezling, or Running of the Kings dues shall then be prevented.

And Thirdly all the Consultations and Contrivances of the Merchants to keep
down the Price (which is the Cutthroat as well of the Kings Revenue, as of the
poor Tinners weal, being both Embarked in the same Bottom) will then likewise
be hindered; If the Hammer were once again in the Blowing Houses, where all the
frauds are Committed, There being no Officer now that attend the same (as they
ought) which are the Reasons that this Commodity is so debased, both at home
and abroad: but Especially in France, where I have been Credibly Informed, that
Tin has been sold there Cheaper then at London: for the said Cornish Factors
finding (by Experience) that the Quick return makes the heavy Purse, will
surely abate of the Price, rather then lie there long on demurrage.

If it Relates to the Tinners, I should gladly hear what might be offered more
to their Advantage, or why a freedom to sell their Goods at pleasure, should
prejudice their Interest more, then it does any other Tradesmen in England.

Now on the whole, it is most Obvious, and Apparent; that both his Majestics
Interest, and the Tinners, are so Connex'd, and interwoven, as they must be
Allowed of to be Inseparable: for whatever advances the Price of Tin,
Encourages the more hands, which increases the Quantities; and so the Kings
Revenue by Consequence.

And whatever Occasions the diminishing or fall of the Price of Tin,
discourages the Tinners, and abates the Quantities Proportionably: but more
Especially at this Time, when all Materials Employed on that Concern, are sold
at such Excessive Rates, which Threatens, and Endangers the sinking of the
whole Revenue, by an utter desertion of that Employment. The like being already
done in Devon. may be with much ease practiced in Cornwall also.

FINIS.

