I Do Appoint Robert Pawlett to Print the Trial of Thomas Knox and John Lane,
and let no other person presume to Print the same.

WILLIAM SCROGGS.

THE TRIAL AND CONVICTION OF THOMAS KNOX and JOHN LANE, FOR A CONSPIRACY, To
Defame and Scandalize Dr. OATS and Mr. BEDLOE; Thereby to Discredit their
Evidence about the Horrid Popish Plot: At the Kings-Bench-Bar at Westminster,
On Tuesday the 25 th of November. 1679. Before the Right Honorable Sir WILLIAM
SCROGGS, Knight, Lord Chief Justice, and the other Judges of that Court. Where,
upon full Evidence, they were found Guilty of the Offense aforesaid.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Pawlett, at the Bible in Chancery Lane, near
Fleetstreet. M. DC. LXXX.

THE Trial and Conviction OF THOMAS KNOX and JOHN LANE FOR A CONSPIRACY To
Defame and Scandalize Dr. OATS and Mr. BEDLOE, Thereby to discredit their
Evidence about the POPISH PLOT.
ON Tuesday the 25 th. day of November 1679 at the Kings Bench Bar at
Westminster, Thomas Knox and John Lane were tried for the Misdemeanour and
Offense herein after in the Indictment expressed, and which Trial was in manner
following.

Proclamation being made in usual manner for Information and the Defendants
called to their Challenges, the Jury were sworn, whose names follow; The JURY.
Sir John Kirk Thomas Harriot Henry Johnson Simon Middleton Hugh Squire
Francis Dorrington John Roberts Rainsford VVaterhouse Thomas Earsby Joseph
Radcliffe James Supple Richard Cooper.
Who being numbered the Clerk of the Crown charged them with the Indictment thus,

Clerk of the Crown. Gentlemen, you of the Jury that are sworn, hearken to your
charge, you shall understand that the Defendants stand Indicted by the Oaths of
twelve honest and lawful men of the County of Middlesex, by the names of Thomas
Knox of the Parish of S. Margaret's Westminster in the County of Middlesex
Labourer, and John Lane of the same Parish and County Labourer, for that
whereas Edward Coleman, William Ireland, and John Grove, and other false
Traitors against our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second by the grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, defender of the Faith, etc. to
the Jurors aforesaid unknown, the 24 th. day of April, in the 30 th year of the
Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King, at the Parish of S. Margarets
Westminster in the Country of Middlesex, Traitorously amongst themselves had
conspired, consulted; and agreed, to bring, and put to death and destruction
our said Sovereign Lord the King, and war against our said Sovereign Lord the
King within this Kingdom of England to stir up, and the Religion in the said
Kingdom of England rightly, and by the Laws of the said Kingdom established,
to the superstition of the Romish Church to change and alter, and the
Government of the said Kingdom of England to subvert; for which their said
most wicked Treasons, and Traitorous conspiraries, consultations, and
agreements, they the said Edward Coleman, William Ireland, and John Grove, in
due manner and according to the Laws of this Kingdom of England were
afterward attainted, and underwent the pain of death for the same. And whereas
William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, John Lord Bellasis, Henry
Lord Arundel of Wardor, William Lord Petre, and Sir Henry Tichbourn Baronet,
the 30 th. day of Nov. in the 30 th. year of the Reign of our said Sovereign
Lord the King aforesaid at the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster aforesaid,
in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, of the Treasons aforesaid, were lawfully
accused, and thereupon according to due form of Law were committed to the Tower
of London, being the Prison of our said Sovereign Lord the King, there safely
to be kept to answer for the Treasons aforesaid, whereupon they the said
William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, John Lord Bellasis, Henry
Lord Arundel of Wardor, and William Lord Petre, were in Parliament impeached by
the Commons in the same Parliament Assembled. And whereas Thomas Earl of Danby,
afterward to wit the said 30 th. day of November, in the 30 th. year
aforesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, of certain
Treasons and other Misdemeanors, was lawfully accused, and thereupon,
according to due Form of Law, was committed to the said Tower of London, there
to be safely kept to answer for the Treasons and Misdeanours aforesaid, of
which said Treasons and Misdemeanors, he the said Thomas Earl of Danby is
impeached in Parliament, by the Commons in the same Parliament Assembled, that
they the said Thomas Knox and John Lane well knowing the said William Earl of
Powis, William Viscount Stafford, John Lord Bellasis, Henry Lord Arundel of
Wardor, William Lord Petre, and Thomas Earl of Danby, to be accused of the
Treasons and Misdeameanours aforesaid, and they the said Thomas Knox and John
Lane, being Devillishly affected toward our said Sovereign Lord the King their
Supreme and natural Lord, and devising, and with all their strength intending
the peace and tranquillity of this Kingdom of England to disturb, and to hinder
and stifle the discovery of the said Treasons, by the said William Earl of
Powis, William Viscount Stafford, John Lord Bellasis, Henry Lord Arundel, and
William Lord Petre, as aforesaid supposed to be committed, and as much as in
them lay to elude the due course of Law, and the prosecution of Justice against
the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, William Lord
Petre, John Lord Bellasis, Sir Henry Tichbourn, and Thomas Earl of Danby, to
retard, they the said Thomas Knox and John Lane afterward, to wit the 30 th.
day of April, in the 31 th. year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, falsely, maliciously and
unlawfully did consult and agree among themselves, Titus Oats Clerk, and
William Bedloe Gentleman, who Informations of the Treasons aforesaid had
given, and whom they the said Thomas Knox and John Lane the day and year
aforesaid, well knew to have given Information of the Treasons aforesaid
against them, the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford John
Lord Bellasis, Henry Lord Arundel, and William Lord Petre, to scandalize, and
upon the trial of the said William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford,
John Lord Bellasis, Henry Lord Arundel, and William Lord Petre, to represent
them to be persons of evil conversation, and Witnesses not deserving credit.
And that he the said Thomas Knox afterward, to wit the said 30 th. day of
April, in the 31 th. year aforesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, in the names and with the consent and agreement of the said John
Lane, and one William Osborn, to disgrace the Information of the said Titus
Oats and William Bedlow, against them the said William Earl of Powis,
William Viscount Stafford, William Lord Petre, John Lord Bellasis, and Henry
Lord Arundel, for our said Sovereign Lord the King, to be given falsely,
maliciously, subtly, and advisedly, did Write and cause to be Written three
Letters, and those Letters, so written falsely, craftily, unlawfully, and
advisedly, did direct and cause to be delivered to himself the said Thomas
Knox, by which said Letters falsely, craftily, and deceitfully, it was declared
that they the said John Lane and William Osbourn were greatly troubled in
their Consciences by reason of certain things which they well knew, and had
concealed concerning the nnjust contrivances of the said Titus Oats and
William Bedloe, in accusing the said Thomas Earl of Danby, to be guilty of the
Treasons and other misdemeanors aforesaid, and that the said Titus Oats was a
person of a wicked and vicious Life, and made an assault upon the said John
Lane, and with the said John Lane to commit that detestable sin called Sodomy
before that time had endeavored. And that he the said Thomas Knox, the sooner
and more effectually to persuade the said John Lane and William Osbourn falsely
to accuse the said Titus Oats and William Bedloe, that they the said Titus
Oats and William Bedloe unjustly, and against all truth had accused the said
Thomas Earl of Danby, of the Treasons and other misdemeanors, aforesaid, and
so to affirm against the evidence of our said Sovereign Lord the King, upon the
Trial of the said Thomas Earl of Danby, for the Treasons and other
Misdemeanors aforesaid, to be had afterward, to wit the said 30 th. day of
April, in the 31 th. year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King
aforesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, falsely, advisedly,
corruptly, and against the duty of his Allegiance, unlawfully gave to the said
John Lane, and William Osborn diverse great sums of money, and also further
falsely, advisedly, corruptly, and against the duty of his Allegiance, the day
and year aforesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, did
promise unto the said John Lane and William Osbourn, that they the said John
Lane and William Osbourn, within a certain time by the said Thomas Knox, to
the said John Lane and William Osbourn, propounded diverse other great sums of
money, and other great rewards therefore should have and receive against the
Duty of their Allegiance, to the great retarding, obstructing and suppressing
of Justice, in manifest contempt of the Laws of this Kingdom of England to the
evil and pernicious example of all others in the like case offending, and
against the peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity,
to this Indictment, the said Thomas Knox and John Lane, by their Attorney plead
that they are not Guilty, nor either of them is Guilty of the offense
aforesaid, and further withal put themselves upon the Country, and the Kings
Attorney likewise. And your charge is to inquire if they are Guilty or not
Guilty, etc.


Clerk of the Crown. Make an, O yes.


Crier. O yes, If any one will give Evidence, on the behalf of our Sovereign
Lord the King, against Thomas Knox and John Lane, of the Misdemeanors and
offense whereof they stand indicted, let them come forth and give their
Evidence.


Then Trenchard Esquire of Counsel for the King in this Cause opened the Indictment
thus.

Mr. Trench. May it please you Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, Thomas
Knox and John Lane, stand indicted for a great and high Misdemeanour, and the
Indictment sets forth, that whereas Coleman, Ireland, Pickering, and Grove, and
other false Traitors did conspire to destroy the King, and change the Religion
established by Law, to levy War against our Sovereign Lord the King* and to
introduce Popery, and for these Treasons were convicted, attainted, and
executed, and further sets forth, that the Lord Powis, Lord Arundel of Warder,
and others were accused of the said Treasons, and were committed to the Tower,
and afterward were impeached for the same by the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, as also that Thomas Earl of Danby, was impeached of High Treason and
other Misdemeanors, that the Defendants knowing Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe had
given Information of these Treasons to stifle the Evidence, and to scandalize
them, did falsely conspire to represent them as wicked persons and men of no
credit. And the Indictment further sets forth that the Defendant Knox, with the
agreement of Lane, and one Osbourn did cause several Letters to be writ, in
which it was contrived to accuse the said Oats and Bedloe, that they had
conspired falsely to accuse the said Earl of Danby, and that Oats was a person
of a vicious conversation, and had a design to attempt an assault upon the
person of the said Lane, with an intention to commit that detestable sin of
Sodomy, the better to effect which wicked designs, the said Knox gave several
sums of money to Osbourn and Lane, and had offered great rewards unto them. To
this Indictment they have pleaded not Guilty, and you are to try whether they
are Guilty or not, of this Misdemeanour.


Then Sir John Maynard the Kings eldest Sergeant at Law persued the charge thus.

Mr. Serj. Mayn. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury;
this cause is of great consequence, and my Lord I desire the Jury to observe
that their question this day is not to inquire whether the Lords or the other
persons accused and impeached in Parliament are Guilty or not, but the question
before them, is, whether the persons that stand here indicted are guilty of
wicked and vile endeavors, to discountenance and suppress the Evidence and
scandalize their persons, who were to give Evidence against these Lords, we are
not to give Evidence against the Lords, but against these persons.


L. Chief, Just. You are right Brother.


Mr. Serj. Mayn. Gentlemen, something I must observe to you, that is an
inducement to this matter, that there has been an horrid and abominable
Conspiracy against the King, the Nation, the Religion, and the Law, appears (my
Lord) by the proceedings in Parliament, wherein the Lords and the Commons, have
several times jointly declared, and, I think, it is so public that no body will
doubt there is such a thing; who is guilty that is another matter.


L. Chief. Just. This Court must take notice of that* because, some have been
tried, convicted, and condemned for it by this Court.


Mr. Serj. Mayn. Your Lordship says right. But, my Lord, the first discovery of
this Conspiracy came from a single person, one that stood single and
discouraged a long time, and that there were endeavors to discourage his
further discovery that will appear. My Lord, when it stood so, it happened that
Sir Edmondbury God. frey had taken his Examination, and these things will be
material in the end of the Cause. Sir Edmondbury Godfrey having taken the
Examination of Oats, then the endeavor was to suppress this Examination that
he had taken, and that by no less a wickedness then the barbarous murder of
that honest Gentleman, whom you all knew, and they not only took away his Life,
but they did strive to baffle and defame him when he was dead, and that will
appear too, and is public and known. My Lord, all this while stood Oats
single, it fell out by the Mercy of God, that a further discovery was made by
Bedloe, he was examined, and it is publicly known, and public Justice has
gone upon it.

The next attempt was to corrupt the testimony of Bedloe, with Bribes and
Rewards, and by other ways, and the person that transacted it, Reading, is
attainted of it, Scelere tutandum est scelus, when men have invented and
designed any great wickedness, they are forced to enter upon others to cover
and conceal the former. My Lord, it proceeded now, and comes to that which will
be the Question this day. Having gone all these ways, now they return again,
to see if they can disgrace and baffle the Evidence Oats and Bedloe had given,
and the way to that is by disparaging and scandalizing them with foul offenses,
especially Dr. Oats, and that was thus (as we shall prove to your Lordship)
Lane had been a servant with Oats, and the other was one of the like
condition, and he was tampered with to accuse Dr. Oats of that horrid sin of
Sodomy, and I think if he were such an one, little credit were to be given to
such a man. This was the design they were to accomplish. And we shall prove to
you, in order to it there were Letters (written and contrived by Knox indeed)
written by Osbourn who is not now before you, but a contrivance of them all.
And, my Lord, there must be a pretense) for in truth these persons had been
Examined, and had charged him with this offense, but upon further Examination
they had renounced their discovery.


L. Chief. Just. Had they all given Evidence? or who did?


Mr. Serj Mayn. No, my Lord pardon me, I am not speaking of their Evidence but
only of their Examination, before the Lords.


L. Chief. Just. What was it that was there witnessed?


Mr. Serj. Mayn. Then they pretended this matter, that they were touched in
Conscience, and now they repent, and must discover the truth for the truths
sake, that themselves were false in the making of the charge, and this, my
Lord* must be furthered with Bribes and Rewards as we shall prove to you. We
shall make out the particulars by Witnesses, and then we think we may leave it
to your Lordship and the Jury to determine. In truth, my Lord, it happens in
this case as it did long ago, when the first discovery was of a like design,
and as is told us by the Historian. Multi ob stultitiam non putabant, multi ob
Ignorantiam non videbant, multi ob pravitatem non credebant and non credendo
conjurationem adjuvabant.


Then Sir Creswel Levins His Majesty's Attorney General, further opened the
Evidence thus.

Mr. Attorn. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury. I
am of Counsel for the King in this Cause whose Suit it is. The Evidence has
been opened fully by Mr. Sergeant. I shall only say this, that this is a
Counter-part of Mr. Readings case, only it seems in this to differ, that the
Counter-Part exceeds the Original, for, I think, that it is of a further extent
then his was. It has been told you by Mr. Sergeant, and, I know, the Court
will tell you, that it matters not whether those persons that are accused of
the Plot, and impeached for it were guilty or not, it is sufficient that they
are accused, and that by these persons. For any body to endeavor to suppress
and withdraw the Kings Evidence, or to disgrace the Kings Evidence, that is not
lawful, be the Crime what it will be, but it is a much greater Crime in a case
of this nature of High Treason, where the Life of the King, the Government of
the Kingdom, the Religion, and the true Worship of God Established in it, and
the Laws of the Nation are in danger: Some of these persons are Guilty, for Mr
Coleman and several others, have been found Guilty, and have been Executed for
it,

The design in this case that lies before you Gentlemen to try, was to throw a
disparagement upon the testimony of those persons by whose Evidence those
Traitors were principally attainted and executed. This is Gentlemen to affront
the justice of the Nation, and indeed to cast a disparagement upon it; and that
sure is as great an offense as can be; the matter of the Evidence has been
opened to you, I shall only acquaint your Lordship and the Jury, that it has
been designed a great while, and so long designed, that one of the persons here
accused, Mr. Lane, one of Oats's Servants, had the opportunity to get into his
Masters secrets, thereby the more effectually to betray him, and as it will
appear by Witnesses, did carry on the design till it was discovered, and by
that discovery prevented as to any success.


Mr. Recorder, Your Lordship is pleased to observe in the Indictment that is
now to be tried, there are but two persons that stand Indicted, that is, Lane
and Knox. I presume the Gentlemen that are on the other side for each of the
Prisoners (for I perceive those that are for the one are not for the other) may
expect that there should be proof made of what is laid as inducement in the
Indictment, and will not tend immediately to that which will be the Question in
this Case: for there is recited in the Indictment the Conviction of Coleman in
this place, and others in other places, for the High Treason the Evidence
whereof these persons are Indicted for scandalizing, we have here the Records
ready to prove it.


Lord Chief Just. I suppose they will admit that.


Mr. Recorder, If they will not, we have that which will prove it.


Mr. Withins, My Lord, we shall not stand upon that.


Sir Francis Winnington, We are ready if you did.


Mr. Sergeant Maynard, And you will admit that Doctor Oats and Mr. Bedloe were
witnesses upon those Trials?


Mr. Withins, Yes, and gave evidence very considerable.


Mr. Recorder, Then my Lord, we must hint to you, that Lane, who is one of the
persons taken notice of in the Indictment, was a Servant to Doctor Oats, Knox
was not in his service; but Knox is a man that made use of Lane as a handle to
the matter he had designed; therefore Letters are prepared, but by whom? that
we shall give you an account of was by the direction of Knox, though the
Letters that will be produced are directed to Knox himself.


Lord Chief Just. Your Indictment says so.


Mr. Recorder, But we shall give you an account, that he was director of those
Letters himself; but as your Lordship may observe, there are not only Letters,
but some accusations or informations. We shall prove to your Lordship whose
handwriting they were, and who dictated those Informations: for I think that
Mr. Knox is pretended to have the most brains; and I believe Mr. Knox in the
consequence will appear to have the most malice. And we shall prove in the next
place, that inasmuch as it would be natural in the course of Justice to ask,
whether these persons should not have money for the reward of such a business;
we shall prove that there were treaties with Mr. Lane and one Mr. Osborne who
is not Indicted, (but was likewise a Servant to Doctor Oats, and had thereby
an opportunity of deceiving him) that they had meetings; how Guineys have been
cunningly dropped down, which was to prevent, as I was acquainting your Lordship,
any such question that should be asked, what moneys and rewards they were to
have for this great discovery of any wickedness that Mr. Oats should be guilty
of. Mr. Knox he prepares them in this manner, At every meeting, when they were
discoursing and pursuing this business, then by some unlucky accident or other
Mr. Knox he is to drop a Guiney or two, according as Mr. Lane and the other
person had occasion or a desire to have it; but none were to be given, but as
by accident, as if Knox holding his Guineys in his hand, or in some other
accidental way should drop them, and then Osborne and Lane were to pick them up
in a kind of a jest only, as if Knox had accidentally let them fall, and they
had as accidentally taken them up. How this came to be discovered we must give
you an account. Matters being thus prepared by the instigation of Knox, and
transacted so far by Lane and Osborne, they thought it then fit to put their
design in execution. Accordingly their Informations are produced before a
Justice of Peace, who finding the matters were improbable; (for I think they
had some scrutiny before the Justice of Peace, and before the Lords Committees
of the Lords house) one of them Gentlemen, though now he is pleased to say he
is Not Guilty, yet at that time had a little more ingenuity, and did confess
the whole matter, and how he was drawn in, and how far he was concerned, and
how Mr. Knox had directed him, and the money and rewards he had received, and
that besides diverse other sums of money had been promised, and great rewards
offered in case this design had taken effect. We shall call our Witnesses
before your Lordship, and give in Evidence the Informations that they had
intended to offer; and if we shall prove the matters that have been opened to
you, I believe the consequence of this case will appear as much to concern the
Government as any that has come to this Bar.


Sir Francis Winnington, My Lord, If your Lordship please we shall now go to
prove our Case; the Question was asked whether they would admit the several
Attainders of those persons that have been executed for this Plot. I now ask
them whether they will admit the several Impeachments that are also mentioned
in the Indictment, both of the five Lords in the Tower, and also of the Lord of
Danby.


Mr. Withins and Mr. Scroggs, Yes, we do.


Mr. Justice Pemberton, All that they will allow.


Mr. Recorder, Then we begin with Mr. Radford. Who was sworn.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis What is your name Sir?


Mr. Radford, Robert Radford.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Come on, Mr. Radford, tell my Lord and the Jury what you know
concerning this business, about Lane and Knox.


Mr. Radford, Sir, if it please your Honor, R. Lane, Father of John Lane was a
Yeomen of the Guard extraordinary, and I am one of his Majesty's Yeomen of the
Guard. As he was in waiting he was telling me a story --


Lord Chief Just. Richard was?


Radford, Yes, Richard the Father was telling me that Doctor Oats did attempt
his Son many times to do such and such things to him that was in the way of
Buggery; said I, Richard, I am ashamed of you, that you should cherish your Son
in such things as these are, so I went away in an anger, and told him, that if
he were my Son I would correct him severely for it, and said no more, knowing
him to be a lying fellow, and all the whole Guard know him to be a lying
fellow, and that there is no truth in him.


Lord Chief Just. All who?


Radford, All the Guard, and that is all I can say.


Mr. Justice Jones, When was this?


Radford, Above a twelve month ago. And I knew that he was a lying man, and I
durst not speak of it, because I knew he was so, and was afraid he would have
put it upon me.


Lord Chief Just. What, he told you that his Son told him so?


Radford. No, he told me only that his Son was weary of Doctor Oats his
service, and I told him that he was come away once before, and why did he go
again? he said his Son could not be quiet.


Lord Chief Just. Did he say his Son told him? The question is plain, Did he
speak it of himself, and not that his Son told him?


Radford, He said only that he had attempted his Son.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis My Lord, we will call Thomas Allen. Who was sworn.


Lord Chief Just. What is this man's name?


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Mr. Allen, my Lord. What do you know of any application to
bring this Lane into Oats's service? Tell your whole knowledge of the matter.


Mr. Allen, My Lord, about the month of December last, when he was gone out of
Doctor Oats his service --


Lord Chief Just. Who was gone out of Doctor Oats's service?


Allen, ^ane; he desired me to intercede for him again and again, and
accordingly he was admitted into his service again.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Did you hear any discourse before this of any attempt upon
him.


Allen, How attempt?


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Did you ever hear of any complaints made by Lane against
Doctor Oats?


Lord Chief Just. Did you ever hear Lane complain that his Master would be
uncivil with him?


Allen, No, I remember nothing of that.


Mr. Recorder, Now, if your Lordship please, we shall give your Lordship an
account, that when he was admitted again, he bragged he should get a great sum
of money, and for that we call Mr. Samuel Oats. Who was sworn.


Lord Chief Just. Are you brother to Mr. Oats?


Mr. S. Oats, Yes Sir.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis What do you know of any sum that this Mr. Lane did pretend
to get, and on what account?


Mr. S. Oats, My Lord, about a matter of a fortnight before he went away from
my Brother, I was in the withdrawing-room --


Lord Chief Just. How long is it ago since he went away?


Mr. S. Oats, It was in April last, as near as I can remember.


Lord Chief Just. Well, go on Sir.


Mr. S. Oats, So there were several Servants in the room, and they were
talking and laughing together, and he was wishing, said he, I wish I had a
Thousand pounds; said some of them to him, what would you do with it? said he,
I would take it and fling it upon the ground and tumble it: says one of them,
you may wish long enough before you have it: I que ion not, says he, but ere
long to find a way to get a Thousand pounds.


Mr. Recorder, Do you hear him Gentlemen? This was a fortnight before he went
away.


Mr. S. Oats, I can only speak as to Osborne as to the thing it self.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Did you ever hear him say which way he did intend to get this
Thousand pounds?


Mr. S. Oats, No, I do not remember that, but upon these scandalous things
coming out, I was considering what he had said, and how he behaved himself in
his service, and upon recollection I did think of this saying of his.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, Ay, he recollected it afterward.


Mr. Williams, Speak those words over again, as near as you can remember.


Then Mr. S. Oats repeated his Evidence to the same effect.

Sir Francis Winnington, What is that of Osborne that you can say?


Lord Chief Just. What does that signify to these Defendants?


Sir Francis Winnington, Although he is not a party that does defend this
matter, yet it is all one entire Act that they three were in combination to
corrupt the King's Evidence, and to stifle it; and though so far as it does
relate of Osborne, it will not convict him being absent, yet it will inlighten
the King's Evidence about the Conspiracy, for he is mentioned in the Indictment.


Lord Chief Just. Well, if you think it material, you may ask what questions
you will about it.


Mr. S. Oats, I was asking Osborne a little after he was let out of the
Gatehouse, how he came to repent himself --


Lord Chief Just. Who had repented himself?


Mr. S. Oats, Osborne.


Lord Chief Just. Had Osborne repented himself, of what?


Mr. S. Oats, Of what he had given an account of before the Committee.


Mr. Just Pemberton, Do you know any thing of that?


Mr. S. Oats, I know nothing but what they did say upon their examination.


L. C. Just. Were you by, and present at their examination?


Mr. S. Oats, I heard nothing but what they said for themselves. I was at some
part of their examination.


M. Just. Pemberton, What did Knox and Lane say?


Mr. S. Oats, Osborne was a saying, that as we walked, said he, in the
Cloisters of the Abbey, where he did dictate what we were to do.


L. C. Just. This is no evidence. Shall what Osborne says at one time and apart
from the rest be any evidence here?


Mr. Recorder, No my Lord, we offer it only as an evidence of the general
Conspiracy.


L. Chief Just. Osborne is a telling how Knox and Lane and he did conspire and
contrive this business, is this evidence against these Defendants? I ask my
Brother Maynard.


Mr. Serj. Maynard, My Lord, if this were single clearly it were no evidence,
but if it fall out in the evidence, that we shall prove Osborne, Knox, and Lane
were all in the Conspiracy, though it is not direct evidence to convict the
other, yet it will inlighten that evidence we give against them.


Lord Chief Just. Why did you not make Osborne a party?


Mr. Sergeant Maynard, He is laid in the Indictment to join with them, but he
is run away.


Mr. Justice Pemberton, My Brother intends it thus, that the business is so
interwoven between them all, that to make it be understood, it is necessary to
bring in something about Osborne.


Mr. Sanders, I pray they may bring something against them first.


Lord Chief Just. Ay, the Counsel say very well on the other side; first prove
some fact against Knox and Lane, and then prove what you will afterward.


Mr. Sergeant Maynard, It is an inducement to it, but I beseech you, in all
cases that are capital, are not the King's Counsel at liberty to prove
circumstances as well as the substance?


Lord Chief Just. The Court will direct it is no evidence against the now
Defendants, unless you prove the fact upon them.


Mr. Serj. Maynard, Unless we do bring it down to Knox and Lane afterward,
that they were guilty, it will not be any evidence I know.


Mr. Holt, If it be not evidence, we conceive with submission to your Lordship,
it ought not to be heard.


Lord Chief Just. Prove something first, Brother, against the Defendants, and
then urge this.


Mr. Recorder, They need not labor it on the other side, we shall. We agree it
is no evidence against the Defendants, but only circumstantial as of the
general Conspiracy.


L. C. Just. But pray how can it be circumstantial evidence and yet no
evidence? Prove the Conspiracy or it signifies nothing.


Mr. Serj. Maynard, If it be circumstantial to make good the evidence of the
fact, it will be material for us to urge it.


L. C. Just. But first prove the fact.


Mr. Recorder, We shall now prove, if your Lordship please, that Knox, who is
one of the persons Indicted, has made his applications to others that had
relation to Dr. Oats, to endeavor to persuade them to pick out something or
other against Dr. Oats. Call Thurston and Ray.


Mr. Serj. Maynard, My Lord, we shall first go to the substance of the
evidence, and then the circumstantial thing will be material which before were
not material.


L. C. Just. Now you go right Brother.


Mr. Serj. Maynard, We shall go this way, to show that Lane and Osborne did
accuse Dr. Oats, and after they had accused him, they were convicted in their
own Consciences, and did confess they had falsely accused him, and afterward
did repent of that repentance, and that Knox had an hand in all this.


L. C. Just. I think you have not opened that clear enough; before whom was
that accusation?


Mr. Serj. Maynard, Before the Lords, and before Sir William Waller.


Mr. Recorder, For they were in the Gatehouse, and there they sent for Sir
William Waller to come to them, and there did confess the matter to him, whom
we desire may be sworn. Which was done accordingly.


Sir William Waller, My Lord, upon the 29. of April, during the Sessions of
Parliament, there was a Committee of Lords appointed for the taking
instructions about this Plot; being there attending upon the Lords, this
complaint of Mr. Oats was brought before them, of the horrid abuse of two of
his Servants. And the Lords were pleased to order Mr. Warcup and my self to
take their examinations.


L. C. Just. What two Servants were they?


Sir William Waller, They did belong to Dr. Oats.


L. C. Just. What were their Names?


Sir William Waller, Osborne and Lane.


L. C. Just. What found you upon their examination?


Sir William Waller, Upon the Examination of Osborne and Lane, I did find they
did agree together to a tittle.


L. C. I. Then tell us Lane's Evidence first. If they agreed in a tittle, tell
it us what it was.


Sir W. Waller. My Lord, Mr. Lane did confess this.


L. C. I. What, upon his Oath?


Sir W. Waller. Yes, upon his Oath, my Lord.


L. C. I. To you?


Sir W. Waller. Yes, my Lord, that he had been induced by Mr. Knox to betray
his Master, and for to swear several things against him which Knox had drawn
up, and dictated to him. He did not write them himself, but Osborne writ them,
and he did Sign them. There were four Letters that were brought before us,
there were three or four Memorials, as they called them, three or four
Informations, which were those Papers that they carried to Mr. Cheyney to
Chelsey.


L. C. I. Who carried them?


Sir W. Waller. Knox took Osborne and Lane with him, and carried them thither,
as Lane swore. And when they came thither, and he was acquainted with the
business, he looked upon it as so foul and notorious a thing, that he would not
meddle with it: but he advised them that they should go (because Knox pretended
the Lord of Danby was much concerned in it) to some other Justice of Peace, or
some of the Privy Council that were Friends of my Lord of Danby.


L. C. I. Knox advised this, did he?


Sir W. Waller. No, they said Mr. Cheyney did. They went afterward (and they
did all confess it) to Mr. Dewy, and M. Dewy gave them the same Answer, that he
could not meddle with it; and after this, Mr. Knox went and took several
Lodgings for them, fearing that Dr. Oats would hunt after them; and one
Lodging, amongst others, was I think the Three Flower-de-Luces in White-Fryers.
And afterward they removed to a place in the Paved Alley, betwixt Lincoln's Inn
Fields and Chancery Lane. During which time, Knox did bid them stand firm to
what they were to do, and they should not want for a considerable Reward; and
have wherewithal to maintain them with their Footmen, and live very well. And,
my Lord, Lane did confess this, that he brought Mr. Osborne to Knox first into
the Painted Chamber, and made them acquainted there. And, my Lord, there is one
thing that I omitted; Mr. Lane did confess to me, that Mr. Knox did at the
One-Tun-Tavern, I think it was, drop a Guinney upon the Table, and said, I will
not give it you, because now I can safely swear that I never gave you any
Money; but be sure you stand fast to these Informations, and to what I have
dictated to you, and you may be sure you shall be well rewarded for your pains.
And he told them this more, My Lord Treasurer would never have surrendered
himself to the Black Rod, unless you had promised to stand fast to this
Evidence; that was to swear to what Evidence he had dictated to them.


L. C. I. Did Lane produce the Informations, and those things that Knox tempted
him to swear?


Sir W. Waller. My Lord, they were produced before us.


L. C. I. What were they? What was the substance of them?


Sir W. Waller. One part was to swear, that M. Bedloe should come to Mr. Oats,
and say to him, That my Lord of Danby should offer him a considerable Sum of
Money to go beyond Sea.


L. C. I. To whom?


Sir W. Waller. To Bedloe. And that was only considerable as relating to Mr.
Bedloe in any part of the Examination: but as to Mr. Oats, they were to accuse
him of having a design of abusing his Body: for he sent to me --


L. C. I. Who did?


Sir W. Waller. Lane sent twice. Upon his first Examination he did seem to be
very shy: but upon the second, he sent one Rix to me, one of the Yeomen of the
Guard, to let me know, that he was troubled in his Conscience at what he had
unjustly done in charging Mr. Oats, and that he was desirous to discharge his
Conscience of the burden that lay on it, and to wave his own Reputation, that
he might acquit the Innocent.


L. C. I. Why, where was the Villainy done that he repented of?


Sir W. Waller. My Lord, it was in reference to his swearing against Dr. Oats.


L. C. I. Where? before the Lords?


Sir W. Waller. He was brought that very Morning before the Lords; but notice
being come that the King was come in, and the House was sitting, he was
remanded, and afterward sent Rix to me, to tell me, he was sensible of the
Injury he had done to Dr. Oats, and would make a Confession of all.


L. C. I. Where had he done him Injury?


Sir W. Waller. In reference to those Abuses that he had offered to swear, and
I think had sworn, but before whom I don't know. I suppose you will have an
account of that by and by.


L. C. I. So then, this is the Substance of what you say as to Mr. Oats, That
Lane sent to you, and showed you several Papers and Informations against the
Credit of Oats and Bedloe, and told you that Knox did tempt him to justify
this, and swear it; and that he went with them to a Justice of Peace in order
to do it, but he did not care to meddle with it, and bid them apply themselves
elsewhere, and afterward they came to you; and whether it was sworn or no, you
cannot tell, but you say he did confess he had wronged Mr. Oats in those
Scandals that he would have put upon him; and that this was by Knox's advice
and direction.


Sir W. Waller. But there is this thing further, he said truly that Mr. Oats
would be something hasty and passionate, but that he was very religious, and
was very constant in sending his Servants to Prayers; and that what he had
accused him of, it was an abominable falsehood, and was done by the instigation
of Knox, who had encouraged him to it by the promises of a great Reward.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And it was he that told you of the dropping of the
Guinney, was it not?


Sir W. Waller. My Lord, he did confess that himself, but he said he lent it.


Sir Fr. Winnington. Pray did Lane confess to you from whom this Money and
Reward was to be had? for he was not a Person that was likely to bestow so much
Money of his own. Was it from any of the Conspirators? or from whom that the
Rewards, and this Money should come, upon your Oath?


Sir VV. Waller. I have examined them many times as to that, but could never
learn any thing.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Sir William Waller, was Knox ever before you?


Sir VV. Waller. Yes, my Lord, I took his Examination, and it was only to
excuse himself, that he received the Letters from them, which they said they
writ out of trouble of Conscience, and would have him to take their
Examinations, and to go along with them before a Justice of Peace.


L. C. I. That was Knox's defense? Said he, they came to me, and I did not go
to them, but they desired me to go along with them to a Justice of Peace.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Did you let him know what they had said to you?


Sir W. Waller. No, my Lord, I kept that private; but there is one thing very
material. That Morning we took Knox's Examination, we were so long about it,
that we could not dispatch it in the Forenoon, and therefore ordered Lane to be
brought before us in the Afternoon; and then did Knox write a Note, and sent it
up by a Woman that was a Nurse there in the Prison, and there was a Paper
conveyed through the Door to him to this purpose, We paid our --


L. C. I. Who writ that Note?


Sir W. Waller. Knox did, and confessed it to me.


L. C. I. To whom was it conveyed?


Sir W. Waller. To Mr. Osborne from Knox. And it was, We always paid our Club
--


Mr. Sanders. How do you know it was from Knox?


Sir W. Waller. He confessed it.


Mr. Sanders. Did he show it you?


Sir W. Waller. No, I did not see the Note, but he confessed it.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Pray Mr. Sanders don't interrupt them, they are in their
Evidence.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. They must do that, for that is the best part of their
Defense for ought I know.


Sir W. Waller. The words my Lord were these, We always Club'd, and you paid
two Shillings at the Sugar Loaf. Tear this.


L. C. I Why, what could this be?


Sir W Waller. Why, I will tell you my Lord, it was upon this account, that he
should not gainsay what he had confessed and agreed to, that so they might not
be in two Stories.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lord, Osborne and Lane had formerly accused, and given
some Informations against Dr. Oats, afterward you see what happened before Sir
W. Waller, they renounce what they had done, and then my Lord, was Knox
imprisoned, and thereupon he writes this Note, We always Club'd together, and
you paid two Shillings at such a place: the Circumstances will come out by and
by, They met at several Places, and we shall prove that Knox bore their
Charges, and paid for them, though by this Note he would make it, that they
bore their own Charges.


M. Just. Pemberton. The succeeding Evidence will open it.


Sir W. Waller. My Lord, here is one thing more that I had forgot, Lane did
confess, that for the preventing of any Discovery of this horrid Fact, it was
agreed amongst them, that if any one should make a Discovery of it, the other
two should murder him.


M. Solicit. Genesis We desire that the Jury may observe that.


Sir W. Waller. He did likewise declare, that the Lords in the Tower, would not
be wanting to acknowledge the kindness in Disparaging the Kings Evidence.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. That was Lane and Osborne did confess that?


Sir W. Waller. Yes, both Lane and Osborne swore it positively.


Sir Fr. Winn. If you have done as to Lane, pray acquaint my Lord and the Jury,
what you know of the Confession of Knox upon his Examination.


Sir W. Waller. Knox confessed not any thing, but stood stiff to it, that the
Papers and Letters were written by them, and contrived by them.


M. Just. Pemberton. And that what he did was at their request?


Sir W. Waller. Yes, but the rest did both confess, that what was done was
wholly by the contrivance of Knox.


L. C. I. Did you ask Knox if he had dropped a Guinny?


Sir W. Waller. My Lord, he confessed he had dropped a Guinny, but it was only to
lend them, and they promised to repay him; and that one morning he dropped, 10 s.
upon the bed, and they took it up.


L. C. I. Knox said he only lent it?


Sir W. Waller. Yes, but they positively swore both the one and the other.


M. Just. Pemberton. What said Knox to that?


Sir W. Waller. He lent them only.


L C I. Well, go on Sir,


Sir W. Waller. And Lane did positively confess, that at all the Places, and
the several Lodgings, and the Treaties and Entertainments they had been at,
they were all at Knox's charge, except twice which might amount to about 18 d.
and that he paid.


L C. I. What said Knox to it?


Sir W. Waller. He denied all.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. As to the manner of it, what said Knox to the dropping of
it?


Sir W. Waller. He confessed he dropped it, but only lent it them.


Sir Fr. Winn. You say Lane was a servant to Dr. Oats, pray whose servant was
Knox?


Sir W. Waller. He did belong to my Lord Dunblane. And moreover M. Knox did
confess to me, that the Papers so drawn up and delivered into his hands had
been in the custody of my Lord Latimer for a long time.


Sir Fr. Winn. Did he so, I hope the Jury will believe him then.


L. C. I. Sir W. Waller does swear, that Knox confessed that all those scandals
raised against Dr. Oats, had been by his hands delivered into the hands of my
Lord Latimer, and were there for some time.


Sir W. Waller. Yes, my Lord.


Sir Fr. Winn. I did not well hear you Sir, one thing, you were saying in the
beginning of your Evidence, that these Gentlemen spoke of my Lord of Danby's
not Surrendering himself, pray let us hear that over again.


Sir W. Waller. Mr. Lane said this, that my Lord of Danby would not have
surrendered himself to the Black Rod, but that he did depend upon their standing
to what Informations they had given in.


L. C. I. Upon your Oath Lane did say this?


Sir W. Waller. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lord, now we will call another Justice of Peace, that
took their Examinations, and we shall then particularly apply our selves to Mr.
Knox, that seems to make these excuses for himself. Call Mr. Justice Warcup.
Who was sworn.


Mr. Warcup. I must beg the favor of the Court, because my memory is bad, that
I may refer to the Informations that were taken before me.


M. Just. Pemberton. You may look upon them for the refreshment of your memory.


Mr. Warcup. I answer to every part of this that has my Hand to it, I desire
it may be read.


Mr. Recorder. No that cannot be, you must not read them, but only refresh your
memory by them.


Mr. Warcup. This John Lane did confess he lived with Dr. Oats, and about the 7
th. of April he left him, and while he lived with him, he said, he sent his
Servants daily to Prayer in the morning to the Chapel, and left but one at
home to Dress him, and whilst he was with Dr. Oats, he was never charged by his
Master with the opening of any Letters, and that the Informations marked 1, 2,
3, 4 and 5. --


Mr. Williams. Pray Sir acquaint the Court as far as you can by your memory.


Mr. Warcup. Lane my Lord, before me denied all that he had said, that is, that
what he had said before the Lords was true, but that particular Examination
before Sir VV. Waller was by him alone.


Sir Fr. VVinn. Was he upon Oath before you?


Mr. VVarcup. Yes, I find he was.


L. C. I. Did you examine him after Sir VV. Waller, or before?


Mr. VVarcup. To the best of my remembrance it was before.


Mr. Just. Jones. He was upon his Oath there too?


Mr. VVarcup. Yes, and I must acquaint you I find it at the bottom to be (
Jurat.) He was brought before the Lords of the Committee for Examinations, and
did there likewise at first swear the things in these Notes contained, and did
afterward come to the said Committee, and beg their Pardon, and Gods Pardon
for what he had sworn, for it was false.


L. C. I. Who did?


Mr. Warcup. Lane did.


L. C. I. Did you hear him?


Mr. VVarcup. Yes.


Mr. Just. Jones. Was he upon his Oath the last time, when he said this to the
Committee?


Sir VV. Waller. Yes my Lord, I was by too, I heard him.


L. C. I. So he swears backwards and forwards.


Sir Fr. VVinn. Such People use to do so.


Mr. VVarcup. That particular of the Note, that Mr. Knox sent up by the Nurse,
I was by and did hear him confess it.


Sir VV. Waller. But he did declare there to the Committee, that it was his
Voluntary Repentance, and that he was exceeding sensible of the Abuses he had
offered to Dr. Oats, in this Design of accusing him in such a manner.


Mr. Just. Jones. What, before the Lords?


Sir W. Waller. Yes my Lord.


Mr. Warcup. Mr. Knox did say he sent such a Note up to Osborne, and that the
words were as I remember, We always club'd, and you paid two Shillings at the
Sugar Loaf, Tear this.


L. C. I. Look you, the use I see that would be made of this, is, that Knox in
a secret way, should give Intimation to this Osborne, that he should not own
that he had been treated by him, or any money spent upon him, and this Note is
the cunning way of Insinuating that matter, as I understand it.


Mr. Warcup. I shall humbly acquaint your Lordship with one thing further; Knox
did confess that he had lain with these People in several private Places, for
there were Warrants out for the Apprehending them, upon the Information given
by Dr. Oats of this Contrivance, that he had lain with them at White Friars,
and Charing Cross, and at other Places.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. That he had obscured them when they were in danger.


Mr. Warcup. That he had layn with them at that time.


Sir Fran. Win. Pray, upon your Oath, when he had told you he had layn with
them in any private Lodging --


Mr. Just. Pemb. Did he say he had advised them where to lie?


Mr. Warcup. He said he had been with them, and advised them where to lie.


Mr. Just. Pemb. Did he say he had taken Lodgings for them?


Mr. Warcup. Yes, he did.


Sir. Fr. Win. Your Question, Sir, has prevented mine; but I would ask him a
Question further. Did he confess to you he paid for those Lodgings?


Mr. Warcup. Truly, My Lord, unless I read the Information, I cannot tell.


Sir Will. Waller. My Lord, I perfectly remember this, That Knox did confess he
had paid for their Lodgings, but they were to pay him again; but both Osborne
and Lane did positively swear he did pay for all, and several times at several
Taverns where he treated them, he bid them call for what they would, and they
should have it.


Mr. Soll. Genesis What do you know of being at the Sugar Loaf at any time?


Mr. Warcup. I tell you what I find here he confessed, that they complaining
they knew not where conveniently to Lodge, this Examinant told them he would
endeavor to find them a Lodging, and the very self-same day, he went by the
direction of one of my Lord Dunblain's Servants, a Coachman to the Sugar Loaf
in White-Fryers and took Lodgings as for himself and two of his Friends, and
lay there with them to the time of his going from the same Lodging, which was
five or six days.


Mr. Just. Pemb. And he did it by the direction of my Lord Dunblain's Coachman?


Mr. Warcup. Yes, My Lord, it is so in the Information.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Is that Information true?


Mr. Warcup. Yes, My Lord, I am sure he said it, or I should not have writ it
down.


Lord Chief Just. Mr. Warcup, had Lane recanted what he had said against Mr.
Oats at that time when the Lodgings were taken?


Mr. Warcup. My Lord, it was before they came to the Lords that they took these
Lodgings.


Mr. Just. Pemb. Ay, that is clear, it was before all came out.


Mr. Warcup. I was commanded by the House of Peers to give my Warrant for the
apprehending of them.


Lord Chief Just. The Lords sent to apprehend them upon the slander of Mr.
Oats, and then he concealed them.


Mr. Recorder. My Lord, Sir William Waller speaks of one Rix that was sent by
Lane to him to make a Discovery, this is the Gentleman. Who was sworn.


Rix. May it please your Lordship, There was one Osborne that was concerned
with this Lane, who is since run away: Osborne came first upon the Guard to me,
and desired me to get him into Service. He desired to come into my Lord
Treasurers Service, and what he desired of me was to frame him a Petition to my
Lord Treasurer. We had no Answer till two days after, and I being upon the
Guard with Dr. Oats, I did suppose I might get him into his Service, I spoke
to Dr. Oats, and he entertained him; and after he had entertained him a while,
this Lane then being a Servant with him, they both told me they were going off
now from Mr. Oats.


Lord Chief Just. Who told you?


Rix. Lane and Osborne, and that they should get preferment; they were sworn
Brothers together, if one did go the other would go. I asked them why they
would go away; oh, said he, I shall keep my man my self. Say you so, said I, I
have been in Town so long, and I could get no such preferment. Then they told
me they should have 100 l. a year, and 500 l. in Money.


Mr. Just. Pemb. Who told you so?


Rix. Osborne and Lane both.


Mr. Just. Pemb. What, 100 l. a year, and 500 l. a piece.


Rix. Yes: So I asked them how, but they would not tell me, but, said Osborne
to me, for your preferring me to Mr. Oats, you shall be no loser. I met him
another time, for Osborne came to desire me to lend him a Cravat. Said he, I
must come down to your House to morrow morning to get a Cravat, I desire I may
have a good one, for I am to go before one of the greatest Peers of the Realm,
to dine with him: Where, said I, to which end of the Town? the other end of the
Town, said he to me: But, said I, why do you leave Mr. Oats? oh, said he, let
Mr. Oats look to himself, for I have enough against him. Then I smelt
something of some design against Dr. Oats, and brought it before Justice
Warcup, and gave in my Testimony, and upon further Inquiry into it, the Lords
ordered him to send out his Warrant for the taking of those Fellows, Knox,
Lane, and Osborne, which he assigned over to me; in a short time after they
were taken, first Lane was taken, and in a day or two Osborne and Knox, and
were examined and taxed with it. Osborne he made a Confession before Justice
Warcup, and they desired me to see Knox and Lane in Prison, and I did see them
in Prison, and when they did come there, Knox said, where is Osborne, why don't
he come to Prison as well as I? I am a better Gentleman than he. Oh, said I, he
has confessed; so he was turned up into the Prison. Said I to Mr. Lane, will
you drink a Pot of Beer? said he, I don't much care if I do: and, said he, Mr.
Rix, if I have not gone too far against my self, if you will stand my Friend, I
will make an honest Confession. Said I, I am glad there is so much Grace in
you, I will then do you all the good I can. Pray, said he, will you please to
go and call Sir William Waller: why not Justice Warcup, said I, who was first
concerned in this Discovery: No, he would have only Sir William Waller. I came
and found him in the Court of Requests, so I went with him to Smiths the
Tobacconist near the Gate, and sent for Lane; the Keeper brought him: I think
this was about nine or ten in the Morning, and from that time till about six at
Night he was in Examination. I went then to Mr. Oats, and told him Lane had
made an honest Confession. I waited on Sir William Waller till the Afternoon,
and then he made an Order, that he having made an honest Confession, should
have the enlargement of the Prison, and not be confined, as others were, which
he had. Lane sent for me the next Day, I came down in a Day or two after, and
his Sister was there with him, they were eating Butter and Radishes, and when I
would have paid for the Drink, Lane cried No, by No means; for Knox has sent
me in Three and twenty Shillings the other Day, and that will serve me, I hope,
till I come out: but now, said he, I have made a Confession, I believe I shall
have no more Money from him; and I desire you would speak for my Enlargement. I
came down to him another time, and he told me he had received a Note, which
Note was put up from a Gentlewoman in the Street, That if he would stand firm
to his Text, he should have Five hundred pounds; Nay, he should not want One
thousand pounds; but in case they would not stand firm to their Text, the Lord
Treasurer would never have come in; and if yet they did not stand firm, he
would lose his Head.




Lord Chief Just. Who came that Note from?


Sir Will. Waller. He told me this, That there was such word brought to him by
the Nurse, and she told him, That a Gentlewoman very well clad came to her, and
desired her to speak to him to Stand fast, and that Osborne and Knox would be
sure to Stand fast, and that they two should be too strong for the other, he
being but a single Evidence; and more than that, he should not want a Thousand
pound, if he had occasion for it. I asked the Nurse what the Gentlewomans Name
was, she told me, she had asked, but she would not tell her.


Lord Chief Just. Where is this Woman? this Nurse?


Sir Will. Waller. She was Nurse to the Gaol, and was turned out upon this
Discovery by the Jailer.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You had this from Lane Sir William Waller.


Sir William Waller. Yes.


Rix. My Lord, after this was done, Lane's Father and Mother told me this at my
own House, That had it not been upon their Sons account, my Lord Treasurer
would never have come in; and they told me that one Hest should come and tell
them so: and Lane himself told me, he thanked God that now he had made an
honest Confession, that now his Heart was very light, he had a burden upon him
before, but now he had confessed, and his Heart was light.


Lord Chief Just. What did he confess?


Rix. He did confess, That my Lord Treasurer would never have surrendered
himself, if he had thought they would not have stood firm, and if they did not
stand firm, he should lose his Head,


Mr. Williams. You say Lane confessed this as of himself?


Rix. Yes, and afterward his Father and Mother told me so, and he did say as
of himself, that he had a Note put under the door.


L. C. I. But from whom had he that Note?


Rix. From a Gentlewoman in the street, he told me so.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. What did he say as to Knox?


Rix. He told me he was set on by Knox, and he drew up all the Writings for
him; and Knox told him, if you come to be Examined at such or such a thing,
make a stop, and turn this way and that way.


Mr. Williams. Pray acquaint the Court and the Jury, did Lane tell you how he
was drawn into this, and who drew him in?


Rix. Knox was the man that drew up the Writings, and promised him those
Rewards he said.


M. Justice Pemberton. You say he told you that Knox promised them? How far
Knox will be concerned in this Evidence, will be considered afterward.


Mr. Sergeant Maynard. Now we come to Knox's own particular actings. What has
been said already, has been out of other peoples mouths, now we come to him
himself, and we call Richard Slightam. (who was sworn.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Mr. Slightam will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you
know of this Knox, what offers have been made you, by whom, and when, and for
what?


Slightam. I was offered Money to carry Notes from the one to the other.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Why, what Office had you there?


Slightam. I was a Prisoner there my self, and under-Goaler too, and I was
offered Money to carry Notes between the one and the other, that they might not
betray one another.


Mr. Recorder. By whom?


Slightam. By Knox


L. C. I. What did they offer you?


Slightam. I had three half Crowns given me at one time by Knox, and he
promised me he would give me a considerable sum.


L. C. I. But he did not name the sum?


Slightam. No.


L. C. I. What did he desire you to do for that Money?


Slightam. He desired me to carry Notes from the one to the other, that they
might not betray one another.


Mr. At. Genesis Between whom? name them.


Slightam. Knox, Lane, and Osborne.


L. C. I. What did you say, that they might not betray one another? why?


Slightam. Yes, that they might not betray one another, for they were fearful
that they should, because they could not speak together, to lay their stories
together.


Mr. At. Genesis And hark you Sir, what Messages did you carry between them?


Sligtham. None, I never carried any.


L. C. I No, what had you your money for?


Slightam. I told them of it below, and they would not let me carry any.


L. C. I. But you got your money?


Slightam. Yes, I got some money.


Mr. At. Genesis Knox you say gave you the three half Crowns. Did you speak with
Lane and Osborne?


Slightam. Lane I spoke with every day, and Lane said, he hoped that the Lords
would not put him in the Pillory, for all he had sworn falsely.


L. C. I. What Lords?


Slightam. My Lord Shaftesbury, and my Lord Privy Seal.


Mr. Smith. What did Knox say to you after Osborne had confessed?


Slightam. That is nothing, said he, if we do but stand firm together, what
Osborne has given in Evidence will signify nothing.


Mr. Smith. Why?


Slightam. For two, he said, were better than one.


Sir Fra. Winn. I think you say you had three half Crowns given you by Knox,
pray who was the first that offered you money to carry the Notes?


Slightam. It was Knox.


Sir Fra. Winn. Ay, he carried the Purse.


Slightam. Yes, I suppose he did.


Mr. Just. Jones. They were both in the Gate House Prisoners at that time.


Slightam. Yes, so was I. But they were locked in several Rooms, and none could
come at them.


L. C. I. But you carried no Note nor Messages, upon your Oath?


Slightam. No.


Mr. Williams. Pray call Mr. Dewy, (who was sworn.) Pray Mr. Dewy will you
acquaint the Court and the Jury, what discourse you had with Knox, who he came
from, what he came about, and what recommendations he brought with him, and
from whom.


Mr. Dewy. My Lord, sometime in the sitting of the last Parliament that began
in March, about ten a clock at night a Message was sent in to me that one would
speak with me from my Lord Latimer: I was either in bed or going to bed; and I
did not think there was really any such Message, because my Lord Latimer did
not know me, nor I him. They were very pressing to come in, insomuch as my man
could hardly keep them out. I told them there was nothing sure of so much
haste, but what might be done to morrow, or some other time: so I spoke not
with them that night. Either the next day, or some short time after, as I
remember, Mr. Knox came to me with another Gentleman, and he brought Papers in
his hands ready written; he told me that they were Informations of one Lane and
Osborne (as I remember those were the names he mentioned then) and they were
against Mr. Oats. Then I began to look upon it as something extraordinary, the
Parliament being then sitting, and the Committee of each House having the
Examination of this business. Said I, Mr. Knox, you have been a Justice of
Peace's Clerk (for I knew him so) and you know it is very unusual to take
Informations against a person without the parties being present, if he may be
had to cross-examine the Witnesses upon Interrogatories, as the Case may be:
and besides, this looks as if it were to take Informations against the King;
which we never do upon Oath. So I dismissed them, and directed them to the
Committee of Secrecy of the House of Commons, for whom it was most proper. This
is all I know of this business.


Mr. Williams. Did Mr. Knox tell you any thing what was contained in those
Examinations?


Mr. Dewy. Yes, he did give me some information, that Osborne and Lane did
repent of something, but I cannot give you information particularly.


Mr. Williams. Pray tell the substance of it.


Mr. Dewy. I cannot remember what the particulars were, but Lane and Osborne
were the parties to be examined, and I shifted them off as well as I could.


L. C. I. Did they come along with Knox?


Mr. Dewy. They were not in my Room, but they were without, I believe.


L. C. I. And did he tell you at the same time that they had recanted?


Mr. Dewy. Truly, my Lord, I cannot well remember; but he said they repented of
what they had falsely accused my Lord Treasurer of.


L.C.I. Did they say they had falsely accused Mr. Oats?


Mr. Dewy. No, they did charge Mr. Oats with some Crime; and they did speak
something of false accusing, I cannot remember what.


L.C.I. Did not they say, Mr. Oats?


Mr. Dewy. I remember it now; it was as if Mr. Bedloe and Mr. Oats had made a
Conspiracy against my Lord of Danby.


Sir Fr. Win. I think you say, you knew Mr. Knox a Justice of Peace's Clerk:
Pray Sir, you are an ingenuous man, from whom did he pretend to come to you?


Mr. Dewy. He came to me from my Lord Latimer, as he said.


Sir Fr. Win. Did he say so, that the Lord Latimer wished him to go to you?


Mr. Dewy. Yes; and I wondered at it, because I did not know my Lord, nor my
Lord me.


Mr. Withins. When was this?


Mr. Dewy. It was the latter end of April, or the beginning of May, as I take
it; I do not very well remember: but the substance of it I remember was, that
they had overheard Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe conspiring against my Lord of
Danby.


L.C.I. Mr. Dewy, can you remember whether they did come to give you
information against Mr. Oats for abusing their Bodies, or Oats and Bedloe's
Conspiracy against the Earl of Danby?


Mr. Dewy. Truly, my Lord, I cannot be positive in it; for the Parliament was
then sitting, and I shifted them off.


Mr. Just. Pemb. You never looked into the Information at all?


Mr. Dewy. No, I did not, I thought it not proper for me.


Mr. Recorder. Call Henry Wiggins and his mother: (who were both sworn.)


Mr. At. Genesis Come on Mr. Wiggins, what do you know of any endeavors of Knox
or Lane, or any of these persons, to take off or scandalize Mr. Oats or Mr.
Bedloes Testimony?


L. C. I. What is this man's Name?


Mr. At. Genesis Henry Wiggins.


Wiggins. About the latter end of February last, Mr. Knox and I met at
Charing Cross, and we went in and drank together; and he proposed several
things to me; first he desired that I would get for him a Copy of the Papers my
Master had.


L. C. I. Who is your Master?


Wiggins. Mr. Bedloe. And especially what concerned my Lord Treasurer; as also
to take a Journal of all my Masters Actions, and the Names of the persons that
came to him; for, said he, my Lord hears that my Lord of Shaftesbury and the
Duke of Buckingham do cabal with him against my Lord. But if my Lord could but
find out his Enemies, he would oppose them, and strive to baffle them. My Lord,
to encourage me to this, he told me he would carry me to his Lord, though it
were at midnight, to discourse with him.


L. C. I. What Lord?


Wiggins. My Lord Treasurer: and he said he should give me encouragement to go
on. Said I, Does my Lord know of this? Yes, said he, I told my Lord I had a
friend lived with Mr. Bedloe, and he gave me encouragement to go on and Treat
with him. And he said moreover, my Lord, Mr. Oats and Bedloe were two great
Rogues; that the King believed not a word they said; and as soon as he had
heard all they could say, they should be Hanged.


Mr. Williams. Pray did he propose any Reward to you?


Wiggins. He told me his Lord should give me encouragement.


L. C. I. What should you do?


Wiggins. He desired me to give my Lord the Papers, and then my Lord should
tell me what I should do about my Master.


Sir Fra. Winn. What did he say of Oats and Bedloe, Sir?


Wiggins. He said, That Oats and Bedloe were great Rogues, and that the King
knew them to be so; and when he had heard what they could say, he would hang
them.


Mr. Williams. Pray upon your Oath, did he offer you any money, or any reward?


Wiggins. He offered me not any particular sum, but he told me I should have
satisfaction and reward, or any Place in my Lords disposal I should be
entertained into, if I went away upon this business.


Mr. Williams. Did he say any thing to you, to invite you, or encourage you to
Swear against your Master?


Wiggins. No, but he told me my Lord should give me directions how to go on.


Mr. Recorder. What say you as to Lane and Osborne?


Wiggins. I did not know them at that time.


Mr. Recorder. What time after was it that you did know them?


Wiggins. I met with them a little while after, and they were discoursing all
together, but I had no discourse with them.


Mr. Recorder. Did Knox at any time speak to you, to bring him into the Company
of Lane and Osborne?


Wiggins. No, Sir.


Mr. Recorder. This was the first time you met with him about this matter?


Wiggins. Yes, it was.


L. C. I. What did you promise Knox you would do?


Wiggins. I told him I would do him any service that lay in my power, but
nothing that would be to my Masters prejudice; and I was appointed by him to
meet him at my Lord Treasurers.


L. C. I. And what other meetings had you besides?


VViggins. I was but twice with him.


L. C. I. You never agreed to any thing?


VViggins. I told it my Master, and it was discovered soon after, so that the
Lords came to hear it.


Mr. At. Genesis Where is Mrs. VViggins? What do you know of any endeavors to
corrupt this Evidence?


Mrs. VViggins. I know no more than what my Son knows; he first came to my
House.


L. C. I. Who?


Mrs. Wiggins. Mr. Knox; and asking me where my Son was, I told him he lived
with Mr. Bedloe: and he said, he very much rejoiced at it, and desired to speak
with him. I told him, No, he could not, for his Master had so much employment
for him, that it was very seldom I my self could get a sight of him. Said he, I
have a little concern with him; and he living with Mr. Bedloe, may do my Lord
Treasurer great service; and doing my Lord Treasurer service, he does his
Majesty service; for his Majesty loves my Lord Treasurer above all things in
the world. And he would not be contradicted, but he would see him. Then the
next day I told him he should come, and we appointed to go to him; but he
should not see him alone without me, I told him; he told me he desired it not.
He came according to the appointment, and I carried him to Charing Cross to an
Alehouse, and there I sent a Porter for my Son, and he came: and the first
thing he said to him was, I am mighty joyful to know you live with Mr. Bedloe;
you may do my Lord great service: In what, says my Son? In letting my Lord know
what company your master keeps, and what Lords they are that daily and hourly
keep company with your master, and Cabal against my Lord. Said I, Mr. Knox,
that is the way to bring my Son's neck to the Stake; that he shall never do.
But, says he, I will tell him a way how he shall do himself no harm at all: And
then he up and told him, he desired him to write him Letters when he found any
thing of secrecy, and set no Name to it; and if he came at twelve a clock at
night, he would let him in to my Lord Treasurer's, and no body should take
notice of it: and he would have had him taken a Coach to have gone to my Lady
Danby presently, to have an assurance from her mouth of encouragement, and that
he should have any Place in her Lords disposal.


L. C. I. Were you ever with my Lady Danby?


Mrs. Wiggins. No, we denied it; and it was discovered. And besides, my Lord, I
told him, if he would lay down my Son a thousand pound he should not do it; he
should not betray his Trust. And then he said, that the King knew Mr. Oats and
Mr. Bedloe to be two great Rogues; and when he had got what he could out of
them, he would hang them.


Mr. Williams. Have you had any offers of late not to come here as a Witness in
this Case?


Mrs. Wiggins. No, my Lord; but there have been persons three times at my house
to know whether I were Subpoena'd yea or no, as from Mr. Knox.


Mr. Williams. Did ever any body persuade you not to come to give Evidence?


Mrs. Wiggins. No.


L. C. I. When was this you speak of?


Mrs. Wiggins. In February, the latter end.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Mr. Dewy, who came in company with Mr. Knox to you?


Mr. Dewy. One Mr. Blayden.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Who is that?


Mr. Dewy. Steward to my Lord of Danby, I think.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Here is Slightam again, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis What have you to say more?


Slightam. Mr. Lane told me they had many Treats, and had so much money, a
Guiney, as I think he told me, to swear against Mr. Oats.


L. C. I. Who gave it him?


Slightam. Mr. Osborne, or Mr. Knox, I cannot tell which.


L. C. I. Where did Lane tell you so?


Slightam. In Prison.


L. C. I. In what Prison?


Slightam. In the Gatehouse.


Mr. Williams. Call Mr. Palmer. (who was sworn.) We call him to corroborate
what that young man VViggins has said.


Mr. Palmer. What he has told here, he discovered first to me, and I
discovered to his Master, that Mr. Knox would have had him to take a Journal of
his masters actions, and to give it him every day. My Lord, I am one of the
Yeomen of the Guard, and I waited upon Mr. Bedloe, and he desired me to help
him to a Clerk: I helped him to VViggins, this young man. He had not been there
three weeks, or a very little time, when Knox came to him to tempt him; and
being a stranger to his master, he knew not how to discover it to him, and told
me, Such a thing is offered to me, but I am a stranger to my master, and I know
not how to break it to him.


L. C. I. The use you make of this, is no more, but only to corroborate what
he has said, that he told it him while it was fresh, and that it is now new
matter of his invention now.


Mr. Recorder. It is very right, my Lord, that is the use we make of it. Call
Thomas Dangerfield. (who was sworn.)


Mr. Williams. Pray, Sir, give an account what you know concerning Mr. Knox
and Mr. Lane, and what designs they have had against Mr. Oats, and who
supported them and maintained them in it.


Mr. Dangerfield. My Lord, all that I have to say in this Case, is this: I do
think it was in the Month of June I was at my Lord Castlemains, and he asked
me, if I had been employed in a business of Knox and Lane, that were Prisone^^
at the Gatehouse: I told him, Not. His Lordship then wrote a Letter to my Lady
Powis, and desired I might be employed in it: And she did tell me that it was a
thing of material consequence, and that I should be furnished with money for
the getting of Knox and Lane out. I took all opportunities for the doing of it
that were necessary. I went to the Gatehouse, made enquiry after Lane, and took
care with his Mother to relieve him, for I heard he was in an indigent
condition at that time.


L. Chapter Just. Did you give his Mother the money?


Mr. Dangerfield. Yes, my Lord, Twenty shillings, and I had that money from
Mrs. Cellier by my Lady Powis's Order. After that time there was one Mrs. Airy,
who used to carry money to the Catholics in Prison, she said that it was
possible, as she had been informed from some of the Priests in the Gate House,
that some things might be had under the hands of Knox and Lane that would be
very material against Mr. Oats: She said she had been informed so. I then
desired that Mrs. Airy that Pen and Ink might be conveyed to them, that they
might have the convenience of giving it under their hands, which she promised,
and they did convey Pen and Ink under the door to this Mr. Lane.


L. Chapter Just. How do you know that?


Mr. Dangerfield. As Mrs. Airy told me. Then she came again, and withal told
me, that it was Mr. Knox's desire that Lane should do something to signify to
him, or satisfy him that he did stand fast, then Lane wrote a little note, and
that note was to this effect. I will die before I will comply with that Villain
Oats, and if any good People will do me the kindness to get me my liberty, I
will do the Catholics the greatest service imaginable in discovering what I
know about Mr. Oats. This I write from the bottom of my heart, and shall die
in it. So help me God.


L. Chapter Just. How came you by the Note?


Mr. Dangerfield. This note was written by Lane's own hand, and given from
under the door to one Mr. Parsons a Priest in the Gate House. This Parsons ga^^
the note to Mrs. Airy, and she gave it to me.


L. Chapter Just. Do you know Lane's hand?


Mr. Dangerfield. Yes, very well, as I shall show you anon.


L. Chapter Just. What became of the Note?


Mr. Dangerfield. My Lord, I don't know what became of the Note, for the
Countess of Powis had it afterward.


L. Chapter Just. Do you believe it was of Lane's own writing?


Mr. Dangerfield. I am very well satisfied of it my Lord, according to the
Judgment I am capable to give of hands; indeed I was not acquainted with his
hand then, but that was the first to my knowledge, that ever I saw of it; but
after I having parted with the Note, and seeing some of his handwriting, upon
recollection I can say I believe it was his own hand.


L. Chapter Just. Did you ever see the Note again?


Mr. Dangerfield. Never afterward. And then my Lord, my Lady Powis was
exceeding glad upon the hearing of it, and as I was informed of it afterward,
she was the greatest part of the following day upon her knees, giving God
thanks for the great advantage, and strength that was come to their Cause.


L. Chapter Just. What! for having a Villain to come over to her side, that swore
backwards and forwards?


Mr. Dangerfield. Afterward I received money several times, and gave his
Mother more to furnish and relieve him. And several times afterward I received
money from Mrs. Cellier by Order of my Lady Powis for the doing of Lane's
business, that is, for his liberty; and I had the Papers from one Lawson an
Attorney, that had been employed in the same business before; and as I was
informed by him, a motion or two was made at this Bar for their Liberty, but
however he began to despair of it, and I was to undertake it; but withal he
said, he was glad he was rid of it, for he had been often employed in the
business of the Catholics, and it had impaired his credit very much, and very
freely delivered the Papers to me, which indeed were not many. After that, my
Lord, I retained Mr. Sanders, as I think it was he, but there was a motion
about it, and with great difficulty I did get Lane out upon common Bail; and
when I had done so, according to my Lady Powis's Order, I brought him to Powis
House; and then my Lady Powis ordered, that he should go by the Name of
Johnson; because if any of the Servants should talk of one Lane being in the
House, it might come to Oates's Ear, the House might be searched, and if he
were found there, it might be prejudicial to the Lords, and all their business.
And then, my Lord, Mr. Wood came a little after with the same Command from his
Lord, and he had some Order --


L. Chapter Just. Who is Wood?


Mr. Dangerfield, That Wood is my Lady Powis's Gentleman: And he came and
ordered that my Lady Powis gave particular Command to the Porter of the House,
in my hearing, that he should give order to all the Servants, to have a
particular eye and care that he did not go from the House, for they were very
dubious of him, having made so many Equivocations before, for they feared Mr.
Oats might find him, or he might go voluntarily and make a Discovery of
himself, and so contradict all he had given an account of there. For, my Lord,
before this, as soon as ever Lane was gone out, they were very desirous to have
what he had to say put in Writing; but they had not opportunity then, but we
let it alone to some other time. Then, my Lord, soon after, about three Weeks
or a Month after; I cannot be positive in the time, because I had a great deal
of business upon my hands; but I suppose it was about three Weeks or a Month
after, my Lord Powis sent for me to the Tower; and told me he was informed that
Mr. Oats was then making search after Lane, and if he found him at his House,
it would be very prejudicial to their business; and he desired me to take care,
and to send him out of the way, that Mr. Oats might not find him, which I did;
and thinking of several places, I could not find any so convenient as Gray's in
Essex, by the Waterside. I came to Lane, and told him that he should be
furnished with money and necessaries for his Journey, and, in order to it, that
very day I took him and gave him a pair of Shoes and Ten Shillings in his
Pocket, and sent him to Gray's. I received two Letters afterward from this
Lane, by which Letters I am very well satisfied, that that Note that he wrote
before that was given under the Door, was his Hand. So then I received a third
Letter (I think) my Lord, and in the Letter he told me that some Person of Mr.
Oates's Acquaintance had been in that Town and seen him, and he thought it was
not material that he staid any longer there, and desired to be removed. So then
I showed my Lady Powis the Letter, and I suppose my Lord Powis had an account
of it also; but I cannot be positive in that, but I had order to remove Lane,
and by my Lady Powis's means I sent down one on Horseback, and he discharged
some Debts Lane had contracted in the House, and sent him away to London; and
after his return to London, he continued three days more at my Lord Powis's
House: At which time, he says, he was forced to lie upon the Chairs, for at
that time were the St. Omers Witnesses removed from Mrs. Celier's, because they
were afraid of being taken up by Sir William Waller, who was in search for
them. So having some other business, I did not send him away presently, but I
had particular order to send Lane into some other place: And I did advise with
Mrs. Celier where to send him, and she said, I think it will be necessary to
send him to Peterly, at one Mr. Waites's House in Buckinghamshire; for, said
she, they are Catholics, and will be sure to take a particular care of him:
But I told her it would be too far; and I would think of some place nearer; and
then I thought it would be necessary to send him to Tottenham, to the White
Heart; and there he stayed, I suppose, four or five Days, or a Week. This was
after the Trial of the Five Jesuits, as I remember. My Lord Powis sent to me,
and told me; Says he, I am in several doubts about this Lane, and if it should
be known that he is Countenanced by me, or any of our people, it would not be
well; so I leave him wholly to you, do what you will with him; but I advise you
to send for him up to Town, and give him Ten Shillings a Week, to live upon. So
when I was at leisure I sent for him again from Tottenham, and I told him; Mr.
Lane, it will be very necessary that you do take some care for a Livelihood
about Town; it is not safe nor advisable for you to be about Powis House; and
at that time I took care he should come there no more, and that if my Lord
Powis's Servants should meet him, they should take no Notice of him; which they
did perform I suppose, and as I was told. But before this, and before I sent
Lane into the Country, the second time, as near as I can remember, Knox was at
Liberty; I had been endeavoring, as soon as I had got Lane out of the
Gate House, to get Knox out also; but I found I could not, and I left that. But
I have been informed by Mr. Knox himself, that one Mr. Nevil, alias Pain, was
furnished with money from the Lords in the Tower, for the getting of Knox's
Liberty; and this Nevil himself did say, as Mr. Knox told me, that he did it by
their Order; and from this Knox, by Mrs. Celier's persuasion, I received
several Papers, which were Informations against Oats; or, at least, those
Papers that they had drawn up before they were in Custody. These Papers were
sent by me to the Tower, and from thence to Mr. Nevil to enlarge upon, I
suppose, as he thought fit; and after to my Lord Castlemain, and afterward
they were re-sent to me by Mrs. Celier, who ordered me to draw up an Affidavit
according to those Directions, and get Lane sworn to the same, which I did, and
took Lane, and asked him, said I, Mr. Lane, here is an Affidavit, can you swear
it; yes, said he, I can swear it, before I read it to him.


L. Chapter Just. I believe so.


M. Dangerfield. Nay, said I, you know not what it is; so I read it to him;
said I, do you know this to be a truth; yes, said he, I do know it to be all
true: Said I, I will read it again to you, because you are to make Oath of it,
and I would not have you do any thing, but what is safe, and then we went to
Sir James Butler, but he was not at home then to have it sworn.


L. Chapter Just. What was the purport of that Affidavit?


Mr. Dangerfield. My Lord, I cannot well remember the Words, but it was about
accusing Mr Oats of Sodomy.


L. Chapter Just. On whom?


Mr. Dangerfield. It was for attempting Buggery on the body of this Lane.


L. Chapter Just. That was the Substance of it?


Mr. Dangerfield. Yes, my Lord: And I did take this Lane to Sir James Butler,
and he did make Affidavit that it was true: And it was left there before Sir
James Butler. I suppose the Affidavit may be in Court, or a Copy of it. So my
Lord, after that Lane being gone from Powis-house, and I having no manner of
converse with him more; but only that every Saturday I took care he should have
his money, sometimes I went to his Mother's Lodgings and left it there for him,
sometimes he would come to me for it: After this we were removed from
Powis-house to Mrs. Celliers; but he was always certain of Ten Shillings a
Week. Sometimes he would pretend that it was too little for him to live upon;
and sometimes I would give him Two, or Three, or Four Shillings more of my
self; but I had no Order to do that from any body. This is all my Lord, I do
know of Lane as I remember.


Mr. Justice Jones. What do you know of Knox?


Mr. Dangerfield. Knox first delivered to me those Papers, that were sent first
to the Tower, and afterward to Nevil, and afterward to my Lord Castlemain,
and redelivered to me; and I did deliver them again to Knox, after they were
enlarged upon: And I believe, after that, Knox had prevailed with Lane to write
them in his own hand.


L. Chapter Just. Why do you believe so?


Mr. Dangerfield. Because being writ in a fair Hand, Knox told me when the
Papers were delivered, these are the main things that I am to work by, and
these must be produced against Oats, and be writ over in a fairer hand, and by
that I believe he prevailed with Lane to write it in his own hand.


L. Chapter Just. Whose hand were they in?


Mr. Dangerfield. It was a strange hand; I knew not, and I do not believe it
was Knox's hand, though indeed, I cannot tell, I know it not.


Mr. Justice Jones. Did Knox ask you who had the perusal of those Papers? and
who had made Additions to them?


Mr. Dangerfield. No, he took the Papers, and took no notice of any addition or
enlargement.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. Pray Sir, tell the manner of the delivering of those
Papers.


Mr. Dangerfield. First, by Mrs. Cellier's persuasion, Knox delivered to me the
Papers, which imported the whole matter of the Charge against Mr. Oats: These
I sent to the Tower by Mrs. Cellier's hands, from thence they were sent to
Nevil to be enlarged upon, from thence to my Lord Castlemain, who was also to
enlarge upon them, and from thence they were sent to Mrs. Cellier again, and
from her delivered to me, and I delivered them to Knox again. I found by his
discourse and every thing else, that Mr. Knox was desirous of my
Correspondence, but yet seemed as if he were shy of any body's taking notice of
it. Said I, to Mr. Knox, there is one Mrs. Downing, that lives at Lambeth over
the Water, where Mr. Oats and Dr. Tongue, and several other Persons used to
meet, where I had been informed by some of the Catholics; by Parsons, my Lady
Powis, and several others, that Mr. Oats, Dr. Tongue, my Lord of Danby, and
others, did meet at the Almes-houses there, where the Plot was contrived and
formed; for they pretended to me there was no such thing really. So, said I, if
you will go with me, we will discourse with her about the matter, for I heard
she talked very freely in several matters nearly concerning Mr. Oats, and my
Lord of Danby, and other Persons. So, as I said, I told him, if you will go
along with me, I have not been there yet, I will go and discourse with her, and
put down what she says in writing. Then Mr. Knox, my Brother, and my self did
go over to this Mrs. Downing, and had much discourse with her, where she did
repeat many Transactions that were very agreeable to the Story that I had
received from my Lady Powis, and several other Persons before. Knox did seem to
be very well satisfied about it, and promised to take cognizance of it, and
said, it was very material, but we did not put it down in writing. I did not, I
know not what he did afterward. We promised to come again another time, but I
do not remember we did ever go afterward. But Mr. Knox solicited me to go with
him, and some Business or other did still intervene; that is all that is
remarkable of Mr. Knox, which I do remember at that time; but I do remember
that after we were removed from Powis-House, when I was at Mrs. Celiers, nay I
think both before and after he was often treating with Mrs. Celier, but I know
not what was their discourse, nor was I desirous to know. But Mr. Knox came
then to me, and began to renew his Correspondence, and withal told me, that he
had some likelihood of bringing Osborn over to their Party. Said he, I find he
is gone again to his Master, but he shall do his Business, (meaning, as I
suppose, Mr. Oats) for he had, as I understood by him at that time, been
tampering with Osborn, but he did tell me it was Osborn's voluntary act, that
he did own it, and that he did go to Mr. Oats again only ^o do Mr. Knox
service. My Lord, some time after this, Knox came to me at Mrs. Celiers, and
told me he had done the Business, expressing the greatest Joy that could be.
What Business, said I? Osborn is come over, said he, and I have had an account
from the beginning to the end of all the transactions of his Master Oats, and
I have not only an account of it, but it is put into writing, and I took Osborn
before a Justice of Peace, and he has made Affidavit of it. When I heard this,
I thought it would give great satisfaction to the Lords in the Tower, and
desired Mr. Knox to let me have a Copy of that Affidavit. He told me, No, he
thought it would not be material to let me have a Copy, for by that means it
might become public and be discovered; and, said he, I have some further
design in this, Mr. Oats is going down to my Lord Lovelace's in Oxfordshire,
and Osborn is going with him, and he has promised me to be a Spy upon his
Masters actions, and to give me an account of all. And this will be material,
but I do not think fit to let you have a Copy of the Affidavit at present. Some
time after this, I told Mrs. Celier the Story, who I suppose went to the Tower
and gave the Lords an account of it. And the next time I had the Honor to see
my Lady Powis, she was pleased to say, she liked it very well, but did not as I
remember say any thing of the Copy; but being desirous to see what Osborn had
sworn, and whether it were agreeable to Lane's Affidavit that I spoke of
before, I desire Knox to let me see it, but he had it not about him at that
time. Some time after that, as near as I can remember I was at Proctor's
Coffee-house at Charing Cross, and Mr. Knox came thither, whether by my
appointment, or his, I cannot well tell, but there we met, and one Bedford was
with me; at that same time Mr. Knox desired we would go into a Back-room, and
now, said he, I will give you satisfaction, and drew out of his Pocket an
Affidavit, it was a sheet of Paper, if not written of every side, I believe of
three sides; it was very long, and he read it, my Lord, and I did find by the
Contents of it, that it did imply the same thing that Lane had sworn before Sir
James Butler; that is, that Mr. Cates should attempt upon Lane's Body to commit
Sodomy, or something very agreeable to it. I told him, Mr. Knox, said I, this
is very material, this will do you a great deal of Service, the Term is coming
on, you would do well to get an Indictment drawn up against Mr. Cates. Said he,
I will do his Business, and will advise with persons able to instruct me in it,
and I don't doubt but to carry on the Business effectually. And to that purpose
I desired him to let me have a Copy of the Affidavit; he promised me I should,
and said he would bring it several times, and he came several times to my
Lodging, but did not bring it; but I having it read to me, and remembering the
Contents of it, the next time I saw my Lady Powis, I gave her an account of it.
Said she, this man is very diligent, and deserves to be encouraged, and as I
believe gave the Lords in the Tower an account of it too, for then she was
lodgd at the Tower with her Lord, and so her Ladishop told me: And, said she,
do you know whether this man be in a condition to prosecute this Business
against Mr. Cates? said she, I believe he is put upon this by my Lord of Danby,
and he I believe takes care of him to furnish him with money. Said I, I have
endeavored to trace him out in that thing, and by all his Correspondents I
could never find, but only by one, that Mr. Knox was ever acquainted or held
correspondence with my Lord of Danby, and that person is Mr. Nettervile, who is
a worthy Gentleman of my acquaintance in the Pall Mall: And being in his
Chamber, Knox came in, and speaking merrily after his manner to him, said he,
Knox when were you at the Tower with my Lord of Danby? said he, I hold no
correspondence with him. Yes, said Mr. Nettervile, it is plain you do, and I
believe a Friend of mine saw you go in the other day: But Knox did positively
deny it; that was all that ever I heard of his correspondence with my Lord of
Danby. After this, when her Ladyship came to me to ask me what condition he was
in to prosecute the Trial; I told her, I believed his condition was very mean,
and it would be very acceptable, if he might or could be furnished with Money.
Well, said she, I will take care of it, and give an account of it to my Lord,
and he shall be furnished. And in the mean time, if Mr. Knox wants money, be
sure you take care and furnish him; but you need not let it be very
considerable, till you see what is raised. Some time after this, Mr. Knox came
to Mrs Celiers House to ask for me, I was then in my Chamber, but not ready; he
came up to me, and told me, said he, Really I am very poor, I am going to pavvn
my Sword, or something to that purpose, can you lend me five pounds? Really Mr.
Knox, said I, I will tell you, the Affidavit that you read to me I have given
an account of it to my Lady Powis, and I suppose some other Persons of Honor
have had an account of it also; I am satisfied they are, and that the Lords in
the Tower will take care that Money shall be raised for your prosecuting of Mr.
Oats. He seemed to smile at this; but said he, if this should be known, it
would be very prejudicial to the Business, and spoil it; but yet however if you
can furnish me with Money at this time, you will do me a great kindness, for I
have very great occasion. I told him, said I, I have not so much Money by me,
you come at an unseasonable time, though indeed I told him a Lie, but I thought
it not safe to part with Money without further order. Mr. Knox went away, and I
gave an account of it to Mrs. Celier, who went either every day, or every other
day to the Tower; I told her what Mr. Knox said, and I do believe (as she told
me afterward) she told my Lady Powis of it, and Mrs. Celier seemed to be angry
that I did not let him have the Money, and ordered me that at what time soever
after that Mr. Knox should come to me, I should let him have what Money he
wanted. Some time after this, Mr. Knox did come to me, and said his condition
was very mean, and you told me, said he, that care should be taken by the Lords
in the Tower to furnish me with Money. Said I, Mr Knox I can let you have 30 or
40 s. if that will do you any kindness; I have no order for any sum at present,
but as soon as it comes, it must come to you through my hands, and it must pass
as if I lent it you, and you shall give me a Note for it to repay it, lest any
thing should come to be discovered, and coming to Mr. Oats hearing, should
prejudice the Business; though I had been too forward before in giving Mr. Knox
an account that the Lords in the Tower would contribute to this Business. At
that time I went up stairs and fetched down 40 s. and gave it him: He came
afterward, and would have borrowed more of me at other times, once or twice
after that, but I did not furnish him, for I had received no order to furnish
him any further. And this, my Lord, is all the correspondence I had with him,
and as near as I can remember, I have given nothing in but what is a very true
account of the Transaction.


Sir Fr. Win. My Lord, I crave one Question of him, if he have done: After the
Papers were corrected and written fair, and enlarged upon by the several
persons, did you read them? and what were the contents of them?


Mr. Dangerfield. My Lord, I did not read them, nor did I draw them, but I do
believe that the contents were the same for substance with the Affidavit that
Lane made before Sir James Butler.


Mr. Williams. Sir, you mention several sums of money that you paid to Knox,
and paid to Lane, pray where had you this money?


Mr. Dangerfield. The 40 s that I gave to Knox it was my own money, but if I
must give an account where I had it, I believe it came originally from the
Tower.


Mr. Williams. The Ten Shillings a week, whence came that?


Mr. Dangerfield. Sometimes from the hands of my Lady Powis, at other times
from Mris. Celier; sometimes from Mr. Wood, and sometimes from my self, and I
placed it to account.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. If your Lordship please, we will now proceed to another
part of our Evidence.


Mr. Williams. About what time were they to Endict Mr. Oats? Was not this
project on foot when the Presbyterian-Plot was on foot?


Mr. Dangerfield. My Lord, I don't know what time; but it was by my Advice to
be done this Term, and so did Nevil advise too.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lord, I would read some of the Memorials or
Informations, that they were to Swear against Dr. Oats concerning the business
that you have heard.


Lord Chief Justice. Would you have them read, Brother?


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chief Justice. Who proves them?


Then the Justices of Peace Swore them.

Mr. Justice Pemberton. Sir William Waller, Did he confess he left them with my
Lord Latimer?


Sir William Waller. These are the Papers that were confessed to be carried to
my Lord Latimer.


Mr. Warcup. Osborn did Swear, That the Informations marked 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5,
were all of his own handwriting, and were dictated by the said Knox.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And he did confess, That these were the Informations that
he had delivered to my Lord Latimer.


Mr. VVarcup. Yes, he did so.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. It will lie on his part, to prove that they were true.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Which will you have read, one, or all of them.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. One, or Two; take Knox's first.


Which was Delivered to the Clerk of the Crown, who Read it in haec verba.

[ Numb. 1.] The Information of Thomas Knox, sworn before me this day of 1679.
THIS Informant does upon his Oath declare, that on the first of this present
April, there came one William Osborne to the Informant in the Painted-Chamber
in Westminster, and told to him the said Informant, that he had something of
moment to reveal to him; and did also desire the Informant to go with him into
the Abbey, and he would reveal it to him; upon which the said Osborne, and the
Informant being together, the said Osborne did tell the Informant, that his
Conscience was mightily troubled for that he found the Lord Treasurer was
maliciously prosecuted by Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow; for that he having been a
servant to Mr. Oats, and had often heard Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow consult
together, in Mr. Oats his Chamber in Whitehall, and resolve how they might
contrive a way whereby to destroy my Lord Treasurer: And that he had chosen to
reveal this secret, and ease his Conscience to the Informant, rather than to
any one else, because he thought he would keep it secret, for his own sake,
because he had already suffered by endeavoring to serve the said Lord
Treasurer, and thereupon the said Osborne showed to the Informant some Papers
written, as he told the Informant, all in his own hand, and which were relating
to the said Lord Treasurer; upon which the said Informant, told the said
Osborne, that he was no servant of the said Lord Treasurers, and did not
therefore desire to meddle in it; and that particularly, because he had never
spoke with the said Osborne before, and desired to be excused; upon which the
said Osborne did press the Informant, and withal did tell him, that if he did
not assist him in this Affair, it was resolved both by him, and one Mr. Lane,
that they would come in on the day of the said Lord Treasurers Trial, and
declare the truth concerning what they knew, concerning the malicious Design of
the said Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow, against the said Lord Treasurer; for that
they could not rest for fear he should suffer innocently, whilst they could
with so good a Conscience, as they thought, save him: And the said Osborne did
withal declare, that the aforesaid Mr. Lane was resolved to speak to the
Informant, upon the foresaid Matter: And the said Lane did accordingly, upon
the said First of April, in the Evening, meet the Informant, and showed him
some Papers, wherein he had taken several Memorials, relating to His Majesty,
the Queen, my Lord Treasurer, and several other Persons: And did withal
declare to the Informant, That his Conscience was so troubled, to see the
malicious Proceedings of the said Mr. Oats and Bedlow, against the said Lord
Treasurer, that he could not rest in his Bed, until he had disburdened it, by
telling the Truth; and if he had not met with this Informant, he was resolved
to declare it speedily to some one else* or come himself at the Day of the said
Lord Treasurer's Trial, and there declare all that he knew, relating to that
Affair. And did withal conjure the Informant, as also the said Osborne, to
keep all they had told him secret: For if it should come to the Ears of the
said Mr. Oats and Bedlow, they would endeavor to Poison, or Murder them, the
said Osborne and Lane, the first time they should see them.

Tho. Knox.


Then a Second was offered to be Read; but there appearing Scandalous Matter to
be in it, reflecting on the King; the Court thought not fit, to suffer the same
to be Read through.

Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lord, I think it appears by the Evidence sufficiently,
how they did design to Accuse Mr. Oats.


Lord Chief Justice. Ay, Brother, come let us hear what they can say to it on
the other Side.


Mr. Withins. May it please Your Lordship, and You Gentlemen of the Jury; I am
of Council for the Defendant Knox, and for Knox only.


Mr. Williams. Pray Sir, hold: My Lord, we have here Two Witnesses more, that
will fortify Mr. Dangerfield in what he has said. Call Susan Edwards, and Mrs.
Blake.


Then Mrs. Blake appeared, and was Sworn.

Mr. Williams. Pray Mrs. Blake, what can you say of any Reward Lane was to
have, for accusing Mr. Oats? or any Promises were made to him?


Mrs. Blake. All that I can say of Lane, is this; That Lane did say once to me,
I am here; and I was Dr. Oate's Man, and he would have Buggered me: And he did
make Complaint for want of Linen; and spoke to me, to wash him some Linen.
Said he, Here I have no Linen, neither will they let me have any; and his Boy
here, will not stir to look for any, unless Willoughby speak to him. Then the
Boy was spoke to.


Lord Chief Justice. What is all this? What says the other Woman?


Mr. Williams. He is called Willoughby sometimes, and sometimes Dangerfield;
for he went by both Names: But I ask you, What Money you know was given to him?


Blake. He told me, he was to be allowed Ten Shillings a Week?


Lord Chief Justice. This is only to strengthen his Evidence.


Blake. He never said to me, from whom it was.


Then Mrs. Edwards was Sworn.

Mr. Serj. Maynard. What do you say Mrs.?


Edwards. May it please you, I don't know Lane; I never saw him in my Life, but
only when he was sent for, by Mrs. Celier, to get an Habeas Corpus for
Willoughby, who was then in Newgate; and he did come the next Day, and gave his
Answer to me.


Lord Chief Justice. She says nothing, but only he was desired to get an
Habeas Corpus for Willoughby.


Mr. Sol. General. Yes, my Lord, she is called to show you, whether Lane had
not Money from Mrs. Celier.


Edwards. That was the first time I saw him; and the next Morning, I saw him
him again: And when he came to the Door, he told his Errand to me. He said, He
could get no Habeas Corpus: For he was such a Rogue, no Body would meddle nor
make with him.


Mr. Dangerfield. I would fain have her asked this Question, my Lord, if you
please; Did you ever see Mr. Knox, at Mrs. Celiers House?


Edwards. If I see him, I can tell.


Then the Defendant, Knox, was shown to her.

Edwards. I cannot say, this is the Man: I have heard much talk of Mr. Knox,
and that he has been there; but I cannot swear, this is he.


Mr. Dangerfeild. My Lord, if your Lordship pleases, when Lane was first
brought to me to the Countess of of Powis House, he was very meanly Equipag'd,
and the Countess of Powis was informed of it, and did desire me to take some
particular care to Cloth him, and that I should put him into a Disguise; but
at that time I had a Suit of Clothes, that were Lined with Blew, which I gave
to him; and I also advised him to Cut off his Hair, and to put on a Perriwigg,
which he did, and has worn it ever since, as I believe.


Lord Chief Justice. Well, let us hear what they say to it.


Mr. Withins. May it please Lordship, I am of Counsel in this Case for Mr.
Knox; there are two Persons here made Defendants: as for Mr. Lane, I have
nothing to do with him, nor to say for him; and his Case has made him appear
to be a very evil Man. But My Lord, I do observe that Indictment consists of
two parts: the first is, that these two Defendants did Conspire together; and
this was the Thirtyeth of April (and the proof comes to that time, for it will
be Material in our Case) that they did Maliciously and Deceitfully combine, and
Conspire against Titus Oats Clerk, and Will. Bedloe Gentleman, who had
discovered this horrid Popish Plot, and whom they knew to have given
Informations of it, to take away their Reputation, and make them Witnesses of
no Belief or Credit; that is one part of the Indictment, the other part is that
to further the same; Mr. Knox did cause two or three Letters to be written, as
from Osborne and Lane to him purporting those aspertions to be laid upon Oats
and Bedloe: for the last part of the Indictment, the Council for the King have
not thought fit to proceed upon it, and they have not given an account of the
Letters: but for the first part, their conspiring to take off the Reputation of
Oats and Bedloe is the only thing they have proceeded upon as I conceive. I
must needs say, my Lord, that Mr. Knox as well as Doctor Oats and Mr. Bedloe,
have had a very great misfortune to meet with these men.


L. C. I. To meet with whom?


Mr. VVithins. To meet with Osborne and Lane, for I do not here pretend to lay
any aspersion, or make any reflections upon the Credit or Reputation of Doctor
Oats or Mr. Bedloe. I think they have served the Nation too well to be
Villifi'd here. But I shall say this, that as Osborne and Lane had a great
design to disgrace and discredit Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe; so they had a
design to draw my Clyent Mr. Knox in, to pursue their malice. I did show you,
that they did begin their Evidence as to time in April, and they have laid it
so in the Indictment: we shall prove to your Lordship, and show you, that
before this, and before that Mr. Knox knew either Osborne or Lane, that they
had drawn up this Accusation against Mr. Oats, and read it to several
Witnesses, which we shall produce. And afterward, when they came to advise how
they should Prosecute the same, they were advised first to go to Mr. Thewer: he
told them that it was a dangerous thing to meddle about, and he would not
involve himself, but bid them take care what they did in it. Upon this they
apply themselves to my Clyent Mr. Knox, he told them the same thing; it is a
matter of great Consequence, I desire not to meddle with it. Said they, will
you not assist us in this business, when we only Discover this to acquit our
own Consciences, who knew these things to be treating and contriving against
the King and my Lord of Danby? For my part, says one of them, I cannot leave
the Town till I have discovered it. Notwithstanding this, Mr. Knox would not
undertake to meddle with it, but left them. They come to him the second time,
and Mr. Knox being a young man, and it seems, being a Servant in the Family,
Entered into a Corresdence with them, to prosecute what they had designed to
do. There is nothing appears (and this I would observe, if your Lordship
please) in the whole Evidence, that Mr. Knox was to Swear any thing against Dr.
Oats, or Mr. Bedloe, (as I remember) but he was indeed engaged to carry on the
Prosecution, these Witnesses enforming him of it; and that it was a Truth, I
must observe to your Lordship upon their Evidence, they did insinuate, as if
Mr. Knox had been at the Charge of maintaining Lane: But I think, that Mr.
Dangerfield has pretty well cleared whence that Maintenance came, that he gave
to Mr. Lane; that it came through none of the Hands of my Clyent Mr. Knox.


Lord Chief Justice. No, Mr. Withins, he is not accused for giving him a
constant Maintenance; but for the Money, the Guinneys, and Ten Shillings. It Is
true, it was said, It was to be paid again; but from him they had the Money:
and it appears, that he provided Lodgings for them, and paid for their Lodgings.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. And pray observe this, That what Mr. Dangerfield speaks
of, is of a Time afterward, after they had been taken and imprisoned, and
confessed the Matter.


Mr. Withins. But this you observe I hope, My Lord, from Mr. Dangerfield's
Evidence; That Knox was very poor, had not any thing to maintain himself with.


Lord Chief Justice. The Sums indeed, don't seem to be very Great; a Guinney,
and Ten Shillings in Silver: But whatever it was, he gave it them, and took
Lodgings for them, and paid for them.


Mr. Withins. I did intend to observe to your Lorship, That it is a pretty
strange thing, that there should be a Design to corrupt Persons, to commit
this foul and horrid Offense; and nothing of a Reward or Corruption proved, but
Two Guinneys, and Ten Shillings.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. What say you to the Promises of Five Hundred Pound, and a
Hundred Pound a Year a piece?


Mr. VVithins. That was Lane's own Evidence. Lane and Osborne might brag what
they would, of what they were to have, and from whom: But I believe, not one in
the Court, believed a Word they said. For it does appear, that Lane did
forswear himself backwards and forwards, as the Wind blew. So that, as for what
Lane has said, it weighs not; but we shall call two Witnesses, to whom Lane
declared this matter in February and March, before the time that Knox was
concerned: so that if we make it appear, that the Contrivance was theirs, and
there was only a great deal of weakness and indiscretion in Mr. Knox, to
believe such idle Persons, against Persons that had showed themselves so
considerable in this Discovery. I hope it will not be thought such a Crime in
us, seeing there is nothing in it, but that a young man was led away; and only
his folly, and his indiscretion drew him in; not any malice or ill design.


Sir Will. Waller. My Lord, Mr. Knox did confess to me, that he did throw
down a Guinney, and then Lane and Osborne took it up; but they both positively
swore, that he threw it down for this Reason, that he might safely Swear, he
never gave them it.


Mr. Saunders. All that they swear is not agreed to be true; My Lord, if your
Lordship please, I am of Counsel for the Defendant Knox, and as to that part of
the Indictment that charges him with writing the Letters they do not proceed
upon.


Mr. Sergeant Maynard. Yes, we do, we proceed upon the whole --


L. Chief Justice. They proceed upon the whole, but you may say if you will,
they give no proof of it.


Mr. Saunders. Then, as to that, with submission to your Lordships Judgment,
the Defendant is to be found not Guilty.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. You must observe, These are not several Crimes, but one
continued Crime, and therefore the Evidence must go to the whole.


L. Chapter Justice. You do well to observe it for your Client, but if you require
it of the Counsel on the other side, it may be they will give you an Answer, if
you will undertake to affirm that they have given no Evidence as to that part
of the Indictment wherein it says, Mr. Knox contrived three Letters to
scandalize Mr. Oats.


Mr. Saunders. We submit it to the Court whether they have or no. For the other
part of the Indictment wherein it is charged that he should maliciously
contrive with Lane to lay a Calumny and Scandal upon Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe,
the very point we are to answer to is this, whether this were a malicious
contrivance or no, and for that we shall give your Lordship this Evidence, That
Knox was a young ignorant man, and drawn in by Lane and Osborne to patronize
their mischief they intended against Oats and Bedloe; for my Lord, Mr. Knox
was not acquainted with them, or had any thing to do with them till that they
had contrived this matter among themselves: for, my Lord, we shall call you
Witnesses to prove, that before Knox had to do with them, they would have had
another person to prosecute this business for them. And if well satisfy you
that he was drawn in, I hope it will acquit us; notwithstanding I will observe
to your Lordship and the Jury, whether Lane be Guilty or not Guilty does not
affect us, if we were only drawn into the contrivance.


L. Chapter Just. Where ever Lane's Testimony stands single against Knox, it is no
Evidence.


Mr. Just. Jones. But if he was not in the Plot at the beginning, but was drawn
in, and did after proceed with them, as Dangerfield proves, I doubt it will not
acquit him.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Consider a little your Case, you say here was a
Contrivance of two, that Knox was not in the beginning, but they offered it to
others with whom it would not take, why let Knox come in when he will, if he
does come into the Contrivance and takes the Papers and manages the business to
fix these Scandals and encourage them to carry them on, Knox is as guilty as
all the rest.


Mr. Saunders. But if these men come and tell him these things are true and we
can swear them, and so is drawn in, it takes away the malice of the Contrivance.


L. Chapter Just. This is the Use the Defendant Knox his Counsel make of it, at
first Knox was not acquainted with the matter, and when he did come to
understand it he thought it to be true, as they affirmed it was true, and, said
they, we will go before a Justice of Peace and swear it: he was willing, there
being a discovery of several Conspiracies against his Lord's Life, as they
said, he being his Servant, he was willing to prosecute the business, and this
is the Use they make of it.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Come let us hear your Witnesses.


Mr. Scroggs. Call Frances Lane and Mary Lane.


L. Chapter Just. But I Will tell you what, it will be necessary to clear your selves
as well as you can of those Papers that were delivered by Knox to Dangerfield,
and went about to the Lords in the Tower, and afterward to Nevill, and by him
amended, and after delivered to Knox again by Dangerfield: this does show as if
you were concerned in the whole affair, and in all the matter of the
Information before it was cooked and after it was dressed. You must give some
account of that, for that sticks strongly upon you.


[Then Mrs. Frances Lane and her Daugher Mary Lane were Sworn.]

Mr. Scroggs. Mrs. Lane, are not you Mother to Lane the Defendant?


Frances Lane. Yes.


Mr. Withins. Pray will you give an account what your Son said to you in
February last.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. We pray they may ask their Questions in general.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Don't you point her to a time.


L. Chapter Just. Answer me, What has your Son said to you at any time concerning
Oats?


Frances Lane. He spoke it about March.


L. Chapter Just. What did he say?


Frances Lane. He used him uncivilly, he had no mind to stay with him.


L. Chapter Just. What said you?


Frances Lane. I desired him to stay longer.


L. Chapter Just. How often did he tell you this?


Frances Lane. Several times.


L. Chapter Just. He had left his Service once, had he not?


Frances Lane. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Was it before or after he left his Service?


Frances Lane. Before and after too.


L. Chapter Just. If he complained he had so used him before, why would he go to
him again?


Frances Lane. Because the times were hard and I persuaded him.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, but would you persuade him after such an abuse of your Son as
that?


Frances Lane. I thought then he would not do so again.


Mr. Just. Jones. When was the first time he complained to you?


Frances Lane. It was about Christmas.


Mr. Just. Jones. Was it before Christmas?


Frances Lane. It was after.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Consider here you bring Lane's Mother to accuse him to
excuse your self.


L. Chapter Just. But is this material?


Mr. Scroggs. It is material to our Client Mr. Knox, who was drawn in here by a
couple of Rascals. We prove that before this time, which Justice Warcup and Sir
William Waller have in their Informations, they offered the same discovery to
others.


L. Chapter Just. Call them and prove it, but you will never have the better name
for calling them ill ones.


Mr. Scroggs. We lay all upon Lane and Osborne who inveigled Knox.


Mr. Saunders. Pray Mrs. Lane tell the Court and Jury how and when your Son
came acquainted with Mr. Knox.


Frances Lane. May it please you my Lord, Osborn brings a Paper to our House
and would have had my Son have read it, but he could not, so he read it
himself; and there were some desperate things in it.


L. Chapter Just. What were they?


Frances Lane. I cannot tell, they were concerning the King and the Queen and my
Lord Treasurer.


L. Chapter Just. When was this?


Frances Lane. In March last, at our House, and I desired them they would not
meddle with such things, for I said they were things beyond them. My Son
promised me he would not meddle with it, but let Osborne alone with it, but
said I, pray go to one Captain Thewer, he is a good civil man, and a man of
understanding. So they did go as I directed them.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Who went?


Frances Lane. Osborne did.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Who went with him? for you say they.


Frances Lane. John Lane my Son.


L. Chapter Just. Was there any thing particular in those Papers concerning Mr.
Oats being guilty of Sodomy?


Frances Lane. I cannot say in particular, it is a great while ago, but he went
to Captain Thewer, and he wished him, after he had read it, said he, don't
meddle with any of these things for it will be the worse for you.


L. Chapter Just. As your Son told you, you were not by.


F. Lane. Yes they both told me so. With that says Mr. Osborne, I Will find out
one Mr. Knox, who had been some acquaintance of Mr. Wiggins, Mr. Bedloe's
Clerk, and so, said he, I will ask Mr. Wiggins, if he be acquainted with Mr.
Knox.


L. Chapter Just. Did your Son at that time know Knox?


F. Lane. No, my Lord, he had never seen him at that time: so my Son went, and
they found Mr. Wiggins and Mr. Knox walking in the Abbey.


L. Chapter Just. Was Lane with him then?


F. Lane. He went with Osborne, and came and told me, Knox would not meddle
with them.


L. Chapter Just. Who came and told you so?


F. Lane. Osborne came and told me so and my Son.


L. Chapter Just. You were not by?


F. Lane. No, not I, but said he, as he told me, I will go to him again, and
afterward he did meet him again, as he said, and delivered them to him.


Mr. Withins. Did you ever see Knox in your life?


F. Lane. I had never seen him then.


Mr. Withins. Did you ever hear your Son say he did know Knox before that time?


F. Lane. Never in my life.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. But you do not prove that they were not acquainted.


L. C.Just. Do you believe Osborne said true, Mr. Saunders?


Mr. Saunders. Not when he spoke to Sir William Waller to accuse my Client of
the Contrivance.


L. Chapter Just. In that case when it is against your Client he did not, but in
other cases he might, well go on.


Mr. Withins. Which is Mary Lane?


M. Lane. I am she Sir. I can say no more then my Mother has said, I was by at
the same time.


Mr. Saunders. Do you know when John Lane came acquainted with Knox? was it
before April last or after?


Mr. Just. Pemberton. How is it possible that any one can swear a Negative?


Mr. Saunders. If we cannot prove the Negative, nor they the Affirmative, it
will be presumed they were not, because it is not known.


Mr. Just. Pemb. Nor do you prove any Informations before given to any one.


Mr. Saund. Yes, to Thewer.


Mr. With. We will ask the Daughter about that.


F. Lane. She can only prove it by hearing it, for she was sick.


Mr. With. Young Mrs. Lane, what was there in that Paper that Osborne brought
to your House?


M. Lane. There was concerning the King and the Queen and my Lord Treasurer.


L. C. Just. Was there any thing in it concerning Mr. Oats?


M. Lane. Yes, there was concerning his beastliness.


Mr. Just. Pemb. Who read it?


M. Lane. Osborne I did hear read it.


Mr. Saun. Your Brother was not acquainted with Knox then?


Mr. Just. Pemb. How can they tell that? it is impossible.


L. Chapter Just. The nature of the thing is such, that it can be proved no
otherwise. But it seemed to them that they were of no acquaintance, it is hard
to prove when an acquaintance begins.


Mr. Saund. And further then this we cannot go in such a case; for that thing
of the great sums of money, certainly it was as little a thing as could be;
there was no more in the case then a Guiney, and ten Shillings and three half
Crowns as proved, and he was cheated of them it seems, for they would not do
the work.


Mr. Scroggs. It Is an improbable thing that he should be so poor as to sell the
Handle of his Sword, and yet be engaged in the management of such a Plot, and
not have money for it.


L. Chapter Just. There is no great store of money appears to be given to Lane, but
he was kept upon a mean maintenance.


Mr. Just. Jones. But it was not without expectation of a reward.


Mr. Just. Pemb. He tells you the wages was to be paid when the work was done.


L. Chapter Just. And when the Roguery was discovered, they had no more money then.


Mr. Just. Pemb. When the business came to be controverted thus, they had no
reason to give it.


Mr. Saund. Though Lane had maintenance, yet our Client Knox was not taken such
care of, still there was provision made for him, but none for us, because we
were drawn in and did not contrive it.


Mr. Just. Pemb. But remember Mr. Saunders, by the same hand there was forty
Shillings given at one time.


Mr. With. Well my Lord we have done: We say that we had no part in the malice
of the contrivance, and therefore ought not to be punished with them.


L. Chapter I. Well Mr. Holt, what say you for Lane?


Mr. Holt. My Lord, I am assigned of Counsel for the Defendant Lane. I have no
Witnesses at all to examine, but only shall make some little Observations upon
the Evidence that is given for the King. As for the Indictment it self, though
it is not several Crimes, but one complicated Crime, yet the Evidence that is
given is only to one part thereof, and therefore I submit it to your Lordship
if the proof be proportionable to the Charge, and whether the Defendant ought
not to be found not Guilty. There has been great mention made of the writing
Letters, yet it would be hard that the Defendant should be found Guilty of such
an Offense when the proof does not come up so high: that would introduce a
severer punishment then the crime proved would justify.


Mr. Just. Pemb. Pray Mr. Holt don't go away with that: I must set you right a
little there, the Crime that is laid is, to discountenance the Kings Evidence,
and to make them that they should not be believed; the means are several,
partly by casting of Crimes upon them, partly by writing Letters; that Crime is
another thing, and therefore if they do not find them Guilty of every one of
the particular means, yet the Crime must be found.


L. Chapter J. You are in the right thus far Mr. Holt, they have laid in the
Indictment, that they endeavoring to disparage the credit of Oats and Bedloe,
have for money's sake, and by promises and contrivances, and writing of Letters
wherein was scandalous matter against Oats and Bedloe, they thereby did
attempt to discredit them. Now say you if this matter be not proved that there
was any scandalous matter concerning Oats and Bedloe, then the contrivance is
not proved: but what though all the Facts in the Indictment are not proved, yet
if there be enough to prove your contrivance to discredit them, and if you
suppose the Evidence true that is given, it rests I think plainly upon your
Client, and you cannot get off from it: but if there be not sufficient proof to
maintain the Indictment for the crime of endeavoring to discredit Oats and
Bedloe, unless they prove the Letters also, you say something, but there is the
business that sticks on you, they have proved enough without that.


Mr. Holt. If the Jury do not find them not Guilty generally, may they not find
them not Guilty of writing the Letters?


L. Chapter I. No; for if the other part of the Evidence did not amount to a proof
of a design of disparaging their Testimony, you had a very strong objection of
it: but if they lay five things, and they prove but one of them upon you, if
that one serves to the disparaging of Oats and Bedloe, which is the substance
of the Indictment, that maintains the Indictment.


Mr. Holt. It does so my Lord, but not the aggravations.


L. Chapter Just. All that you say then is in mitigation of a Fine, but if all be
true that is proved upon your Client, as I see no reason to doubt it, you will
save but little by this defense.


Mr. Holt. My Lord, as to the matter, it all depends upon the credit of the
Witnesses, and credibility of the Circumstances in themselves and one with
another. Some of the Evidence is but very slight, and sure were but produced to
spend time.


L. Chapter Just. Indeed there was a great deal of it to little purpose; for ought
I see this Trial needed not to have been above an hour.


Mr. Holt. As for his saying he should have 100 li. a year, and the bettering
of his fortune, it was but his vanity and extravagance.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Holt does argue as much for his Client as the Case will bear.


Mr. Holt. They have endeavored to lay all upon us, now if so be we are
affected with any severe Evidence, I think the same Evidence (to requite them)
does affect them.


L. Chapter Just. This is a kind of Battel-royal, where every one has two Enemies
to oppose.


Mr. Holt. Here is Mr. Dangerfield he comes, and in his Evidence tells you,
that my Lady Powis was so long upon her knees to thank God that her Party was
so much strengthened by the accession of Law, My Lord, I desire the Quality of
Mr. Lane may be taken notice of, a Footman and a young rash Fellow, one that
both for Age and Quality could not be very considerable.


Lord Chief Just. But two Witnesses is better than one, Mr. Holt, do you
remember that? Knox used that Expression, if Lane do but keep firm, we shall be
too hard for Osborne alone, for two Witnesses are better than one, but by that
he counted Lane worth something.


Mr. Holt. You must consider what he was to swear they could scarce get an
Evidence so proper for what they would have him swear.


Lord Chief Just. Mr. Williams, what Answer can you give to all the
Transactions that Mr. Dangerfield tells you of about Knox? Besides, take notice
of this, you would have this to be a Contrivance by Lane and Osborne to be
between themselves, and that your Clyent must be a stranger to it; and when he
comes to know it, he knows it only as a remorse of Conscience that they tell
him they have, and desire him to go with him before a Justice of Peace to swear
it, and he hearing something that might affect his Master the Earl of Danby,
and believing that always true, did encourage that matter only for his Masters
Service, and thought he did a good Act in it: but your subsequent behavior
shows it was a Conspiracy rather; for, First, your secret ways of sending your
cunning Notes, We all club'd together, and you paid two Shillings at the
Sugar Loaf, bear this, which shows, and does to my apprehension, signify as if
he would never own that he spent any thing upon them, and that he was bountiful
to them. And then the giving of Money to the man to convey Notes, that they
might not betray one another; does not all these subsequent Actions, especially
those Dangerfield tells you of, and receiving the Papers after they were
enlarged upon speak it a Conspiracy, what can you say to all this?


Mr. Williams. My Lord --


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Stay a little, and Answer all together; Do but consider
with your self, those Informations your Clyent Knox did own he took, and before
they were sworn, and carried them to My Lord Latimer's Lodgings, and he
himself owns, that he took Lodgings for them, and lay with them, and when the
Lords were in pursuit of them.


Lord Chief Just. And then does he steal them from place to place, takes
Lodgings for them, and pays for them.


Mr. Just. Jones. He brings one of them to make Affidavit, and will keep it by
him, is shie of showing it; afterward does show it, this makes him a Contriver
too, as well as an Executer.


Mr. Saunders. If your Lordship please --


Mr. Just. Pemb. Consider too the Papers that were put in too of Caution, that
Knox and they should not be found in several Tales; for Knox had been examined
before they were, that was the meaning of those Instructions?


Lord. Chapter Just. If you have any Witnesses to wipe your selves clean from the
matter of receiving the Papers from Dangerfield, and taking Lodgings for them
when they were under that accusation, do.


Mr. Saunders. I have a word to answer upon the Testimony of Mr. Dangerfield.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Consider this, That he attempted another man upon the
same account; your Clyent did tempt VViggins to do the same thing to his Master.


Mr. Saunders. That was in February before, and all that he said, was, that he
would have had out of Mr. Bedloe's Servant, what Company his Master kept, and
what he did.


Lord Chief Just. You do observe right.


Mr. Just. Pemb. And to have betrayed his Papers to him.


Lord Chief Just. That does not reach this Indictment indeed but that thing
that he would have tempted him to, was to have discovered, and to have a
transcript of all the Papers that concerned my Lord of Danby; that he should
watch his Company, and know what Lords were with him, that he might make his
opposition as well as he could, and that he should have what Place he did
desire under my Lord. It does not affect the Case of the Indictment, but if
shows you are a Tempter of men, and that you are a Cautioner, that you would
hire a man to betray his Masters Papers, which is not fair, let the Master be
who he will.


Mr. Justice Pemberton, It facilitates the belief of this.


Lord Chief Justice, Yes: Ay, Ay, it is to make the Jury more apt to credit
what the Evidence of this particular Fact is.


Mr. Saunders, My Lord, let me offer this word and I submit, Mr. Dangerfield
himself does swear, that Lane brought him a Paper containing the same matter
that he did falsely accuse M. Oats of, and he read it over three times to him,
and then he Swore it before Sir James Butler, My Lord, I will put my Cause upon
that Point, whether Mr. Dangerfield did not believe it to be true at that time.


Mr. Justice Jones, Your Clyent is the more mischievous man to contrive it so
as to make the thing to be believed when it was false.


Lord Chief Justice, The Use of the Argument he makes is this, that as Mr.
Dangerfield might be deceived into a belief that the Information was true; so
might Mr. Knox as well, when he saw one ready to swear it; but has Dangerfield
done those subsequent Acts which he has done in the Confederacy, for which he
is now Indicted?


Mr. Saunders, He swears in his Information, that they came to his Hands from
Lane and Osborne.


Lord Chief Justice, Well Gentlemen, you of the Kings Counsel and of the Jury,
you need not any summing up of the Evidence, I think the thing is Evident.


Mr. Justice Pemberton, Gentlemen, it is a very clear Case, as clear as the Day,
I think you need not go from the Bar, but do as you will.


Then the Jury laying their Heads together, agreed without delay, and without
moving from the Bar.

Clerk of the Crown, Gentlemen are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Omnes, Yes.


Clerk of the Crown, Who shall say for you?


Omnes, Foreman.


Clerk of the Crown, How say you, are the Defendants Guilty of the Offense and
Misdemeanour whereof they stand Indicted, or not Guilty?


Foreman, Guilty.


[ At which the People gave a great Shout.]

Mr. Sergeant Maynard, My Lord, I pray the Verdict may be Recorded.


Mr. Justice Jones, Let it be so. Come, where are these two young Fellows? let
us see if they can show their Faces now.


[ And they were brought into the middle of the Court.]

Knox. Will your Lordship give me leave to speak one word for my self?


Mr. Justice Jones, No: No, there is no speaking now, take them into your
Custody Marshal.


[ Which was done, and the Court broke up.]

FINIS.
Books lately Printed.
THE Trial, Conviction, and Condemnation of Anthony Brommich, and William
Atkins, For being Romish Priests, before the Right Honorable the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs, at this last Summer Assizes at Stafford, held there for the
County of Stafford.

Where they received Sentence of Death accordingly.

Together with the Trial of Charles Kern, at Hereford Assizes last, for being
also a Romish Priest.

The Lord Chief Justice Scroggs his Speech in the Kings Bench the first day of
this Michaelmas Term, 1679 occationed by the many Libellous Pamphlets which are
published against Law, to the Scandal of the Government, and Public Justice.

Together with what was declared at the same time on the same Occasion in open
Court, by Mr. Justice Jones, and Mr. Justice Dolben.

Sold by Robert Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery Lane.


