THE TRIAL OF Capt. Henry Wickham, LATE COMMANDER OF Their MAJESTY'S Ship THE
DIAMOND.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1695.

THE TRIAL OF Captain Henry Wickham, etc.
Note, That at London some days before the Trial, Capt. Henry Wickham desired a
Copy of the Charge deposed against him, that he might not be surprised, but
have his Proofs ready as there should be Occasion, but Bathurst, the Judge
Advocate, refused it. Capt. Wickham being able to prove that his Lieut. Coleman
had sold Nine of his Men at Barbados, desired to know of the Judge Advocate
the Method of bringing an Indictment against him, and the rather for that he
was informed that Coleman was now the Evidence against him, but the Judge
Advocate's Answer was, that there was no need of it, for the Charge against
Coleman would naturally arise in the Trial; because when Capt. Wickham should
plead the Loss of his Ship was occasioned by the want of Men, he would then
have a fair Opportunity to accuse the said Coleman; but notwithstanding this,
the Judge Advocate said at the Trial that Coleman was now the King's Evidence,
and whatsoever the Captain had to say against him signified nothing, it being
not then a proper time to accuse an Evidence.

The TRIAL.
At a Court-Marshal holden on Board the Britannia at Spithead, the (...) day of
April, 1694. Present, Edward Russel, Esquire Admiral, Lord Berkley, etc.

Judge Advocate. CApt. Wickham. You are brought here to answer for the King's
Ship The Diamond, which was lost under your Command, and here are several
Depositions against you:


Whereupon Lieut. Coleman was called, and his Deposition read, (which had been
penned with as much Art and Cunning as possible) the Heads whereof were as
follows --

1. That Capt. Wickham sold thirty or forty of his Men to the Merchants Ships
at Barbados.

2. That he did not order the Ship in a readiness when the Engagement approacht.

3. That he the said Coleman did advise Capt. Wickham to take some Men out of
the said Merchants Ships under his Convoy.

4. That Capt Wickham came down between Decks, and said we must take Quarter.

Capt. Wickham. I have been denied a Copy of my Charge, and I therefore pray I
may have time to recollect, before I give an Answer to those Accusations.


Mr. Russel. Sir, you had time enough to prepare your self for the Trial.


Capt. Wickham. Sir, This Gentleman that has thus accused me, knew very well
that I would lay the Loss of the Ship to his charge, for selling Nine or Ten of
my best Men a few days before we left Barbados, as is well known to Coll.
Holt and Major Delaval, who are now ready to attest the Truth of it.


Judge Advocate. He is the King's Evidence, and his Deposition is good against
you.


Capt. Wickham. Here is a Paper under this Lieutenants Hand, when the Action
was fresh in his Memory, wherein he has given a true account of the whole
Matter, and is contradictory to what he now alleges, and I therefore desire
this Paper may be read.


Judge Advocate. It signifies nothing, he has sworn to the contrary, what he
has sworn is to be believed.


Mr. Russell. It signifies nothing.


Capt. Wickham. You do not know what is in it, and I beg it may be read, the
Action was fresh in their memories when they signed it at St. Maloes, it was
their voluntary Act, and they are Witnesses one for the other.


Judge Advocate. It will do you no good, they are Evidence for the King, and
they have sworn to the contrary.


Mr. Russell. No, it will do you no good, they have sworn to the contrary.


Capt. Wickham. If it will do no good, I desire however it may be read,
because it will make them appear to be a pack of Villains.


Mr. Russel. Come Sir, come to the Business, the Kings Ship is lost, by your
selling thirty or forty men, as your Lieutenant has sworn; what have you to say
to that?


Capt. Wickham. I beg liberty of the Court to ask Lieut. Coleman a question.


Court. Ay, pray do.


Capt. Wickham. Do not you own that you signed a Certificate at St. Maloes of
the Action?


Lieut. Coleman. Yes.


Capt. Wickham. Was it not your Voluntary Act?


Lieut. Coleman. I don't know but I might have been detained there, if I had
not signed it.


Capt. Wickham. Have not you owned since you came for England, that I behaved
my self with as much Honor in that days Action, as any man in the World, for
that (as I am told) was your Expression?


Lieut. Coleman. I never said such a Word.


Capt. Wickham. Then I pray the Court to give me leave to call in three or four
Witnesses, Lieut. Fisher, Lieut. of the St. Michael, Mr. Burchet the Admirals
Secretary, etc. Who will all certify they heard him highly commend my
Behavior in that Days Action, and said that I was very unjustly abused by the
Mob.


Judge Advocate. It signifies nothing to call your Witnesses, nor can what they
say be any thing to your Advantage, for Coleman is upon his Oath, and denies
all.


Mr. Russel. What have you to say concerning your selling thirty or forty Men?


Capt. Wickham. What Men I spared to the Merchantmen were their own, or in
lieu of some of those I had taken from them at their first coming to Barbados,
if I had not returned them part, they must never have sailed from thence. And
moreover, their Majesty's Orders are positive against the disabling
Homeward-bound Ships, and that upon Miscarriage in such cases the Captain shall
be answerable for the loss of them; but I had Sir Francis Wheeler's Orders to
assist all the Ships under my Convoy, as much as was possible: I never took a
bribe of any Man, neither did I spare above twelve Men among the thirty Ships
that came with us from Barbados, and those were to such as I had disabled. I
can prove that Lieut. Coleman sold nine or ten of my best Men at our coming
away, as is well known to Coll. Holt and Maj. Delaval, who are both here, and
will swear to the Truth of it;


upon this a man was called, who said that he and two more were put on board
one Elderidge at Barbados, and that he was told that Captain Wickham had a
Reward of fifteen Guineas.

Capt. Wickham. I did put that Man and two more on board that Ship, I do
acknowledge, but it was by order of Sir Francis Wheeler, and here is under the
Masters Hand to avouch that I had of him no manner of Consideration for the
said Men, but spared them to him in Obedience of Sir Francis Wheelers Orders.


The Man owned it was done while Sir Francis Wheeler was there.

Then the Gunner's Depositions were read, which agreed with the Lieutenants,
that the Ship was not in so good a condition to receive the Enemy as she ought
to have been, and by the Captains Neglect; and that he the said Gunner spoke to
the Captain five or six times to get more Guns out below, and that the Captain
replied, No, it signified nothing, only put out four more to windward.

The Carpenters Depositions were read, that the Captain did not order more
Ports to be knocked open than the Gunner speaks of.

Mr. Russel. Why was not your Ship in a Readiness when the Enemy approacht?


Capt Wickham. I ordered the lower Guns to be run out, so far as a Gun before
the Mainmast, which was a great many more than I had hands to manage, and if
more Ports had been opened, not having Men to defend them, it would but have
exposed us the more to the Enemies small shot, having many Occasions in time of
Battle to run forward for Powder and other necessaries at such a time; and
besides, it was giving them more breaches to enter in at, when they boarded us:
This was what I was cautious of: And the Enemies made themselves Masters of
those ports we had open, for want of Men to defend them, as soon as any other
part of the Ship. A fortnight before we come near the Channel, I ordered all
the Sea-ments Chests into the Hold, all the Cabbins to be knocked down upon the
Gun-Deck, that all might be clear at a minutes warning, and this very Gunner,
as well as my Lieutenant, has often said to me, that we were in such a
readiness, that it was impossible we should be surprised by an Enemy. I several
times told them and the other Officers, that if any thing they could think of
in the Ship were out of Order, they should acquaint me with it, and if we had
had success, they would have remembered the care I took at all times to have my
Ship in a readiness to enter upon Service. They both own that I ordered them to
manage the Gun-Deck, and that to be their Charge, and all the Men to their
Quarters there, and yet they have sworn that I would not suffer more than five
or six Guns to be put out; we were engaged three quarters of an hour before we
were boarded, and for them to employ forty of such hands as we had at four Guns
or six, is somewhat strange, having twenty spare Guns by them, which they
themselves might have run out in a minute, or as many of them as they could
have managed. I appointed my Lieutenant and Gunner to do the best Service they
could upon that Deck, and if there was not Service done, it was their fault and
not mine. I managed the upper Deck to the utmost of my Power, without any
assistance; my Master was bed-ridden, the Eldest Lieutenant distracted, and in
a little time the chief Mate was blown up; and if this Lieutenant and Gunner
had not more Guns below out, (although they had my express order for it) they
should have come up upon Deck, and helped to have defended the Ship there, but
Coll. Holt, Capt. Garth, Capt. Hutchinson, and my self, were left alone, as
they are ready to certify, after we were boarded by the Ship of forty Guns,
and three hundred Men, and entered by Ninety at least; they can likewise
witness whether this Lieutenant and Gunner came to assist us with any of the
Men they had with them, though I called to them several times, and did what I was
able to get them to our assistance, but they thought themselves safe, and very
well knew upon whom the blame of all would be laid. If they had been the Men
they pretended to be, they would have done something extraordinary with the Men
they had, and if they had not done it out of their Zeal for the Service of
their King and Country, yet I did verily believe the favor I had shown them
would have inclined them to have stood by me in such an Exigency, and not have
left me to shift for my self. Capt. Garth can testify, that when he and I
retreated upon the Gun-Deck, in hopes to join some of our Men there: We found
the Enemy was entered, and we saw not beside the Gunner above three of our Ships
Company.


Mr. Russel. Why did not you take the Men out of the Merchants Ships?


Capt. Wickham. The Merchants Ships in our Company were so weak, that I should
have run a great hazard in disabling them at Sea, for the Enemy having two good
Ships, and the Advantage of their sailing, one of them might have kept me in
play whilst the other had taken all the Merchantmen, and then I must have been
accountable for their loss, the Merchants would have said two Privateers would
never have attempted a Man of War and a Fire-ship, though I had been ill manned.
But besides this, most of them kept to windward, and at such a Distance that my
Boat might have been intercepted by the Enemy, and then I must have suffered
for sending away the Boat at such a time with so many Men.


Judge Advocate. Why did you go down between Decks, and tell them they must
take Quarter?


Capt. Wickham. Coll. Holt, Capt. Garth and Hutchinson, can all testify, that
I was so far from asking quarter, that I stood with those three Gentlemen in
our Steerage, till at last having neither Officer nor Seamen to stand by me,
forty French Men were in the Great Cabin, Coll. Holt, and Capt. Hutchinson
were seized in the Steerage, and Capt. Garth and my self leapt down between
Decks, in hopes to join some of our Men there, but instead of meeting with
them, were immediately engaged there with three or four French Men, one of
which he killed with his Sword, I wounded another of them, and then were we
presently blown up, and both suffocated, as the said Captain Garth will
testify upon his Oath.


Then the Pursers Deposition was read, purporting, that after the Ship was
engaged, he retreated into the Forecastle with seven or eight Men, and defended
that till he heard the Captain had taken Quarter.

Another Man deposed, that he saw Captain Wickham in the Hold, after the Ship
was blown up between Decks.

Mr. Russell. What have you to say to this Captain?


Capt. Wickham. I beg leave to ask this Man some Questions.


Court. Ay, Ay,


Capt. Wickham. At what time did you see me in the Hold?


Man. After the Ship was blown up between decks.


Capt. Wickham. Will you swear to what you say?


Judge Advocate. He has taken his Oath, --


Capt. Wickham. Where was Coll. Holt, Capt. Hutchinson and Capt. Garth, when
you saw me in the Hold?


Man. Coll. Holt, Hutchinson and Garth were between Decks.


Capt. Wickham. Will you swear to that?


Man. I have sworn it.


Capt. Wickham. It is as true, that I was in the Hold, as that they were
between decks, I therefore pray the Court to take Notice what this Fellow says
he has sworn to, and examine Coll. Holt and Capt. Hutchinson, whether they were
between Decks in my Ship in that days Action.


Mr. Russell. It signifies nothing to ask them.


Court. Call Coll. Holt and Capt. Hutchinson, which was done.


Court. Was Capt. Wickham in the Hold after the Ship blew up between decks.


Coll. Holt and Capt. Hutchinson. We were both seized by the French in the
Steerage in the Captains Presence, before the Ship blew up between decks, and
we declare, that neither of us were between decks in Capt. VVickhams Ship that
day, but upon their seizing of us, the Captain jumpt from us down between
decks, and Captain Garth followed him.


Court. Capt. Wickham have you any thing more to say to this man?


Capt. Wickham. Yes, I hope the Court will take notice he is forsworn, and
besides, I have his Hand and all theirs that have sworn against me to
contradict what they have said, and have Evidence ready to make it appear that
most of my Officers owned for the first Month after they came for England, that
they had signed and left a Paper in my Hands, containing a true account of the
Action, and that while they speak well of me, they were in danger of having
their bones broke, and could not have Preferment, I therefore again pray that
this Paper so signed may be read.


Court. Read that Paper.


Clerk reads as follows.

We the Officers and Seamen belonging to their Majesty's Ship The Diamond, do
testify, that on the 20th. of September, about 11 in the morning, we engaged
with two French Frigates, one of forty Guns, the other of thirty four, that of
thirty four engaged us first to the windward nigh an hour, within half Musket
shot, in which times she killed and wounded us several Men, the other boarded
us upon the Lee-quarter, having on board him two hundred and eighty men, they
entered us in the Gun Room, great Cabin and Quarter Deck, where we fought them
above half an hour after they were entered, and cut down our Colors, having
fifty of our best men killed and wounded, and not above eighty men well on
board when we began, several being very weak with the flux, our Company with
boys not exceeding one hundred and forty; we were so weak at last, and their
number so great, that one after the other as they seized us took quarter, being
almost suffocated with their Stink-pots and Granado-shells, which they hove in
at the ports and holes they tore with their great Guns in our quarter. We
likewise declare, that our Captain to the uttmost of his power did Encourage
us, and defend their Majesty's Ship, as long as it was possible with so weak
anumber as remained, to which we subscribe our hands the 27th. of September,
1693.

Robert Colemam, Lieut. John Shales Robert Hemmens, Boatswain, Thomas Ursgate,
Carpenter.
to the Number of Forty Nine.


When half the Paper was read, Captain Wickham interrupted, and said --

Capt. Wickham. I hope, Gentlemen, you will allow the Kings Ship was fought
for, where there was fifty two killed and wounded out of eighty, and you will
find when my Witnesses are called, their Declaration will agree with this
Paper, which is a true account of the Action.


Mr. Russel. Sir, You are not to fortell what your Witnesses will say for you,
they shall be heard, when we have done with the Kings Evidence.


Two or Three of the Ships Company were called.

Court. What have you to say against Captain Wickham?


Two or Three of the Ships-Company. We believe our Ship was lost for want of
Good Conduct in the Captain, for that he seemed to be in great disorder and
consternation.


Capt. Wickham. I think it very hard that my Swabbers shall be asked how I
behaved my self in that Action, when there were indifferent Persons, and Men of
Honor on board, who were great Sufferers by our Misfortune; they are here, and
I desire the Court will hear their Declarations.


Court. Call Coll. Holt. He appears.


Court. What account can you give as to the Loss of The Diamond.


Coll. Holt. Sir, To my Knowledge Capt. Wickham did his utmost endeavor to
defend the Ship as long as it was possible, and they wrong him who say to the
contrary. I remember very well, after we were boarded by the Philippo, upon the
Starboard-quarter, the Captain ordered every Body to their close quarter, and
Capt. Hutchinson, who was shot through the arm, Major Garth and my self retired
along with the Captain off the Quarter Deck into the Steerage, the French at
the same time entering at the Gallery in the great Cabin; we defended the
Steerage as long as it was possible; I verily believe the Ship that boarded us
had forty Guns, and three hundred Men, and at the same time the Captain had no
body to stand by him but the Gentlemen which I have named, though he endeavored
what he could to get more men to our assistance. We had some Powder fired in
the Steerage by their Granado-shells, which almost suffocated us, and I saw it
was to no purpose for us to pretend to hold out much longer, unless we had had
more men, being at that time not above four or five to defend the Steerage, the
rest of the Men being run away: The great Cabin was full of the French, who
were then entering in every where, the other Ship of thirty six Guns within
half Pistol shot upon our Weather bow. In this Condition Capt. Hutchinson and
my self were seized on by the French, both of us took quarter, and the Captain
and Major Garth jumpt down between Decks. I saw a Declaration signed by Capt.
Wickham's Officers and Seamen at St. Maloes, which gives a true Account of the
Action, it expresses the Men we had Killed and Wounded, and also the weak
Condition we were in when we began to Engage. If the Captain of the Fire-ship
had acted his part, I verily believe we should not have miscarried in that
days Action.


Mr. Russel. Coll. Holt is a Land-man, and those that are the King's Evidence,
being Seamen, are better Judges in such a Case.


Court. Withdraw.


Court. Call Capt. Hutchinson.


He appears.

Court. What can you say as to the Loss of The Diamond?


Capt. Hutchinson. When we saw the Enemy first in the Morning, I heard the
Captain order the Ship should be cleared, and all things ready to engage, he
immediately brought too, to stay for the Merchantmen, and made them a Sign to
give Notice to them to clear their Ships; I heard Capt. Wickham call to Capt.
Perry in the Fire-Ship to keep close under his Lee-quarter, within call, and
when we made the two Ships plain to be Frenchmen, the Captain ordered all the
Ships Company upon Deck, told them to this effect, that they had now an
Opportunity to do their Majesty's Service, added, that the Enemies Ships were
small ones, and we must fight a dozen such as they were; he took particular
Notice that none of his Men were drunk, and drank their Majesty's Healths to
them, afterward ordered every Man to his Quarters. I remember one of the Ships
came first upon our Larboard-side, pretty near, and we fired warmly one at the
other for a considerable time, and I observed this Ship did us very much
Damage: Then the other of forty Guns, and I verily believe three Hundred good
Men, fired their Broadside in our Star-board quarter, and boarded us there;
presently after the Captain upon their Boarding us, ordered every body to their
close Quarters, and at that time I took Notice, that upon the Quarter Deck,
where I and the rest of the Land-Officers were with Capt. Wickham, there were
not above five left but were Killed or Wounded, the Enemies small-shot did us
so much damage there. Coll. Holt, Major Garth and my self, along with the
Captain, retired into the Steerage, which place we defended as long as we
could. Major Garth guarded the great Cabbin-door with a Blunderbuss, it being
then in the Enemies possession: Their Granado-sheels fired some Powder in the
Steerage, which almost suffocated us all; and I observed the Captain received
much Damage at that time; there was no body but the Gentlemen I have named, and
a Boy along with us, besides what were disabled, though the Captain did his
utmost Endeavor to get more to our assistance, the great Cabin being full of
the French, Coll. Holt and my self seeing there was no possibility of any
longer resistance, being seized on took quarter. Captain Wickham and Major
Garth leapt down between Decks, I verily believe that in the two Ships the
French had five hundred good men.


Mr. Russel interrupted Captain Hutchinson in his Declaration, and said he was
a Land-man, and not a proper Judge of Sea-matters.

Capt. Hutchinson. Sir, I had Eyes, and could see who fought, and who did not.


Court. Withdraw.


Court. Call Major Garth.


Maj. Garth. I desire to be Sworn.


Judge Advocate. Sir, you are to declare what you know without being sworn,
since you are not an Evidence for the King.


Maj. Garth. I saw Capt. Wickham all the Action, and know he did as much as
was possihle to defend their Majesty's Ship, after we were boarded by a Ship of
forty Guns, and three hundred Men, by the Captains Orders we retired to our
close Quarters, and there was not one of his own Men stood by him, or was along
with us in the Steerage, besides Coll. Holt, Capt. Hutchinson wounded in the
Arm, my self and a Boy, though the Capt. endeavored as much as he could to get
more to our assistance, the Great Cabin was then full of French Men, who
entered at the Star-board-gallery, which they laid open with their great shot.
I defended the Cabin door with a Blunderbuss as long as I was able, till at
last they seized Coll. Holt, and Capt. Hutchinson at the same time: Capt.
Wickham and I jumpt down between decks, in hopes to join with some of our Men
there, but the first we met with were four French Men, who asked us to take
quarter, but we engaged with them; and I my self killed one, and threw another
of them toward Capt. Wickham; and in this condition we were both of us blown
up, and quite suffocated. I do likewise declare, that I did not see besides the
Gunner, above three of our men upon the Gun deck, and whoever says that Capt.
Wickham did not to the utmost of his Power endeavor to defend their Majesty's
Ship, as long as any body stood by him, wrongs him to the greatest degree in
the World.


Court. Captain Wickham, have you any more Evidence?


Capt. Wickham. Yes, I have Evidence enough to prove the truth of the Paper
signed by my Officers at St. Maloes, and that they stood to it a Month after
they came for England, but for the Reasons aforesaid they durst not speak well
of me, and I therefore pray my Witnesses may be called.


Judge Advocate. Captain Wickham, your Witnesses as to this matter signify
nothing, the Kings Evidence have sworn the contrary.


Capt. Wickham. If you will not suffer my Witnesses to be called, who are ready
to prove that my Officers have been corrupted since they came into England, I
pray that you will call in Coll. Holt, Capt. Hutchinson, and Capt. Garth, who
were indifferent Persons in the action, and hear what they have to say in
favor of those men, who are Evidence against me: They have already declared
that I did my utmost Endeavor to defend their Majesty's Ship, as long as I had
any to stand by me.


Mr. Russel. They are the Kings Evidence, and need no Man's Certificate.


Court. Captain Wickham, have you any more to say?


Capt. Wickham. No, if you deny me such reasonable requests, I have nothing
farther to desire, only that the Court will consider that fifty two men being
killed out of eighty is an Argument that the Kings Ship was fought for; this
was attested at St. Maloes' by all the Ships Company that remained, and I have
given their Declaration already into the Board under their own Hands. I have
something to say against Capt. Perry, the Commander of the Fire ship, and I
desire I may be heard when he is called in,


upon which Capt. Perry was called, and after his Officers were Examined, Capt.
Wickham was sent for.

Mr. Russel. What have you to charge Capt. Perry with, Capt. Wickham?


Capt. Wickham. Sir, Capt. Perry might with ease have intercepted the French's
boarding of us, if he had but kept in the Station I ordered him, which was to
lie close under our Lee-quarter, within Call; and that was my Orders to him, in
the hearing of his Ships-company as well as mine; besides, I made no Sail but
our Top-sail half-mast, that he should have no Excuse for being out of the way.


Capt. Perry. I was in the station you ordered me to lie in.


Capt. Wickham. If you were, then you quitted it to the Enemy, for we were
boarded upon the same quarter I ordered him to lie, which they could not have
done without being on board of him, if he had been in his station, as he
pretends he was; I appeal to the Court-Marshal, whether it was possible for the
Enemy to have boarded us where they did, if Capt. Perry had not sheered from
them as they past him.


Capt. Perry. You were to have made me a Sign with your Sprit-sail Top sail,
which I have to show under your hand.


Capt. Wickham. Yes, I own it, but you well knew that was in case I could not
speak with you before we engaged; if so, I was to have made you the sign you
speak of, but this caution was added to my Orders, that Accidents might happen
which might hinder us from making the sign aforesaid, therefore when we saw an
Enemy, I ordered him to use his utmost Endeavor to get within call of me and
that I would then appoint him a station, where I thought it most proper: He
likewise knew, I chiefly depended upon his intercepting the Enemies boarding of
us, if he saw them attempt it, and that was my Orders to him, and his not doing
it was the loss of our Ship: Nay, his own Master prompted him to board the
Eneas they past him, which I can prove; Capt. Perrys answer was, he would not
be Foolhardy, and at the same time commanded the Helm, a Weather, which I
think was plainly sheering from them, his Master likewise minded him of our
weak condition, and told him to this Effect, that the Enemy had four times our
number on board, and would certainly carry us, if he did not endeavor to
intercept them; at this time the other Ship of thirty six Guns, and two hundred
men, lay within half Pistol-shot, upon our Weather-bow, which Capt. Perry could
not but see. But besides all this, not half an hour before we engaged, he sent
his Boat on board me for a barrel of Powder to prime his Ship, which was a
great Token of his Readiness to go upon Service, when he had concealed his want
of Powder till that time of day, though he had in our passage, I am certain, been
twenty several times on board me, without making the least complaint of any
manner of want; neither did he so mu^^ as open his Sally-port, which the French
declared themselves, that if they had suspected him to have been a Fire-ship,
they durst not have attempted what they did. The Ship that Boarded us past by
Capt. Perry without so much as firing on shot, great or small, at him, neither
had he one man hurt in the Action: He knew I had not above eighty well men in
the Ship, and might have reasonably concluded we must needs have some of them
shot down in that time, the Ship of thirty six Guns having then engaged us near
three quarters of an hour, within half Pistol shot, and the Phillipo which past
him and boarded us, had forty Guns, and three hundred and odd men, they were
plain enough to be seen by Capt. Perry, for they were manned half shrowds high,
as thick as they could stand on the contrary side to him, ready to enter us as
soon as they got on board. I am certain Capt. Perry cannot pretend they blinded
him with the smoke of their Guns, as they past by him; for, as I said before,
they did not fire one great Gun, or small one at him, but just as they boarded
us, fetched a large sheer, and fired a whole broadside in at our quarter. This
was all the Service Capt. Perry did me in that unhappy days action, and I hope
the Court-Marshal will take it into their consideration, and likewise please to
consider how impossible it was for me to have the Ship better manned then we
were, after serving four years in a Country so sickly, that two died out of
three on board all the Ships that came into those parts, in that time. Besides
what I have already laid to Capt. Perry's Charge, I can prove he had Sugar and
Rum on board, to the value of three or four hundred pounds, which was no small
temptation to him to preserve his Ship, for the sake of so considerable a Cargo.


Court. Withdraw.


After an hours consideration, Capt. Wickham was called in.

Mr. Russel. Capt. Wickham, the Court-Marshal has befriended you, they have
sentenced you ten years Imprisonment, and to pay a Thousand pounds to their
Majesty's.


Note that in the whole Court-Marshal there were thirty four Commanders
against, and fourteen for Capt. Wickhams suffering Death.

Capt. Perry sentenced the same with Capt. Wickham, notwithstanding there were
twenty four of the Court-Marshal for his suffering Death, and but twenty five
against it.

Extract of a Court-Marshal, held on Board their Majesty's Ship the Brittania,
at Spithead, the 30 th. of April, 1694.
Captain Henry Wickham, late Commander of their Majesty's Ship The Diamond, was
accused for the Loss of the said Ship, by surrendering her to the Enemy, she
being taken by two French Privateers on the 20th. day of September last, off
Cape Clear on the Coast of Ireland, after a strict Enquiry into the aforesaid
Charge, and the examination of many Witnesses upon Oath, it appeared to the
Court, that Capt. Wickham did not use fit means to man his Ship out of the
Merchants Ships, and also that he was wanting in his Conduct in the Defense of
his Ship, and that he falls under the tenth Article, but in regard several
Officers of the Army, who were on Board him did testify that the Diamond was
very thinly manned, and that they had also many Men killed and wounded, and
that the men forsook their Quarters before she was surrendered; the Court does
resolve that Capt. Henry Wickham shall be only fined One Thousand Pounds to the
King, and that he be imprisoned for the Space of Ten Years.

This is a True Copy of the Original Paper remaining in the Admiralty-Office.
T. PARMITER.

FINIS.

