AN ARGUMENT, Showing, that a Standing Army Is inconsistent with A Free
Government, and absolutely destructive to the Constitution of the English
Monarchy.

Cervus Equum pugna melior communibus herbis
Pellebat, donec minor in certamine longo
Imploravit opes hominis fraenumque recepit.
Sed postquam victor violence discessit ab host,
Non Equitem dorso, non fraenum depulit ore.
Horat. Epist. 10. LONDON; Printed in the Year 1697.

DEDICATION, To all those whom it may concern.
Qui capit ille facit. WHen I consider your great Zeal to your Country, how
much you have exposed your selves for its Service, and how little you have
improved your own Fortunes, I think it is but Justice to your Merits to make
your Encomiums the Preface to the following Discourse. It Is you that have
abated the Pride, and reduced the Luxury of the Kingdom: You have been the
Physicians and Divines of the Commonwealth, by purging it of that Dross and
Dung, which corrupts the Minds, and destroys the Souls of Men. You have
convinced us that there is no Safety in Counselors, nor Trust to be put in
Ships under your Conduct.

You have cleared the Seas, not of Pirates, but of our own Merchants, and by
that means have made our Prisons as so many Storehouses to replenish your
Troops. In fine, to use the Expression of the Psalmist, Your Hearts are
unsearchable for Wisdom, and there is no finding out your Understanding. When I
consider all this, and compare your Merits with your Preferments, how you came
by them, and your behavior in them, I cannot but think a Standing Army a
Collateral Security to your Title to them, and therefore must commend your
Policy in promoting it. For by these Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice.
These will be our Magistrates, who will not bear the Sword in vain. These, like
the Sons of Aaron, will wear their Urim and Thummim on their Backs and Breasts,
and will be our Priests, who will hew the Sinners to pieces, as Samuel did Agag
before the Lord in Gilgal. By these you will be able to teach us Passive
Obedience, as Men having Authority, and not as the Scribes. You will have your
Reasons in your Hands against resisting the higher Powers, and will prove your
Jus Divinum by the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon.

Your Honors most obedient Slave and Vassal, A. B. C. D. E. F. G.

An ARGUMENT, showing that a STANDING ARMY is inconsistent with a free
Government, and absolutely destructive to the Constitution of the English
Monarchy.
WHen I consider what a dismal Scene of Blood and Desolation has appeared upon
the Theater of Europe during the Growth and Progress of the French Power, I
cannot sufficiently applaud and admire our thrice happy Situation, by which we
have long enjoyed an uninterrupted course of Peace and Prosperity, whilst our
Neighboring Nations have been miserably harassed by perpetual War: For lying
open to continual Invasion, they can never enjoy Quiet and Security, nor take a
sound Sleep, but, Hercules like, with Clubs in their hands: So that these
Halcyon Days which we enjoy amidst such an universal Hurricane, must be solely
attributed to our Tutelar God Neptune, who with a Guard of winged Coursers so
strongly intrenches us, that we may be said to be media insuperabiles unda, and
not unfitly compared to the Earth, which stands fixed and immovable, and never
to be shaken but by an internal Convulsion. And as Nature has been thus liberal
to us in our Situation, so the Luxuriancy of our Soil makes it productive of
numerous Commodities fit for Trade and Commerce: And as this Trade renders us
Masters of the Silver and Gold of the East and West without our toiling in the
Mine, so it breeds us multitudes of able-bodied and skilful Seamen to defend
the Treasures they bring home, that even Luxury it self, which has been the
Bane and Destruction of most Countries where it has been predominant, may in
some measure be esteemed our Preservation, by breeding up a Race of Men amongst
us, whose manner of Life will never suffer them to be debauched, or enervated
with Ease or Idleness. But we have one thing more to boast of besides all these
Felicities, and that is, of being Freemen and not Slaves in this unhappy Age,
when an universal Deluge of Tyranny has overspread the face of the whole Earth;
so that this is the Ark out of which if the Dove be sent forth, she will find
no resting place till her Return.

Our Constitution is a limited mixed Monarchy, where the King enjoys all the
Prerogatives necessary to the support of his Dignity, and Protection of his
People, and is only abridged from the Power of injuring his own Subjects: In
short, the Man is loose, and the Beast only bound; and our Government may truly
be called an Empire of Laws, and not of Men; for every Man has the same right
to what he ean acquire by his Labor and Industry, as the King has to his
Crown, and the meanest Subject has his Remedy against him in his Courts at
Westminster: No Man can be imprisoned, unless he has transgressed a Law of his
own making, nor be tried but by his own Neighbors; so that we enjoy a Liberty
scarce known to the ancient Greeks and Romans.

And lest the extraordinary Power entrusted in the Crown should lean toward
Arbitrary Government, or the tumultuary Licentiousness of the People should
incline toward a Democracy, the Wisdom of our Ancestors has instituted a
middle State, viz. of Nobility, whose Interest it is to trim this Boat of our
Commonwealth, and to skreen the People against the Insults of the Prince, and
the Prince against the Popularity of the Commons, since if either Extreme
prevail so far as to oppress the other, they are sure to be overwhelmed in
their Ruin. And the meeting of these three States in Parliament is what we call
our Government: for without all their Consents no Law can be made, nor a Penny
of Money levied upon the Subjects; so that the King's Necessities do often
oblige him to summon this Court, which is the Grand Inquest of the Kingdom,
where the People speak boldly their Grievances, and call to account overgrown
Criminals, who are above the reach of ordinary Justice: so that the Excellence
of this Government consists in the due balance of the several constituent
Parts of it, for if either one of them should be too hard for the other two,
there is an actual Dissolution of the Constitution; but whilst we can continue
in our present Condition, we may without Vanity reckon our selves the happiest
People in the World.

But as there is no degree of Human Happiness but is accompanied with some
Defects, and the strongest Constitutions are most liable to certain Diseases;
so the very Excellence of our Government betrays it to some Inconveniences, the
Wheels and Motions of it being so curious and delicate that it is often out of
order, and therefore we ought to apply our utmost Endeavors to rectify and
preserve it: and I am afraid it is more owing to the accident of our Situation,
than to our own Wisdom, Integrity or Courage, that it has yet a Being; when we
see most Nations in Europe overrun with Oppression and Slavery, where the
Lives, Estates and Liberties of the People are subject to the lawless Fancy and
Ambition of the Prince, and the Rapine and Insolence of his Officers; where the
Nobility, that were formerly the bold Assertors of their Countries Liberty, are
now only the Ensigns and Ornaments of the Tyranny, and the People Beasts of
Burden, and barely kept alive to support the Luxury and Prodigality of their
Masters.

And if we enquire how these unhappy Nations have lost that precious Jewel
Liberty, and we as yet preserved it, we shall find their Miseries and our
Happiness proceed from this, That their Necessities or Indiscretion have
permitted a standing Army to be kept amongst them, and our Situation rather
than our Prudence, has as yet defended us from it, otherwise we had long since
lost what is the most valuable thing under Heaven: For, as I said before, our
Constitution depending upon a due balance between King, Lords and Commons, and
that Balance depending upon their mutual Occasions and Necessities they have
of one another; if this Cement be once broke, there is an actual Dissolution of
the Government. Now this Balance can never be preserved but by an Union of the
natural and artificial Strength of the Kingdom, that is, by making the Militia
to consist of the same Persons as have the Property; or otherwise the
Government is violent and against Nature, and cannot possibly continue, but the
Constitution must either break the Army, or the Army will destroy the
Constitution: for it is universally true, that wherever the Militia is, there
is or will be the Government in a short time; and therefore the Institutors of
this Gothic Balance (which was established in all Parts of Europe) made the
Militia to consist of the same Parts as the Government, where the King was
General, the Lords by virtue of their Castles and Honors, the great
Commanders, and the Freeholders by their Tenures the Body of the Army; so that
it was next to impossible for an Army thus constituted to act to the
disadvantage of the Constitution, unless we could suppose them to be Felons de
se. And here I will venture to assert that upon no other Foundation than this,
can any Nation long preserve its Freedom, unless some very particular Accidents
contribute to it; and I hope I shall make it appear, that no Nation ever
preserved its Liberty, that maintained an Army otherwise constituted within the
Seat of their Government: and let us flatter our selves as much as we please,
what happened yesterday, will come to pass again; and the same Causes will
produce like Effects in all Ages.

And here I cannot avoid taking notice of some Gentlemen who a few Years since
were the pretended Patriots of their Country, who had nothing in their Mouths
but the sacred Name of Liberty, who in the late Reigns could hardly afford the
King the Prerogative that was due to him, and which was absolutely necessary to
put in motion this Machine of our Government, and to make the Springs and
Wheels of it act naturally, and perform their Function: I say, these Gentlemen
that could not with Patience hear of the King's ordinary Guards, can now
discourse familiarly of twenty thousand Men to be maintained in times of Peace;
and the odious Excuse they give for this infamous Apostasy is, that if they
should not gratify the Court in this modest Request, another Party may be
caressed who will grant this, or any thing else which is asked, and then they
say matters will be much worse; as if Arbitrary Government was a different
thing in their hands, from what it is in others, or that the Lineaments and
Features of Tyranny would become graceful and lovely when they are its Valet de
Chambres. But let them not deceive themselves, for if they think to make their
Court this way, they will quickly find themselves outflattered by the Party
they fear, who have been long the Darlings of Arbitrary Power, and whose
Principles as well as Practices teach them to be Enemies to all the legal
Rights, and just Liberties of their Native Country; and so these wretched
Bu^glers will be made use of only to bring together the Materia(...) of
Tyranny, and then must give place to more expert (...)itects to finish the
Building.

And tho we are secure from any Attempts of this kind during the Reign of a
Prince who has rescued us from a Captivity equal to what Moses redeemed the
People of Israel from: A Prince whose Life is so necessary to the Preservation
of Europe, that both Protestant and Popish Princes have forgot their ancient
Maxims, and laid aside their innate Animosities, and made it their common
Interest to choose him their Patron and Protector: A Prince in whom we know no
Vices but what have been esteemed Virtues in others, viz. his undeserved
Clemency to his Enemies, and his exposing too much that Life upon which depends
not only our Safety, but the Liberties of all Europe, and the Protestant
Religion through the World: I say, was this most excellent Prince to be
immortal (as his Great and Glorious Actions) we ought in common Prudence to
abandon all thoughts of Self-preservation, and wholly to rely on his Care and
Conduct. But since no Virtue nor pitch of Glory will exempt him from paying the
common Debt to Nature, but Death has a Sithe which cuts off the most noble
Lives; we ought not to entrust any Power with him, which we don't think proper
to be continued to his Successors: and doubtless our great Benefactor will not
regret this, or any thing else that can reasonably be demanded in order to
complete that Deliverance so far advanced by his invincible Courage and
Conduct; for to set us, like Moses, within view of the promised Land, with a ne
plus ultra, is the greatest of all Human Infelicities, and such I shall always
take our Case to be, whilst a standing Army must be kept up to prey upon our
Entrails, and which must in the hands of an ill Prince (which we have the
misfortune frequently to meet with) infallibly destroy our Constitunion. And
this is so evident and important a Truth, that no Legislator ever founded a
free Government, but avoided this Caribdis, as a Rock against which his
Commonwealth must certainly be shipwrack'd, as the Israelites, Athenians,
Corinthians, Achaians, Lacedaemonians, Thebans, Samnites, and Romans; none of
which Nations whilst they kept their Liberty were ever known to maintain any
Soldiers in constant Pay within their Cities, or ever suffered any of their
Subjects to make War their Prosession; well knowing that the Sword and
Sovereignty always march hand in hand, and therefore they trained their own
Citizens and the Territories about them perpetually in Arms, and their whole
Commonwealths by this means became so many several formed Militias: A general
Exercise of the best of their People in the use of Arms, was the only Bulwark
of their Liberties; this was reckoned the surest way to preserve them both at
home and abroad, the People being secured thereby as well against the Domestic
Affronts of any of their own Citizens, as against the Foreign Invasions of
ambitious and unruly Neighbors. Their Arms were never lodged in the hands of
any who had not an Interest in preserving the public Peace, who fought pro
aris and focis, and thought themselves sufficiently paid by repelling Invaders,
that they might with freedom return to their own Affairs. In those days there
was no difference between the Citizen, the Soldier, and the Husbandman, for
all promiscuously took Arms when the public Safety required it, and afterward
laid them down with more Alacrity than they took them up: So that we find
amongst the Romans the best and bravest of their Generals came from the Plough,
contentedly returning when the Work was over, and never demanded their Triumphs
till they had laid down their Commands, and reduced themselves to the state of
private Men. Nor do we find that this famous Commonwealth ever permitted a
Deposition of their Arms in any other hands, till their Empire increasing,
Necessity constrained them to erect a constant stipendiary Soldiery abroad in
Foreign Parts, either for the holding or winning of Provinces: Then Luxury
increasing with Dominion, the strict Rule and Discipline of Freedom soon
abated, and Forces were kept up at home, which soon proved of such dangerous
Consequence, that the People were forced to make a Law to employ them at a
convenient distance; which was, that if any General marched over the River
Rubicon, he should be declared a public Enemy: and in the Passage of that
River this following Inscription was erected; Imperator sive miles, sive
Tyrannus armatus quisquis sistito, vexillumque armaque deponito, nec citra hunc
amnem trajicito: and this made Caesar when he had presumed to pass this River,
to think of nothing but pressing on to the total Oppression of the Empire,
which he shortly after obtained.

Nor, as I said before, did any Nation deviate from these Rules but they lost
their Liberty; and of this kind there are infinite Examples, out of which I
shall give a few in several Ages, which are most known, and occur to every ones
reading.

The first Example I shall give is of Pisistratus, who artificially prevailing
with the Athenians to allow him fifty Guards for the Defense of his Person, he
so improved that Number, that he seized upon the Castle and Government,
destroyed the Commonwealth, and made himself Tyrant of Athens.

The Corinthians being in apprehension of their Enemies, made a Decree for four
hundred Men to be kept to defend their City, and gave Tymophanes the Command
over them, who overturned their Government, cut off all the principal Citizens,
and proclaimed himself King of Corinth.

Agathocles being the Captain General of the Syracusians, got such an Interest
in the Army, that he cut all the Senators to pieces, and the richest of the
People, and made himself their King.

The Romans for fear of the Teutones and Cimbri, who like vast Inundations
threatened their Empire, chose Martus their General, and, contrary to the
Constitution of their Government, continued him five Years in his Command,
which gave him such opportunity to insinuate, and gain an Interest in their
Army, that he oppressed their Liberty: and to this were owing all the Miseries,
Massacres, and Ruins which that City suffered under him and Scylla, who made
the best Blood in the World run like Water in the Streets of Rome, and turned
the whole City into a Shambles of the Nobility, Gentry and People.

The same thing enabled Caesar totally to overthrow that famous Commonwealth;
for the Prolongation of his Commission in Gaul gave him an opportunity to
debauch his Army, and then upon a pretended Disgust he marched to Rome, drove
out the Senators, seized the Treasury, fought then Forces, and made himself
perpetual Dictator.

Olivaretto de Fermo desired leave of his fellow-Citizens, that he might be
admitted into their Town with a hundred Horse of his Companions; which being
granted, he put to the Sword all the principal Citizens, and proclaimed himself
their Prince.

Francis Sforza being General of the Milanese, usurped upon them, and made
himself Duke of Millain.

After Christiern the Second King of Denmark had conquered Sweden, he invited
all the Senators and Nobility to a magnificent Entertainment, where after he
had treated them highly for two days, he most barbarously butchered them: None
escaped this Massacre but the brave Gustavus Ericson, who was then a Prisoner;
but he afterward escaping through a thousand Difficulties, by his good
Fortune, Courage and Conduct, drove the Danes out of Sweden, and restored the
Swedes to their ancient Kingdom. Nothing then was thought too great for their
Generous Deliverer, every Mouth was full of his Praises, and by the Universal
Voice of the People he was chosen their King; and to consummate the last
Testimony of their Gratitude, they trusted him with an Army: but they soon
found their Mistake, for it cost them their Liberty; and having granted that
unum magnum, it was too late to dispute any thing else: His Successors having
been pleased to take all the rest, and now they remain the miserable Examples
of too credulous Generosity.

The Story of Denmark is so generally known, and so well related by a late
excellent Author, that it would be Impertinence in me to repeat it; only this I
will observe, that if the King had not had an Army at his Command, the Nobles
had never delivered up their Government.

Our Country man Oliver Cromwell turned out that Parliament under which he
served, and who had got Immortal Honor through the whole World by their great
Actions; and this he effected by the Assistance of an Army, which must be
allowed to have had as much Virtue, Sobriety, and public Spirit, as has been
known in the World since amongst that sort of Men.

The last Instance I shall give, is of a French Colony, as I remember in the
West Indies, who having War with the neighboring Indians, and being tired in
their March with the extremity of Heat, made their Slaves carry their Arms, who
taking that opportunity fell upon them, and cut them to pieces; a just
Punishment for their Folly. And this will always be the fate of those that
trust their Arms out of their own hands: for it is a ridiculous Imagination to
conceive Men will be Servants, when they can be Masters. And as Mr. Harrington
judiciously observes, Whatever Nation suffers their Servants to carry their
Arms, their Servants will make them hold their Trenchers.

Some People object, That the Republics of Venice and Holland are Instances to
disprove my Assertion, who both keep great Armies, and yet have not lost their
Liberty. I answer, that neither keep any standing Forces within the Seats of
their Government, that is, within the City of Venice, or the great Towns of the
United Provinces; but they defend these by their own Burghers, and quarter
their Mercenaries in their conquered Countries, viz. the Venetians in Greece,
and the Continent of Italy, and the Dutch in Brabant and Flanders; and the
Situation of these States make their Armies, so posted, not dangerous to them:
for the Venetians cannot be attacked without a Fleet, nor the Dutch be ever
conquered by their own Forces, their Country being so full of strong Towns,
fortified both by Art and Nature, and defended by their own Citizens, that it
would be a fruitless Attempt for their own Armies to invade them; for if they
should march against any of their Cities, it is but shutting up their Gates, and
the Design is spoiled.

But if we admit that an Army might be consistent with Freedom in a
Commonwealth, yet it is otherwise in a free Monarchy; for in the former it is
wholly in the disposal of the People, who nominate, appoint, discard, and
punish the Generals and Officers as they think fit, and it is certain Death to
make any Attempt upon their Liberties; whereas in the latter, the King is
perpetual General, may model the Army as he pleases, and it will be called
High Treason to oppose him.

And tho some Princes, as the Family of the Medices, Jews the XIth, and others
laid the Foundation of their Tyrannies without the immediate Assistance of an
Army, yet they all found an Army necessary to establish them; or otherwise a
little Experience in the People of the change of their Condition, would have
made them disgorge in a day that ill-gotten Power they had been acquiring for
an Age.

This Subject is so self-evident, that I am almost ashamed to prove it: for if
we look through the World, we shall find in no Country, Liberty and an Army
stand together; so that to know whether a People are Free or Slaves, it is
necessary only to ask, Whether there is an Army kept amongst them? and the
Solution of that Preliminary Question resolves the Doubt: as we see in China,
India, Tartary, Persia, Ethiopia, Turkey, Morocco, Muscovy, Austria, France,
Portugal, Denmark, Sweden, Tuscany, and all the little Principalities of
Germany and Italy, where the People live in the most abandoned Slavery; and in
Countries where no Armies are kept within the Seat of their Government, the
People are free, as Poland, Biscay, Switzerland, the Grisons, Venice, Holland,
Genoa, Geneva, Ragusa, Algiers, Tunis, Hamborough, Lubeck, all the free Towns
in Germany, and England and Scotland before the late Reigns. This Truth is so
obvious, that the most barefaced Advocates for an Army do not directly deny it,
but qualify the matter by telling us, that a Number not exceeding fifteen or
twenty thousand Men are a handful to so populous a Nation as this: Now I think
that Number will bring as certain Ruin upon us, as if they were as many
Millions, and I will give my Reasons for it.

It Is the misfortune of all Countries, that they sometimes lie under an unhappy
necessity to defend themselves by Arms against the Ambition of their
Governors, and to fight for what is their own; for if a Prince will rule us
with a Rod of Iron, and invade our Laws and Liberties, and neither be prevailed
upon by our Miseries, Supplications, or Tears, we have no Power upon Earth to
appeal to, and therefore must patiently submit to our Bondage, or stand upon
our own Defense; which if we are enabled to do, we shall never be put upon it,
but our Swords may grow rusty in our hands: for that Nation is surest to live
in Peace, that is most capable of making War; and a Man that has a Sword by
his side, shall have least occasion to make use of it. Now I say, if the King
has twenty thousand Men before hand with us, or much less than half that
Number, the People can make no Effort to defend their Liberties without the
Assistance of a Foreign Power, which is a Remedy most commonly as bad as the
Disease; and if we have not a Power within our selves to defend our Laws, we
are no Government.

For England being a small Country, few strong Towns in it, and those in the
King's Hands, the Nobility disarmed by the destruction of Tenures, and the
Militia not to be raised but by the King's Command, there can be no Force
levied in any part of England, but must be destroyed in its Infancy by a few
Regiments: For what will three or four thousand naked and unarmed Men signify
against as many Troops of Mercenary Soldiers? What if they should come into
the Field and say, You must choose these and these Men your Representatives;
Where is your Choice? What if they should say, Parliaments are seditious and
factious Assemblies, and therefore ought to be abolished; What is become of
your Freedom? Or, if they should encompass the Parliament House, and threaten
if they do not surrender up-their Government, they will put them to the Sword;
What is become of the old English Constitution? These things may be, and have
been done in several parts of the World. What is it that causes the Tyranny of
the Turks at this day, but Servants in Arms? What is it that preserved the
glorious Commonwealth of Rome, but Swords in the hands of its Citizens?

And if besides this, we consider the great Prerogatives of the Crown, and the
vast Interest the King has and may acquire by the Distribution of so many
profitable Offices of the Household, of the Revenue, of State, of Law, of
Religion, and the Navy, together with the Assistance of a powerful Party, who
have been always the fast and constant Friends to Arbitrary Power, whose only
Quarrel to his Present Majesty is, that he has knocked off the Chains and
Fetters they thought they had locked fast upon us; a Party who has once
engaged us in an unhappy Quarrel amongst our selves (the Consequence of which I
dread to name) and since in a tedious and chargeable War, at the vast expense
of Blood and Treasure, to avoid that Captivity they had prepared for us: I say,
if any one considers this, he will be convinced that we have enough to do to
guard our selves against the Power of the Court, without having an Army thrown
into the Scale against us: and we have found oftener than once by too fatal.
Experience the truth of this; for if we look back to the late Reigns, we shall
see this Nation brought to the brink of Destruction, and breathing out the last
Gasp of their Liberty; and it is more owing to our good Fortune, than to any
Effort we were able to make, that we escaped the fatal Blow.

And I believe no Man will deny, but if Charles the First had had five thousand
Men beforehand with us, the People had never struck a stroke for their
Liberties; or if the late King James would have been contented with Arbitrary
Power without bringing in Popery, but he and his black Guard would have bound
us hand and foot before this time: But when their ill-contriv'd Oppression came
home to their own Doors, they quickly showed the World how different a thing it
was to suffer themselves, and to make other People suffer, and so we came by
our Deliverance; and tho the late King had the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy,
People, and his own Army against him, and we had a very wise and courageous
Prince nearly related to the Crown, and backed by a powerful State for our
Protector, yet we account this Revolution next to a Miracle.

I will add here, that most of the Nations I instanced before were inslaved by
small Armies: Oliver Cromwell lest behind him but 17000 Men; and the Duke of
Monmouth, who was the Darling of the People, was suppressed with two thousand;
nay, Caesar seized Rome it self with five thousand, and fought the Battle of
Pharsalia, where the Fate of the World was decided, with twenty two thousand;
and most of the Revolutions of the Roman and Ottoman Empires since were caused
by the Pretorian Bands, and the Court-Janizaries; the former of which never
exceeded eight, nor the latter twelve thousand Men: And if no greater Numbers
could make such Disturbances in those vast Empires, what will double the Force
do with us? And they themselves confess it, when they argue for an Army; for
they tell us we may be surprised with ten or fifteen thousand Men from France,
and having no regular Force to oppose them, they will overrun the Kingdom. Now
if so small a Force can oppose the King, the Militia, with the united Power of
the Nobility, Gentry and Commons, what will an equal Power do against the
People, when supported by the Royal Authority, and a never-failing Interest
that will attend it, except when it acts for the Public Good?

But we are told this Army is not designed to be made a part of our
Constitution, but to be kept only for a little time, till the Circumstances of
Europe will better permit us to be without them. But I would know of these
Gentlemen, when they think that time will be? Will it be during the Life of
King James, or after his Death? Shall we have less to fear from the Youth and
Vigor of the pretended Prince of Wales, than now from an unhappy Man sinking
under the load of Age and Misfortunes? Or, will France be more capable of
offending us just after this tedious and consumptive War, than hereafter when
it has had a breathing time to repair the Calamities it has suffered by it? No:
we can never disband our Army with so much safety as at this time; and this is
well known by these Conspirators against their Country, who are satisfied that
a Continuation of them now, is an Establishment of them for ever: for whilst
the Circumstances of Europe stand in the present Posture, the Argument will be
equal to continue them; if the State of Europe should alter to the advantage of
France, the Reason will grow stronger, and we shall be told we must increase
our Number: but if there should be such a turn of Affairs in the World, that we
were no longer in apprehension of the French Power, they may be kept up without
our Assistance; nay, the very Discontents they may create shall be made an
Argument for the continuing of them. But if they should be kept from oppressing
the People, in a little time they will grow habitual to us, and almost become a
part of our Constitution, and by degrees we shall be brought to believe them
not only not dangerous, but necessary; for every body fees, but few understand,
and those few will never be able to persuade the Multitude that there is any
danger in those Men they have lived quietly with for some Years, especially
when the disbanding them will (as they will be made believe) cost them more
Money out of their own Pockets to maintain a Militia: and of this we have had
already an unhappy Experience. For Charles the Second being connived at in
keeping a few Guards (which were the first ever known to an English King
besides his Pensioners, and his Beef-eaters) he insensibly increased their
Number, till he left a body of Men to his Successor great enough to tell the
Parliament, he would be no longer bound by the Laws he had sworn to; and under
the Shelter and Protection of these he raised an Army that had put a Period to
our Government, if a Complication of Causes (which may never happen again) had
not presented the Prince of Orange with a Conjuncture to assert his own and the
Nation's Rights. And tho we have so lately escaped this Precipice, yet Habit
has made Soldiers so familiar to us, that some who pretend to be zealous for
Liberty, speak of it as a Hardship to his present Majesty, to refuse him as
many Men as his Predecessors; not considering that the raising them then was a
Violation of our Laws, and that his Government is built upon the Destruction of
theirs, and can no more stand upon the same Rubbish, than the Kingdom of Heaven
be founded in Unrighteousness.

But the Conspirators say, we need be in no apprehensions of Slavery whilst we
keep the power of the Purse in our own hands, which is very true; but they do
not tell us that he has the power of raising Money, to whom no one dares refuse
it. Arma tenenti
Omnia dat qui justa negat.


For it is as certain that an Army will raise Money, as that Money will raise an
Army; but if this course be too desperate, it is but shutting up the Exchequer,
and disobliging a few Tally-Jobbers (who have bought them for fifty per Cent.
discount) and there will be near three Millions a Year ready cut and dried for
them; and whoever doubts whether such a Method as this is practicable, let him
look back to the Reign of Charles the Second: And I am afraid the Officers of
the Exchequer have not much reason to value themselves for their Payments in
this Reign; at least the Purchasers of the Annuities are of that opinion, and
would be apt to entertain some unseasonable Suspicions, if they had not greater
Security from his Majesty's Virtue, than the Justice of the Ministers. But if
we could suppose (whatever is the fate of other Countries) that our Courtiers
design nothing but the Public Good, yet we ought not to hazard such unusual
Virtue, by leading it into Temptation, which is part of our daily Duty to pray
against. But I am afraid we don't live in an Age of Miracles, especially of
that sort; our Heroes are made of a coarser Allay, and have too much Dross
mixed with their Constitutions for such refined Principles: for in the little
Experience I have had in the World, I have observed most Men to do as much
Mischief as lay in their Power, and therefore am for dealing with them as we do
with Children and mad Men, that is, take away all Weapons by which they may do
either themselves or others an Injury: As I think the Sheep in Boccaline made a
prudent Address to Apollo, when they desired, that for the future Wolves might
have no Teeth.

When all other Arguments sail, they call to their Assistance the old Tyrant
Necessity, and tell us the Power of France is so great, that let the
Consequence of an Army be what it will, we cannot be without one; and if we
must be Slaves, we had better be so to a Protestant Prince than a Popish one,
and the worst of all Popish ones the F -- King. Now I am of Mr. Johnson's
Opinion, that the putting an Epithet upon Tyranny is false Heraldry; for
Protestant and Popish are both alike; and if I must be a Slave, it is very
indifferent to me who is my Master, and therefore I shall never consent to be
ruled by an Army, which is the worst that the most barbarous Conquest can
impose upon me; which notwithstanding we have little reason to fear whilst we
keep the Seas well guarded.

It is certain there is no Country so situated for Naval Power as England. The
Sea is our Element, our Seamen have as much hardy Bravery, and our Ships are as
numerous, and built of as good Materials as any in the World: Such a Force well
applied and managed is able to give Laws to the Universe; and if we keep a
competent part of it well armed in times of Peace, it is the most ridiculous
thing in nature to believe any Prince will have thoughts of invading us, unless
he proposes to be superior to us in Naval Power: For the Preparations
necessary for such an Undertaking will alarm all Europe, give both to us and
our Confederates time to arm, and put our selves in a posture of Defense. And
whoever considers that the Prince of Orange with six hundred Ships brought but
fourteen thousand Men, and the mighty Spanish Armado (then the Terror of the
World) embarked but eighteen thousand, he will be assured that no Invasion can
be so sudden upon us, but we shall have time to get ready our whole Fleet,
bring some Forces from Scotland and Ireland, and prepare our own Militia if
there shall be occasion for it; especially in times of Peace, when we shall
have the liberty of all the Ports of France, and shall or may have Intelligence
from every one of them.

But they tell us such a Wind may happen as may be favorable to our Enemy, and
keep us within our own Ports; which I say, as France lies to England, is almost
impossible: for if we lie about Falmouth, or the Land's end, no Fleet from
Breast or the Ocean can escape us without a Miracle; and if the design be to
invade us from any Port in the Channel, a very few Ships (which may safely lie
at Anchor) will certainly prevent it: nor is it to be conceived that that
cautious Prince will be at a vast Expense for the Contingency of such a
Critical Wind, or will send an Army into a Country where their Retreat is
certainly cut off, when the failing in any part of his Design will bring a new
War upon him, which lately cost a third part of his People, a great many large
Countries and strong Towns, with all the Honor he had heaped up by his former
Victories, to get rid of.

And here I must confess, that the misapplication of our Naval Force (which is
our known Strength) for these last eight Years, is the strongest, as it is the
most usual Argument against me: which unriddles a Mystery I did not understand
before, tho I never was so foolish as to believe all the Errors of that kind
were the Effects of Chance or Ignorance, or that losing so many Opportunities
of destroying the French Fleet had not some extraordinary, tho occult Cause;
and yet, notwithstanding the restless Attempts of our Enemies, and the paltry
Politics of our own wretched St -- n, this Fleet triumphantly defended us, so
that our Enemies in eight Years War could not get one opportunity of invading
our Country.

It Is objected, that the Officers of our Fleet may be corrupted, or that a
Storm may arise which may destroy it all at once, and therefore we ought to
have two Strings to our Bow. By which I perceive all their Fears lie one way,
and that they do not care if they precipitate us into inevitable Ruin at home,
to prevent a distant Possibility of it from France. But I think this Phantom
too may be laid by a well-train'd Militia, and then all their Bugbears will
vanish. This Word can be no sooner out, but there is a Volly of small Shot let
fly at me: What! must we trust our Safety to an undisciplined Mob, who never
dreamed of fighting when they undertook the Service; who are not inured to the
Fatigue of a Camp, or ever saw the Face of an Enemy? And then they magnify
Mercenary Troops, as if there was an intrinsic Virtue in a Red Coat, or that a
Raggamuffin from robbing of Henroosts in two Campagns could be cudgel'd into a
Hero. Tho I must confess the Conduct of the Court in industriously enervating
this Force, does in some measure justify their Objections: For the detestable
Policies of the last Reigns were with the utmost Art and Application to disarm
the People, and make the Militia useless, to countenance a standing Army in
order to bring in Popery and Slavery; and if any Methods were proposed to make
it more serviceable, the Court would never suffer them to be debated; and such
Officers as were more zealous in exercising their Companies than others were
reprimanded, as if they designed to raise a Rebellion. And now the worthy
Patriots of this Reign are taking Advantage of the traitorous Neglect and
infamous Policies of the last. But why may not a Militia be made useful? Why
may not the Nobility, Gentry, and Freeholders of England be trusted with the
Defense of their own Lives, Estates and Liberties, without having Guardians and
Keepers assigned them? And why may they not defend them with as much Vigor and
Courage as Mercenaries who have nothing to lose, nor any other Tie to engage
their Fidelity, than the inconsiderable Pay of Sixpence a day, which they may
have from the Conqueror?

Why may not the Laws for shooting in Crossbows be changed into Firelocks, and
a competent Number of them be kept in every Parish for the young Men to
exercise with on Holidays, and Rewards offered to the most expert, to stir up
their Emulation?

Why may not the whole Militia of England be reduced to sixty thousand, and a
third part of those kept by turns in constant Exercise?

Why may not a Man be listed in the Militia till he be discharged by his
Master, as well as in the Army till he be discharged by his Captain? And why
may not the same Horse be always sent forth, unless it can be made appear he is
dead or maimed?

Why may not the private Soldiers of the Army, when they are dispersed in the
several parts of the Kingdom, be sent to the Militia? And why may not the
inferior Officers of the Army in some proportion command them?

I say, these and other like things may be done, and some of them are done in
our own Plantations, and the Islands of Jersey and Guernsey, as also in Poland,
Switzerland, and the Country of the Grisons; which are Nations much less
considerable than England, have as formidable Neighbors, no Sea nor Fleet to
defend them, nothing but a Militia to depend upon, and yet no one dares attack
them: And we have seen as great Performances done formerly by the Apprentices
of London, and in the late War by the Vaudois in Savoy, the Miquelets in
Catalonia, and the Militia in Ireland, as can be paralleled in History: And so
it would be with us, if the Court would give their hearty Assistance in
promoting this Design; if the King would appear in Person at the Head of them,
and give Rewards and Honor to such as deserve them, we should quickly see the
young Nobility and Gentry appear magnificent in Arms and Equipage, show a
generous Emulation in outvying one another in Military Exercises, and place a
noble Ambition in making themselves serviceable to their Country: as anciently
the Achaians and Thebans from being the most contemptible Nations in Greece, by
the Conduct of Pelopidas, Epaminondas, and Philopemen, came to have the best
disciplined Troops and most excellent Soldiers in the World.

They object, that such a Militia as this is a standing Army, and will be as
dangerous, and much more chargable. I answer;

That there can be no danger from an Army where the Nobility and chief Gentry
of England are the Commanders, and the Body of it made up of the Freeholders,
their Sons and Servants; unless we can conceive that the Nobility and Gentry
will join in an unnatural Design to make void their own Titles to their Estates
and Liberties: and if they could entertain so ridiculous a Proposition, they
would never be obeyed by the Soldiers, who will have a respect to those that
send them forth and pay them, and to whom they must return again when their
time is expired. For if I send a Man, I will as surely choose one who shall
fight for me, as a Mercenary Officer will choose one that shall fight against
me; and the late Governments are Witnesses to the truth of this, who debauched
the Militia more than ever I hope to see it again, and yet durst never rely
upon them to assist their Arbitrary Designs; as we may remember in the Duke of
Monmouth's Invasion, their Officers durst not bring them near his Army for fear
of a Revolt. Nay, the Pensioner-Parliament themselves turned short upon the
Court, when they expected them to give the finishing stroke to our Ruin.

To the last part of the Objection, That this Militia will be more chargable
than an Army; I answer, That since (as I suppose) no Man proposes wholly to lay
them aside, if we add the extraordinary Expense of maintaining twenty thousand
Men to the ordinary Charge of the Militia, it is much more than sufficient to
make the latter useful. But if this Objection were true, it ought not to enter
into Competition with the Preservation of our Laws and Liberties; for it is
better to give a third part of my Estate, if it were necessary, than to have
all taken from me.

And tho it should be granted, that a Militia is not as serviceable as an Army
kept to constant Discipline, yet I believe these Gentlemen themselves will
confess, that sixty thousand of them trained as before, are as good as twenty
thousand of their standing Troops, which is the Question; for it is impossible
to have them both useful at the same time, they being as incompatible as broad
and clipped Money, never current together; and therefore the Court must depend
wholly upon a Militia, or else they will not depend upon them at all. And this
by the way may silence that Objection, that we must keep our Army till the
Militia be disciplined; for that will never be done whilst the Court has an
Army: and the same Objection will be made seven Years hence as now; so that a
small Army can be of no use to us, but to make our Fleet neglected, to hinder
the Militia from being trained, and enslave us at home; for they are too few to
defend us against an Invasion, and too many for the People to oppose.

I dare speak with the greater assurance upon this Subject, having the
Authority of as great Men as the World has produced for my Justification.
Machiavel spends several Chapters to prove, that no Prince or State ought to
suffer any of their Subjects to make War their Profession, and that no Nation
can be secure with any other Forces than a settled Militia. My Lord Bacon in
several places bears his Testimony against a Standing Army, and particularly he
tells us, that a Mercenary Army is fittest to invade a Country, but a Militia
to defend it; because the first have Estates to get, and the latter to protect.
Mr. Harrington has founded his whole Oceana upon a trained Militia; and I have
lately read a French Book, called a History of the Politics of France, which
says, Ensin si on veut ruiner Les Anglois il suffit de les obliger a tenir des
Troops sur pied. Nay, I believe no Author ever treated of a Free Government,
that did not express his Abhorrence of an Army; for (as my Lord Bacon says)
whoever does use them, tho he may spread his Feathers for a time, he will mew
them soon after; and raise them with what Design you please, yet, like the West
India Dogs in Boccaline, in a little time they will certainly turn Sheep-biters.

Perhaps it will be said, that the Artillery of the World is changed since some
of these wrote, and War is become more a Mystery, and therefore more Experience
is necessary to make good Soldiers. But wherein does this Mystery consist? not
in exercising a Company, and obeying a few words of Command; these are
Mysteries that the dullest Noddle will comprehend in a few Weeks. Nay, I have
heard that the Modern Exercise is much shorter and easier than the Ancient. But
the great Improvements in War are in Regular Encampments, Fortification,
Gunnery, skilful Ingineering, etc. These are Arts not to be learned without
much Labor, and Experience, and are as much gained in the Closet as in the
Field; and I suppose no Man will say, that the keeping standing Forces is
necessary to make a good Ingineer.

As to actual Experience in War, that is not essential either to a Standing
Army or a Militia, as such; but the sormer may be without it, and the latter
gain it according as they have opportunities of Action. It Is true, at present
the Army has been trained up in a long War, and has gained great Knowledge:
but these Men will not be lost when they are disbanded, they will be still in
England; and if the Parliament does give them a Gratuity suitable to the
Service they have done their Country, they will be ready to resume their Arms
whenever occasion offers.

But I desire to know of these Patriots how comes an Army necessary to our
Preservation now, and never since the Conquest before? Did ever the prevailing
Party in the Wars of York and Lancaster attempt to keep up a Standing Army to
support themselves? No: they had more Sense than to sacrifice their own
Liberty, and more Honor than to enslave their Country, the more easily to
carry on their own Faction. Were not the Spaniards as powerful, as good
Soldiers, and as much our Enemies, as the French are now? Was not Flanders as
near us as France? and the Popish Interest in Queen Elizabeth's time as strong
as the Jacobite is now? and yet that most excellent Princess never dreamed of a
Standing Army, but thought her surest Empire was to reign in the Hearts of her
Subjects, which the following Story sufficiently testifies. When the Duke of
Alanson came over to England, and for some time had admired the Riches of the
City, the Conduct of her Government, and the Magnificence of her Court, he
asked her amidst so much Splendour where were her Guards? which Question she
resolved a few days after as she took him in her Coach through the City, when
pointing to the People (who received her in Crowds with repeated Acclamations)
These, said she, my Lord, are my Guards; These have their Hands, their Hearts,
and their Purses always ready at my Command: and these were Guards indeed, who
defended her through a long and successful Reign of forty four Years against
all the Machinations of Rome, the Power of Spain, a disputed Title, and the
perpetual Conspiracies of her own Popish Subjects; a Security the Roman
Emperors could not boast of with their Pretorian Bands, and their Eastern and
Western Armies.

Were not the French as powerful in Charles the Second and King James his time,
as they are after this long and destructive War, and a less Alliance to oppose
them? and yet we then thought a much less Army than is now contended for, a
most insupportable Grievance; insomuch that in Charles the Second's Reign the
Grand Jury presented them, and the Pensioner Parliament voted them to be a
Nuisance, sent Sir Jos. W -- son to the Tower for saying, the King might keep
Guards for the Defense of his Person, and addressed to have them disbanded. And
now our Apostates would make their Court by doing what the worst Parliament
ever England saw could not think of without Horror and Confusion. They say the
King of France was in League with our late Kings, so he is with us; and he
would have broke it then, if he had thought it safe, and for his Interest as
much as now. But they say we have more disaffected Persons to join with him;
which I must deny, for I believe no King of England in any Age had deservedly
more Interest than the present; and if during such an expensive War, in which
we have consumed so much Blood and Treasure, paid such vast and unequal Taxes,
lost so many thousand Ships, and bore a Shock by recoining our Money, which
would have torn up another Nation from its Foundation, and reduced it to its
ancient Chaos, when most Countries would have sunk under the misfortune, and
repined at their Deliverance (as Men in Sickness commonly quarrel with their
dearest Friends) I say, if at that time he had so great and universal an
Interest, there can be no doubt but in times of Peace, when the People reap the
Fruits of that Courage and Conduct he has shown in their Defense, he will be
the most Beloved and Glorious Prince that ever filled the English Throne.

I will make one Assertion more, and then conclude this Discourse, viz. That
the most likely way of restoring King James, is maintaining a Standing Army to
keep him out.

For the King's Safety stands upon a Rock whilst it depends upon the solid
Foundation of the Affections of the People, which is never to be shaken till
it is as evident as the Sun in the Firmament, that there is a formed Design to
overthrow our Laws and Liberties; but if we keep a Standing Army, all depends
upon the uncertain and capricious Humors of the Soldiery, which in all Ages
have produced more violent and sudden Revolutions, than ever have been known in
unarmed Governments: For there is such a Chain of Dependence amongst them, that
if two or three of the chief Officers should be disobliged, or have Intrigues
with Jacobite Mistresses; or if the King of France could once again buy his
Pensioners into the Court or Army, or offer a better Market to some that are in
already, we shall have another Rehearsal Revolution, and the People be only
idle Spectators of their own Ruin. And whosoever considers the Composition of
an Army, and doubts this, let him look back to the Roman Empire, where he will
find out of twenty six Emperors, sixteen deposed and murdered by their own
Armies; nay, half the History of the World is made up of Examples of this kind:
but we need not go any farther than our own Country, where we have but twice
kept Armies in time of Peace, and both times they turned out their own Masters.
The first under Cromwell, expelled that Parliament under which they had fought
successfully for many Years; afterward under General Monk they destroyed the
Government they before set up, and brought back Charles the Second, and he
afterward disbanded them lest they might have turned him out again. The other
Instance is fresh in every one's memory, how King James's Army joined with the
Prince of Orange, now our Rightful and Lawful King. And what could have been
expected otherwise from Men of dissolute and debauched Principles, who call
themselves Soldiers of Fortune? who make Murder their Profession, and enquire
no farther into the Justice of the Cause, than how they shall be paid; who must
be false, rapacious and cruel in their own Defense. For having no other
Profession or Subsistence to depend upon, they are forced to stir up the
Ambition of Princes, and engage them in perpetual Quarrels, that they may share
of the Spoils they make. Such Men, like some sort of ravenous Fish, fare best
in a Storm; and therefore we may reasonably suppose they will be better pleased
with the Tyrannical Government of the late King, than the mild and gracious
Administration of his Present Majesty, who came over to England to rescue us
from Oppression, and he has done it, and triumphs in it in spite of his
Enemies.

In this Discourse I have purposely omitted speaking of the lesser
Inconveniences attending a Standing Army, such as frequent Quarrels, Murders
and Robberies; the destruction of all the Game in the Country; the quartering
upon public, and sometimes private Houses; the influencing of Elections of
Parliament by an artificial distribution of Quarters; the rendering so many Men
useless to Labor, and almost Propagation, together with a much greater
Destruction of them, by taking them from a laborious way of living to a loose
idle Life; and besides this, the Insolence of the Officers, and the
Debaucheries that are committed both by them and their Soldiers in all the
Towns they come in, to the ruin of multitudes of Women, Dishonor of their
Families, and ill Example to others; and a numerous train of Mischiefs besides,
almost endless to enumerate. These are trivial as well as particular Grievances
in respect of those I have treated about, which strike at the Heart's-blood of
our Constitution, and therefore I thought these not considerable enough to bear
a part in a Discourse of this nature: Besides, they often procure their own
Remedy, working Miracles, and making some Men see that were born blind, and
impregnable against all the Artillery of Reason; for Experience is the only
Mistress of Fools: A wise Man will know a Pike will bite when he sees his
Teeth, which another will not make discovery of but by the loss of a Finger.

What I have said here against Standing Armies, I would be understood of such
as are the Instruments of Tyranny and their Country's Ruin, and therefore I
need make no Apology to our own which was raised by the Consent of the
Parliament in this just and necessary War, and next under God and our Great and
Glorious Deliverer, have by their Bravery and Conduct preserved our Liberties,
and the Protestant Religion through Europe. For if in future Reigns any Designs
should be levelled against our Laws, we may be assured these Men would be
discarded, and others promoted in their rooms who are fit for such Arbitrary
Purposes.

Nor do I think it reasonable that our Army should be ruined by that Peace,
which by their Courage and Fidelity they have procured for their Country; and I
doubt not but the Generosity and Gratitude of the Parliament will give them a
Donative equal to their Commissions, which, when the Foreigners are paid and
sent home, will amount to no extraordinary Sum; at most'tis but supposing the
War to have six Months longer continuance, which is an easy Composition for the
Charge of keeping them. But if there are any Gentlemen amongst them who think
we can no otherwise express our Gratitude, but by signing and sealing our own
Ruin, I hope we shall disappoint their Expectations, and not give the World
occasion to tell so foolish a Story of us, as that we turned to grass one of
the most powerful Monarchs in the World for breaking our Laws, that we have
maintained an eight Years War at the Expense of forty Millions of Money, and
the Blood of three hundred thousand Men, to justify the glorious Action we have
done; that by it we preserved all Europe besides, and lost our own Liberties;
at least I hope it shall not be said we consented to it.

FINIS.

