THE TRIAL OF Capt. Thomas Wallcot, FOR High Treason.
In Conspiring to compass the Death of His Majesty, and to Subvert the
Government. Who was Tried this 12 th. of July, at the Sessions House in the
Old-Bayley, and there found Guilty of the said High Treason. Being an Impartial
Relation of the most Materials during the said Trial. As likewise what occured
in Relation to James Duke of Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, And others.
THis day the Session of Oyer and Terminer began in the Old Bailey; where after
some Proceedings against Felons, etc. the Grand Jury for London found the Bills
of High Treason against James, Duke of Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Captain Thomas
Walcot, John Rouse, William Blake, William Hone, and diverse others; whereupon
the four last, viz. Walcot, Rouse, Hone, and Blake, were brought to the Bar,
and there severally Arraigned for High Treason, in Conspiring the death of the
King, etc. after which, Captain Thomas Walcot was alone brought to his Trial,
and having put himself upon God and his Country, was ordered to look to his
Challenges, as the Jurors came to the Book to be Sworn, of which he excepted
against about Ten or Eleven, and the Kings Counsel against one.

The Court having thus far proceeded, the Indictment was Read, the substance of
which, was, That he Thomas Walcot, the Prisoner at the Bar, had on the second
of March last past, and at diverse other times, Conspired with many Traitors,
whose Names were therein recited, in the Parish of St. Nicholas Bashaw, and in
sundry other places, to Depose the King from his Right and Title to the Kingdom
of England, etc. And not only so, but Him to Assassinate, and to final
destruction, and to Subvert the Government, to raise Rebellion through the
Land, and a miserable Slaughter to make amongst his Subjects throughout the
Kingdom and that in order thereunto, he had provided Arms, as Blunderbusses,
Muskets, Pistols, etc.

After this, Mr. North one of the Kings Counsel, opened the nature of the Fact,
also what particulars the Evidence were to give, and declared the Haniousness
of the Fact; being seconded by Mr. Attorney General, who at large declared the
Conspiracy, as it was laid in all or most of its Circumstances; how, according
as the Evidence had Deposed in Counsel, it was Contrived, Managed, and carried
on. And after him, Mr. Sergeant Jefferies laid down such Material Points as the
other had Omitted, aggravating the Haniousness of the Crime, declaring and
laying open at large, the Damnable Treason and Conspiracy, desiring the Jury
well to consider the weight of the Cause they were to determine; and adding,
that if the several particulars were proved against the Prisoner by the
Witnesses for the King, who had been for the most part privy to the whole
Design, they would like good Englishmen and Christians, find the Traitor
Guilty.

The Kings Council having laid open the Indictment, the Evidence were called;
the first was Colonel Rumsey, who deposed, That for a considerable time past,
there had been a Design carried on by diverse disaffected Conspirators, against
the Life of His Sacred Majesty, and that in order thereto, diverse Consults had
been held, and sundry Devices proposed, to bereave His Majesty of His Life, and
Crown; and that at most of those Consults, Captain Walcot had been present, and
consenting to the Models laid and designed, to effect the horrid Treason, to
raise a Rebellion throughout the Nation, to root out the Legal Line, and repose
the power in the people. Nay, so far had they proceeded, as to settle a Form of
Government amongst themselves, and appoint Rulers and Officers to manage the
Affairs, relating to Government* and computed what numbers might be raised in
such places, where the Conspirators had most Intrest, 1000. at least, being to
be raised in Wapping. But whilst this Device was in hand, another was thought
of, which was to Assassinate the King, in his return from New Market, the last
time he was there; The Conspiracy and Plot to bring it to pass being thus
laid, several persons were to use their Interest, to raise Men for that
purpose, who were with Carbines, Muskets, Pistols, etc. to be Armed, and lie
in Ambuscade in Rumbold the Malster's House, near H^dsdone, and to send several
persons in Country Habits to over-through a Cart, to stop the Passage of a
Lane, the King's Coach was to pass; upon which designed stop, about fifty Men
well appointed, were to have Sallyed out, Rumbold being appointed to kill the
King, and the Duke of York: others to Kill the Horses, Coachman, and
Postilion, and the Prisoner, with a Commanded party, to fight the Guard
himself; as he declared to the Evidence, thinking it the braver part of the
Action, as thinking it beneath him to Assasinate a Naked Man; but this Plot
miscarrying by reason of the Fire, diverse other Projects were laid to take away
the Life of His Majesty, the Conspirators meeting frequently to Consult how to
bring about their pernicious Design: all which by the Discovery, were
frustrated.

The next Evidence that deposed, was Mr. Keeling; who declared, That he had
been privy, for some Months past, to the Conspiracy, and had been at diverse
Consults, Wherein the Destruction of the King was proposed and agreed on as the
only expedient to further their purpose; and that by Goodenough, and others, he
had been solicited to raise Men for the New Market Expedition; which he at
first boggl'd at; and that at sundry times the Prisoner had been at the said
Consults, and approved of the proceeding, Himself being to have a principal
Command, and to be aiding in the Assassinating the King; and being by the Court
demanded what induced him to discover? he declared, it was the secret impulse
of his Tormented Conscience, which would not suffer him to rest till so great a
wickedness was made known. This being the substance of his Depositions, Mr.
Bourn was Sworn, who gave Evidence in effect to what the former had deposed:
Then Mr. West stood up, and declared the manner of the Contrivance of the Plot,
together with the several Declarations that were to have been disporsed it the
Design had taken effect; also the many other Wicked designs to take away the
Life of the King, as at the Playhouse, Bull-Feast, and upon his coming from
Windsor in his Barge; declaring that he had bought Arms for that purpose, with
many other Circumstances; charging the Prisoner in particular. There were
likewise Two Letters under his Hand proved in Court, one to Sir Lyonel Jekins
to implore the Pardon of His Majesty, in lieu whereof he promised to discover
the whole Design laid in England, Ireland, and Holland; which, as he said,
none could do better than himself: Another was intercepted by Captain
Richardson, directed to a Friend of his, to persuade Colonel Rumsey, and Mr.
West, to be Tender of him in their Evidence; To these possitive Evidences, his
Answers were for the most part but feeble; he alleging himself indisposed of
the Gout at the time it was alleged he went to see how fit Rumbold's House was
for the purpose, and the impossibility of his bringing such things to pass as
were Sworn against him; yet Confessing that he had often associated himself
with the Conspirators, but hoped though he had some knowledge of the Design,
that it would amount to no more than misprision of Treason; but being confuted
of his Error by the Court, after the Evidence was Summed up, and the Charge
given, the Jury, after a short Debate, found him Guilty of the Treason as in
the Indictment laid.

Printed for Langely Curtis, at the Sign of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's Head,
near Fleet-Bridge:


