TRUTH VINDICATED: OR A detection of the Aspersions and Scandals cast upon Sir
ROBERT CLAYTON and Sir GEORGE TREBY, Justices; and SLINGSBY BETHELL and HENRT
CORNISH Esquires, Sheriffs, of the City of LONDON, in a Paper published in the
Name of Dr. Francis Hawkins Minister of the Tower, ENTITLED, THE CONFESSION OF
EDWARD FITZ-HARRIS Esquire; etc. The Copy of which Paper is herewith Printed, for
the Readers clearer judgment in the Case.

LONDON: Printed for Rich. Baldwin, 1681.

TRUTH Vindicated, etc.
OUT of a just care that the Protestant Religion and Interest may not suffer,
nor our own Reputations be blasted by the most odious Scandals causelessly cast
upon us in the execution of our several Offices, we are constrained to make
known unto the World the abominable falsehoods and fictions of that pretended
Confession of Fitz-Harris, published by Dr. Francis Hawkins Minister of the
Tower.

We could not indeed suddenly resolve whether it were needful to open the
Villainy of that Paper, in regard it carries in its own forehead so many evident
marks of malice and falsehood to every observing man that knows what happened
about Fitz-Harris.

But having heard that some have been deceived by that Paper, and induced to
believe that it was Written by Fitz-Harris (bona fide) from some compunction of
Conscience, or sense of obligation to reveal the truth at his death, We hold it
our duty to discover the Popish practice and contrivance in the forming and
publishing that pretended Confession.

The poor deluded, timorous Wretch consenting perhaps to the wickedness, whilst
he was persuaded it should save him from the Gallows, though he was conscious
to himself, that the matters pretended to be confessed were a parcel of
falsehoods invented to serve base designs; the whole Paper having no face or
appearance of a dying Criminal's open-hearted confession of his sins, nor any
expressions of remorse of Conscience for them. No more notice is taken of any
of those (too well known) debaucheries and wickedness of his Life, than if he
had lived like a Saint or Angel; no acknowledgment or mention is made of those
odious repeated perjuries to the Secretaries of State, to Sir Robert Clayton,
etc. and to the Judges of the King's Bench, of which, he must have known himself
to be guilty, if he had thought this pretended Confession to be true. There Is
nothing in it that looks plain, clear and natural, as seriously intended to
discharge his Conscience, and satisfy the world about the matters formerly
sworn by him, and published by Authority. If any such purpose had been really
in his heart, like a true penitent sinner, he must natually have descended to
the particulers of what he had sworn, and have declared to the world, whether
his Ghostly Father, Gough, did really tell him in the year 1672 (as he had
deposed) of the Papists designs to bring the D. of York to be King, to restore
Popery, and of killing the King to make way for it; He could not but have
confirmed or denied the truth of his Oath, That his other Ghostly Father,
Parry, (the Portugues Embassador's Confessor) told him in 1678, That a Council
of Roman Catholics had resolved, that seeing the King failed in the
expectations they had from him, he should be destroyed, and that the business
was near, and he should soon see it done. If his Conscience had been to be
unburdened in this Consession, he could not have forborne to say clearly, that
he deposed truly or falsely, That the Marquess Montecuculi in 1679, swore him
first to secrecy, and then offered him Ten thousand pounds to kill the King
either in his own person, or by any other.

And if this pretended Confession were conscientiously taken by Dr. Hawkins, as
from a penitent sinner whom he absolved from his sins (as he says) he could not
be so negligent or ignorant in his Priestly Office, or so false to the King and
the Religion he professes, as not to exhort the sinner when he seemed to
retract what he had sworn before, to confess the truth in matters of such
concern to the life of the King, and the being of the Protestant Religion, and
the public justice of the Kingdom, knowing that his Confession about those
things had been published to the whole world.

But this Paper shows it self, when duly examined, to be a studied artisicial
contrivance to cover the Popish Treasons, without an impudent direct
forswearing the particulars that have been evidently proved, and a design by
equivocations and sly insinuations mixed with downright falsehoods and fictions,
to persuade the world that there are amongst the Protestants abominable
practices of subernation of Perjuries against the Papists, wicked Conspiracies
against the King, Queen and Duke of York, and vile designs against the Lords of
the Council. We doubt not but time will discover how, and by whom this
pretended Consession was modelled and put together, and how long it was upon
the Anvil to fashion it, and how the miserable man was prevailed upon to give a
seeming consent to it, against the dictates of his Conscience, with hopes to
save his life by serving such designs, though he was seemingly to renounce
those hopes, to make himself the better to be believed.

For the present, let it suffice that we anatomize this mock Confession, and
show its shameful falsehood out of its own matter and form.

It is to be observed, how he begins his Confession; not like a man that had
before confessed upon his Oath many Popish Treasons and Designs against the
Protestants, their Religion and Lives; and from whom (being now attainted of
Treason) was to be expected a clear account of all the Popish Intrigues he
knew: But without Apology or Preamble, he tells the world (believe it who can)
That the Treason of the Libel whereof he was convicted, came from a Protestant,
viz. the Lord Howard; and that he was no further concerned in it, than as he
was employed to give the King notice of such Libels, which he was wont to do by
Mrs. Wall, the Lady Portsmouths Woman.

But the Conscience of this poor wretch could not but witness within him, that
he had often protested before God, that the Lord Howard knew nothing of the
Libel, and that he had bitterly complained sometime to Sheriff Cornish, and
sometime to Sheriff Bethel in Newgate, that he was pressed with the powerful
Argument of saving his Life, to accuse my Lord Howard and Lord of Shaftesbury
of the Libel; and that he was so importuned thereunto, that he was sorced to
down of his knees, and beg that he might not be further pressed therein, the
Lord Howard being innocent of it, and the Lord Shaftesbury being such a
stranger to him, as he had scarce ever spoke to him: adding with great
asseverations, that if it were to save his Life, he could not be guilty of so
base a villainy; but would rather dye than accuse the innocent. What large
offers were also made to some of his friends, to persuade him to accuse the
Lord Howard, may hereafter be proved. He also knew (as many Thousands do) that
the Evidence given at the King's Bench, upon his Trial, was full and clear, That
he provided and furnished all the matter of the Libel, and dictated other parts
of it, and that it was drawn into form at his request, and for him. And himself
confessed he showed the Papers of the Libel to the Lord Arran. But perhaps the
miserable man was deluded to think his Life might be saved, by accusing the
Protestants, and excusing himself as a Spy upon them: Therefore he next
proceeds (in his Sham Confession) to a Protestant Plot, viz. That the Lord
Howard told him of a design to seize upon the King's person, to carry him into
the City, and there detain him till he had condescended to their desires; and
that himself and Heyns were privy to the design.

Here is a Wonderul tale of a Protestant Plot between two Irish Papists and a
Protestant Lord; one English Sheep in conjunction with two Irish Wolves, to
hunt and pursue the same prey, and this is told to be believed and Swallowed
like the Articles of the Popish faith, without chewing or asking question about
the particulars, or the probability or possibility of the thing.

Doubtless if those Words have any sense in them, viz. by detaining the King
until he has condescended to their desires, it must be meant, until he has
passed Acts of Parliament, or Laws suitable to the Protestant desires.

Surely the Inventer of this, never considered that such a design was of a
thing impossible, unless the Parliament did concur and Act in such a Treason,
and prepare and frame their desires into Bills for that purpose; and unless the
Government, and also the force of the City did join with the Parliament to
detain the King in Custody for the same ends; and doubtless it was an absolute
impossibility to know the mind and sense of a Parliament before it had a being;
and another, to understand the resolutions of the vast body of the City in a
matter never propounded to any of their assemblies. Yet this sham Consession
has the confidence to say, that Heynes and Fitz-Harris were privy to this
Design, and had several Meetings with the Lord Howard, and particularizeth the
revocation of the Act for the Settlement of Ireland, as one of the Acts that
was to be passed in the execution of this Design.

Yet there is nothing of Circumstance, or particular, pretendedly discovered to
induce the weakest of men to believe it. If this counterfeit confessor were
privy to such a design, and met to consult it, he must certainly have known
what forces were thought of to Master the King's Guards, and who was to Command
them, and out of what ground they were to spring up in a Night, like Mushrooms,
and which of those Newborn Regiments were to Carry the King Prisoner to London;
he must have also heard who were to prepare and prevail with the Members of
Parliament to pursue this design. Fitz-Harris and Heynes, two Irish Papists,
and neither of quality, parts, estates, or interests, were doubtless well
chosen instruments, to apply to the Members of Parliament, to revoke the
Settlement of Ireland, and were likely to be admitted into Secrecy with them
about this Design and Treason.

We ask pardon that we cannot speak more gravely of this matter, this feigned
discovery of a Protestant Plot being more ridiculous then the birth of the
Mountains; And for that reason, we think it needless to relate the frequent
protestations made by Fitz-Harris, That he knew nothing of any design of the
Lord Howard against the King or Government: This very Confession it self, when
examined, being the clearest evidence of its own wickedness and folly.

Now this Mock Confession having told this vain Story of a design against the
King by the Protestants, he applies himself in the next page, by false
insinuations, to persuade the World (in effect) that there was no Popish Plot,
and that the Protestant Officers and Magistrates, have wickedly endeavored to
suborn him, to make a Confession that might corfirm a Popish Plot.

He declares, that in Newgate, the Sheriffs, Bethell and Cornish, came to him
with a token from the Lord Howard, which he knew to be true, and told him
nothing would save his Life, but discovering the Popish Plot, and gave him
great encouragements from the Lord Howard, that if he would declare that he
believed so much of the Plot as amounted to the introducing the Roman
Catholics, or if he would find out any that would Criminate the Queen, Royal
Highness, or make so much as a plausible Story to comfirm the Plot, that the
Parliament would restore him to his Fathers estate, with the profits thereof
since His Majesty's Restoration.

We have no way left us in nature to evince the falsehood of this whole Story,
but by Circumstances, or the testimony of such as were present when the
Sheriffs were severally with him, or their own averments upon Oath, which they
are ready to give, that all those particulers are false and groundless
inventions.

It Is so far from the least appearance of truth, that the Sheriffs went to him
with a token from the Lord Howard, that they will severally depose, that they
never saw or heard from the Lord Howard in any kind, whilst Fitz-Harris was in
Newgate; and Capt. Richardson and the keepers can Witness that they never came
together to Fitz-Harris, or discoursed him together, or were in Newgate at the
same time whilst he was there, save only that Sheriff Bethell on the 10th of
March was coming out from Fitz-Harris, when Sir Robert Clayton and Sir George
Treby, with Sheriff Cornish were coming in to examine him; but Sheriff Bethell
made then no stay, but left them forthwith; nor did he ever see Fitz-Harris in
his life, until Wednesday the 9th of March last, which was four days after he
had made his first Confession of the Popish Treasons to the Secretaries of
State, the same in substance with that, printed by order of the Commons in
Parliament; and Sheriff Bethell had not then come to Fitz-Harris, if he had not
sent to him the day before to desire to speak with him.

Sheriff Cornish likewise never saw Fitz-Harris, until Sunday the 6th of March,
which was after the Secretaries of States first examination of him, and he then
discoursed him only in the presence of Captain Richardson, who can testify the
falsehood of those Suggestions, that he pretended to come from the Lord Howard
with a token etc. And can prove that Sheriff Cornish chiefly advised him to
make an honest true Confession about the Libel, and its authors and abettors;
but Fitz-Harris of his own accord and Motion, told him, that he had known the
proceedings of the Popish Plot for Seven or Eight years, and that he could make
great and considerable discoveries, wherein His Majesty's Life was still in
danger, for that the grand Plot (So he called it) was still carrying on. And
further said, that he could discover considerable things about the Popish Plot,
and Godsreys Murder, not yet discovered. Then he desired Sheriff Cornish to
take his examination, who told him, he could not, for he was not in the
Commission of the Peace: then Fitz-Harriis prayed him to send a Justice of the
Peace to him, but Sheriff Cornish forthwith applied himself to His Majesty, and
acquainted him with the discourse herein related; and thereupon, Monday March
the 7th, the Secretaries of State and the Kings Attorney, came and examined him
a second time, and the next day a third time, before Sir Robert Clayton and Sir
George Treby ever saw his face, their examination of him being taken on
Thursday March the 10th; So that neither of the Sheriffs, or the City Justices
ever spoke word in private with Fitz-Harris until he had been fully examined at
three several times by the Secretaries of State, and before them sworn to the
substance of all his printed Examination.

We hope from these matters of fact which are here truly related, it will
appear to be a wicked device in the mock Confession, to insinuate most falsely
to the world, a Consultation and Confederacy between the Lord Howard and the
Sheriffs (who never saw nor heard from his Lordship in the Case) to suborn
Fitz-Harris with promises of rewards, mixed with threats, to confess the Popish
Plot, or to put him upon chargeing the Queen, his Royal Highness, or any man
else, as is suggested.

But the stupid folly of this false tale, if considered, may be alone
sufficient to render it worthy of no credit, in that it makes the Sheriffs so
void of understanding, as to have thought a declaration from such a wretch as
Fitz-Harris, of his belief of the Popish Plot to have been of great value, and
that it was worth a high reward for him to have invented a plausible story to
confirm the Plot, after the Villainy of it has been declared in so many
Proclamations of His Majesty's, the Votes of four successive Parliaments, and
Sentences of Death given against the Popish Plotters in all the highest
Judicatures of the Kingdom.

Who but Dr. Hawkins could have had faith enough in such a story, to suffer his
pretended Penitent (as he did) to renounce before him, all the mercies of God
Almighty, if it were not Truth?

With the like falsehood in the same Paragraph, the Sham Confession charge the
Sheriffs to have brought heads with them from Everard, to have accused
Fitz-Harris for a Yorkist, put on by the King to put the Libel into Protestants
Houses to trapan them; and Fitz-Harris denies that he knew of any such thing.

We could not have easily thought the heart of any man so vile, to have formed
out of nothing this horrible slander; but the wicked intent herein is not hard
to be discerned.

If the King can be induced to believe it, the Popish ends are compassed; he
must needs be highly incensed against the Sheriffs: And if he should think (as
it is insinuated) that they did it by consent with other Protestants, His Royal
heart must pass severe censures upon them, and be jealous of base designs
against him. And if any Artifice can prevail upon His Majesty to distrust the
loyalty of any number of his Protestant Subjects, it is matter of Triumph to the
Popish party and their adherents.

Other wicked uses of this Slander, might be to blunt the edge of the evidence
given upon Fitz-Harris his Trial, about a trapanning use intended to be made of
the Libel, and to make the world believe, that he was a wretched counterfeit,
when he desired the Sheriffs, as they came severally to him (with seeming
uprightness and sincerity) to advize my Lord Shaftsbury, and other Members of
Parliament from Fitz-Harris himself, to take heed to their Pockets, for that
there was a design to slip Treasonable Papers into them, and then seize them,
whilst they had them about their persons.

The next business of the Mock Confession is, to persuade such as will be
deceived, that the Confessions he made about the Popish Plots, and Godfrey's
Murder, were altogether false, and sorced from him by the Sheriffs. I (says
the Paper) finding my self in Newgate Fettered, Moneyless, Friendless, and I
could see no other refuge for Life, but complying with them ( i.e. the
Sheriffs) so to save my Life I did comply.

This looks something like the practice of that infamous Popish Midwife, Mrs.
Celier, who attempted to cousen the world into a belief, That the Protestants,
upon salse Accusations, cast some innocent Papists into Newgate, and there
tormented them in Irons, and otherwise, to extort false Confessions from them
of a Popish Plot.

But the truth will be attested by many Witnesses, that Fitz-Harris was never
fettered, or put into Irons, or harshly used whilst in the Sheriffs custody;
but on the contrary, treated with all the civility his Case would permit, and
so he declared at the Gallows; and thanked the Sheriffs even with his dying
breath, when he ought to have expressed just indignation against them, (and a
Dying repenting Sinner could not have forborne it) if he had thought (as this
sham Confession says) that they had forced or persuaded him to defile his
Conscience with so many Perjuries, and to blot the Names of his Ghostly
Fathers, and whole Popish Party, and many great Persons with so many black
Treasons and other crimes.

And it will be as evident from circumstances, that there was no more force put
upon Fitz-Harris's mind by the Sheriffs, to procure his Confession, than was
upon his Body.

The Sheriffs jointly (as is said before) never discoursed him, and neither of
them took any Confession upon Oath from him, or pretended to any Power so to
examine him, nor had it in their Power to reward or punish him. Whatsoever this
mock Confession says, Fitz-Harris could not think the Sheriffs a refuge to
save his Life, whom he knew not to have Power to save a hair of his Head.

There Is another invention in this sham Confession as false and as rediculous
as any of the former, never dreamt of by the Sheriffs, nor perhaps by any Body
else, save the inventers of it, till that vile Paper came forth (viz.) That the
Sheriffs brought instruction from the Lords and Commons (as they said) who met
that day in order to Address to the King in his behalf, if he should confirm
the Instructions: which must be intended surely, If he should swear as they
would have him, that is, as the Mock Confession explains it, to the Heads,
which the Examination taken by Sir Robert Clayton and Sir George Treby
contains; and a great deal more relating to the Queen, his Royal Highness, and
the Earl of Danby; declaring French Pentioners, Lords, Hallifax, Hide,
Clarendon, Feversham, Seymor and others; the Burning the Fleet, Forts and
Government in Popish hands, Meal Tub Plot, Apprentices Plot, and these and many
other Heads Fitz-Harris is made to say, were brought him by the Sheriffs.

Surely this was contrived to persuade the credulous Papists in foreign
Countries, that the Lords and Commons were then sitting in Parliament; and that
the Sheriffs consulted and confederated with them to suborn Fitz-harris to be a
Witness of the Popish Plots and Practices, which they had declared to the
world; or at least that some Lords and Commons were privy and parties to the
Subornation of Fitz-harris by the Sheriffs, to swear as they should instruct
him; and that those Lords and Commoners intended to use their Interest with his
Majesty for his Pardon, to make him (though false) their legal Witness

But as in truth there was no Parliament sitting whilst Fitz-harris was in the
Sheriffs custody, nor in ten days after, and the place of their sitting is well
known was to be at Oxford, and not at London; so there were no instructions for
him to confirm, or swear to, either from Lords or Commoners, none of the heads
mentioned, nor any others brought to him by the Sheriffs, or either of them; no
address for his Pardon imagined, or thought of by either Lords or Commons, nor
mentioned by the Sheriffs, or either of them; no meeting for any such intent,
no discourse between the Sheriffs and any man or men under the Sun, about such
an Address; every circumstance of this Hellish Tale coming out of the forge of
the Father of Lies.

Yet it may be this was thought a hopeful invention to take off from the credit
of all the Evidence given in Courts of Justice, concerning all the Popish
Designs enumerated under those Heads and Instructions; and indeed it seems to
be a crafty way, to throw dirt at all those solemn Declarations made in
Parliament concerning the Abettors of those Popish and French Designs, and the
adherents to them, by whose countenance all their Plots have been managed, that
have so endangered the King and Kingdom.

And though this false poisonous tongue seems to spit its venom directly at the
Sheriffs, yet it endeavors to do the greatest mischief to the King and the
Parliament, and to defame to the whole world all the late Proceedings of
Parliaments against the Popish Plotters, and their favorers.

The mock-confession goes on further to defame (if his tongue be a slander) Sir
Robert Clayton, and Sir George Treby, Justices of the Peace for the City,
darkly insinuating that they would have induced him to say more than was true,
and plainly saying that what he deposed before them concerning Father Patrick,
was forced out of him, and was not true; and he so represents Sir George
Treby's carriage in taking his whole Examination, that he would have the whole
thought to be of no validity.

But doubtless Mr. Fitz-harris did not, nor could he possibly have believed
himself (if he consented to have it written) that Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir
George Treby dealt unfairly with him, or forced out of him either what he swore
concerning Father Patrick, or any thing else of his Confession.

He knew very well that they came to take his Confession, not officiously, but
upon his own earnest reiterated entreaty, at several times, to each of the
Sheriffs apart, that some Justices of the Peace might be sent to him, to whom
he might make a full discovery of matters not before discovered in the Grand
Popish Plot, (as he called it.) He knew also that they came not till Thursday
in the afternoon, the tenth of March, and that he had been thrice examined by
the Secretaries of State, Lord Conway, Sir L. Jenkins, and the
Attorney General, before Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir George Treby, ever saw
him; and he was conscious to himself, that he had first sworn before the
Secretaries all that he would now retract concerning Father Patrick, as forced
out of him by Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir George Treby, and the other matters
also in substance, that are contained in his Printed Examination, by Sir Robert
Clayton, and Sir George Treby, except that one passage in it about De Puy; and
the whole House of Commons at Oxford are Witnesses herein, That when Sir George
Treby read Fitz-harris's Examination to the House, Mr. Secretary Jenkins
declared, That he had before confessed the same in substance to the Lord
Conway, the Attorney General, and himself, except that about De Puy. Yet (for
what reason we know not) the contrivers of this Sham-retractation, or
declaration, took no care to retract or excuse his swearing the same matters
before the Secretaries of State.

Perhaps, because those Examinations were never Printed, and scarce any
Foreigners, nor many English men did know that Fitz-harris had thrice sworn to
the same Confession in substance before the Secretaries of State, which he did
the fourth time before Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir George Treby.

Besides, it best answered the design of this Sham-confession, to conceal the
first Examinations as much as could be, and to represent it to the world, as if
Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir George Treby, had forced out of him the Confession
of all those Popish Treasons mentioned in his Printed Examination, as it was
reported to the Parliament. There Is a Trial of skill also for the same purpose
in this mock-confession to wrest some of Sir Robert Clayton's, and Sir George
Treby's words from their honest sense wherein they were spoken, and to separate
them from their other words, properly joined with them (as the Devil used the
Scripture) that they might seem to imply a wicked intent, to draw Fitz-harris
to say what was not true.

When it was late in the night, and Fitz-harris complained he was tired, having
been about three hours upon Examination, and was asked what he could say
concerning Godfrey's Murder; and he answered in general only (something.) Could
any thing be replied more harmlesly by Sir Robert Clayton, than to wish him to
recollect himself against the next day, when it was intended to examine him
further, if he had not been removed out of their power? Yet even these words of
Sir Robert Clayton's are recited, as if they implied some ill practice by him
upon the Examinant, or at least some sinister intent of his in that matter.

The Sham-confession further craftily insinuates (though it does not expressly say
it), that this wretched man's Depositions about the Counsels held at St. James's
and Windsor concerning Godfrey's Murder, were taken by Sir Robert Clayton, and
Sir George Treby (which is utterly false); then the Confession declares that he
was put upon what he said against the Queen and the Earl of Danby about that
Murder; and that Sir George Treby would have had him say that the Duke, the
Lord Bellasis, Arundel and Powis, were at the Consult, and that he had seen
them go to it at St. James's. Surely these Sham-Confessions are thus methodized
and put together, in hope to abuse or deceive the world into a Belief, or
Opinion, that whatsoever this Fitz-Harris Deposed first, and last, about the
Popish Plot, and Godfrey's Murder, was done by the Practices, Force, and
Inducements of the City-Sheriffs and the Justices of the Peace.

Whereas it is most notoriously known, that it was upon Fitz-Harris's own
Motion to the Judges of the King's Bench, that his Depositions were taken before
that Court, about Godfrey's Murder, and that then, and not before, he
discovered the Councels held at St. James's and Windsor about Godfrey's Murder,
and the persons concerned and present therein; and the words he heard from the
Earl of Danby coming out from the Consult, and the account he then had from De
Puy, of the Resolutions taken for that Murder.

And this was in the Term, after that the Parliament at Oxford was Dissolved,
and above six Weeks after his most close Imprisonment in the Tower, where the
City-Sheriffs, or Magistrates, or any from them, were never admitted to see
him. Indeed the counterfeit Confession (to avoid a plain conviction of its
falsehood) durst not say by whom Fitz-Harris was put upon saying what he did, of
the Queen and Earl of Danby about Godfrey's Murder.

But as the matters are connected, it is strongly implied to have been by the
City-Magistrates, none other being named or referred unto.

And to persuade the World, that the vilest Wickedness may justly be believed
of them (viz.) the City Officers, the Impudence of Hell is assumed to bring in
Sir George Treby, desiring or willing him to accuse the Earl of Danby and the
Popish Lords in the Tower, thus speaking, (as if the worst of Devils had spoke
in him) Do but you SAY it, we have those that will SWEAR it. If such as know
not Sir George Treby can believe him to be so vile a Wretch, as he is rendered,
and could also think Sir Robert Clayton could have been guilty of the same
Wickedness in consenting to it, or silently conniving at it, to which a
thousand worlds could not have hired him: Yet when they shall hear of Sir
George Treby's profession of the Law, his Reputation and Place, surely it is
impossible for them to believe him to have been so exceeding silly, as to
discover to an Irish Papist, whom he had never seen before, such a strange
Mystery and Secret of Darkness amongst the Protestants, and City-Magistrates,
viz. That they had a pack of Knights of the Post, godless perjurious Wretches,
in readiness to swear whatsoever they would have them.

If they had been so provided with false Witnesses against the Duke and the
Popish Lords, as this counterfeit Confession suggests, and if there had been a
wicked Design against them, there was no need of Fitz-Harris his SAYING any
thing about them; no body can think that he was better able than Sir George
Treby to instruct a false Witness against them, especially when the
Shamconfession represents him first instructing Fitz-Harris, what he should say
against the Duke and Lords, that then the Sons of Belial might come from their
lurking-places, and SWEAR to his words.

Surely it had been the wiser, the safer, and the shorter way for Sir George
Treby, to have given his Swearers (if there had been such) their Lessons
immediately, without desiring Fitz-Harris (as is vainly suggested) first to say
it over after him, that then the Witnesses might Swear it.

Neither the false Suggestions nor the Perjuries could have gained any weight
or credit from the Authority of Fitz-Harris, by his saying what they were to
swear.

In fine, They must desire to be cozened, that will but seem to believe so
black, so vain, so unlikely, and so foolish a Slander of Sir Robert Clayton and
Sir George Treby, only upon Dr. Hawkins's saying, (if he has said true) that
he had the words of Fitz-Harris for it; who has convicted himself of forty
Perjuries, if the pretended Confession to Dr. Hawkins had been bona fide made
by him.

But this pretended Confession having loaded with Infamy the Sheriffs and
Justices of Peace, employed in Fitz-Harris's Examination, takes wonderful care
with all the Art and Skill the Contrivers had, that the Earl of Danby might be
wiped clean from Godsrey's Murder, for which he was Indicted by the occasion of
Fitz-Harris's Oath.

For that purpose the words of this Confession are so framed, that the world
may think, that the Sheriffs or Justices of the City, were the practisers with
him in that Deposition, the Paper saying, They were the more desirous to accuse
the Lord Danby of Godfreys Murder, because the Crime of Murder is not inserted
in his Pardon.

The word THEY will be understood to relate to Sir Robert Clayton and Sir
George Treby, who only were mentioned before, or the Sheriffs; though Fitz-Harris
was never Examined about the Lord Danby by any of them, nor had any of them
ever heard the least of the matters Sworn by him against the Lord Danby, about
that Murder, until they were public at the Kings-Bench-Bar, which was six
Weeks after Fitz-Harris's removal from the Sheriffs custody, to be close
Prisoner in the Tower.

And if he knew before his Oath against the Lord Danby, that Murder was not in
his Pardon (which we do not believe) he was better informed than Sir Rob.
Clayton or the Sheriffs, and the most men of England. But it seems strange,
that this mock-Confession did not, for the help of this Popish Plot, absolutely
retract the whole Evidence given by Fitz-Harris at the King's Bench Court;
whereas those parts of it are now left as true, that Deposed the Councels held
at St. James's and Windsor, and that the Lord Danby coming out of one of them,
breathed out the threatening words (as Fitz-Harris remembers) and that De Puy,
that was then in hearing o the Counsel, presently told him, that Godfrey's
Murder was then resolved upon, etc. but a fine, thin excuse is invented since
his Oath, that he believes De Puy spoke out of ill will to the Lord Danby. Yet
nothing is said to show, how he now comes so to believe, more than when he was
sworn in the Court to speak the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth.

We hope we have said enough to convince every Impartial Reader, of the
Impiety, Fraud, and Mockery of the pretended Confession; Yet we should not have
taken this trouble, if we could have suffered with patience, that all the
Popish Treasons and Wickednesses lately Discovered, against our Religion, the
King and Kingdom, should be represented to the world, as the Devices and
Practices of the Protestants, their Officers and Magistrates against the
Papists, and that a seeming conscientious Confession of a Dying man should be
cried up by the Papists, at home and in foreign Countries, as a ground to have
it so believed.

We have reason to fear, that the Sufferings of the Protestants beyond the
Seas, are upon this occasion already increased, our English Papists there daily
decrying the Popish Plot, and catching at occasions to scandalize all
Protestants in Authority that oppose them, and to stir up Enmity and Rage
thereby against the oppressed Protestants.

We must acknowledge that we were surprised with astonishment, when we first
saw this Mock-Confession of Fitz-Harris published; and the more, that it should
be done by a Dr. of the English Church, either Fr. Hawkins, or Hawkesworth,
(which Name he will own, we cannot yet learn) but that a Dr. of our Church
should, upon pretense of his private Conference with a Papist, Attainted of
Treason, publish in Print to the whole world for Truth, That two Justices of
the Peace, and Two Ministers of Justice, High-Sheriffs of the City of London,
have combined with certain Lords and Commons of the Parliament, in a horrid
Conspiracy against the Queen, Duke of York, and many Privy-Councellors, and in
wicked Practices against the Papists, and endeavored to prevail with
Fitz-Harris to perjure himself, by forming a plausible Story to confirm the
Popish Plot.

We say again, That a Dr. of our Church should cause to be sent into all
Kingdoms and Countries, such black Scandals of so many Persons of Quality and
Authority in our Kingdom, to render them (as much as in him is) more infamous
and odious, than words can express; at this we were struck with horror; and so
much the more, when we consider, that the Doctor was not ignorant, that these
pretended Words or Confessions of Fitz-Harris, were contrary to his most solemn
Oaths, Sworn before the King's Ministers, as well as before those Justices; and
that all the Commons of England in Parliament, had by Order caused what he had
so Sworn to be Published: And the Doctor could not be ignorant, that the whole
scope of that Mock Confession, was to throw the Odium of a Plot against the
King's Person upon some Protestants, and to discredit and prevent the
prosecution of the Popish Plot.

The Doctor also might with very little pains have satisfied himself by
undoubted Evidence of the Falsehood of several of the matters of Fact in the
Confession; and surely his Function as a Divine, his Duty as a Neighbor, and
much more as a Christian, required that he should in some kind have heard, at
least, some of the parties accused, in their own behalf, (to whom he might have
had easy access) before he had proclaimed them to the world, to be guilty of
such infamous Crimes: He cannot excuse himself for want of Time, this Mock
Confession was taking and forming, as we can prove, a Week at least before
Fitz-Harris's Death: And we have reason to think, that the miserable deluded
man understood many things in it, as they were modeled, as little as he did
the Doctrine of the Four General Councils, which he owned for his Faith,
whosoever put it upon him.

But the Doctor took care that none of the parties accused might see the arrows
intended to wound them, till their good names should feel them, and therefore
kept his Confession in secret until the poor wretch was dead and cold, that
would perhaps have showed the fraud with his last breath, if he had been
absolutely certain that it was to be his last; but that the Doctor assured him
of the contrary even very near his last hours, in due time will be proved.

The Sheriffs at the Gallows remembered Fitz-Harris of his promise made to each
of them in Newgate, That if they did put him to death, before he could discover
to the Parliament what was yet undiscovered of the Popish Plot, which he said
he reserved for them, he would leave it behind him in writing. He answered
them, That he had left it with Dr. Hawkins.

The Sheriffs demanded of the Doctor that it might be read to the people,
whilst the man was living to own it; but the Doctor only refused it, not the
Man, (how he was awed we know not), then the Sheriffs demanded a Copy of it
from the Doctor as their due, as what belonged to Fitz-Harris; but after some
shuffling answers that he had it not about him, and that a Great man had it, he
promised them a Copy; but either he thought he was not bound by his promise, or
else he made no conscience of breaking the Bond.

We doubt not but time will bring to light the whole contrivance of obtruding
upon the world this Mock-confession, and make it appear that Dr. Hawkins, or
Hawksworth, knew that Fitz-Harris never intended it should pass for a true and
real Confession, if he died for the Treason.

And perhaps for that reason there was no one person of Quality or Authority
about the Tower, or any other of eminency and integrity called in all the days
of its contrivance, before whom Fitz-harris might own any article of the
Confession, though doubtless if there had been only fair dealing, the Doctor
must needs have desired it for his own safety and credit, nor is it accountable
why it was not done; it may be also those two obscure men, and the woman, whose
names are set to the Printed Paper as Witnesses, knew no more what the
Confession and Declaration was, which Fitz-Harris protested to them he had made
to Dr. Hawkins freely, than the Sheriffs knew what the further discovery was of
the Popish Plot, which he also told them with his dying breath, he had left
with Dr. Hawkins, no shadow of any such discovery having yet been produced by
him; but on the contrary this odious Sham-confession to persuade the world,
that the noise of Popish Plots has been from the wicked practices of some
Protestants.

We have only left to pray, That the God of Truth may bring to light all the
hidden works of darkness, that no wicked device formed against the Protestant
Religion, his Majesty and the Kingdom, may ever prosper; and let every good man
say, Amen.

FINIS.
The Confession of Edward Fitz-harys Esquire
I Edward Fitz-harys, having been indicted of High Treason, for endeavoring to
dethrone the KING, was thereupon found guilty, and Sentence of death passed
upon me. I the aforesaid Edward Fitz-harys do voluntarily and freely, without
any hopes to save my Life, but as a dying man, and to discharge my Conscience
toward God, and for the better satisfaction of the world, make this
Declaration following, in the presence of God, and unto Dr. Francis Hawkins
Chaplain of the Tower of London.

I do profess and declare my Religion in the general to be that which has been
truly and anciently delivered in the first Four General Councils; and in
particular, my Belief is that true Faith of a Christian briefly contained in
those Three Creeds commonly called, The Apostle's Creed, St. Athanasius's, and
The Nicene Creed: And I die a Member, and in the Communion of Christ's Holy
Catholic Church, hoping for Mercy through the alone Merits of the Passion of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

I do also confess and declare, as to the Crimes which I die for, I was no
further concerned in the Libel, than as employed to give the King notice of
what Libel or other Accusations there were against him; and to this intent, and
no other, I endeavored to get this Libel; which at length I did, from Mr.
Everard, all written under his own hand, and carried it to Mrs. Wall, by whose
means I conveyed all matters of this or the like nature to the King. I told her
I had a business of great consequence to acquaint the King with: but she
answered me, That my Lord Sunderland being out, there would be no Money had for
secret Service, and advised me to go to the Lord Clarendon, or Hyde; but before
I could do this, I was taken. As for that part of the Libel which I left with
Everard, as a Pledge to assure him I would not betray him, I received it of the
Lord Howard: And the Money I received from the King, was for bringing a Libel
called The King Unvailed, and the Lady Portsmouths Articles. I call God to
witness, I never had a Farthing charity from the King.

I do further confess and declaere, That the Lord Howard told me of a Design to
seize upon the King's Person, and to carry him into the City, and there detain
him till he had condescended to their Desires. Heyns and my self were privy to
this Design, and had several Meetings with the Lord Howard; and as an
Encouragement, the Lord Howard assured us of breaking the Settlement of
Ireland, taking off the Additional Revenue of the Bishops, Forty nine-men, and
Grantees, whose Estates were to be shared amongst the Party.

I do confess and declare, That while I was in Newgate, the Sheriff's Bethel
and Cornish came to me with a Token from the Lord Howard, which I knew to be
true, and brought Heads with them from Everard, wherein he accused me of being
a Court Emissary, or Yorkist, put on by the King to put the Libel into
Protestants houses to trepan them. But I declare upon my death, I had no such
intent, nor do I know any such thing. The Sheriffs likewise told me, I was to
be tried within three or four days; that the people would prosecute me, and the
Parliament would impeach me, and that nothing would save my life, but
discovering the Popish Plot. And then the Sheriffs aforesaid gave me great
Encouragement from my Lord Howard, that if I would declare that I believed so
much of the Plot as amounted to the introducing the R. C. or if I could find
out any that could criminate the Queen, R. H. or make so much as a plausible
story to confirm the Plot, that the Parliament would restore me to my Fathers
Estate, with the Prosits thereof since His Majesty's Restoration. I sinding my
self in the condition I was, in Newgate, Fettered, Moneyless, and Friendless,
my Wife ready to Lie in, without any subsistence, my Children in a miserable
condition, and must needs be in a worse by my death; and I could see no other
Refuge for life, but complying with them; so not with ambitious intent, but to
save my life, I did comply. The Sheriffs brought Instructions which they said
came from the Lords and Commons, who met that day in order to Address to the
King in my behalf, if I should confirm the Instructions: and they made use of
the Lord Shastsbury's name, and others, what Advantage I might have thereby. At
the first I made a formal story concerning the Plot, which was not prejudicial
to any body, but most relating to general Heads known publicly; upon which Mr.
Cornish told me, These were things cried about the Streets two years ago: I
replied, I could say no more: Mr. Sheriff said, He was sorry for me with all
his heart, but thought I could say more if I would, and pressed me hard to
speak to several Heads; unto which unless I spoke, he said, there was no hopes
of life. The Heads I was to speak to, is what the Examination taken by Sir
Robert Clayton and Sir George Treby contains, and a great deal more that I did
not say then relating to the Queen, R. H. Earl of Danby, declaring French
Pensioners, Lords Hallifax, Hyde, Clarendon, Feversham, Seymer, and others; the
burning the Fleet, Forts and Governments in Popish hands, Meal-Tub-Plot,
Prentices Plot, the contrivance of the Libel on the Lady Portsmouth, being a
French Design to destroy Protestants: These and many other Heads were brought
me by the Sheriffs.

I do farther confess and declare, That Sir Rob. Clayton and Sir George Treby
coming to me to examine me, Sir Rob. Clayton asked me what I could say
concerning Godfrey's Murder: I answered, Something. He replied, It may be I was
in a confusion; recollect your self. And what I said concerning Father Patrick,
was forced out of me; and what I said concerning him, is not true. Sir George
Treby was with me three hours, or thereabouts, and pressed to say concerning
Godfrey's death; and said, Unless I could speak to that Murder, I could say
nothing: Whereupon, I said something I had from others. He asked me, if I could
say no more? I replied, Is not this enough to save my Life? Am I not Rogue
enough? The Recorder hereupon swore, Gods wounds, what were you ever but a
Rogue? Then the Recorder entered upon the Heads of the Examination; which being
done, he told me, All this would not save my Life, unless I would speak to the
Libel, which was a Court-trick; and it was not for nothing that I had been so
often seen at the Lady Portsmouth's. The Lord Shaftsbury said, You know more of
these matters than any man. Sir George would have me speak to the Consult; that
the Duke was at it, the Lords Bellasis, Arundel, and Powis were at it; You have
seen them go to it at St. James's; without doubt they were there: Do you but
say it, we have those that will swear it.

I do further declare and confess, That what I said against the Queen and the
Duke, I was put upon, in the matter of Sir Edmunbury Godfrey's Murder: And do
further declare, That what I swore against the Earl of Danby, the threatening
words that were uttered I did (to the best of my remembrance) hear; but whom
they concerned I could not well know, by what my Lord himself said. And what de
Puis told me concerning my Lord of Danby, I do believe was spoken out of ill
will; and what I said against him, was to stave off my Trial till a Parliament;
and they were the more desirous to accuse the Lord Danby of Godfrey's Murder,
because the Crime of Murder is not inserted in his Pardon. I am sorry for what
I said against the Queen, his Royal Highness, and the Earl of Danby; I desire
God to forgive me the wrong I did them, and do heartily beg their Pardon.

I do further declare and protest, That this Confession and Declaration of mine
I own sincerely, as a dying man, and not to save my life; and I call God and
all his Angels to witness the Truth of it; and I renounce Mercy at the Hands of
God Almighty, if this be not true.

And I do further declare and protest, as a dying man, unto James Walmesly,
Edward Pattel, and Mary Walmesly, That I have made this Confession and
Declaration unto Doctor Hawkins freely, and of my own voluntary accord, without
any manner of promise made, or hopes given me by him from the King of saving my
life by this Confession; I having given him to understand beforehand they were
matters of consequence, and such as chiefly concerned the good of the King and
Kingdom.

I give the Doctor my hearty Thanks for all his Prayers, Counsel, and
Charitable Offices he has done me, and I pray God to bless him for ever for
it. I forgive all the World, and desire all the World to forgive me; and the
Lord have mercy on my Soul.

EDWARD FITZ-HARYS.

This Protestation was made by Mr. Fitz-Harys, July 1. between the hours of 7
and 8 in the morning, in the presence and hearing of us whose Names are
hereunder written.

James Walmesly. Edward Pattel. Mary Walmesly.


I Do hereby declare, That Mr. Fitz-Harys, before he began to write any part of
this Narrative, was more than once assured by me, that there was no hope of his
life that I know of, whatever he should say; nor of his Salvation, if he should
say any thing that he knew to be false: of which he being thoroughly sensible,
and perfectly convinced, proceeded to write the Narrative aforesaid. And I
continuing to admonish him upon every point that was material, not to say any
thing but what was exactly true, he took occasion, at several periods of his
Narrative, to kneel down, and solemnly to protest the truth of every word
therein contained. And this I do again declare upon the Faith of a Christian,
and the word of a Minister of the Gospel.

Francis Hawkins.

FINIS.

