THE TRIAL AND Condemnation OF MERVIN, Lord Audley Earl of Castle-Haven.

AT Westminster, April the 5th 1631.

For Abetting a Rape upon his Countess, Committing Sodomy with his Servants,
and Commanding and Countenancing the Debauching his Daughter.

With the Learned Speeches of the Lord High-Steward, the Arguments of the
King's-Councel upon that occasion, and the Lord Audley's Speech at the place of
Execution.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

THE PREFACE.
IT IS no less deplorable than wonderful* that in this Nation where the purest
Religion is professed, and where Vice and Immorality are punished by severe
Laws, Wickedness should ascend to such a height, as equals* if not exceeds, all
the Barbarous Regions of the Earth. Time was, when gross enormities in this
Island, like Batts and Owls were obscured by Night and Darkness, and those that
committed them were ashamed to own their Crimes, or suffer their Examples to
infect the open Air. They were contented to go to Hell alone, without Usurping
the Office of Beelzebub, or loading their Souls with the Guilt of Tempting their
incautious Brethren; but now the most Scandalous, Inhuman, Unnatural, and
Beastly Offenses, stalk abroad at Noon day, and he thinks himself a Puny in
Wickedness, and scarce worth the Damning, that cannot boast of numbers of Souls
that he has lead to Destruction.

Ravishing Women, was a Crime rarely heard of among our Ancestors, and though
no Age has been so happy* but it has produced some Monsters in Morality, as
well as Nature; yet now this Sin is grown so common, that scarce a Sessions
passes, wherein there is not one or more Convicted of Rape, and that in the
most Scandalous manner too, upon the Bodies of mere Children.

Nay, the Debauches of this Age have found out another way of Ravishing Women,
and that is, of their Honors and Reputations; for where the Villains have
impudently assaulted the Chastity of Virtuous Women, and have encountered
nothing but Scorns, or the Bastinado from a Footman; there they will be sure to
fix a Scandal, and boast of the Favors they never received. Nay, a Fellow that
has neither Sense in his Head, Money in Pocket, nor a Tatter to his Back, but
what a Louse would break its Neck from, shall dignifie himself Gallant to
persons of the Best Quality, that never could reach above the Rank of a
Dung-hill-raker*

Another Abomination that shocks our Natures, and puts our Modesty to the
Blush, to see it so commonly perpetrated, is the Devilish and Unnatural Sin of
Buggery. A Crime that sinks a Man below the Basest Epithet, is so Foul it
admits of no Aggravation, and cannot be expressed in its Horror, but by the
Doleful Shrikes and Groans of the Damned. A Sin that caused God Almighty Pluere
Gehennam de Coelo, to Rain down Hellfire upon Sodom and Gomorrah, and turn a
Fruitful and Pleasant Country, into utter Barrenness and Desolation.

This Sin being now Translated from the Sadomitical Original, or from the
Turkish and Italian Copies into English; not only in the Infamous Example of
that Monster Ri -- by, and other Notorious Sodomites; but he^ring also that
there is at this time several taken up at Windsor, and others of the same Gang
now Committed to Newgate, who were engaged in a more than Beast-like
Confederacy among themselves, for exercising this Unnatural Offense: I thought
I could not more oblige the Public, than (having this Trial lying by me in an
Old Manuscript which was never yet Printed,) to Publish it at this Juncture,
that by Reading the Sin, so Tragically Delineated in its Horrid Shape, and ugly
Visage, by the Grave and Learned Sages of the Law, and in the Death of a Noble
Peer, other Men might be terrified, and scared from those Sins that are
attended with nothing but Infamy and Death in this World, and Eternal Damnation
in the next. And,

Now, seeing I have some Paper left, give me leave to tell the Miscreants of
our unhappy Days, that the preceding Sins of Sodom, which spaun'd the Unnatural
Sin of Buggery, were the same that now Reign among our English Debauche's, and
as they would avoid the Effects, so they ought to be careful in removing the
Cause, or without the help of Prophecy, it is easy to foretell their R^ine.

Pride, Luxury, and Irreligion, were the Infernal Parents of Sodomy, and that
of their Destruction: And he must have neither Eyes, nor Ears, that knows not
how egregiously the same Vices Reign amongst us also. Pride is in its Achme,
and nothing so much admired as Ease and Softness, Courtship, Address, and
Entertainment, And that Delicata Insania, Effeminate Madness, had banished all
manly Virtues. Instead of those Noble Characters of Virtue, Wisdom, and
Courage, the great things in Vogue, and the only obtaining Bonne Graces, are,
that the Fop Eats and Drinks nicely, manages his Whore, his Snuff Box, his
Wigg, his Comb and Glass discreetly, mouths his Oaths finely, and handles his
Knife and Fork to Admiration!

But the great Qualification they Boast of, and which wholly imploys our Modern
Wits, is in Belching out Blasphemy against the God that made them, and throwing
bitter Scoffs and Profane Jests upon Religion; and having no other way to
demonstrate their Courage, they show it in this: That they dare venture to be
Damned to be accounted Contemptibly Witty. But if they are not already so far
sunk into Beast, as they have lost the benefit of Thinking, I would faign stop
their Career by a few Modest Questions, viz. Whether they can the better endure
Eternal Torment, because they don't believe them? Or, whether they can
extinguish the Flames of Hell, by going Merrily and Laughing thither? You all
know that Ri -- by's other Heinous Crimes was Accompanied with horrid
Blasphemy. See your Faces in his Glass at the Bar, on the Pillory, and the
Brink of Hell, and if that will neither shame nor fright you; let me beg the
favor of you to leave the Kingdom, for that will be the best Office you ever
did, or can do for England, and the Obligation shall be gratefully acknowledged
by

Gentlemen, (If it ben't a Shame to Style you so;) Your Humble Servant, The
Prefacer.

THE TRIAL AND Condemnation OF MERVIN TOUCHET, Lord Audley, Earl of
Castle-Haven, etc.
ON Monday the 25th of April, in the Year of our Lord 1631. About the Hour of
Ten in the Morning, the Lord Keeper Coventry, being by special Commission
Constituted Lord High-Steward of England, with twenty six of the Nobility came
into Westminster Hall, Attended by an Herald, and six Sergeants at Arms; And
the Lord High-Steward being sat in a Chair of State, and the Peers on each side
of a Table covered with Green Velvet, Proclamation was made for Silence.

Then Sir Thomas Fanshaw Clerk of the Crown, Read the Commission, and the Usher
of the Black Rod kneeling before the Lord High-Steward presented his Lordship
with a White Rod; After which a second Proclamation was made, Commanding all
persons to keep to Silence, and the Lord High-Steward having desired the Peers
of the Realm and the Privy Counselors to be Covered, the Lords were called by
their Names, as follows,

Earl of Po^^land Lord Treasurer. Earl of Dorset and Middlesex Lord Chambl.
Earl of Manchester Lord privy Seal. Earl of Arundel Lord Marshal. Earl of
Pembroke. Earl of Kent. Earl of Essex. Earl of Warwick. Earl of Carlisle. Earl
of Bedford. Earl of Worcester. Earl of Derby. Earl of Leicester. Earl of
Salisbury. Earl of Holland. Lord Viscount Conway. Lord Visc. Wimbleton. Lord
Visc. Wentworth. Lord Visc. Dorchester. Lord Howard. Lord Peircy. Lord Strange.
Lord Clifford. Lord North. Lord Peeters. Lord Goring.
Judges Assisting at this Trial. Sir Nicholas Hyde, Lord Chief Justice of
England, Sir Thomas Littleton, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir
Humphrey Davenport, Lord Chief Baron, Mr. Justice Jones, Mr. Justice Whitlock,
Mr. Justice Crook, Mr. Baron Denham.

The King's Learned Counsel. Mr. Sergeant Crew, Mr. Attorney General, Mr.
Solicitor General, Sir John Finch, Sir Thomas Fanshaw Clerk of the Crown, Mr.
Keeling, with other Officers and Attendants.

The Lords having answered to their Names, the Lieutenant of the Tower was
required to bring forth his Prisoner, who was then in the Treasury Chamber, and
from thence was Guarded into the Court by the Warders of the Tower, and being
put into a place enclosed for that purpose, covered with Blew Bays, and the
Lieutenant of the Tower into another place adjoining to it; the Prisoner having
made his Complement to the Lord High-Steward, and the rest of the Noble Lords
that were to Try him, the Lord High-Steward spoke to him in these words.

My Lord,

The King's Majesty being informed by common Fame, and the Verdict of diverse
Gentlemen of Quality in the Country where you ^ive* That you stand Impeached of
several Great and Heinous Crimes, that the Truth of the Charge may be known, he
has this day brought you to your Trial, therein imitating the Almighty in the
XVIIIth of Genesis, who came down to see if the Sins of the People were as
Notorious as the Cry that was about them; and truly the Kings of the Earth, can
have no better Example than what has been given them by the Great and all Wise
King of Heaven; and therefore our Sovereign who is God's Vicegerent upon Earth,
has now brought you to Justice, and desires that all proceedings should be
carried on with as much equality as the Rules of Equity and Justice themselves
have prescribed. And because (my Lords) the Crimes that will now be brought
before you, are of such a Horrid Nature, that may justly raise in some of your
Lordships a Detestation, and in others Pity and Compassion. I advise you to lay
aside both these Considerations, and let your Reasons and Consciences sway your
Judgments, and your Heads direct your Hearts. My Lord Audley, I question not
but you are really satisfied (as well as I am my self) that the Noble Peers
here Assembled, have as much Justice in their Hearts as Noble Blood in their
Veins, and since such as they are to Try you, if you are Conscious of your own
Innocence, speak without Fear; for if you are falsely Accused, those that do it
shall not escape an Exemplary Punishment; but if you know your self Guilty, I
advise you to give Honor to God and the King, by Confessing your Faults, for
neither vain Confidence nor Subtlety can obscure or prevail against the Truth;
and if that touches your Heart, your own Conscience will be a thousand
Witnesses against you, and God also who is greater than them all. Persist not
therefore in an Obstinate denial of the Truth, for if you do, God will put it
into'th Hearts of these Noble Lords to find it out, and to do what is Just in
relation to the Punishment of the Crime. Consider of it, and the Lord Direct
you.

Lord Audley. My Lord, I have been six Months a Prisoner, under a close
Confinement, without the Advice of Friends or Counsel, and long Imprisonment
has reduced me into a very weak Condition. When I was in my best state of
Health my Voice was very low, and therefore I desire your Lordships will be
pleased to allow me the liberty of Counsel to speak for me.


Lord High-Steward. Your long Imprisonment has been a singular favor to you.
You have had more time than ever any Peer had that was brought to this Bar.
However, you shall ask nothing which the Law can give you, but it shall be
freely granted to you, and therefore I will propound your Request to the
Judges, and leave them to give you satisfaction in it.


My Lords the Judges. Will the Law allow us to give my Lord Audley the liberty
of Counsel to speak for him? I shall be glad to have your Opinions in it.


Lord Chief Justice Hyde. In Criminal Causes Counsel cannot be allowed in
matters of Fact* in matters of Law it may.


Lord Chief Baron. The Law is express in this Case, and Counsel ought not to be
granted.


Lord High-Steward. Read the Indictment.


Clerk of the Crown. Mervin Lord Audley, Thou art here Indicted, etc. for that
thou and Gyles Broadway, Genesis both of Fountain Gifford, in the County of Wilts,
not having the Fear of God before your Eyes, but being moved and seduced by the
Instigation of the Devil, Did on the twentieth day of June in the Sixth Year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. at Fountain
Gyfford aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, did, by Force and Arms, etc. In and
upon Ann Lady Audley, then being in the Peace of God and our Sovereign Lord the
King, Make an Assault; And the aforesaid Gyles Broadway, the aforesaid Ann Lady
Audley, by Force and Arms against the Will of the said Ann, then and there did
violently, and Feloniously Ravish, and the said Ann then and there against her
Will did Carnally know against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his
Crown and Dignity, and against the Statute in that Case made and provided; what
say thou Mervyn Lord Audley, art thou Guilty of the Rape of which thou
stand Indicted, or not Guilty?


Lord Audley. Not Guilty.


Clerk of the Crown. How will you be Tried?


Lord Audley. By God and my Peers.

Then the Clerk of the Crown Read another Indictment against the Lord Audley to
this effect, viz. That he Mervin Lord Audley, not having God before his Eyes,
nor respecting the Order of Nature, but moved and seduced by the Instigation of
the Devil, the first of June in the Sixth Year of our Sovereign Lord Charles,
etc. at Fountain Gifford, in the said County of Wilts, in the Mansion House of
the said Lord Audley, Did there by Force of Arms upon one Florentius Fitz
Patrick, Wickedly, Devilishly, Feloniously, and contrary to Nature, exercise
Venery, and the said Florentius Fitz Patrick, then and there did Carnally know,
and that Detestable, and Abominable, Sodomitical Sin called Buggery, (not to be
named among Christians,) Then and there with the said Florentius Fitz Patrick,
Devilishly, Feloniously, and contrary to Nature did commit and perpetrate, to
the great Displeasure of Almighty God and Disgrace of all Mankind, and contrary
to the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and
against the Statute in this Case made and provided, etc.

The like Indictment for the same Offense, Committed with the same Person on
the Tenth of June the same Year, at New Sarum, in the Mansion House of the Lord
Audley, was also preferred, but not Read against him. All which Bills were found
against the Prisoner, in a Court held by special Commission (granted for that
purpose,) at New Sarum, before Edward Georges, Sir Thomas Richardson, Lord
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, Sir Nicholas Hyde Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Sir John Denham, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, Sir Edward
Hungerford, Sir Walter Vaughan, Sir Lawrence Hyde, Sir Thomas Fanshaw, to them,
or any three or more of them, to inquire into the matters of Fact as is before
alleged.

To all which Indictments the Lord Audley having Pleaded Not Guilty, and put
himself upon his Trial; the Lord High-Steward delivered himself to the Lords as
follows.

My Lords,

The Prisoner is Indicted for Rape and Sodomy, by two Indictments, he has
Pleaded Not Guilty; and it is my Duty to Charge your Lordships with the Trial of
it, and yours to Judge of it. The Matters of Fact are to be proved by Evidence,
and your Lordships are to balance it. I have already observed to you, that
probably this Cause may move some of you into Pity, and others into
Detestation; but neither of these ought to be thrown into balance, since a
Grain on either side may sway the Scales; Therefore let Reason rule your
Affections, and your Heads govern your Hearts; hear diligently, weigh matters
equally, and then the Scale will lean on the right side. The Judges will assist
your Lordships in point of Law, and therefore if any doubt arises among you,
you will propound it to me, and I to them. In these proceedings your Lordships
are not upon your Corporal Oaths, for the Law presumes you of such Honor and
Integrity, that you will act as Justly without an Oath, as others under that
Obligation; and for the same Reason the Law admits of no Challenges. God direct
you to do it.

His Lordship having concluded, the King's Attorney General opened the
Indictment in the following Words.

May it please your Grace my Lord High Steward; here are two Indictments
against Mervyn Lord Audley, the first is for Rape, and the second is for
Sodomy; the Prisoner is Honorable, the Crimes of which he stands Indicted are
foul and Dishonorable, and if they should be proved true, I dare be bold to
say, That never Poet invented, nor Historian related any thing so Odious,
Inhuman, and abominable. Suetonius has with Horror displayed the Vices of some
Heathen Emperors, that having engrossed an absolute power, were fearless of
punishment, and shameless in committing abominable Enormites; yet no Author has
produced a Man that ever equaled, or came near the Crimes that this Lord is
accused of. This is a Crime, to the Honor of our Nation be it spoken, that is
scarcely heard of in an Age, and whenever it happens calls aloud for timely
punishment, that the Infection spread no farther, nor provoke Divine Vengeance
to pour down the Vials of his wrath upon the whole Kingdom. I can speak it with
great satisfaction, That in all King James's Reign, and from his Majesty's
first Accession to the Crown, till now, I never heard the like occasion to
speak against a Peer of the Realm; and as God knows I do it now with abundance
of Regret, so I hope I shall never have the like occasion to do it any more.
His Majesty who is your Pattern of Virtue, not only as a King, but in his
personal Capacity, and of whom it is hard to say, whether he excels most in
Justice, or Mercy, (though I am inclined to believe it is in his Mercy) would have
my Lord Audley, the Prisoner at the Bar, heard with as much favor as a Crime
of that Horrid Nature will allow. When the Notice of this Crime came first to
His Majesty's knowledge, he was amazed, and gave strick command that the Truth
might appear, and his Throne and People might be cleard from the Guilt of such
abominable impieties; therefore the Prisoner was Indicted according to Law in
his own Country, and by Gentlemen of known Worth and Integrity; Billa Vera
being found against him, he is brought to this Bar to be Tried by these
Honorable Lords his Peers; of whose Wisdom and Justice there can be no
question, and therefore we may expect the Event accordingly: First I shall
begin with the Rape.

Now Rape is defined to be an Unlawful Carnal Knowledge, and Abuse of a Woman
by Force against her Will. This was Felony by the Common Law, and though the
Statute of Westminster, 1. Cap. 13. lessened it into a Misdemeanor, yet it was
soon after 13. Ed. 1. C. 34. made a Capital Offense without Clergy, agreeable
to the Law of the Almighty Legislator, Deuteronomy. 22. and Genesis 34. and was accounted
by our Forefathers, so Detestable and Abominable a Crime, Bracton, l. 3. p.
147, that those who were guilty of it, were punished with the Loss of their
Eyes, and their Privy Members, that they might at once be deprived of the
wicked Inlets, and Instruments of their Base and Unlawful Lusts; but I shall
not Tire your Lordships patience with Citing Authorities, nor enlarging upon
the Hainousness of an Offense that admits of no aggravation, and therefore
shall only mention three or four Rules in Law, relating to the present Case;
the Truth of which I submit to the Opinions of my Lords the Judges.

First, When any Offense is Felony, either by the Statute, or Common Law, all
Accessaries before and after, are incidently included, so that if any be
aiding, assisting, or abettiag any to do the Act, though the Offense be personal,
and done by one only, as is in this Case, not only he that does the Act is
Principal, but also they that are present, Abetting, and Aiding the Misdoer,
are Principals also.

Secondly, If the party on whom the Crimes was Committed, be notoriously
Unchaste, and a known Whore, yet there may be a Ravishment.

Thirdly, In an Indictment of Rape, there is no Limitation of time for the
prosecution; for Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, no time occurs against, or
prevents the King 's Suit; but in case of an Appeal of Rape, if the Woman do
not prosecute in Convenient time, it will bar her.

Fourthly, If a Man take away a Maid and Ravish her by Force, and afterward she
gives her consent and Marries him that did the Act, yet it is a Rape.

As for the Crimen Sodomiticum, in the second Indictment, I shall not
Paraphrase upon it, since it is of so abominable and Vile a Nature, (that as
the Indictment truly expresses it, Crimen inter Christianos non nominandum) it
is a Crime not to be named among Christians; and by the Law of God, as well as
the Ancient Laws of England, it was punished with Death. Levit. 20. Fleta, l.
6. Cap. 35. Sodomitae in terra vivi confodiantur: Sodomites are to be buried
alive in the Earth; or rather as some understand the Phrase, be set deep and
alive into a Pit dig'd for that purpose, with their heads above ground, till
they are famished to Death, and this agrees with the Mirror, Cap. 4. The
Statute of 25. Hen. 8. Cap. 6. made it Felony without Clergy, which though
Repealed by 1. Mar, yet it was revived by the 5. El. Cap. 17. and is still in
Force.

As to this Indictment there is no other Question, but whether it be Crimen
Sodomiticum penetratione, whether he penetrated the Body, or not; to which I
answer, the Fifth of Elizabeth, sets it down in general Terms, and ubi Lex non
distinguit, ibi non distinguendum; and I know you will be cautious how you give
the least Mittigation to such abominable Sins; for when once a Man indulges his
Lust, and Prevaricates with his Religion, as my Lord Audley has done, by being
a Protestant in the Morning, and a Papist in the Af^ernoon* no wonder if he
commits the most abominable Impieties; for when Men forsake their God, it is no
wonder he leaves them to themselves.

But here I find things that exceed all imagination, and is what the Poet truly
Calls imprincipiti vitium, or meditated mischiefs, for his ill inclinations
were bent, to force his Wife to be naught against her own Inclinations, which
the wickedest Man I ever heard of before would have Virtuous and Honest, how
bad soever he is himself; but on the contrary, the Prisoner at the Bar tells
his Wife, if she loves him, she must love Antill his Servant also; and to
incline the Lady to lie with him, he fetches an argument from Scripture, and
tells her, that her Body is his, and that she is bound to obey his Commands;
and if she Sinned in obeying him, it was no fault of hers, but his own, and he
would answer for it. He allowed this Antill, his vicious favorite, to spend
Five Hundred Pounds a Year; but would not allow his Eldest Son One Hundred. If
his Lady or Daughter wanted necessaries, they must lie with Skipwith, another
of his Servants, before they could have Money to buy what they wanted, telling
his Daughter he had rather she should have a Child by Skipwith, than any other
person; but these things, my Lord, I had rather should come out of the Mouths
of the Witnesses than from mine; therefore, pray Crier, call Walter Tyte.


Crier. Vous avez Walter Tyte, who being sworn, the Attorney General said.


Attorney General. Walter Tyte, Inform my Lord High Steward, and the rest of
these Noble Lords, the Conditions and Circumstances of Antill and Skipwith
before they came into my Lord Audley's Service, and how my Lord Audley
Preferred and Enriched them afterward.


Walter Tyte. Antill, my Lord, was a Footman to Sir Henry Smith, and had not
(as I verily believe) one Farthing when he came to my Lord, besides the Clothes
on his back; he lived with my Lord as his Footman and Page several years; then
he had Leave* given him to keep Horses in my Lord's Grounds, by which it was
discoursed that, in a short time, he got Two Thousand Pounds. He never sat at
Table with my Lord, till he had Married my Lords Daughter, with whom he gave
him to the Value of Seven Thousand Pounds. Henry Skipwith was sent by my Lord
from Ireland, to be my Ladies Page; his Father and Mother was very poor people,
yet he spent Five Hundred Pounds a Year of my Lord's Money. He gave him at one
time a Thousand Pounds, and has since made over to him leveral parcels of Land,
to the value of Two Hundred Pounds a Year.


Attorney General. Pray what Religion did my Lord profess.


Walter Tyte. At first every Body knows he was a Protestant; but after the
buying of Founthill House, he turned to the Romish Religion, at the Instance of
some Popish Gentlemen who were Neighbors.

Then the Lady Audley appearing as an Evidence, she was Sworn, and the Attorney
General said to her.


Attorney General. Will your Ladyship be pleased to inform these Peers with the
Real truth, concerning my Lords Vile, and unheard of Actions to your Ladyship?


Countess. My Noble Lords, I should be glad if a way might be found out, that I
might deliver my Testimony in a Written Affidavit, and not by word of Mouth in
this public Audience.


Lord High Steward. I will propound it to the Judges, and if the Law will allow
it, you shall be at your own Election. My Lords the Judges, you have heard what
the Countess desires of us; will you give your Opinions, and satisfy her
Ladyship about it?


Lord Chief Justice Hyde. By the Law, the Testimony relating to matter of fact,
that is* what relates to the Charge in the Indictment, must be made Viva Voce,
and not otherwise* and the reason is, because persons may take a greater
liberty of inserting in an Affidavit, what is not really true; which the Awe of
the Court, or asking apt Questions, may probably prevent, or discover the
falsehood.


Lord High Steward. Your Ladyship I hope is satisfied with the Judges Opinion,
and the Reasons on which its grounded.


Countess. Why then my Lords, the first or second Night after we were Married,
Antill came to our Bed, and the Lord Audly talked lasciviously to me, and told
me my Body was his, and if I lay with any Man with his consent, 'twas not my
fault, but his. He made Skipwith come naked into our Chamber and Bed; and took
delight in calling up his Servants to show their Nudities, and forced me to
look upon them, and to commend those that had the longest. Broadway, a Servant
of my Lord's, by his Lordships command, lay with me, and I making resistance,
my Lord Audley held my hands, and one of my Feet, and I would have killed my
self with a Knife afterward, but he took it from me* before that Act of
Broadway's, I had never done it. He delighted to see the Act done, and made
Antill come into the Bed to us* and lie with me in such a marmer, as he might
see it, and though I cried out, he never regarded the complaint I made, but
encouraged the Ravisher.


Attorney General. Pray Young Lady Audley* will you give my Lord High Steward,
and these Lords an account, of your Fathers barbarous usage of you!

I was Married to my Husband by a Romish Priest in the Morning, and at Night by
a Prebend of Killkenny. I was first compelled to lie with Skipwith, by the
Earls persuasions and Threatenings, saying, I should have nothing but what
Skipwith gave me. He saw Skipwith and I lie together several times, and so did
many Servants of the House besides. He tempted me to lie with others also,
telling me, my Husband did not love me, and if I would not, he would tell my
Husband I did lie with them. He used Oil to enter my Body first, for I was then
but Twelve Years of Age, and usually lay with me by the Earls Privity and
command.

The next Evidence that appeared was Sworn, was Broadway, to whom the Solicitor
General said, Broadway, give a true account of what you know of my Lord
Audley's unnatural doings.


Broadway. I lay at his Lordships Beds Feet, and in the Night he called for
some Tobacco, which, when I brought to him, he caught hold of me, and bid me
come to Bed, which I at first denied, but at last consented, and went into the
Bed on the Lords side, but he turned me upon my Lady, and bid me lie with her;
my Lord Audley held both her hands, and one of her Legs, and at last I lay with
her, notwithstanding her resistance. The Lord Audley also used my Body as a
Woman, but never Pierced it, only spent his Seed betwixt my Thighs. I have seen
Skipwith lie with the young Lady in Bed, and when he got upon her, the Lord
Audley stood by, and encouraged him to get her with Child. He also made
Skipwith lie with his own Lady, telling him he could not live long, and it
might be the making of him, and the like he said to me!


Lord High Steward. Pray Mr. Attorney let Skipwith be called, that we may hear
what he can say?


Skipwith. For the most part I lay in Bed with the Earl. He gave me his House
in Salisbury, and a Manor of Two Hundred and Sixty Pounds a Year. I lay with
the young Lady very commonly, there being Love between us before and after. My
Lord said he had rather have a Boy of my getting than of any other. She was but
twelve Years of Age when first I day with her, and I could not enter her Body
but by Art, and my Lord gave me things to open her Body.


Sir John Finch. Pray let Fitz-Patrick be called. Is your Name Fitz-Patrick?


Fitz-Patrick. Yes, Sir.


Sir John Finch. Well, be sure you speak the truth, and give these Lords the
^rue, and whole Account, of what you know concerning the Charge against my Lord
Audley.


Fitz-Patrick. Henry Skipwith was the great Favorite of my Lord Audley, he
usually lay in bed with him, and the Lord would make him lie with his own Lady,
and with the young Lady his Daughter, and these things I saw several times, it
being done in my Lords sight also. My Lord made me lie with him at Fount-hill
and Salisbury, and once spent his Seed, but did not penetrate my Body, and I
understood he had often done the like with others. He kept a Woman in his House
called Blandina, who was a Common Whore to his Lordship, and his Servants. His
House was a Common Brothel-House, and the Earl himself took delight not only in
being an Actor, but a Spectator while other Men did it. Blandina was once
abused by himself and Servants, for the space of seven Hours together, until
she got the French Pox.


Lord High-Steward. You Gentlemen of the King's Counsel, have you any more
Witnesses to produce, if you have, pray be expeditious?


Mr. Sergeant Crew. My Lord, we have several more, and desire that Friar may be
Examined.


Lord High-Steward. Where is he, call him.


Friar. Here, my Lord.


Lord High-Steward. Pray speak what you know about my Lord Audley; but be sure
it be the Truth.


Friar. I only know that Skipwith, and the young Lady Audley, lay several times
together while my Lord was present, and that he said he would feign have her
have a Boy by him.


Attorney General. May it please your Grace, my Lord High-Steward, we have
several Witnesses more to produce, but their Testimonies being the same your
Lordships have already heard, and what I humbly conceive is sufficient to prove
the Charge in the Indictment, against the Prisoner at the Bar, I shall give
your Lordships no further trouble; but shall leave it to the clearness of the
proofs which your Lordships have heard, for I know your Wisdoms to be such,
that you know in so dark a business, a clearer proof cannot be made; for Men
though never so wicked, do not use to call Witnesses to see it; I shall say no
more but commit the whole to your Lordships Considerations.


Lord High-Steward. My Lord Audley, when I came first thither, I could not have
believed there would have been such manifest proofs, as you find has been
produced of horrible Crimes against a person of your Honor. I shall give you
all the liberty you can desire in making your Defense, and therefore desire to
know what you have to say for your self, in reference to what has been Sworn
against you.


Lord Audley. I humbly thank your Grace for the favor you are pleased to grant
me, though being no Scholar, nor learned in the Law, I have nothing to depend
upon in my Defense, but my own Innocence, and your Lordships good Construction
of my weakness. My Lords, I must acknowledge that Skipwith was but poor when he
came to me, that he lay with me several times, when I was straightened for Room
in my House, and being a good Servant I gave him good Rewards. Antil I thought
deserved my Favor also, and therefore had my Consent to Marry my Daughter, and
I gave him a good Fortune with her.


Lord High-Steward. I advise you my Lord, not to deny what is plainly proved
against you, lest you give the Lords cause to suspect the Truth of the rest.


Lord Audley. My Wife has been a Whore, and has had a Child, which I concealed
to save her Honor. She, and my Son, and one Mr. William Wroughton, have
plotted against my Life, and all that is alleged against me is only their
inventions, and gives a dangerous Example in the Kingdom; for no Peer, or any
other person, can be secure of his Life, that has (as I have,) a Wife who
desires a younger Husband, and a Son that is gaping after my Estate, and has
the Devil and wicked Servants to assist their Maliee, in endeavoring to take
away my Life wrongfully. This my Lords, is my Condition, and I hope your
Lordships will take care, that you don't involve the Peers, the Gentry, and
Commons, under a dangerous President in my Condemnation; for, if a Wife of such
a Character, may be allowed to be a Witness against her Husband, no Man is
safe, when his Wife dislikes him, and would have a younger Husband.


Lord High-Steward. If your Lordfhip had proved a Conspiracy to take away your
Life, you had urged what had been material; but for want of proof it signifies
nothing: However, I will propound your Objections to the Judges.

My Lords the Judges, Can a Rape be Committed against a Whore? And can a Wife
be a Legal Witness against her Husband?


Lord Chief Justice. If the Woman on whom the Crime is Committed, be a Whore,
yet it may be a Ravishment: And in Civil Causes a Wife cannot be a Witness
against her Husband, but in Criminal Causes she may.

But, my Lord, what do you say to what these Fellows your Servants have Sworn
against you?


Lord Audley. They are persons of mean and base extraction, and suborned by my
Wife and Son to take away my Life, and Witnesses, according to Law, should be
honest Men, and of untainted Reputation, which these are not. Fitz-Patritk is a
Recusant, and therefore cannot be a Witness; besides, I have often beat him for
his Knavery and turned him away, and now he is hired by my Son to Swear against
me.

To which the Judges answered, it did not appear he was Convicted of Recusancy;
that all are held Legal Evidences for the King, till they are Convicted of
Crimes that may disable them; and as to their Reputation, no Men of unstained
Credit, could be Witnesses of such monstrous Inhumanities; besides, what the
Witnesses have Sworn, has put their own Lives into the same danger with his
Lordship's.


Lord Audley. My Lord, I desire to know, whether the Statute intends that all
kind of pollution, Man with Man, is Buggery, or not, seeing the Witnesses say
there was no penetration?


Lord High-Steward. My Lords the Judges, you hear the Lord Audley's Query, pray
give him your Opinions?


Lord Chief Justice. It is Buggery by the Law; for the Law of this Land makes
no distinction of Buggery, if there be Emissio Seminis.


Lord High-Steward. Are persons of mean Extraction, and of no Estates,
sufficient Evidences against a Baron?


Lord Chief Justice. Against any Man.


Lord High-Steward. Is a Man that is Particeps Criminis, a party in the Crime,
a Legal Witness against the Accused?


Lord Chief Justice. Yes, my Lord, for otherwise, Facts of this nature, would
seldom or never be discovered, and till he is Attainted, he is (Bonus and
legalis Homo) a Competent Evidence.

Then the Lords withdrew to consider of the Evidence, and being returned, the
Lord High-Steward asked them one by one whether my Lord Audley was Guilty of
the Rape, or not Guilty; and they Seriatim laying their Hands upon their
Hearts, all answered Guilty. Then his Lordship asked them whether he was Guilty
of Sodomy, or not Guilty; and fifteen of the six and twenty answered Guilty.

Then the Lieutenant of the Tower was Commanded to bring forth his Prisoner,
and he being brought to the Bar, the Lord High-Steward spoke to him as
follows.


Lord High-Steward. Mervyn Lord Audley, you have been Indicted of two Heinous
Crimes, Rape, and Sodomy* you have pleaded not Guilty, and put your self upon
God, and your Peers, who have found you Guilty of both, and now my Heart
grieves for what my Tongue must utter* but Justice is the way to cut off all
Wickedness.

O think upon the Turpitude of your Offenses, with an unfeigned Sorrow, and a
Sincere Repentance; and as your Crimes have been Abominable, so let your
Mortification for them be as remarkable. It Is not a slight and formal
Contrition can obliterate your Offenses, for you have not only Sinned against
the Law of God and Nature, but against the Rage of Man, Jealousy; and though
you are not Condemned for that enormity, you caused your Daughter to be abused,
and having Honor and Fortune to leave behind you, would have the spurious
Issue of a Varlet to Inherit both. My Lord, I am sorry to see you so
unconcerned, and that you discover no signs of Sorrow, or Repentance, for the
Crimes you have Committed. How are you obliged to bless God, that his Judgments
did not seize and hurry you away, with the load of these Sins upon your
Conscience, and in the very Act of your Filthiness; but has (I hope) reserved
you as a Subject of his Mercy, and when you were blinded in your Sins, has
brought you to this day of Shame, that the sight of them might turn you to him
by Shame, Sorrow, and Repentance. These, my Lord, are Arguments that invite you
to lay hold of his Mercy, and secure a happy Eternity, and therefore I advise
you, to improve this opportunity, and for the few Moments you have to Live,
endeavor to wash away your Crimes in Tears of true Repentance, for the many
Crimes you have Committed; That the Sentence I am going to Pronounce, may
prevent your dreadful Doom from God Almighty.

The SENTENCE. For as much as Thou Mervyn Lord Audley, have been Indicted of
diverse Fellonies, and by thy Peers have been found Guilty of them, thy SENTENCE
therefore is, That Thou return to the place from whence Thou came, and from
thence to the place of Execution, and there be Hanged by the Neck, till thy
Body be Dead. And the Lord have Mercy on Thee.

The Lord Audley hearing his Sentence, fell upon his Knees, denied the Fact,
and desired the Lords to intercede with His Majesty, to grant him a little time
to reconcile himself to God; which their Lordships promised they would, and
then the Court was dissolved.

At the Intercession of the Lords, he had time given him by the King till
Saturday the Fourteenth of May, and the SENTENCE was changed into that of
Beheading. His Coffin was sent to him about a Week before his Death, and he was
daily visited by Dr. Wickham, Dean of S. Paul's* to prepare himself for his
Dissolution. The Day of his Execution being come, he ascended a Scaffold on
Tower Hill, in a plain Black Grogram Suit, a falling Band, and a Black Hat
without a Band; Accompanied by Dr. Winnerf, and Dr. Wickham, and several
Noblemen and Gentlemen. Then he addressed himself to Prayers, and having done,
he stood upon his Legs, and leaning upon the two Deans, after a short and
private Conference with them, he turned to the Lords and spoke as follows.

I Thankfully acknowledge the great goodness of Almighty God, whose Divine
Majesty has bestowed upon me Honor, Riches, and other Endowments, which I have
misspent in a Vicious Life, and have justly deserved Death, as the Reward of my
Sins against God; but for the two Heinous Crimes for which I am now to Suffer,
I deny them upon my Death, and freely forgive all that have been any way
accessory to it; even as heartily as I desire Forgiveness at the Hands of God,
which I hope to obtain through his Infinite Goodness and Mercy, and the
assistance of your Prayers, which I humbly beg of your Lordships, and this
whole Assembly.

It has been Reported to my Disadvantage, that I have been unsettled in my
Religion, and therefore I have made a Confession of it to these two worthy
Doctors, and have Published it in Print under my Hand a Week since, and do now
again Renounce all the Errors and Superstitions Taught by the Church of Rome,
or any other Church; and declare my self a Member of the Church of England, and
steadfastly Believe all the Articles of that Church, as they are confirmed by
Authority of Parliament.

Having thus acquainted you with the Articles of my Faith, I must next
acknowledge the great Justice and Mercy of the King's Majesty. His Justice in
bringing me to a Trial, and his Mercy in appointing me to be Tried by such
Noble Peers, and in assigning me this kind of Death, rather than that
pronounced in my Sentence; but above all, for giving me so long a time to
repent in, and sending these two worthy Divines to assist me; for I hope, nay,
can speak it to my Comfort, that I have made such good use of these Favors,
that I am fully prepared to Die, and before you all give my hearty Thanks to
these two good Men, for the great pains they have taken in coming to me,
praying for me, and Preaching and Reading to me; and I desire your Lordships
will give my humble Thanks to the King for sending them to me, and for all the
rest of his Favors; for which I pray God to Bless His Majesty, the Queen, the
young Prince, the King and Queen of Bohemia, and all the Royal Family. And now
my Lords, and all you who are Spectators, I humbly request you that you would
remove your Eyes from me, and your Thoughts from what I am to suffer, and lift
up your Eyes, your Hands, and your Hearts, to Heaven in Prayer for me; and so I
take my last Farewell of your Lordships, and all the World.

After this, his Lordship betook himself to his private Prayers, and then
undrest, and prepared himself to receive the Fatal Stroke: Then taking leave
again of the Lords and Doctors, he prayed a while by himself, pulled his
Hankerchief over his Face, laid his Neck upon the Block, and having given the
Sign, the Executioner at one Blow, divided his Head from his Body.


FINIS.

