I Do appoint Benjamin Took to Print the TRIAL of Laurence Braddon and Hugh
Speak; and Order that no other Person presume to Print the same.

Geo. Jeffreys.

THE TRIAL OF LAVRENCE BRADDON AND HVGH SPEAK, Gent. Upon an INFORMATION OF
High-Misdemeanor, Subornation and spreading false Reports. Endeavoring thereby
to raise a Belief in His Majesty's Subjects, that the late Earl of ESSEX did
not Murder himself in the TOWER, contrary to what was found by the Coroners
Inquest. Before the Right Honorable Sir George Jeffreys, KNIGHT and BARONET,
Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of KING'S BENCH, and the rest of the
Reverend JUDGES of that Court, holden at Westminster, on Friday the 7th. of
February, 1683.

LONDON: Printed for Benjamin Took at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

THE TRIAL OF Laurence Braddon and Hugh Speak, Gent.
On Thursday the Seventh of February, Anno Dom. 1683. Annoque Reg. Caroli
Secundi xxxvi. A Trial was had at the Kings Bench Bar, in a Cause between our
Sovereign Lord the King, and Laurence Braddon and Hugh Speak, Gentlemen; upon
an Information exhibited against them the last Term, by his Majesty's Attorney
General, for an High Misdemeanor: and to which, they the same Term pleaded Not
Guilty, and the Trial proceeded in this manner.
Cl. of Cr. Crier, call the Defendants, Laurence Braddon and Hugh Speak.


Crier. Laurence Braddon and Hugh Speak, come forth or else this Inquest shall
be taken by your default.


Mr. Wallop. They appear.


Cl. of Cr. Gardez votrez Challenges. Swear Sir Hugh Middleton,


(which was done,) and there being no Challenges, the Twelve Gentlemen sworn to
try this Cause, were these. Sir Hugh Middleton, Jur. Thomas Harriott. Jur.
Thomas Earsby, Jur. Joshua Galliard, Jur. Richard Shoreditch, Jur. Charles
Good, Jur. Samuel Rouse, Jur. Hugh Squire, Jur. Nehemiah Arnold, Jur. John
Bifield, Jur. William Wait and Jur. James Supple. Jur.


Who being counted, Proclamation was made in usual form for Information.

Cl. of Cr. Gentlemen, you of the Jury hearken to the Record. His Majesty's
Attorney General in this Court has exhibited an Information against the
Defendants by the Names of Laurence Braddon of the Middle Temple, Gentleman,
and Hugh Speak of Lincolns Inn, Gentleman.

And the Information sets forth.

That whereas Arthur Earl of Essex, the 12 th of July, in the Thirty Fifth year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. was
committed to the Prison of our Lord the King, in the Tower of London, for
certain High-Treasons by him supposed to be committed. And the said Arthur Earl
of Essex being a Prisoner in the Tower of London aforesaid, for the
High Treason aforesaid, the 13 th. day of July, in the aforesaid Thirty Fifth
Year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King, that now is; not having
the fear of God before his eyes, but being moved and seduced by the Instigation
of the Devil, at the Tower of London, aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex
aforesaid, himself feloniously, and as a Felon of himself did kill and murder,
as by an Inquisition taken at the Tower of London aforesaid, in the County of
Middlesex aforesaid, the 14 th. day of July, in the year aforesaid, before
Edward Fernham Esquire, then Coroner of our Lord the King, of the Liberty of
the Tower of London, aforesaid, upon the view of the Body of the said Arthur
Earl of Essex; and now in this Court remaining of Record more plainly does
appear. They the said Laurence Braddon and Hugh Speak not being ignorant of the
Premises, but contriving, and maliciously and seditiously intending the
Government of our said Lord the King of this Kingdom of England, into Hatred,
Disgrace and Contempt to bring, the 15th. day of August, in the aforesaid
Thirty Fifth year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is,
and diverse other days and times as well before as after, at the Parish of S.
Clement Danes in the County of Middlesex, with force and arms, etc. falsely,
unlawfully, maliciously and seditiously did conspire and endeavor to make the
Subjects of our said Lord the King of this Kingdom of England, to believe that
the Inquisition aforesaid was unduely taken, and that the said Arthur Earl of
Essex by certain Persons unknown, in whose Custody he was, was Killed and
Murdered. And to perfect and bring to effect their malicious and seditious
Contrivances aforesaid; they the said Laurence Braddon and Hugh Speak at the
Parish of S. Clement Danes in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, the 15th. day
of August, in the Thirty Fifth year aforesaid, falsely, unlawfully, unjustly,
maliciously and seditiously did conspire to procure certain false Witnesses to
prove, That the said Arthur Earl of Essex, was not a Felon of himself, but that
the said Earl of Essex by the said Persons unknown was killed and murdered:
And to persuade other Subjects of our said Lord the King to believe this to be
true, they the said Laurence Braddon and Hugh Speak, falsely, maliciously and
seditiously, then and there in writing did declare and cause to be declared,
the said Laurence Braddon to be a Person that would prosecute the murder of
the said Earl of Essex; to the great Scandal and Contempt of the Government of
our Lord the King of his Kingdom of England, to the evil example of all other
in the like case offending, and against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the
King, his Crown and Dignity. To this Information the Defendants have severally
pleaded Not Guilty, and for their Trial have put themselves upon the Country;
and His Majesty's Attorney General likewise, which Country you are: Your Charge
is to enquire, whether the Defendants, or either of them, are Guilty of this
great Misdemeanour whereof they are Impeached, or Not Guilty? If you find them
or either of them Guilty, you are to say so; if you find them, or either of
them Not Guilty, you are to say so, and no more, and hear your Evidence.


Then Proclamation was made for Evidence.

Mr. Dolben. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen that are Sworn,
this is an Information preferred by Mr. Attorney General, against the
Defendants Laurence Braddon and Hugh Speak, and the Information does set forth,
That whereas Arthur late Earl of Essex the 12 th. of July last, was committed
to the Tower of London for certain Treasons supposed to have been by him done:
And the said Earl being so committed Prisoner to the Tower for Treason, not
having the fear of God before his eyes, feloniously and as a Felon, did kill
and murder himself, as by an Inquisition taken before the Coroner of the
Tower-Liberty may more fully appear, yet the Defendants Laurence Braddon and
Hugh Speak not being ignorant of the Premises, but designing to bring the
Government into Hatred and Contempt, the 15 th. day of August last, at the
Parish of S. Clement Danes in this County, with force and Arms falsely,
unlawfully, maliciously and seditiously did conspire together to make the Kings
Subjects believe, That the Inquisition aforesaid was unduly taken, and that the
said Earl of Essex did not murder himself, but was by certain Persons unknown,
in whose custody he was, murdered. And it further sets forth, that these
Defendants Laurence Braddon and Hugh Speak designing to disturb and disquiet
the minds of the Kings Subjects, and to spread false reports, did conspire to
procure certain false Witnesses to prove, that the said Earl of Essex was not a
Felon of himself, but was by some Persons unknown, killed and murdered: And to
persuade other Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the King, to believe the said
Report, they did falsely, maliciously, Unlawfully and Seditiously cause to be
declared in Writing, That the said Laurence Braddon was the Person that did
prosecute the said Earls Murder. And this was to the great Scandal of the
Government, to the evil Example of all Persons in like case offending, and
against the Peace of the King, his Crown and Dignity. To this the Defendants
have pleaded Not Guilty, if we prove it upon them, we make no question you will
find it.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of this Jury, Mr.
Speak and Mr. Braddon, these two Gentlemen, are accused of as High Conspiracy
as ever has or could well happen in our days, of throwing the Murder of a
Person that killed himself, upon the Government. And I must acquaint you, their
design was of an higher Nature than barely that; for this Gentleman, my Lord of
Essex was committed to the Tower for the late Plot, and being so committed,
when he had killed himself there, that was more than a thousand Witnesses to
open the eyes of the People, and confirm the belief of the Conspiracy: And one
would have thought, after that there had been an end of the design, that these
Protestant Gentlemen, as they call themselves, were carrying on; when the Earl
of Essex a Person of that Quality and Worth, should go to Murder himself upon
the sense of what he was Guilty of. So that the Design, Gentlemen, was to
stifle the Plot, and at the same time they must throw this ill thing that the
Earl had committed upon himself, upon the Government, that, Gentlemen, was the
main disgrace in order to stifle that great Evidence of the Plot. And Mr.
Braddon must of his own head, not being put on by any of the Friends of the
Earl of Essex, who were all very sensible the Earl had done this Fact,
committed this Murder upon himself; but I say, he out of a true Principle to
manage the Protestant Cause as they call it, but indeed it was the Plot, he
becomes the Prosecutor of this business, and you will find him by the proofs in
the Case, a man of many like Projects. For you will find him value himself upon
these Titles, That he is the Prosecutor of the Earl of Essex's Murder, and the
Inventor of the Protestant Flails, an Instrument, I suppose Gentlemen you have
all heard of.

Now Gentlemen, to make this appear to the World, Letters are sent into all
Parts of England of this Bruit and Report. He himself goes about to find
Evidence; for it was so great a truth, and there was such a plain proof that
the Earl of Essex had killed himself, that he must labor it to get Evidence.
And he goes about it accordingly, and at length he meets with a little Child of
Twelve years of Age, and he prepares for him all with his own handwriting, a
Deposition, which is a feigned Story all of it, and in every part of it will
appear to be false, and there he mightily solicits this young Boy to sign it.
He comes to his Fathers House, carries him in a Coach, forces him away, and
forces him to sign this Paper that he had thus prepared for him, all of his own
invention and writing; and with the like confidence as he appears here, (for so
he does appear with very great Confidence, as you may observe) he attests it
himself. And Gentlemen, we shall show you, that here up and down the Town he
makes it his common discourse, what he was in hand with, and makes his boast of
himself to be the Prosecutor of the Earl of Essex's Murder, and he had as good
a Confederate as himself, Mr. Speak, and he having an Interest in the Country,
whither the news must be sent all abroad, and Mr. Braddon must go to pick up
Evidence, I know not where a great way off of a Murder committed in the Tower.
We shall prove to you, he had Letters Missive and recommendatory from Mr. Speak
to a Gentleman with whom Mr. Braddon was to advise: for they looked upon it to
be as dangerous an Enterprise almost as the Plot it self, as indeed it was;
therefore they must be wary, and Mr. Braddon is advised to go by a wrong name,
so this Mr. Speak and Braddon were to carry on and make up this Tragi-Comedy,
for I can call it nothing else, for the ridiculousness as well as the
dangerousness of the Design. The report was to be that this Murder of the Earl
of Essex was committed by the Officers that attended my Lord, and to fall out
in time when his Majesty was in the Tower, as if the King himself had a hand in
it. We shall trace it in all the parts of it by several Witnesses, and hope you
will make them an Example, first by finding them Guilty, and the Court
afterward by a severe Punishment for such a villainous practice, to scandalize
the Government with the Murder of a Noble Peer. We shall begin with showing
you the Inquisition, or rather first with the Convictment of the Earl of Essex
for High Treason, because that is said in the Record by way of inducement.

Call Mr. Reynolds, (who was sworn) Have you the Warrant of Commitment of my
Lord of Essex?


Mr. Reynolds, Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Show it the Court. Let the Clerk read it.


Mr. Reynolds. This is the Commitment that was delivered the Lieutenant of the
Tower, together with my Lord of Essex.


Cl. of Cr. This is directed to Thomas Cheek, Esquire, Lieutenant of his
Majesty's Tower of London. Subscribed Leolin Jenkins, and dated --

Sir Leolin Jenkins, Knight, of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
and Principal Secretary of State.
THese are in his Majesty's Name to will and require you to receive into your
Custody the Person of Arthur Earl of Essex herewith sent you, being committed
for High Treason, in compassing the Death of the King (whom God preserve) and
conspiring to Levy War against His Majesty. And him the said Earl of Essex to
keep in safe custody, until he shall be delivered by due course of Law. And for
so doing this shall be your Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Whitehal the 10th. day of July, 1683. L.
Jenkins.
To Thomas Cheek, Esquire Lieutenant of His Majesty's Tower of London.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we will then read the Inquisition, that the Earl being
thus in the Tower, killed himself.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Show the Inquisition. Where is Mr. Farnham?


Mr. Farnham. Here I am. The Inquisition is returned here, and is upon Record.


Cl. of Cr. Here it is Number 11. He reads

London. ss. An Inquisition indented, taken at the Tower of London aforesaid,
in the County of Middlesex, the 14th. day of July, in the year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second by the Grace of God of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. the Thirty Fifth; before
Edward Farnham Esquire, Coroner of our said Lord the King, of the Liberty of
the Tower of London aforesaid, upon view of the Body of Arthur Earl of Essex,
then and there lying dead; by the Oaths of Samuel Colwel, Esquire, William
Fisher, Thomas Godsel, Esquire, Thomas Hunt, Nathaniel Mountney, Esquire Thomas
Potter, William How, Robert Burgoine, Eleazer Wickins, Thomas Hogsflesh, Henry
Cripps, Richard Rudder, William Knipes, John Hudson, John Kettlebeter, Lancelot
Coleson, Morgan Cowarn, Thomas Bryan, William Thackston, Richard Cliffe,
Zebediah Pritchard, William Baford and Theophilus Carter, good and lawful Men
of the Liberty of the Tower of London aforesaid, who being charged and Sworn to
enquire for our said Lord the King, when, by what means and how the said Arthur
Earl of Essex, came to his Death, upon their Oaths do say, that the said Arthur
Earl of Essex the 13th. day of July, in the Thirty Fifth year of the Reign of
our said Sovereign Lord the King aforesaid, at the Tower of London aforesaid,
in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, about the hour of Nine in the Forenoon of
the same day, not having the fear of God before his eyes, but being seduced and
moved by the Instigation of the Devil, of his Malice aforethought, at the Tower
of London aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, then and there being alone in his
Chamber, with a Razor of the value of one Shilling, voluntarily and feloniously
did cut his Throat, giving unto himself one Mortal Wound, cut from one Jugular
to the other, and by the Aspera Arteria, and the Windpipe to the Vertebres of
the Neck, both the Jugulars being thoroughly divided, of which said mortal
Wonud, the said Arthur Earl of Essex instantly died; And so the Jurors
aforesaid say upon their Oaths, that the said Arthur Earl of Essex, in manner
and form aforesaid, then and there, voluntarily and feloniously as a Felon of
himself, did kill and Murder himself, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord
the King, his Crown and Dignity. In Witness whereof as well I the Coroner
aforesaid, as the Jurors aforesaid, to this Inquisition have Interchangeably
put our Seals, the day and year abovesaid.


Mr. At. Genesis Call Mr. Evans and Mr. Edwards. After this, my Lord, we shall
show you, that Mr. Braddon went about the Town, and declared the Earl was
Murdered, and he was the Prosecutor. There is Mr. Evans, Swear him (which was
done.) Pray will you give an account to my Lord and the Jury, what you know of
Mr. Braddon's going about and declaring he was the Prosecutor of my Lord of
Essex's Murder?


Mr. Evans. My Lord, All that I know of this matter is this. About the 17th. of
July last --


L. C. J. When is the Inquisition?


Cl. of Cr. It is the 14th. of July.


L. C. J. Well go on.


M. Evans. The 17th. of July last, I was at the Custom-House Key, shipping of
some Lead, and the Person that brought me the Warrant, I told him I could not
Execute it without one of the Commissioners Officers; and I bid him go to Mr.
Edwards, who was the next Officer adjoining to the Key, and he went to his
House, and told him I was at the Waterside, and had a Warrant which I desired
him to be present while I Executed it, Mr. Braddon it seems, was then present
in the place with Mr. Edwards when this was told him, and hearing my Name, Mr.
Braddon came down with Mr. Edwards, and found me then at Smith's Coffee-House,
and Mr. Edwards told me, Mr. Braddon had been with him examining his Son in
relation to a matter of a Razour that was thrown out of my Lord of Essex's
window, and I presently replied, I desired they would not speak of any such
matter to me, for I had seen the Coroners Inquisition upon Oath, where it was
declared, the thing was so and so, and two Persons had Sworn what seemed to be
contrary to this; and therefore I desired they would forbear any such discourse
to me.


L. C. J. Who they?


Mr. Evans. Braddon and he were together.


L. C. J. Who, he? Man.


Mr. Evans. Mr. Edwards. And withal I made my application to Mr. Braddon, and I
desired him he would not meddle with such a matter, for I thought it might be
prejudicial to him, and Mr. Edwards too. Mr. Braddon made me no answer, but
went directly out of the Room.


L. C. J. What do you mean by so and so, and a Razour thrown out of a window?
We do not understand your So, and So.


Mr. Evans. Relating to a matter of a Razour.


L. C. J. Prithee, we don't know what that matter of a Razour is.


Mr. Evans. A Razour that was said to be thrown out of my Lord of Essex's
Window.


L. C. J. Tell us what the Story was, man.


Mr. Evans. Mr. Edwards told me that Mr. Braddon was with him to examine his Son
relating to a matter of throwing a Razour out of my Lord of Essex's Window:
This is that he said to the best of my remembrance.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was Braddon present there?


Mr. Evans. Yes, Mr. Braddon and Mr. Edwards were both present.


L. C. J. Well, what was the discourse between you? Tell us plainly.


Mr. Evans. Says Mr. Edwards to me, Mr. Braddon has been to examine my Son about
such a matter, so I desired he would not discourse any thing of that matter to
me, and I told him, I advise you not to proceed, for I told him it would be
prejudicial both to him and Mr. Edwards too.


L. C. J. What is meant by this matter? He examined my Son about a matter, and
I desired him he would not discourse of this matter, What is all that matter?


Mr. Just. Holloway. What did you apprehend by it?


Mr. Evans. I apprehended that Mr. Braddon had been to examine Mr. Edwards's Son
about such a matter.


L. C. J. What matter man?


Mr. Evans. His dispersing of any such Report.


L. C. J. What Report?


Mr. Evans. A Report of throwing a Razour out of my Lord of Essex's window.


L. C. J. Here is a Razour thrown out of a window, and a matter of I know not
what.


Mr. Just. Withins. Suppose a man should throw a Razour out of a window, what
signifies that?


L. C. J. Where had he heard of that matter?


Mr. Evans. This is all I heard, my Lord, I am upon my Oath.


L. C. J. But I wish thou would let us know, what it is thou did hear.


Mr. Jones. Was there no talk of a bloody Razour?


Mr. Evans. No, not a word of it.


L. C. J. How came you to be frighted then, and to be unwilling to hear of that
matter, and to tell him, you thought it might be prejudicial to him and Mr.
Edwards?


Mr. Evans. I told him I had seen the Coroners Inquest, where it was proved,
that the Razour lay in such a place; therefore I desired they would not speak
to me of any such matter, and I desired Mr. Braddon not to proceed in it, for
you may do your self, and Mr. Edwards too, some prejudice.


Mr. At. Genesis Look you, Mr. Evans, what did you understand by the throwing the
Razour out of the window, and giving him caution not to proceed? The Razour
might be found there, what was the meaning of it?


Mr. Evans. May it please your Lordship, There was a Report at the
Custom-House, that very morning the Earl of Essex cut his Throat, that there
was a Razour thrown out of the window.


Mr. Jones. You did advise Braddon, you say, not to proceed in it.


Mr. Evans. Yes.


Mr. Jones. How came you to advise him so?


Mr. Evans. Because it might be prejudicial to him, and Mr. Edwards too.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there no talk between Mr. Edwards, Mr. Braddon and you, that
Mr. Braddon would be a Prosecutor of the Murder of the Earl of Essex, upon
your Oath?


Mr. Evans. Not one word or Syllable. For Mr. Braddon spoke not one word, good
or bad: I gave an account to Secretary Jenkins, of every word that passed.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not you advise him not to prosecute the business?


Mr. Evans. I did advise him not to disperse such a Report.


L. C. J. What Report?


Mr. Evans. Of a Razour being thrown out of my Lord of Essex's window.


Mr. At. Genesis Why, suppose there had been a Razour thrown out of the window,
what then?


Mr. Evans. Then it was contrary to the Information and Evidence given before
the Coroner.


L. C. J. Why so? why might it not be thrown out after it was found in the
place where the Inquisition says? Thou art a wonderful cautelous man, Where is
the danger of the Report, of a Razour being thrown out of a window? there must
be something more in it, if we could but get it out of him.


Mr. Evans. Will your Lordship be pleased to hear me.


L. C. J. Ay, I do hear thee, but I do not understand thee.


Mr. Evans. May it please your Lordship, I will read the words verbatim that I
gave to the Secretary.


L. C. J. Why, I believe you can read, and I make no doubt you can write too,
or you are not fit to be a Custom House Officer.


Mr. Evans. I put in this Paper to the Secretary, and will repeat what I said
then, as near as I can upon my Oath.


L. C. J. I care not a farthing what you delivered to the Secretary, tell us
what thou have to say plainly.


Mr. Evans. May it please your Lordship, I will read it what it is.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You may look upon your Paper to refresh your memory, but you
must not read it here.


Mr. Evans. If it please you, I will tell you the reason and occasion I had to
go to the Secretary.


L. C. J. I know not what occasion thou had to go to the Secretary, nor do I
care what thou did when thou came there, it may be thou made three Legs,
it may be never a one; what is that to us? what can thou say to the matter
here before us?


Mr. Evans. That is all I can say my Lord. It was an Accident that they came
into my company. And I tell you the manner and the occasion. That Person that
brought me the Warrant, saying to Mr. Edwards that I was below, Mr. Braddon
hearing my name named, comes down with Mr. Edwards, for he had told Mr. Edwards
I was related to him, and they both came to the Coffee-House, and there they
began to discourse about this matter.


Mr. Just. Withins. Who began to discourse?


Mr. Evans. Mr. Edwards.


L. C. J. Well, what was it he said to thee?


Mr. Evans. Mr. Edwards began thus. Says he, Mr. Evans, this Gentleman has been
at my House to examine my Son concerning a Report that is spread abroad
concerning a Razour that was thrown out of the Window of the Earl of Essex's
Lodgings, that morning he cut his Throat. I hearing of that, said I, Gentlemen,
I have read the Coroners Inquest that is in Print, and it is otherwise declared
there: And therefore let there be no discourse of any such matter, for I
believe no such thing. And said I, to that Gentleman, Mr. Braddon, pray forbear
meddling in any such thing, for Mr. Edwards is a poor man, and has diverse
Children, he may be ruined, and you likewise may be ruined your self, if you
proceed any further in it.


Mr. At. Genesis We shall Interpret this matter by our other Witnesses.


L. C. J. Ay, so you had need, for there is nothing to be made of this Fellows
Evidence.


Mr. North. [Lifting up his hands in an unusual manner;] Pray, by the Oath you
have taken, when you gave that advice, did Mr. Braddon make you no answer?


Mr. Evans. No, none at all.


Mr. Braddon, Mr. Evans, pray will you answer one thing?


L. C. J. Pray Sir, let us have no elevation of hands. Your confidence does not
so well become you in a Court of Justice, this is not a Cause wherein you need
use so much confidence.


Mr. Braddon. Sir, pray answer, did not I --


L. C. J. What is it you would ask him?


Mr. Braddon. My Lord, I desire he may be asked, Whether I, with a Brother of
his, did not come to his Country House, on the Monday immediately after my Lord
of Essex's death, and whether at his Table there was not a Report then of a
Razour being seen to be thrown out of my Lord of Essex's window?


L.C.J. Pray ask by your Council, they are most proper to ask questions for
you. Tell them what you would have asked, and do'nt make long Stories your self.


Mr. Wallop. Were you not in company with Mr. Braddon, the Monday after my Lord
of Essex's death?


Mr. Freke. What was the Report Sir at your Table, upon the Monday next after
my Lord of Essex's death?


Mr. Evans. My Lord, if your Lordship please --


L. C. J. Pray Sir, make a short and plain Answer to what questions are asked
you, and let us have none of your Circumlocutions, and your discourses of the
matter, and the matter; but let us understand what you say.


Mr. Evans. I will my Lord.


L. C. J. What is your question?


Mr. Braddon. Whether I was not upon the Monday after the Earl of Essex's
death, at his Table, where there was a discourse of a Report, that a Razour was
thrown out of the window, before Murder was cried out, and concerning a Boy,
which went to take it up.


L. C. J. What a Story is here, pray ask him a fair and a short question, if he
can remember what was said at his House? We are got quite to the Custom-House
and the Coffee-House again, and I know not where.


Mr. Freke. What discourse was there at your Table, Sir, the immediate Monday
after the Earl of Essex's death, concerning a Razour thrown out of a window?


Mr. Evans. My Lord, this to the best of my remembrance, is what I have to say,
and remember of the thing, that a Gentleman being with him --


L. C. J. Who?


Mr. Evans. Mr. Braddon.


Mr. Wallop. Where was this?


Mr. Evans. In the Country.


Mr. Wallop. Where, in what Country?


Mr. Evans. In Essex.


Mr. Wallop. What was the place's name?


Mr. Evans. At Wansted, my Lord: and being there, and he plucking out a paper.


L. C. J. He, who?


Mr. Evans. A Brother of mine, that that Gentleman came down with to see me.


L. C. J. What is his name?


Mr. Evans. His name is Mr. William Hatsell.


L. C. J. With whom did he come?


Mr. Evans. With this Person.


L. C. J. With this Person, who is this Person?


Mr. Evans. Mr. Braddon.


L. C. J. Why can thou not name him, without this wire-drawing? Thou art a
most exact Custom-House Officer, I Will warrant thee, thou can not make a plain
answer to a plain question.


Mr. Evans. My Lord, I beg your pardon, I do not know the methods of Court.


L.C.J. Prithe, I care not for thy methods, nor thy matter, but deal plainly
with us.


Mr. Evans. My Brother Mr. Hatsell, came down along with Mr. Braddon to my
House at Wansted in Essex, on the Monday after my Lord of Essex's death, and
coming down, my Brother Mr. Hatsell, pulled out the Coroners Inquest upon Oath
that was printed, and showing of it to me, I read it, and as soon as ever I had
read it, said I, Mr. Edwards, that was at the Custom-House that very morning
when the E. of Essex's Throat was cut, did declare to me upon the Custom-House
Key, That his Son did declare, that the Razour was thrown out of the window,
which seems to contradict this Paper, that says, it was found lying by him.


Mr. Freke. Was this before Mr. Braddon was with Mr. Edwards?


Mr. Evans. I cannot tell that.


Mr. Freke. Was it before Mr. Braddon and Mr. Edwards came to you to the
Coffee-house?


Mr. Evans. Yes, I believe it was.


Mr. At. Genesis You say Mr. Braddon came with Mr. Hatsel to your House at
Wantstead?


Mr. Evans. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was the Person that told this Story?


Mr. Evans. He brought down the printed Paper with him, and upon plucking out
that Paper and reading of it, the Story was told.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray who was the Person that told him it was so reported at the
Custom-house?


Mr. Evans. I made that Answer my self immediately upon reading the Paper; for
I observed what the Coroners Inquest had returned, and upon that I made this
Observation, That it seemed to contradict what was declared at the Custom-house
that morning my Lord of Essex cut his Throat.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray who declared there that the Razor was thrown out of the
Window?


Mr. Evans. It was Mr. Edwards told me.


L. Chapter Just. Why consider with your self now, You say first of all Edwards and
Braddon came to me to the Coffee-house.


Mr. Evans. That was at another day.


L. Chapter Just. I am sure you swore so at first.


Mr. Evans. With your Lordships Favor --


L. Chapter Just. And with your Favor too Sir. Pray will you hear me, I have heard
you a great while I am sure to no purpose. But consider with your self, and
pray be pleased to reconcile what you say now with what you said at first if
you can. You say first of all Edwards and Braddon came to me to the
Custom-house, and found me out at the Coffee-house, and that Edwards should
say, Some body had been with his Son, in order to examine him about a Razor
that was thrown out of my Lord of Essex's Window, and that you immediately
cried out, Have a care of that, for that contradicts the Inquisition that I
have seen in Print, which declares as though the Razor was found in the Room.
And after that you say, It was that you saw the Inquisition when Hatsel came
down with Braddon, and you told him of the Report at the Custom-house* How came
you if you had not seen the Inquisition till then, to give out such words at
the Custom-house, Have a care of meddling with that, because that contradicts
the Inquisition?


Mr. Evans. My Lord, This was several days before that?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, my Lord, this Discourse at Wantstead was before that at the
Custom-house.


Mr. Wallop. This that he now speaks of is an Answer to Mr. Braddon's Question,
which was about a Discourse that passed before this other at the Custom-house.
This that he speaks of the Discourse at a Coffee-house was afterward, but
indeed he first spoke of it; but these were two distinct matters at several
times. This last of the Custom-house was, when he had made the Examination of
the Boy, as that Witness says.


L. Chapter Just. Therefore I think it was fit to explain it, for it looked very
inconsistent before, what thou said at first, and what thou say now; but if
thou tellest me thy Essex matter was before thy Coffee-house matter, it is
well, otherwise the matter I assure you looked very ill.


Mr. Evans. This is the truth, my Lord, and I can tell no more.


Mr. At. Genesis Take the Times, my Lord, and you will see he does speak very
notably. The 13 th. of July my Lord of Essex murdered himself, the 14 th. of
July the Inquisition was taken before the Coroner, pray what was the day that
Hatsel and this Gentleman came down to you to Essex?


Mr. Evans. I cannot tell that, Sir, truly; but it was before this matter of the
Examination of the Boy.


L. Chapter Just. But pray let me ask you one Question, If your matter about the
Inquisition in the Country was before the matter of your cautious Discourse at
the Custom-house, how came you to tell them, I heard this Report of a Razor
thrown out of the Window, that morning the Earl of Essex cut his own Throat?


Mr. Evans. Mr. Edwards reported this same thing that very same morning to me
and several others at the Custom-house-Key.


L. Chapter Just. Why did you not tell us this before?


Mr. Evans. I beg your pardon, my Lord, I do not understand the methods of the
Court.


Mr. Wallop. Mr. Hatsel gave the occasion by pulling out the Inquisition.


L. Chapter Just. Pray, Sir, make your Observations anon, let the King's Council go
on with their Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis What Discourse had Mr. Braddon with you then at that time when
Hatsel came down with him to your House you say, and pulling out the
Inquisition you read it, and made Answer, You heard at Custom-house-Key such a
Report that very morning the Earl murdered himself.


Mr. Evans. Mr. Braddon was walking up and down the Room, I did not speak it to
him, but I spoke it to Mr. Hatsel, but I believe Braddon overheard and took
notice of it.


Mr. Just. Withins. Did he concern himself about it?


Mr. Evans. No, not much, I did not hear him say any thing, but he walked up
and down the Room.


L. Chapter Just. Now after all this Discourse of the matter, for ought I can
understand, the matter is but this: He says, Edwards before the meetings either
at his House in Essex, or at the Coffee-house by the Custom-house, reported to
him, as though the Earl of Essex had not murdered himself, but some body else had
done it for him. And this was reported at the Custom-house that morning the
Earl of Essex cut his own Throat* and he hearing this Report at the Custom
house at that time, afterward comes Braddon and Hatsel to his House into
Essex, and after Hatsel had showed him the Paper of the Inquisition in Print,
he said, I heard some Discourse from Mr. Edwards at the Custom-house of a quite
other nature, and then he says, Braddon and Edwards came to the Coffee-house,
and there it was he desired them not to talk of that matter, for, said he, that
contradicts the Inquisition I saw before. This is the substance of what he said.


Mr. At. Genesis And hereby it does appear, that Braddon, and Evans, and Edwards,
and Hatsel, are all of a Gang.


L. Chapter Just. Have you the Information he gave in to the Secretary, Mr. At.
Genesis That that was given before the Council?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, it is much the same with what he has said now.


Mr. Evans. Yes, my Lord, it is verbatim, as I have declared now.


Mr. At. Genesis Only this other part of Hatsel and the meeting in Essex was
spoken of since, that was not declared before.


Mr. Evans. No, my Lord, that I did not speak of, because I was not examined
about it.


Mr. At. Genesis That was part of the Secret.


Mr. Evans. No, it was common Discourse with me. And I did not think any thing
of it, what Mr. Edwards said at the Custom-house, was spoken to a great many
others as well as me, and the people seemed to be surprised with an account of
the thing at the first news of my Lord of Essex's death. And if I had thought
it material I could have brought a great manny that were by then; but Mr.
Edwards is here brought himself, I suppose he will not deny it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Look you, Sir, you say that very morning my Lord of Essex killed
himself, Mr. Edwards discoursed, and made this Report to you at the
Custom-house, pray tell what the discourse was? what he said to you? and then
tell us what time of day it was?


Mr. Evans. To the best of my remembrance it was about eleven a Clock; there
were several persons standing together, among the rest Captain Goodland, and
some of the Searchers, and Mr. Edwards was there, and said he, I am informed
from home, That my Boy has been at home, and given an account to my Wife, that
being in the Tower, he saw a hand throw a Razor out of a Window, and he named
my Lord of Essex's Window; and this Mr. Edwards did not only tell me, but to a
whole Coffee-house of people, this matter of fact.


Mr. Just. Holloway. Did not Mr. Edwards tell you, That some body had been
examining his Boy about that Report?


Mr. Evans. That was the second time, when Mr. Braddon and Mr. Edwards came
together.


Mr. Just. Holloway. Who was it had been examining his Boy did he say?


Mr. Evans. Mr. Braddon he said had been to examine his Son.


Mr. Just. Holloway. That was after the discourse at Essex that Braddon came to
examine his Son concerning the Razor.


Mr. Wallop. Yes, it was after the discourse at Essex, where Hatsel plucking
out the Paper Evans told Mr. Braddon first of this Razor.


L. Chapter Just. Well, make your defense by and by Mr. Wallop: Do not make your
Remarks now.


Mr. At. Genesis Come, Mr. Edwards. Crier swear him


(which was done)

L. Chapter Just. What do you ask him Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Edwards, Pray will you give the Court an account of this
business; for I don't know whether you heard what that Gentleman that went out
last said, he says you raised this Story, Pray give an account what you know of
it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray tell what you know of Mr. Braddon's coming to your Son, and
what discourse he or you had about the murder of the Earl of Essex.


Mr. Edwards. The Report that Mr. Braddon came to enquire after, was with us
some three days before; It was in our Family three days before, and upon the
17. of July. -- --


L. Chapter Just. What was the Report, Mr. Edwards, before Mr. Braddon came to you?


Mr. Edwards. The Report I have already declared before the Council.


L. Chapter Just. But you must tell us too, what it was.


Mr. Edwards. The Report of the Boy the 13. of July about 10 a Clock, as I was
informed by my Family, and by the Boy afterward by word of mouth, was this, He
comes in about 10 a Clock, says he, I have been at the Tower (to one of his
Sisters,) and have seen his Majesty and the Duke of York, and the Earl of Essex
has cut his throat, and I see an hand throw a Razor out of the Window, and one
came out of the house, a Maid, or a Woman in a white Hood and a Stuff Coat and
took it up, and went in again, and then I heard a noise as of murder cried out.
This was the Boys Report, and more than as his Report I cannot speak to it.


L. Chapter Just. This was your Son, was it not?


Mr. Edwards. Yes, the younger of them. The two Boys were that morning going to
Merchant-Taylors School together as they used to do, and by the way hearing the
King was in the Tower, this younger Boy that was well acquainted with the
Tower, gave his elder Brother the slip and went into the Tower, and rambled
about from place to place.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not you examine him?


Mr. Edwards. Ay, I did examine him.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not you find that he denied it again?


Mr. Edwards. No, I did examine him, and I found no denial of any thing at all
that he had reported till Mr. Braddon came to make enquiry. As Soon as he came
to make the enquiry, and I understood what Mr. Braddon's business was, I begged
of him that he would not insist upon it by no means; I begged of him as if I
had begged for my life, but he was so zealous in the business, that nothing
would satisfy him. And after I had told Mr. Braddon that which I could not
deny, which was the Boys Report, I left him and went down to the Custom-house,
and some of my Family discoursed the Boy at that rate that he began to deny it,
and in less than half an hours time recollected himself and began to own it
again, and so the Boy was off and on till the time he was before the Council;
and to this day he seems to stand in the denial, whether he will do it now or
no I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you acquaint Mr. Braddon, That you had found this Boy to be
a lying Boy, and detected him in Lies several times?


Mr. Edwards. May it please you Sir, I acquainted him with thus much: Said I,
Mr. Braddon, As I have dealt ingenuously with you, to let you know what the
Boy's Report was, so I must likewise tell you, that I cannot nor will undertake
to assert the truth of it, and presently upon that my Daughters told me, the
Boy had many times excused his playing Truant by false Stories.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you acquaint Mr. Braddon, that your Boy was a lying Boy at
that time?


Mr. Edwards. I think I did not at that instant of time.


L. Chapter Just. How old is this Boy you talk of?


Mr. Edwards. About 13 years of Age, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of Mr. Braddon's forcing your Boy to sign any
thing that he had prepared after this?


Mr. Sol. Genesis When you told him, your Boy had denied it, what did he say? was
he pleased and satisfied?


Mr. Edwards. He was not told it by me, but some of my Family.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How did he behave himself?


Mr. Edwards. At the same time they told him he denied it, at the same time
they told him he owned it again.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How did Mr. Braddon behave himself?


Mr. Edwards. Like a civil Gentleman. I saw nothing else by him, but that he
was very zealous in the Business, that is the truth of it, nothing could
persuade him to desist.


Mr. Just. Holloway. Pray did you ask Mr. Braddon, or did he tell you, what was
the reason that he was so inquisitive about this Razor, and the Report of the
Boy?


Mr. Edwards, As to that he told me, he would let me know the reason of it,
which was out of conscience.


Mr. Jones. Did not Mr. Braddon carry your Son before several Justices of Peace?


Mr. Edwards. Before none as I know of, not one truly to my knowledge.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you understand he had taken your Boy from your House in a
Coach?


Mr. Edwards. Never till he carried him into his Majesty's presence before the
Council, and I knew not that till the Boy came home.


Mr. Thompson. Mr. Attorney, Have you done with him? May I ask him a Question?


Mr. At. Genesis Ay, ask him what you will.


Mr. Thompson. If I understand you right Sir, this Report of the Boys was that
morning that the Earl of Essex was murdered --


L. Chapter Just. Was murdered, murdered himself man.


Mr. Thompson. My Lord, I mean the day of his death. Now I would ask you Sir,
when that was?


Mr. Edwards. The Boy's Report was this, Sir --


Mr. Thompson. I ask you not what his Report was, but when? what day it was?


Mr. Edwards. The 13 th. of July. That day the Earl of Essex cut his Throat.


Mr. Thompson. How many days after that was it when Mr. Braddon came to you?


Mr. Edwards. It was not till the 17 th. of July.


Mr. Thompson. Had you discoursed of the Report of your Boy at the
Custom-house, or any where else, that same day he came to you?


Mr. Edwards. I cannot say that.


Mr. Thompson. Had you discoursed it before Mr. Braddon spoke to you upon your
Oath?


Mr. Edwards. Yes, I believe I had.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Had you discoursed it before your Boy told you?


Mr. Edwards. I should then indeed have been the Contriver of the Story.


Mr. At. Genesis So it is like enough you were.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Had you discoursed it to any body before you went home to your
own House upon your Oath Sir?


Mr. Edwards. Upon my Oath then I discoursed nothing of that nature, not a
tittle of it, nor knew nothing of it, till I had it from my own Family.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you not discourse of it before you went home?


Mr. Edwards. No, when I came home they told me of it.


L. Chapter Just. I ask you again Sir, Did not you tell it before you came home?


Mr. Edwards. About 10. a Clock, I having heard the News of the Earl of Essex's
cutting his Throat, at the Custom-house, I stepped home, being very near to my
own House, and as soon as I came in at the Door, the Family began to give me an
account what News the Boy brought in.


L. Chapter Just. That was the first time you heard of it?


Mr. Edwards. Yes, that was the first time I heard of it.


L. Chapter Just. And did not you discourse of it till after that?


Mr. Edwards. No.


L. Chapter Just. Call Mr. Evans. Let him come in again then.


Mr. At. Genesis Let Mr. Evans come in again.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Evans, I would ask you this Question, There was three times
that you say, I think, that you had discourse with Edwards about the Matter, as
you call it, once at Essex, and twice at the Custom-house?


Mr. Sol. Genesis No, not in Essex, it was Hatsel and Braddon, my Lord, that came
to him there, Edwards was not there.


L. Chapter Just. When you first had a Discourse with Edwards about this Matter,
what was it that Edwards did say to you?


Mr. Evans. Being upon Custom-house-Key, and Captain Goodland and several
others standing upon the Key, that very morning my Lord of Essex's Throat was
cut, about 11. a Clock Mr. Edwards came to us, being standing upon the Key, and
told us, That he was informed his Boy had been at the Tower, and came home and
told his Mother, He saw a Hand throw a Razor out of a Window, and that he went
to take it up, and a Maid or a Woman came and took it up, and went in again.


L. Chapter Just. Evans, did he tell you this, as if he had been at home?


Mr. Evans. No, I think it was that he had it from home by some Hand or other.


Mr. Edwards. I was at home.


Mr. Evans. My Lord, at two a Clock in the afternoon, when he came again to the
Custom-house, he did tell us, he had been at home, and his Boy had told him the
same Story.


L. Chapter Just. But when he told you before he had dined, did he say, He had been
at home?


Mr. Edwards. My Family can testify I was at home between 10. and 11. a Clock.


Mr. Evans. To the best of my remembrance he told me he heard so from home.


L. Chapter Just. Before he went home, you say, he told you of this, and that was
10. a Clock in the morning, and about 2. of the Clock in the afternoon, he
said, he had been at home, and it was true.


Mr. Evans. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Edwards. My Lord, I was at home.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Edwards, did you tell him so, or did you not?


Mr. Edwards. It is like I might say so about 10. a Clock, but not before I had
received the Report at home.


Mr. Evans. I understood it so, my Lord, That he had heard from home.


L. Chapter Just. I ask you this upon your Oath, mind the Question, and answer me
plainly, Did you speak to him, that you had such a Report from home, or did you
not?


Mr. Edwards. When I told it him, I had it from home, for I brought it from
home.


L. Chapter Just. Nay, did you tell him you had such a Report from home at 10 a
Clock or no?


Mr. Edwards. I told him that I had met with such a Report.


L. Chapter Just. From whom?


Mr. Edwards. From my Family at home, for the Boy came not to me to tell it^


L. Chapter Just. Then did you see Mr. Evans about 2 a Clock that afternoon?


Mr. Edwards. It Is probably I did.


L. Chapter Just. Did you, or did you not?


Mr. Edwards. Yes, I believe I might. I beseech your Lordship give me leave to
speak. Mr. Evans and I am conversant forenoon and afternoon every day, we have
Business together.


Mr. Evans. We have Business, my Lord, about shipping off Goods.


Mr. Edwards. But, my Lord, if you please, I will tell you, that is the
occasion of our being together.


L. Chapter Just. Answer me my Question, Did you or did you not tell him so?


Mr. Edwards. I did not acquaint him with it before I had been at home, and
received it from my own Family.


L. Chapter Just. Look you Sir, Don't you go about to evade the Question, nor
trifle with the Court, you must answer me my Question directly and upon your
Oath, Did you tell him you had notice from home of such a Report, or no?


Mr. Edwards. I did not receive notice from home, but I brought it from home.


L. Chapter Just. Did you tell him you had it from home?


Mr. Edwards. I told him I had it from my Family, who told me the Boy had made
such a Report.


L. Chapter Just. Did you tell him you had it from your Boy, or received notice
from home about it?


Mr. Edwards. I did not tell him any thing before I had been at home.


L. Chapter Just. Well then answer me this question. Did you tell him in the
afternoon at two a Clock, Now I have been at home and examined my Boy, and find
it so as I told you?


Mr. Edwards. I examined my Boy at Dinner, and I found the Boy agreed with the
Report of my Daughter, and confirmed it.


L. Chapter Just. I ask you what you told Mr. Evans, not what your Boy or your
Daughter told you.


Mr. Edwards. It is probable I might tell Mr. Evans the same story after dinner
at Two a Clock, that I did before.


L. Chapter Just. Now tell us the passage again, Mr. Evans, as you heard it.


Mr. Evans. To the best of my remembrance at two a Clock in the Afternoon Mr.
Edwards came and told us he had examined the Boy, and says he, the Boy has
confirmed all that I told you.


L. Chapter Just. But before that in the Morning what did he say?


Mr. Evans. I cannot say exactly the time, but I think it was about 10 a Clock.
There were four or five more besides my self standing at Custom-house Key, and
Mr. Edwards came to us and told us, says he; I am informed from home, as I
understood it, not that he had been at home, but that he heard it from home,
that his Boy being at the Tower had seen an hand throw a Razor out of a Window.


L. Chapter Just. What said he at two of the Clock?


Mr. Evans. He said he had examined his Boy, and he said the same thing, that
he had told us he had heard in the morning.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord we are now but upon the Entrance of our Evidence, to
show upon what slender grounds, how slight a foundation there was for this
Gentleman to undertake this Prosecution.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Mr. Edwards, pray let me ask you a question, Did Mr. Braddon
tender any Paper to your Son to sign?


Mr. Edwards. I was informed he did do it afterward, but I saw him not do any
such thing.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you never say that Mr. Braddon had tendered a Paper to your
Son to sign?


Mr. Edwards. I do not believe I ever did say so, I do not remember any such
thing.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray recollect your memory and tell us, whether you did, or did
not.


Mr. Edwards. I thank God Sir that he has given me my memory and my
understanding, I bless him for it.


Mr. At. Genesis But it were well if thou had any honesty too.


Mr. Edwards. And honesty too Sir: I have not lived these 39 years at the
Custom-house without honesty. I never had my honesty questioned to this day. I
am sure no body can tax me with dishonesty.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray Mr. Edwards let your anger alone for a while, and answer
the question that I shall ask you: Did your Son refuse to sign that Paper?


Mr. Edwards. He did sign it at last.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did he refuse to sign it?


Mr. Edwards. I, do not know whether he refused it or no.


Mr. Just. Withins. Did you hear that your Son refused it?


Mr. Edwards. I did hear that he had signed it.


Mr. Just. Withins. But did you hear that he refused to sign it?


Mr. Edwards. The Boy did not tell me he had refused to sign it. I did not hear
him refuse it.


L. Chapter Just. Thou do prevaricate very strangely, I must tell thee that
notwithstanding thy reputation of 39. years of honesty: Prithee answer plainly,
Did you hear at any time, that your Son had refused to sign it?


Mr. Edwards. No, my Lord, I did not to the best of my remembrance.


L. Chapter Just. That is a plain answer man. But thou do so shuffle up and down,
one cannot tell what to make of what thou say.


Mr. Thompson. Sir I desire to ask you one question, Whether ever Mr. Braddon
and you had any former acquaintance?


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray stay Sir, and if you please, spare your Question a little,
for we have not yet done with Mr. Edwards. Mr. Edwards, pray swer me, Did Mr.
Braddon ever tell you, that he had other Informations to confirm this Report of
your Son from others?


Mr. Edwards. Truly I do not remember he said any such thing.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you ever say he told you so? Consider of it, and remember
your former Examination.


Mr. Edwards. It Is like since he may have said so, but not at his first coming.


Mr. Sol. Genesis At his first coming did your Son sign his Paper then?


Mr. Edwards. No, he did not, as I am informed, I saw it not.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But afterward you say Mr. Braddon did tell you, He had other
Evidence to confirm it.


Mr. Edwards. It may be he might, I cannot say it positively.


Mr. At. Genesis You say he did not sign the Paper at his first coming?


Mr. Edwards. No, I am informed he did not.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How do you know he did sign it at last?


Mr. Edwards. My Wife and Daughters information.


L. Chapter Just. But how then can you say, that you never heard he did refuse it?


Mr. Edwards. My Lord, he did not tender a Paper to him to sign till he had
been 2. or 3. times there, as I have heard, it was not tendered the first time
he came.


L. Chapter Just. I wonder how thou have escaped 39. years with such a Reputation.


Mr. Edwards. My Lord, I never was thought otherwise, nor I hope never gave any
occasion for such a Thought.


L. Chapter Just. I Will assure thee, I do not nor can take thee for one.


Mr. Edwards. I hope I have done nothing to make your Lordship think the
contrary.


L. Chapter Just. Yes, thou have. Thou did nothing but shuffle up and down, thou
art to consider thou art upon thy Oath, and must answer Questions plainly.


Mr. Edwards. My Lord, I do answer as truly as I can.


Mr. At. Genesis Hark you then, Mr. Edwards, answer me.


L. Chapter Just. Speak the truth, and nothing but the truth, that is all that is
required of thee; no Court of Justice ought to be afraid to hear truth. Let
truth come out of Gods Name.


Mr. At. Genesis Did Mr. Braddon ever tell you, That he had other Evidence
besides your Son?


Mr. Edwards. I do not remember he said any such thing at his first coming.


L. Chapter Just. How thou do shuffle again. Answer plainly.


Mr. At. Genesis I ask you, whether ever he did say it?


Mr. Edwards. Yes, he did say so afterward.


Mr. Sol. Genesis I must ask you one Question more, (for I see it is very difficult
to get it out of you) Pray did he tell you, that he had other Evidence besides
your Son, before he signed the Paper or after?


Mr. Edwards. It was before, as I take it. I speak to the best of my knowledge,
my Lord, I can say no more.


L. Chapter Just. If thou have a mind to continue the Reputation thou have got, as
thou say, the way is to answer Questions, and speak the truth plainly, let it
concern whom it will.


Mr. Edwards. I labor to do it, my Lord, to the best of my Understanding and
Capacity.


L. Chapter Just. I would not have thee say a tittle more than the truth, but let
the truth come out.


Mr. Freke. Now Sir, I would ask you, if they have done with you, Did you ever
know Mr. Braddon before the 17 th. of July? Or did you ever see him before?


Mr. Edwards. No, I never had any knowledge of him, nor ever heard a word of
him.


Mr. Wallop. Mr. Edwards. The Question was asked of you, Whether Mr. Braddon
did say, There was other Evidence besides your Son; pray when was that?


Mr. Edwards. He did not at the first time, but afterward he did.


Mr. Wallop. That was a good while after, he had been with the Boy first.


L. Chapter Just. Make your Observation by and by Mr. Wallop. This is not a time
for them.


Mr. At. Genesis Then where is Edwards the Boy?


(who was brought forthwith into Court.)

Mr. Edwards. I charge you in the presence of Almighty God speak truth Child.


Mr. Sol. Genesis And so should you too.


Mr. Edwards. Be sure to say nothing but the truth.


L. Chapter Just. And Child turn about and say, Father, be sure you say nothing but
the truth.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, This is the Boy, he is very little and very young, will
your Lordship have him sworn? What Age are you of?


William Edwards. I am 13 my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know what an Oath is?


Will. Edwards. No.


L. Chapter Just. Suppose you should tell a Lie, do you know who is the Father of
Liars?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Who is it?


Will. Edwards. The Devil.


L. Chapter Just. And if you should tell a Lie, do you know what would become of
you?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. What if you should swear to a Lie? if you should call God to
witness to a Lie, what would become of you then?


Will. Edwards. I should go to Hellfire.


L. Chapter Just. That is a terrible thing. And therefore Child, if you take an
Oath, be sure you say nothing but what is truth, for no Party, nor Side, nor
any thing in the World, for that God that you say will call you to account, and
cast you into Hellfire, if you tell a Lie, and witness to a Falsehood, knows
and sees all you do, therefore have a care, the truth you must say, and nothing
but the truth.


Crier. Pull off your Glove, and hearken to your Oath.


(Then he was sworn.)

Mr. Sol. Genesis And now remember you call God to witness to the truth of what
you say.


Mr. At. Genesis Young man, look upon that Paper, is that your Hand?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you sign that?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Prithee tell the Court, how thou came to sign it?


L. Chapter Just. Ay, Child be not afraid. Tell the truth, for if thou tellest the
truth, thou need not be afraid, but if thou tellest a Lie, thou have need to
be afraid; let no body, whatever has been said to thee, affright thee from
telling the truth.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Don't be afraid of thy Father or any body, but tell plainly what
thou know, and speak only the truth.


Mr. At. Genesis How come you to sign that Paper?


Will. Edwards. Mr. Braddon bid me sign it when he had writ it.


L. Chapter Just. Hark thee Child, Did he take it from thee what he writ, or did
he write it from himself? Come hither Child, be not afraid, no body here will
do thee any hurt.


Then the Boy was lifted up upon the Table before the Judges.

L. Chapter Just. Look upon that Paper, did thou put thy Name to that Paper,
Child?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Whose Handwriting is that Paper besides thy Name?


Will. Edwards. Mr. Braddon's.


L. Chapter Just. Did he bring it ready written?


Will. Edwards. He writ in our Parlour.


L. Chapter Just. How came he to write it?


Will. Edwards. He said it was for the Earl of Essex to give to his Wife.


L. Chapter Just. And what did he ask thee before he writ that?


Will. Edwards. He asked me, whether I saw any thing at the Tower, and so I
told him, Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, tell us what you told him, and be not afraid Child, but tell
the truth.


Will. Edwards. I told him I was in the Tower, and saw a Razor thrown out of a
Window.


L. Chapter Just. You told him so, and then what said he to you?


Will. Edwards. He bid me speak the truth.


L. Chapter Just. Was that all the words you had?


Will. Edwards. I afterward went with my Brother into the Tower, and I showed
my Brother the Place, and then afterward Mr. Braddon writ this, and he said it
was to give to the Countess of Essex.


Mr. Just. Holloway. Did he read it to you after he had writ it?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


Mr. Just. Holloway. And did he ask thee, whether it were true?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. And did thou tell him it was true?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. And did thou tell him all that was in that Paper was true?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Did you tell him all that was writ in that Paper before he writ
it down.


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Prithee mind the Question, and speak truth, Did thou tell him
all that was in that Paper before he writ it down?


Will. Edwards. Yes, I told him, and so he writ it down.


Mr. Just. Holloway. You heard it all read to you, you say?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Then I ask you again, Did you tell him all that was in that Paper
that was read to you, before he writ it down?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. And after you had told him, he writ it down?


Will. Edwards. I told him as he writ it down.


L. Chapter Just. And after such time as he had writ it down, did he read it to you?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. And then you put your Name to it?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis I pray, my Lord, he may be asked this Question, Whether or no
when he first brought it in, the Boy did not deny to sign it?


L. Chapter Just. Did he bring the Paper thither before thou signedst it?


Will. Edwards. It was upon the Table.


L. Chapter Just. Did not thou refuse to put thy Name to it?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Why?


Will. Edwards. I was afraid.


L. Chapter Just. Why?


Will. Edwards. For fear of coming into danger.


L. Chapter Just. Why, what danger could there be? There was no danger if it was
truth.


Will. Edwards. That was not the truth.


L. Chapter Just. Which was not the truth? Was not the Paper that he had written,
truth?


Will. Edwards. No.


L. Chapter Just. How so, Child? Was not that thou toldest him the truth?


Will. Edwards. No.


L. Chapter Just. Tell the truth now then.


Will. Edwards. So I do.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then he offered it first to you, and bid you sign it, and you
denied to put your hand to it, because it was not true?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. And how long after did he offer it to you again?


Will. Edwards. A little while after.


L. Chapter Just. But did you tell Mr. Braddon it was not true, when you refused to
sign it?


Will. Edwards. No, I did not.


L. Chapter Just. Why did thou refuse to sign it then?


Will. Edwards. I was afraid because it was not true.


L. Chapter Just. Did not thou tell Mr. Braddon it was not true?


Will. Edwards. I did not tell Mr. Braddon it was not true.


L. Chapter Just. Why then wast thou afraid to sign it because it was not true at
one time, and yet did sign it though it was not true, at another time?


Mr. Sol. Genesis Child, Did thou give Mr. Braddon any reason, why thou did
not sign it at that time?


Will. Edwards. No, Sir.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How did thou come to sign it? Did any body speak to thee
between that first time thou refusedst to sign it, and the second time thou
did sign it?


Will. Edwards. He would fain have got my Aunt to have signed it.


L. Chapter Just. Thou say thou did first refuse it, because it was not true?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. And then afterward thou did sign it?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Then I ask thee, who persuaded thee to sign it after that time
that thou first refusedst it?


Will. Edwards. My Mother was afraid to have me sign it.


L. Chapter Just. Who persuaded you to sign it?


Will. Edwards. Mr. Braddon said, there was no harm in it, so I did it.


L. Chapter Just. Did Mr. Braddon then persuade you to sign it?


Will. Edwards. He said there was no harm in it, that was all.


L. Chapter Just. Did you do it at his desire?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. And you refused it at first when he desired it?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. What, because it was false?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Why then would thou sign it afterward, if some body did not
persuade thee to it?


Will. Edwards. He told me there was nothing of harm in it.


Mr. At. Genesis Had thou any money offered thee by Mr. Braddon?


Will. Edwards. No.


Mr. At. Genesis Had thou any money promised thee?


Will. Edwards. No.


Mr. At. Genesis Had thou any thing else offered or promised thee?


Will. Edwards. No, nothing at all.


L. Chapter Just. You have heard what he has said, Gentlemen.


Jury. No, my Lord, we have not heard a word.


L. Chapter Just. Then I will tell you what he has said exactly. He says that Mr.
Braddon writ it from him; that he writ it in the Room while he was there; that
after such time as he had writ it, Mr. Braddon read it to him: He says, that he
had carried his Brother to show him the place where he assigned that the Razor
was found in the Tower, he says, that after such time as the Writing was
finished, Mr. Braddon offered it him to sign, and he refused to sign it, and I
asked him the reason why, and he says because it was false; he says some short
time afterward Mr. Braddon came to him again.


Will. Edwards. No, Sir, it was the same time.


L. Chapter Just. Well, the same time Braddon was at him again, and told him there
was no harm in it, and therefore desired him to sign it, and because he would
not, he would have had his Aunt to have signed it; and he says, that Braddon
telling him there was no harm in it, he did sign it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But withal he says that it is false.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, he swears now it is all false.


Mr. Freke. Did you tell Mr. Braddon it was false?


L. Chapter Just. No, he says he did not.


Mr. Freke. Did your Sister at all discourse with you after you had dictated to
Mr. Braddon? Pray what discourse had you with her, after Mr. Braddon writ that
Paper, before you refused to sign it?


L. Chapter Just. Do not ask any leading Question, Sir, but propose a fair plain
Question.


Mr. Freke. Did you discourse with your Sister at all, after Mr. Braddon had
been at your house?


Will. Edwards. Yes, I had been at School, and when I came home they said that
a Gentleman that came from the Earl of Essex's Brother, had been to inquire of
the truth of the Report I had raised.


Mr. Freke. What did your Sister say to you?


Will. Edwards. That was all.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did she name the Gentleman, and did you see him afterward?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Who was it?


Will. Edwards. That Gentleman, Mr. Braddon.


Jury. My Lord, We don't hear a word he says.


L. Chapter Just. He says, he had been at School, and when he came home, they told
him a Gentleman came from the Earl's Brother, to inquire of the truth of what
he had reported: It was asked him who the Gentleman was, and he says it was
that Gentleman Mr. Braddon.


Mr. Thompson. Before such time as Mr. Braddon came to you, what did you tell
your Father about this Razor, and when?


Will. Edwards. Sir, I told him the King and Duke of York were at the Tower,
and while I was there, I said I saw a Hand cast out a bloody Razor, and a Maid
come out and take it up, and go in again.


Mr. Thompson. Did you see any such thing as a Bloody Razor cast out?


Will. Edwards. No.


L. Chapter Just. What a dust has such a trivial Report made in the world! Admit
the Boy had said any such thing, what an Age do we live in, that the Report of
every Child shall blow us up after this rate? It would make a body tremble to
think what a sort of people we live among: To what an heat does Zeal transport
some people beyond all reason and sobriety? If such a little Boy had said so,
it is not an halfpenny matter, but presently all the Government is to be
libelled for a Boy, which whether he speaks true or false is of no great
weight, and he swears it is all false.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, We shall next call Dr. Hawkins's Son of the Tower.
Where is Thomas Hawkins?


(who was sworn.)

Mr. At. Gen My Lord, Agreeable to what the Boy has now said, to show you that
what Mr. Braddon got him to sign was all false, here is the young man that
truanted with him the same morning, that was with him all the time, the whole
morning, that says there was no such thing, and he saw no such thing; and how
could it enter into the Boys head such a malicious lie, if it had not been
dictated. Pray, Mr. Hawkins, will you acquaint my Lord and the Jury, whether
you played Truant that morning with this other Boy, and where you were.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, Tell the truth in Gods name, Young Man, be it one way or
the other, let the truth come out.


Hawkins. In the morning, Sir, I met with him at the Tower, going round with
the King, and we walked round the Tower as long as the King walked, and then
the King going into the Constables house, we and some more Boys were playing --


L. Chapter Just. Prithee speak out, as though thou were at play at Chuck-farthing.


Hawkins. After we had been at play, I went home, and after I had been there a
little while, news was brought to my Father, that the Earl of Essex had killed
himself. My Father went down, and I followed him, and after I had been there a
little while, William Edwards came home, and there we stood looking up at the
Window an hour or two at least, and after we had tarried there a great while, I
went out of the Tower Gate a little after 11.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there no Razor thrown out of the Window?


Hawkins. No, there was no Razor thrown out.


L. C. J. Did not thou see a Razor thrown out of the Window? and a Maid come
and take it up?


Hawkins. No, there was no such thing.


L. C. J. Were you there before Edwards came?


Hawkins. Yes,


L. C. J. And you went out with him?


Hawkins. Yes.


L. C. J. Did you and Edwards go away together?


Hawkins. Yes.


Mr. Thompson. Did he tell you of any such thing?


Hawkins. No.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What time of the day was it that you went out of the Tower?


Hawkins. Almost 11 a Clock.


Mr. Wallop. The Boy does say, he did tell his Father and Mother, and all the
Family of it. And it is plain by the Father that it was known in the Family by
10 of the Clock.


Mr. At. Genesis Was this young man with you all the time that you was there,
Edwards?


William Edwards. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not you tell your Father of this Story when you came from
the Tower?


William Edwards. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis And that was the same time you came out of the Tower with
Hawkins?


William Edwards: Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis And you Hawkins, was this young man with you all the time you
were at my Lord Essex's Window?


Hawkins. He came thither while I stood there.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, This is but the beginning of our Evidence, your
Lordship sees what a fine Case it is, and how all this noise and bustle has
come to be made in the World. The Rumor first did arise in a Fanatic Family,
and was propagated by that Party.


Mr. Jones. Ay, it is easily known whence it came.


L. C. J. Gentlemen, pray will you go on with your Evidence, and make no
descants.


Mr. Freke. You Hawkins, when you came from your Fathers house, did you find
that Boy in the Tower?


Hawkins. Yes Sir, a going round with the King.


L. C. J. That was before this thing happened.


Mr. Freke. Were you with him all the while he was in the Tower?


Hawkins. Just before my Lord Essex cut his Throat I went home.


Mr. Freke. Were you with him all the time or no? And how long were you with
him?


Hawkins. I went with him round the Tower with the King. And after we were at
play, and then I went home, and then when I had been at home a little time, the
rumor and noise came that the Earl of Essex had killed himself, so I went with
my Father and stood before the Window, and I tarried there a while before he
came home, and I stayed with him looking at the Window a great while, and we
went out of the Tower together.


Mr. Freke. You little Boy Edwards, was this Mr. Hawkins with you all the time
that you were in the Tower?


William Edwards. Yes, but only a little while that I was at the Mills.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We had not laid so much weight upon Mr. Braddon for
this matter, but that he could not be quiet, but must inform the King of it,
and this matter was all examined before the King, the Boy was sent for, and
before his face the Boy declared it was a Lie. And after he knew this, and
after the Boy had twice in the presence of the King denied it, yet
notwithstanding all this, then was the Project between him and Speak. We shall
first prove the Examination of this matter before the Council, and how he was
acquainted with it. Pray call Mr. Blathwaite and Mr. Mon-Stevens.


Mr. Blathwaite was Sworn.

Mr. At. Genesis Pray Mr. Blathwaite will you give an account whether you were
present at the Council, when Mr. Braddon brought this Information, and how the
matter was Examined there, and what was done?


Mr. Blathwaite, My Lord, It was on the 20 th of July that Mr. Braddon came to
White Hall, he may remember I was there, for he could not but see me attending
on the King. This little Boy was brought before his Majesty, and was asked what
Information he had given Mr Braddon? And whether the Matter of the Information
was true? The Boy said it was a Lie, and that upon his faith it was not true.
Mr. Braddon knew all this, for he was called in and informed of it; and I
believe Mr. Braddon will remember that he heard the Boy deny it. The whole
Examination could not but show that it was an Invention of his, as he said it
was to excuse himself for having played Truant that day, and that because he was
afraid to go home he invented that Lie. After this Mr. Braddon as it appears
did nevertheless pursue this business.


L. C. J. Pray only tell what you know of your own knowledge, both before and
after.


Mr. Blathwaite. I know my Lord that Mr. Braddon (having been in the Country)
came afterward before the King, and was again Examined upon this matter by
which it appeared that he did continue in his pursuit, though he was always
informed of the denial the Boy made, and that it was understood to be a Lie by
the whole Family of the Edwards's, as well as from the denial of the little
Boy; for they did confess that the Boy used to tell Lies, and one of the
Sisters said he had denied it at first, but afterward was brought to say it.
And if I remember right the words of one of the Sisters were, BRADDON COMPELLED
THE BOY TO SIGN IT. Those are the words in the Minutes that I took at the
Examination, therefore I believe it was so, that the Boy had denied before to
sign it. But this I only mention as what the Sister said.


L. C. J. Have you any more questions to ask Mr. Blathwaite Gentlemen?


Mr. North. Because we will not trouble Mr. Blathwaite to call him again; pray
produce the Letter.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir, will you look upon that Letter and tell the Court what
you know of it, and whose hand it is.


Mr. Blathwaite. My Lord, this is a Letter that was produced before the King,
when Mr. Speak attended there. It was then put into my hands; and I do well
remember, and likewise I have written upon it, that Mr. Speak owned it to be
his Letter.


L. C. J. Did he own it to be his Letter Sir?


Mr. Blathwaite. Yes, he did own it to be his Letter.


Mr. At. Genesis That is all we have to trouble you with at present Sir, We will
now call Mr. Mon-Stevens. (who standing up by the Crier was sworn.) And we call
him to prove, That Mr. Braddon had notice the Boy had disowned this Matter.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You hear the Question, Sir, pray acquaint my Lord and the Jury,
what you know of this Boys Examination before the Council, and this Gentleman's
having notice the Boy disowned the thing.


Mr. Monstevens. My Lord, About 5 or 6 days after my Lord of Essex had murdered
himself in the Tower, I saw Mr. Braddon at the Secretary's Lodgings, my Lord
Sunderland's Lodgings at White Hall, with a young Woman, and a Boy about 12 or
13 years old. The Boy was just now in Court, I saw him there. He came to me,
and told me, he had earnest Business to speak with my Lord Sunderland, That he
came from Sir Henry Capel, and he told me, he came with an Information, That
the Boy had given relating to the Earl of Essex's death. (The Information I
believe is in Court.) He gave me the Information, and I read it, and I
remember, there was something in the Information of a Razor thrown out of a
Window, a bloody Razor thrown out of my Lord Essex's Window, and after I had
read the Information, I told Mr. Braddon, I wonder Sir Henry Capell had not
appeared himself in a Matter of that moment, wherein the Reputation of his
Family was so much concerned, and I took the liberty to tell him, That I
believed if Sir Henry Capell had thought that to be true, that was contained in
that Paper, he would doubtless have came to my Lord Sunderland himself.
Thereupon, he told me, That Sir Henry Capell had not been well, and did not
stir abroad. Then I told Mr. Braddon again, as I very well remember, That I was
confident, he had been abroad lately, and had been to wait upon the King, since
the death of my Lord of Essex. Then, my Lord, he had little or nothing to say
to that, but, he said, what he did, he was obliged to do in Conscience, and out
of the Duty he owed to the Memory of my Lord of Essex. Upon that, my Lord
Sunderland came by, and I went with him to my Lord Sunderland, and he gave him
that Paper, as I suppose, which I read, and my Lord Sunderland took the
Information, and afterward Mr. Braddon was committed in Custody, and then the
thing was brought before the King, and the Lords of the Council, which Mr.
Blathwaite has given you an account of.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I pray that a word of the Information may be read, we
will first prove the Information taken by him, and then call Sir Henry Capell,
who will prove that he never had any Order from him, as he said he had, but it
was only his own busy Inclinations.


Cl. of Cr. This is Subscribed, William Edwards.


L. C. J. Call the Boy in again.


Mr. Braddon. May I ask Mr. Monstevens a Question, My Lord?


L. C. J. Ay* ask him what you will.


Mr. Braddon. Sir, Did not I come to you the Thursday Evening, and waited at
the Duchess of Portsmouth's Lodgings, before I brought the Boy and the Girl to
White Hall?


Mr. Monstevens. No, I did not see you there.


Mr. Braddon. You are positive in that Sir?


Mr. Monstevens. Yes, I will take my Oath again of it, if you will.


Mr. Braddon. Then I will prove I was, and that I saw you at Ten of the Clock
that Morning.


Mr. Monstevens. I remember, my Lord, very well, That I was surprised to see
him at the Lodgings at White Hall. I never saw him to the best of my
remembrance, but once in my life.


Mr. Braddon. What time was it, pray, you first saw me?


Mr. Monstevens. It was in the Afternoon, as I remember.


L. C. J. Hark you young Man, do you know my Lord Gerard?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. C. J. Which Lord Gerard do you know?


Will. Edwards. My Lord Brandon Gerard.


L. C. J. How came you to know him?


Will. Edwards. By sight I know him.


L. C. J. Do you know where he lodged in the Tower?


Will. Edwards. Yes.


L. C. J. Where?


Will. Edwards. At one Mr. Sam's.


L. C. J. Was you ever in his Lodging?


Will. Edwards. No.


L. C. J. Never at all?


Will. Edwards. No.


L. C. J. Did you never tell any body you were in my Lord Brandon Gerrad's
Lodgings?


Will. Edwards. Never in my life.


L. C. J. Did you never tell Braddon, that you went to see his Lodgings?


Will. Edwards. Into the House I never went.


L. C. J. Did you never tell Braddon, That you went to see my Lord Brandon
Gerard's Lodgings? Never in your life?


Will. Edwards. No, Sir.


L. C. J. Now read it.


Cl. of Cr. Reads --

The Information of William Edwards, second Son to Thomas Edwards, of the
Parish of Allhallowes Barkin, London, taken the 18 th day of July, in the 35 th
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the 2 d. Anno 1683 says:
That this Informant on Friday the 13 th of this instant July, as he was going
to School, with his Brother Edward, he heard that his Majesty, and his Royal
Highness the Duke of York, were going to the Tower. Whereupon this Informant
left his Brother, and went to the Tower to see his Majesty, and his Royal
Highness. And when this Informant had seen his Majesty and his Royal Highness,
this Informant about Nine of the Clock in the Morning of the same day, went to
see my Lord Brandon Gerard's Lodgings; and as this Informant was standing
almost over against my Lord Gerard's Lodgings, between the Lord Gerard's, and
the late Lord of Essex's Lodgings, this Informant saw a Hand cast out a bloody
Razor out of the said Earl of Essex's Lodgings. And this Informant was going to
take up the said Razor, which he saw on the Ground to be bloody, but before
this Informant came to the Razor, there came a Maid running out of Captain
Hawley's house, where the said Lord of Essex lodged, and took up the said
Razor, which he carried into the said Captain Hawley's House. And this
Informant, believes that it was the said Maid, who he first heard cry out
Murder. And this Informant further says, That he heard the said Maid, say to
some which were about the Door, after the Murder was cried. That she did hear
the said Lord of Essex to groan three times that Morning. The Father, three
Sisters and Brother will swear, That the said William Edwards did declare the
substance of this Information to them on Friday the 13 th instant, and never in
the least denied it till Tuesday after, when being chid and threatened by the
elder Sister, he did deny it, but soon after confessed it, and signed it in the
presence of five or six Witnesses.


Mr. Just. Wythins. Thus you see, he persuaded him to tell a fine Story, of
going to see my Lord Brandon Gerard's Lodgings, but the Boy never told him any
such thing.


L. C. J. No, he never told him a word of it, he swears.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, your Lordship has heard from Mr. Monstevens, That this
Gentleman Mr. Braddon made use of the Name of an honorable Person Sir Henry
Capell, and so at the Secretarys and at Edward's house, made use of the Name of
my Lady Essex. We shall now call Sir Henry Capell (who was Sworn) Sir Henry
Capell, Will you please to give an account, Whether ever you employed this
Gentleman Mr. Braddon about any such business as he has here undertaken?


Sir H. Capell. I hope you will give me as short a dispatch as you can Sir, for
it is very uneasy for me to be here in this Crowd.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We give you some trouble Sir Henry, but indeed it is not we, but
this Gentleman that has been pleased to use your Name has necessitated it.


Mr. At. Genesis We ask you a short Question, whether you employed Mr. Braddon to
go to Mr. Edward's House or to the Secretarys or any where else to prosecute
this matter of your Brothers death?


Sir H. Capell. My Lord, I know very little of Mr. Braddon. He was to speak
with me twice. The first time he took me in very great disorder, both as to the
circumstance of Time and Place which are so tender with me, that truly I cannot
express nor do I very well know what I did say or what he said to me, but the
Second time he came to me, I do very well remember what I did say. And that
which I did say the Second time is the most material Thing I have to say in the
matter. He came to me and spoke of such a business as the Court is well
apprized of already (I hope you will pardon me if I do not repeat it) I made
answer to him. Mr. Braddon I am under great grief and under a great burden of
Business in my private Family, whatsoever you have to say in the matter, I
desire you would go to a Secretary of State and acquaint him with it. This is
the most material Thing that was said that I remember.


Mr. At. Genesis But you never employed him to go about to prosecute any such
thing?


Mr. J. Withins. Sir Henry. Pray answer me, Did you desire him to go to
Edward's House and ask him any Questions about it?


Sir H. Capell. I know nothing of Edward's nor his House at all.


Mr. Braddon. Sir H Capell, will you please to let me ask you one Question, Do
you not remember I came to Essex House on the Monday night, and that I came and
told you of such a Report, and that I had not been with the Father of the Boy
as yet, but if you would then send one with me I would go, and in his presence
examine the Boy, and you Sir promised me that you would, and whether you did
not appoint me to tarry at such a Place where you promised to send one to go
along with me?


Sir H. Capell. My Lord, I have a gross Idea of that which he speaks of
concerning his having one to meet him, and that I told him such an one should
meet him, and the person did desire to be excused, and I did excuse him, and so
he did not go, upon which this Gentleman Mr. Braddon came to me the Second time
which was after Dinner, and I directed him to go to a Secretary of State and
acquaint him with what he had to say in the business.


Mr. Braddon. Did not you promise Sir, to send one to me to go with me, and
desired me to meet at such a place?


Sir H. Capell I remember no more but what I have said.


Mr. Braddon. Upon the Oath you have taken, Sir Henry Capell, I desire you
would recollect your Memory, whether you did not promise me in the Morning to
meet at such a Place, and was not I twice with you that day?


Sir H. Capell. Sir I know no more.


Mr. J. Withins. Do you think, Sir Henry Capell would forswear himself, Mr.
Braddon?


Mr. Braddon. My Lord, I only desire him to recollect his Memory.


Sir H. Capell. Only I do farther remember, He seemed to be very willing to go
to the Secretary of State.


Mr. At. Genesis And if he had acquiesced there he had done very well, and there
had been no farther trouble.


Mr. Jones. But that was not the way he intended, that would not do his Work.


Mr. Sol. Gen Pray, Mr. Blaithwaite, do you give my Lord and the Jury an
account, whether this Information was ever carried before any Justice of Peace
in order to have it sworn before him, and the circumstance of it.


Mr. Blaithwaite, My Lord, I do very well remember, when this Information was
before the King and was showed to Mr. Braddon, he there confessed That he had
gone about to find some Justice of Peace to take it upon Oath. He named Sir
Robert Clayton, and Sir John Lawrence. And I do very well remember and it is
upon my Minutes, That he confessed That Sir Robert Clayton, being asked by him
to take the Information in private alone without Company being by Sir Robert
Clayton refused to take it unless he might take it more publicly, and Sir
Robert Clayton, refusing to take it alone, in private, he would not let him
take it at all, but went away with it. I remember, this for Sir Robert Clayton
and it may be Mr. Braddon may remember the same of Sir John Lawrence, but I
cannot tell that.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, Now we are come to the 20 th of July when this business
was heard before his Majesty, and the Boy declared it was a Lie, and then he
had full notice it was a Lie. But after this Mr. Speak and he consult together,
and he must be sent as an Emissary into the Country to pick up Informations and
Evidences and with this and some other Informations in his Pocket to possess
the People That the Government had Murdered my Lord of Essex. And he must be
sent I know not how far, as if the further he went from London the better
Intelligence he was like to have of a thing done at the Tower. The Justice of
Peace that took him was summoned, but is since dead. But we will call the
Persons that were present when he was taken, where is Mr. Beech? (He was Sworn)
Mr. Beech, will you acquaint the Court and the Jury with the manner of
apprehending this Gentlemen and what Papers were found about him?


Mr. Beech. My Lord, I was present when Mr. Braddon was apprehended in
Wiltshire and several Papers were found upon him, and upon Examination he was
committed to the County Goal, and from thence removed by Habeas Corpus hither
up to London. I have Copies of all the Papers that were taken about him, which
I Examined with the Originals. The one was the Copy of a Letter sent by one
Speak to Sir Robert Atkyns, and there were other Papers in the nature of
Informations, another was a Letter to one Compton Postmaster at From. Mr.
Braddon upon his Examination said, his business was to enquire after the Murder
of the Earl of Essex, and that one Mr. Burgis had sent him a Letter to this
purpose, That it was reported at From that very day the Earl of Essex cut his
own Throat, that he had so done, the news of which could not so soon come down
thither.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray speak out Sir. Tell what his business he said was, and as
to the Letters he had about him, tell us what he said.


Mr. Beech. He told me that he had a Letter from one Mr. Burgis of Marlebrough
to go to one Compton at From who is Postmaster there, to inquire about a
Report, that it was said was reported in From the 13 th day of July, the same
day the Earl of Essex Murdered himself, that he was Murdered. Mr. Braddon had
that Letter about him. I went afterward to that Compton at From, he said he
never heard, any thing of it, or that there was any noise of the Earl of
Essexe's Murder until the Sunday following, which was two or three days after.
From thence I went to my Lord Waymouth a Person of Quality, that lives near
From, and acquainted his Lordship with it, and he then said that he had an
account on the Sunday of My Lord of Essex's Murder, and he believed that was
one of the first Letters of it that was in the Country.


Mr. At. Genesis Are these the Papers you found about him, Sir?


Mr. Beech. I Examined these Copies with the Originals, and they were true
Copies.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, put them in.


Mr. Beech. Truly Mr. Braddon gave a very ill account of his Journey to those
that did Examine him.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray look upon those Papers that are the Originals.


Mr. Beech. One Col. Airs was the Justice of Peace, before whom Mr. Braddon was
Examined, and by whom he was Committed, he is since dead, but I do believe this
was the Original Letter that was taken about Mr. Braddon.


L. J. C. Do you believe that was the Original?


Mr. Beech. I do, I have a true Copy of it.


Mr. At. Genesis Besides we will prove it otherwise to be Mr. Spekes hand. It was
proved by Mr. Blathwaite that Mr. Speak upon his Examination did own it, what
say you Mr. Blathwaite?


Mr. Blath. He did own it. And said in these words, as I remember, he believed
it to be his hand.


Mr. At. Genesis What that Paper?


Mr. Blathwaite. Yes, and I have put my hand upon it, That it was owned by him.


L. C. J. Read it.


Cl. of Cr. This is subscribed by Hugh Speak, and dated London Lincolns Inn
August 15 th 1683, Wednesday Night 10 a Clock, and directed, For the ever
Honored Sir Robert Atkyns Knight of the Bath, at his House at Netherswell near
Stow on the Old in Gloucester-shire.

Honored Sir,
THe Bearer hereof is one Mr. Braddon, a very honest Gentleman, whose Father
has at least eight Hundred per Ann. in Cornwall; It seems it is his Fate to be
the only Person that follows, and Prosecutes the Murder of the Earl of Essex,
and he has made a very considerable discovery already of it, notwithstanding
the hard Stream he rows against, as things stand and are carried on at present.
But indeed I think it could never have fallen on so fit a Man, for he has been
a very hard Student, and is a Person of a very good Reputation, Life and
Conversation and has a great deal of Prudence, and has as much Courage a any
one living whatsoever. He went away on a sudden hence Post toward Marlebrough
to make some farther discovery, and what he has discovered he will give you a
full account, and of all the Transactions hitherto above it. I lent him my Man
to go with him for fear he should come to any mischief, for most here fear that
he will be either stabbed or knocked in the head, if he do not take great care
of himself, seeing he came into these parts I thought it not amiss to go and
advise with you how he had best to proceed in it, and I did charge him not to
let any body know who he was, that it might not be known that he had been with
you; For I would not for the whole World that you should come to any prejudice
in the least for your kindness toward us. For we labor under many
difficulties as the Tide runs at present.

Pray call Mr. Braddon by the name of Johnson when he is with you, I have given
him the same Item. We hope to bring on the Earl of Essexe's Murder on the Stage
before they can any of those in the Tower to a Trial. He being in great have I
have not time to write more, but to assure that Mr. Braddon is a Person of that
Integrity and Courage that no body needs fear to trust him. I was very willing
that he should take your advice in this Case which is of so great a moment,
seeing he came within twenty or thirty Miles or thereabouts of your House. He
will give you a full and clear Relation of every thing in that Affair, and how
hand they have been upon him. Sir Henry Capel told him, that it was a thing too
great for him, etc. All which Mr. Braddon (that you are to call Johnson whilst
he is with you at your house) will give you a true Relation of. Mr. Braddon
has been at a great Trouble and Charge already about it; I know few that would
have ventured to have undertaken this Affair besides himself as times go. I
received yours this day, with the great pains you took, and the Letter to the
Lady Russel which finding unsealed I sealed, without looking into it, and
carried it my self; she returns you ten thousand thanks, and says, she knows
not what return to make you for your most extraordinary kindness. I have not
time to write any more at present by reason that Mr. Braddon alias Johnson
stays only for this my Letter. I am Sir,

Your most obliged Friend and most humble Servant, Hugh Speak.
I am Writing a Letter to send to you by the Carrier.





Mr. At. Genesis This Gentleman brings in Mr. Speak to be the Author of all this
Contrivance. But we shall prove to you, That at the same time, this Letter was
taken about him, this Gentleman had others that were likewise taken. These
Examinations which I desire may be likewise read.


Mr. -- My Lord, I came lately from Sir Robert Atkyns, He is an utter Stranger
to all this, he is now in the Country and knows nothing of it.


L. C. J. If they will use his Name I cannot help it.


Mr. -- My Lord, I would not have any Reflection upon him, for he knows nothing
at all of this matter.


Mr. Sol. Genesis The Letter was never received by Sir Robert Atkyns, but taken
before it came to him.


Mr. At. Genesis All the matter is, it is an unhappy thing to be thought well of,
by such sort of people.


L. C. J. I see nothing of Sir Robert Atkyns in the Case, but only his Name is
used and notice is taken of the great Obligations some People have to him, for
his great kindness to his Friends.


Cl. of Cr. Here is an Information.


L. C. J. Was this found about him too?


Mr. Beech. Yes, I believe that is the very Paper, I have no Copy of that
Paper, but I well remember the Contents of it.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you sign it or mark it?


L. C. J. He may believe it to be without signing.


Mr. Beech. I presume Mr. Braddon will own it.


Cl. of Cr. The Information of Mrs. Edwards, Wife to Tho. Edwards says, That
about 10 of the Clock in the Morning on Friday the 13 th of this Instant July,
this Informants youngest Son William Edwards aged about 13 years, came
trembling to this Informant and in great amazement and horror told this
Informant, that the Lord of Essex had cut his Throat in the Tower, and further
said, That he the said William Edwards in the Morning about 9 of the Clock, did
see a hand cast out a Razor out of the said Lord of Essex 's Lodging Window,
which Razor he saw on the Ground to be bloody. And the said William Edwards was
going to take up the said Razor, but before he came to it, there came a Maid
running out of Captain Hawley 's House where the said Earl of Essex lodged, and
took up the Razor, which she the said Maid forthwith carried into the said
Captain Hawley 's House, and soon after he the said William Edwards heard her,
as he the said William Edwards did believe, cry out Murder. And this Informant
further says, That the substance of which the said William Edwards has sworn
in this Information, he the said William Edwards on Friday last did declare to
this Informant and her whole Family, several times attesting it to be true, and
several times since.


Cl. of Cr. Here is the Information of William Edwards, second Son of Thomas
Edwards. Mr. At. Genesis That is the same with what was read already.


L. C. J. Ay, that is the Boys Information.


Cl. of Cr. Here is another, it is Dated August the 8 th, 1683. The Information
of Jane Lodeman aged about 13 years, did in the presence of these, whose names
are here under written, declare as follows, That the said Jane Lodeman was in
the Tower on Friday Morning, the 13th of July last, and standing almost over
against the late Earl of Essex 's Lodging Window, she saw a hand cast out a
Razor out of my Lord's Window, and immediately upon that she heard Shrieks, and
that there was a Soldier by my Lords door, which cried out to those within the
house, that somebody should come and take up a Razor which was thrown out of
the Window, whereupon there came a Maid with a white Hood out of the house, but
who took up the Razor she cannot tell.

This is Subscribed

John Boom, and William Smith.


Cl. of Cr. Here is another Paper August the 8 th, (83.) Mr. William Glasbrooke
does declare. That one Jane Lodeman aged about 13 years, inhabiting in the same
house, where he the said William Glasbrooke lodged, did on Friday the 13 th of
July last past between the hours of 10 and 11 in the Morning, in the presence
and hearing of him the said William Glasbrooke declare to her Aunt, That the
Earl of Essex had cut his Throat, upon which her Aunt was very angry with her,
whereupon she the said Girl did declare, that she was sure of it, for she saw
him throw the Razor out of the Window, and that the Razor was bloody, and that
she heard two Groans or Shrieks (which of the two words she used, he the said
William Glasbrooke is not certain) of this, he the said Glasbrooke is ready to
make Oath.

This is Subscribed

William Glasbrooke, Margaret Smith.


Mr. At. Genesis He carried his Stuff about him it seems wherever he went.


L. C. J. It Is Stuff indeed. Good God what an Age do we live in!


Mr. At. Genesis It is not taken upon Oath before any Magistrate, but cooked up
to amuse the Country, as if they were formal Informations. Here is another
Letter Mr. Beech, was this Letter found about him?


Mr. Beech. Yes, this Letter was found about him.


Mr. At. Genesis It is from one Burgis, a man of the same Kidney.


Cl. of Cr. This is directed for Mr. Cumpen at the Dolphin at From, and it is
Subscribed Jeremiah Burgis, and dated Marleb. Oct. 21.

Mr. Cumpen,
MY kind love to you. These are to desire you to call to mind, that I was in
From the 6t^ of July being Friday, where I heard the Report that the Earl of
Essex had cut his own Throat, I would desire you to inquire into it, to know
who first reported it, and give this Gentleman the truth of it. And in so doing
you will oblige me who am

Your Friend, Jeremiah Burgis.



Mr. Beech. Under favor my Lord, This Letter talks of a Report that was the
13th day, the very day the Earl of Essex murdered himself, I went directly to
From and spoke with this Cumpen, and he told me, he did not speak with Burgis
nor see him, nor was there any such Report before the Sunday Morning. From
thence I went to my Lord Weymouths as I told you.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We have gone through our Evidence for the present, to
show how this man has endeavored to spread this matter to the scandal of the
Government. We shall end here at present to see how he has improved his
confidence, by what defense he will make to all this proof. Afterward if there
be occasion, We shall give an account of the Earls death, how he murdered
himself. And for that we have a Cloud of Witnesses, tho this Gentleman has
taken upon him so much confidence as to contest it.


L. C. J. That would be very fit Mr. Attorney, because they have raised a doubt
in some Peoples minds about it.


Mr. At. Genesis I thought it best to reserve it till after I see what defense he
will make.


L. C. J. Take your time.


Mr. Wallop. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I am
of Counsel for Mr. Braddon and Mr. Speak, the Defendants here. You see what the
Issue is before you Mr. Speak and Mr. Braddon, they are in the Information
charged, That they did Conspire together to make the People believe, That
whereas the Earl of Essex murdered himself, and so it was found by the
Inquisition, yet they would have the People believe, that that Inquisition was
taken unduly, and that they did Conspire to procure false Witnesses to make
these things out. Now Gentlemen, the only point that you are to inquire of, is
this, Whether these two Gentlemen did maliciously, factiously, and seditiously
set these things on foot. This Report that the Earl was murdered, or whether
there were such intimations offered to them accidentally and casually, without
officiousness or any of their own seeking, that might induce a good man or a
wise man to follow the business upon such Information given. For our parts that
are for the Defendant we say this for our Clients, We are not so much to make
any men guilty of this Murder, that is not our business, but to prove our own
innocence and fair dealing in this matter. Now Gentlemen, if these two Persons
had no inducement to lead them on to this, but did it of their own heads, that
is Criminal in them, but if they had that which might induce a wise and good
man though they were much mistaken, yet they are not to be found Guilty of this
offense, that is charged on them. I shall leave it Gentlemen to you, who I
question not have observed the Evidence that has been given, and whose proper
work it is to make your Judgment upon. But in our defense the steps we go are
these, and we desire you would please to observe them. First we say, that the
Report of this Murder was the day before, two or three days before, and that
very day, so many Miles distant from London, that hearing of such a Report we
might very easily be induced to make some inquiry after it; and of this 4
Instances we shall give in the Course of our Evidence, that this was a great
many Miles off London talked of at the day, and immediately after the day,
before the News could reach those places after the Fact committed. Then we
shall proceed to those passages concerning the Boy, and produce Evidence to set
forth the true State of that Matter, That this Boy as he says himself did tell
the Family this Story that very day that my Lord murdered himself, immediately
upon his coming home. Now this Original Story is impossible to be contrived by
Mr. Braddon, be it true or be it false. Then Mr. Braddon coming into Essex to
Mr. Evans house at Wansteed, there what was said by the Boy was spoken of. Then
Mr. Braddon finding this Information of the Boy, which he had given merely of
himself, and which contradicted the Inquisition and put him upon this Inquiry.
Now how far this Intimation has weight, and may be an inducement to a good and
a wise man, as I say that we must leave to you. But besides that, there is a
Girl a stranger to the Boy, that at the same time upon the matter, and to this
same effect and substance, delivered such an Evidence as might very well serve
to confirm us in our Inquiry, and this is the Course of our Evidence in the
substance of it. And we shall apply our selves to your Lordship and the Jury
after the Evidence given, and make our Observations upon it, and submit it to
you Gentlemen.


Mr. Williams. Will your Lordship please to spare me one word that is an
Objection that we would make from the Record it self. The Information that does
recite, That the Earl of Essex was imprisoned in the Tower, and during his
Imprisonment there, cut his own Throat, and became Felo de se. And that there
was an Inquisition taken before such an one, before Edw. Farnham Coroner of the
Liberty of the Tower, My Lord, I was not here when the Inquisition was read, if
I had I should have made the Objection then, but this is that I say, If we can
falsify that part of the Record, if there be a mistake there, that is, if
Farnham was not Coroner then they fail in their proof, and we must be found not
Guilty, for so it is in the Information.


L. C. J. It is said to be before him as Coroner of the Liberty.


Mr. Williams. Yes, My Lord, They recite that he is Coroner, and that the
Inquisition was taken before him as Coroner, and Mr. Braddon knowing of it did
thus and thus.


L. C. J. Why is he not Coroner?


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I desire the Inquisition may be looked into, I cannot
go to contradict the Inquisition, but my instructions only are that he is
Deputy Coroner, and if it be so they are mistaken in their Information.


Cl. of. Cr. It is Coram Edvardo Farnham Coronatore.


Mr. Williams. Then we cannot help it. But there are these things, that we say
to it, one part of the Information is, That we should go about to persuade the
people, that this Inquisition was not duly taken, another part is, That we did
procure false Witnesses to prove it; now what proof is offered as to the matter
of persuading the people, I must submit to you, whether it be such as comes up
to the Charge in the Information. There is some kind of proof, but what it is
you see. Then for the other Matter which is the procuring false Witnesses, that
under favor I think I may affirm, that there is no proof at all of, that Mr.
Braddon or Mr. Speak did procure false Witnesses. Gentlemen, we shall endeavor
to acquit our selves of all, if we cannot of all, yet of part, especially that
part which seems to be the most Criminal. And I must needs say I have not heard
any Proof of procuring false Witnesses, by either of the Defendants. Then there
is a third thing charged, and indeed in the Evidence there is something that
looks toward it, That he should go about by Papers and otherwise to publish
it, That he was a person employed to prosecute the Murder of the Earl of Essex.
Now as to this matter all I shall say for Mr. Braddon is this, If he have done
something more, it may be by a transport of Zeal, than became him, that must be
submitted how far it is criminal. If he did what did not become a mighty wise
and discreet Man, yet if he did what became a rational Man of ordinary Capacity
to do, if he had this Information and so many other Informations, and he did
search innocently a little into it, if he did not do it Seditiously and
Factiously with an ill mind, we hope there is no such great harm done. And
indeed Gentlemen, his Mind is to be tried in this matter. And it is an hard
matter to try a Man's Mind, quo animo a Man did such an Action; that he did it,
there is some sort of Evidence, but if he did it not out of an ill Principle
and with an evil Intention, then, under favor, we take it he is not Guilty of
this Information. And we shall endeavor to make it out thus, This Gentleman
hearing of this Report of the Boy, makes his Application first to Sir Henry
Capell, who was a person well known to be nearly related to this unfortunate
Lord, the Earl of Essex, and he tells him what Information he had received. Sir
Henry Capell puts him into an excellent Course, and desires him to go and
inform a Secretary of State, and he did so, and if he had gone only this way,
all that he had done had been innocent. Then the matter is only this; He has
gone a little out of the way, and has taken some Informations and Examinations
in Writing: why tho he has gone a step or two awry, yet if it was with a design
to prepare the matter, the better for the Secretary, by laying these Papers
before him, we hope there is no Crime; if we did it not Seditiously, but only
with an intention, That Mr. Secretary might receive a more clear and full
Information; I hope the Jury will acquit us.


L. C. Just. You say well. Come prove your matter.


Mr. Thompson. Call Mr. Fielder and Mrs. Mewx and Mr. Jews.


Jews appeared.

Crier. Lay your Hand on the Book.


Jews. My Lord, I desire my Charges may be paid, before I Swear.


L. C. J. Prithee what have I to do with thy Charges? I will not make Bargains
between you, If you have any Evidence to give, and will give it, do, if not
let it alone


Jews. My Lord, I shall not give any Evidence 'till I have my Charges.


L. C. J. Mr. Braddon, if you will have your Witnesses swear, you must pay them
their Charges.


Mr. Braddon. My Lord I am ready to pay it, I never refused it, but what shall
I give him?


L. C. J. Nay, I am not to make Bargains between you, agree as you can.


Mr. Thompson. My Lord, We are willing to do what is reasonable. You Jews what
do you demand?


Jews. He cannot give me less than Six Shillings a day.


L. C. J. Why, where do thou live?


Jews, At Marlebrough.


L. C. J. Why can thou earn 6 s. a day by thy own Labor at Marlebrough?


Jews. My Lord, I am at 40 s. or 3 l. a Week charge with my Family and Servants


L. C. J. What Trade art thou?


Jews, A Stapler.


L. C. J. And does your Trade stand still while you are here in Town?


Jews. Yes, to be sure it cannot go well on.


L. C. J. Well I say that for you, you value your Labor high enough, I know
not what your Evidence may be; but Mr. Braddon you must pay your Witness if you
will have him.


Mr. Braddon. I will my Lord very readily, what will you have? I have paid you
something already.


Jews. Give me Twenty Shillings more then. You cannot give me less.


Then Mr. Braddon paid him Twenty Shillings, and he was Sworn.

L. C. J. Well what do you ask him, Mr. Thompson?


Mr. Thompson. We ask him what report he heard of the Earl of Essex's Death,
and when?


L. C. J. What is your Name, friend?


Jews. Jews.


L. C. J. Well what is it you say?


Jews. My Lord, as I was riding up Husband, within Three or Four Miles of
Andover, --


Mr. Wallop. How many Miles is that off of London.


Jews. Fifty two.


Mr. Wallop. Well, go on.


Jews. Between the hours of Three and Five, but it is so long ago that I
cannot exactly tell the certain time, a Man asked me what News I heard in the
Country, I told him I heard none. Says he, I hear the Earl of Essex has cut his
Throat: it was upon a Friday in the Summer, I forget the day of the Month, I
cannot tell what Month it was certainly.


Mr. Thompson. What day of the Week was it?


Jews. I remember it was upon a Friday?


Mr. Thompson. Cannot you tell what Month it was?


Jews. I cannot tell what Month it was, it was in the Summer I know.


Mr. Braddon. My Lord, I desire to ask him a question.


L. C. J. Do if you will. Ask him what you will.


Mr. Braddon. Did not you go to Marleborough on the Saturday.


Jews. I did go to Marleborough the next day, which was Saturday.


Mr. Braddon. I desire to know of him, whether he did meet with the News of it
there then?


Jews. My Lord, as to that, when I came home, my Neighbors asked me if I had
heard any News? I told them, says I, I hear the Earl of Essex has cut his
Throat. Why when did you hear it, say they? I heard it yesterday, said I. Said
they, it was done but yesterday, how could you hear it so soon? That is all I
have to say my Lord.


Mr. Williams. By the best Conjecture you can make, was it that very day the
Earl of Essex cut his Throat?


Jews. I do not know that ever any such Man cut his Throat, but this I heard,
and I tell you the time as well as I can.


Mr. Williams. Then pray let us have our Money again.


L. C. J. Thou art well paid, I will say that for thee.


Mr. Williams. Where is Mr. Fielder? Swear him. (Which was done.) Pray Sir,
what did you hear, and when, of the Earl of Essex's Death?


Mr. Fielder. The Wednesday and the Thursday of the same Week, that the Earl of
Essex cut his Throat, it was reported in our Town of Andover, that he had so
done. The Women as they came in and out of the Town talked of it one to another.


L. C. J. What was talked of that Wednesday and Thursday?


Mr. Fielder. That my Lord of Essex cut his Throat in the Tower.


Mr. J. Withins. What before he had cut his Throat?


Mr. Fielder. Yes.


Mr. J. Withins. That is very strange indeed.


L. C. J. Lord, what a story is here.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, if you please I will tell you what use we would make of
it. --


L. C. J. I know what use you would make of it, the use is just the same as you
make use of all sorts of ridiculous and shamming stories, to set us together by
the ears, and rake into all the Dunghills that can be, to pick up matter to put
us into confusion.


Mr. Williams. But my Lord, if there was such a report so long before, --


L. C. J. Mr. Williams you were here in Town at that time I am sure.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, I heard it at Eleven a Clock that day, that is the
soonest I heard it.


L. C. J. What an Age do we live in? what stuff is here picked up, on purpose
to kindle the Fire and set us all into a flame!


Mr. At. Genesis What day of the Month was it Fielder, upon your Oath?


Mr. Fielder. I did not mind the day of the Month, I cannot tell that.


Mr. At. Genesis How do you know it was that Week?


Mr. Fielder. Because on the Saturday night that Week we had the certain News
of it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You say somebody told you then of it on Saturday?


Mr. Fielder. Yes, on Saturday we had certain News of it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Who gave you the certain Intelligence?


Mr. Fielder. Some Clothiers.


Mr. Williams. Was Gadbury your Countryman?


L. C. J. Ay, prithee ask him that, whether Gadbury told it him, or Erra Pater
if you will?


Mr. At. Genesis From what Market-people was it reported?


Mr. Fielder. Some Women.


Mr. Sol. Genesis It was only Women's stories then?


Mr. Fielder. Yes, they talked of it among themselves.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it the Forenoon or the Afternoon?


Mr Fielder. The Wednesday and Thursday both it was the common talk of the Town
all day long.


Mr. J. Withins. Name one that spoke it to you.


Mr. At. Genesis Ay, name one of any credit if you can.


Mr. Fielder. I cannot, it was the Women as they came in and out of my shop,
and as they went up and down the Town.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, we leave it with your Lordship and the Jury. He swears he
then heard such a Report.


Mr. J. Withins. Do you believe this Mr. Wallop your self? You are a man of
Ingenuity, I appeal to you.


Mr. Wallop. I believe that Mr. Braddon in his Prosecution of this matter, went
upon the ground of this Report, for he had heard the like Evidence was given in
my Lord Staffords Trial, about the News of Sir Edmondbury Godfreys being
killed, before it was known here what was become of him, and that perhaps might
mislead him if he be mislead.


Mr. J. Withins. Do you believe, that this man can speak truth, when he says it
was Reported all about their Town for two days before it was done, and yet
cannot name one person that spoke it?


Mr. Fielder. I keep a public shop, and don't take notice of every one that
comes in and out, to remember particularly.


Mr. J. Withins. You heard it up and down the Town you say, surely you might
remember somebody.


Mr. Wallop. He might hear it, and not take notice of one, but it was the
common same at Andover.


Mr. Williams. Let it go as it will. Your Lordship and the Jury hear what he
says. --


L. C. J. But under favor, Mr. Williams, it ought not to pass so easily, it is
a contrivance to deceive the King's Subjects, and shows a design to pick up
Evidence to amuse the unwary, and fill their heads with fears and jealousies of
I know not what.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, I would excuse my Client from malice as well as ever I
can, and therefore we produce these Witnesses to show what grounds he had for
what he did.


Mr. Williams. We will next call some Women that live near the Tower, that
might give him some occasion for his concerning himself in this business, Jane
Lodeman, and Margaret Smith. This voice and rumor in the Country made him to go
into the Country, but it shows he was no contriver of the Report.


Mr. At. Genesis I would feign know of Fielder, when he told Mr. Braddon of this.


Mr. Braddon. My Lord, I desire the family of the Edwards may be called.


L. C. J. Name them, Who are they? How can we tell who your Witnesses are?


Mr. Braddon. Crier call them, Mrs. Edwards and her Daughter. Will your
Lordship give me leave to make my own defense?


L. C. J. Ay, if you will, but then take notice your Council are discharged
from making any defense for you.


Mr. Braddon. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, These
were the inducements following, that put me upon engaging in this matter. --


Mr. At. Genesis Call your Witnesses first, and then speak.


Mr. Braddon. Mr. Edwards, and Mrs. Edwards.


(who came into Court)

Mr. J. Withins. Pray Mr. Braddon, answer me this one Question, What was the
matter that encouraged you to proceed after you knew the Boy had denied it, and
said it was all a lie?


Mr. Braddon. I was bound to answer to an Information after I had been examined
at the Council; I had not otherwise stirred in it again.


L. C. I. Well, what do you ask Edwards?


Mr. Braddon. What day was the first day I saw you, and had discourse with you,
and what was the discourse I had with you?


Mr. Edwards. It was the seventeenth of July.


Mr. Braddon. What did you tell me then that your Boy reported?


Mr. Edwards. I told you what I acquainted the Court withal before, that the
Boy had brought home such a Report.


Mr. Braddon. Had the Boy ever denied it before I saw you?


Mr. Edwards. That day you came to speak with me about it, as I was informed by
my Wife and my Daughter, the Boy did deny it.


Mr. Braddon. Was it before I came, or after I came that he denied it?


Mr. Edwards. It was after you came.


Mr. Braddon. What were the inducements that made him to deny it?


L. C. J. He tells you himself, because it was false.


Mr. Braddon. I desire the elder Sister Sarah Edwards may be called.


Mr. Wallop. It is apparent the Boy did first affirm it. --


L. C. J. I thought Mr. Braddon would have made his defense himself, Mr.
Wallop, but you will be breaking in upon him with your Remarks. Make your
Remarks by and by, this is a time for Evidence.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, I only say this, It Is apparent the Boy did first affirm
it, and we shall show how he came to deny it.


L. C. J. It Is not proper for you to make Remarks, when you are examining your
Witnesses; but when you sum up, You may take what notes you will, and reserve
them till that time, but do not break in upon the Evidence.


Crier. Here is Sarah Edwards now.


(who was sworn)

Mr. At. Genesis This is not the Sister, this is the mother of the Boy.


L. C. J. Well, what do you ask her?


Mr. Braddon. What discourse had you with your Boy about Ten of the Clock that
Friday morning I met you?


Mrs. Edwards. I had no discourse, but what my Child told me.


Mr. Braddon. What did your Child tell you?


Mrs. Edwards. I gave an account to my Lord Keeper, he had it in writing, I
gave him an account in writing.


Mr. Braddon. But you are now called upon your Oath, and are to speak the
Truth, and must give an account to his Lordship and the Jury upon your Oath,
what it was the Boy told you.


Mrs. Edwards. What was it Sir he came and told me? why the Boy told me, Mother
says he I have been at the Tower, and seen the King's Majesty and his Royal
Highness, and says he the Earl of Essex has cut his Throat; and Lord Mother
says he, and wept. Lord Child said I, I am afraid, you are going to make some
excuse to me that I should not beat you, being you have played Truant, no
mother says he I did not. He continued in this for a little while, and then
afterward did deny it.


Mr. Braddon. What did he deny?


Mrs. Edwards. What he had said to me.


Mr. Braddon. Did he deny that he had been at the Tower? Or that the Earl of
Essex had cut his Throat?


Mrs. Edwards. No, he denied what he said he saw.


Mr. Braddon. What was that?


Mrs. Edwards. He said he saw an hand out of a Window, and a Razour fell down,
and he went to take it up, and there came out a Woman or a Maid, a short fat
Woman came out and took it up and went in again.


Mr. Wallop. And he said this crying and weeping you say?


Mrs. Edwards. Yes, he did so.


Mr. Braddon. Did he deny it before such time as I had been there?


Mrs. Edwards. No, you was once at my House before, and spoke to my Husband,
and then you came the same day again.


Mr. Braddon. Pray, what was the discourse your eldest Daughter had with the
Boy between the time of my first coming, and the time of my second coming?


L. C. J. It Is impossible for her to answer any such Question, what discourse
two other people had.


Mr. At. Genesis Bring the Daughter her self, and let her tell.


L. C. J. Hark you Mrs. Edwards before you go. The Boy denied it, it seems in
two or three days after he had given out such a Report.


Mrs. Edwards. Yes, my Lord he did.


L. C. J. How came he to deny it?


Mrs. Edwards. I will tell you how, When this Gentleman came and acquainted my
Husband with his business, it put us all into a great damp; and my Husband
said, now both my Boys were gone to School, and says he, after the Gentleman
was gone, to my Daughter Sarah, Don't you say any thing to your Brother when he
comes in, but let him alone, and we will talk to him. So with that she was so
grievously affrighted and so amazed, that as soon as he came in she said,
prithee Billy deal truly, and don't you tell any lie to save your Breech, for
here has been a Gentleman to inquire some thing about what you said, why Sister
says he will any thing of harm come, truly Child says she I don't know, and
upon that he did deny it.


L. C. J. Did you tell Mr. Braddon he had denied it?


Mrs. Edwards. He was told he had denied it.


L. C. J. Did you tell Mr. Braddon before the Paper was signed that he did deny
it.


Mrs. Edwards. Yes, my Lord, he knew that before the Paper was signed.


Mr. Braddon. Mrs. Edwards, Did not the Boy come to you, and cry out he should
be hanged, and then did deny it?


Mrs. Edwards. Yes, that he did.


Mr. Braddon. From whence did he come that he was in such a fright?


Mrs. Edwards. I cannot tell that Sir.


Mr. Braddon. Did not your eldest Daughter chide him and threaten him?


Mrs. Edwards. Yes, she did bid him speak the Truth.


Mr. At. Genesis And then he denied it?


Mrs. Edwards. Yes.


L. C. J. Ay, says she to him, Billy do not to save thy Breech tell a lie, but
speak the Truth, why then says he the Truth of it is there was no such thing.


Mr. Braddon. My Lord, she says it was after his Sister had Chid and threatened
him.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You are a little too fierce upon the Woman Mr. Braddon, you do
not Observe what she says.


L. C. J. Yes, he is wonderful zealous, flourishing his hands. --


Mr. Sol. Genesis She says, the Daughter did tell the Son that he must speak the
Truth, and not tell a lie to save his Breech, for there had been a Gentleman to
inquire about it, why says the Boy will there come any harm of it, I don't know
says his Sister, why then says he I tell you the Truth there was no such thing.


L. C. J. Ay, when she engaged him to tell the Truth, and not tell a lie to
save his Breech, then the Truth comes out.


Mr. Braddon. Pray call Sarah Edwards the Daughter. My Lord, they told me in
the House that she had frighted him into a denial.


L. C. J. Pray good Sir how came you to be a Justice of peace? And to turn
Examiner? You live in the Temple, or belong to the Temple, how come you to take
Examinations here in London, but that some people are so very zealous and
officious in matters that concern them not, on purpose to raise a dust.


( Then Sarah Edwards the younger was sworn.)

Mr. Braddon. Did not your Brother deny what he had said by your means?


L. C. J. Pray ask a fair Question.


Mr. Braddon. Mrs. Pray tell your Knowledge of what the Boy declared?


L. C. J. Ay, Ay, Tell what you know, what your Brother said concerning his
seeing a Razour, and his denying of it afterward. Tell all from the beginning
to the end, and tell Truth in Gods name, and nothing but the Truth. We desire
the Truth may come out, let it be of which side it will.


Sarah Edwards. My Brother came home and said, he had been at the Tower, and
that he had seen his Majesty and his Royal Highness, and the Earl of Essex had
cut his Throat, and that he saw an hand fling out a Razour out of a Window, and
that a Maid or a Woman came out and took it up, and went in again, and
presently after he heard the noise of murder cried, so I knowing he was very
apt to tell lies, I did not believe it.


Mr. Braddon. Pray Mrs. did you prevail with him to deny it afterward


L. C. J. You are so wonderful full of Zeal and heat in this matter, you cannot
let your own Witnesses tell their own Story, but you must interrupt them. You
have been bred to the Law, and you have been before here present I suppose at
many Trials, and what pretense can you have to be more indulged in an
extraordinary way of proceeding than others, it is not for the integrity of your
Conversation I am sure that you ought to have it, but only because you have
more impudence.


Mr. Braddon. My Lord, I have nothing of confidence, but what is grounded upon
innocence.


L. C. J. I tell you, you are too confident, and pray know where you are, and
behave your self as you ought.


Mr. Braddon. My Lord, I hope I do no otherwise.


L. C. J. We must give such liberty and toleration because of the extravagance
of his confidence as to let him break in upon all rules and methods. When you
behave your self as you ought to do, the Court will indulge you and give you
all just liberty, but don't expect for your Zeal-sake and the flinging of your
hands to do what you list. Go on Mistress.


Sarah Edwards. So Sir this Mr. Braddon came on Tuesday following about one or
two of the Clock and asked for my Father, and coming, my Sister Mary went to
the door and called my Father out to him. When my Father came to him, he told
my Father he came from Sir Henry Capell, and the Countess of Essex to know the
Truth of my Brothers Report. So my Father told him the Boy had reported such a
thing, but he would not assert the Truth of it, for he had been informed by us
that the Boy was apt to tell lies to excuse his playing Truant, so the Child
was gone to School when Mr. Braddon came, and when he came home from School
they went to the Child, said I, Billy will you be sure to tell me the Truth of
this Report, why Sister said he, will any harm come of it? Nay said I, I do not
know, for there has been a Gentleman to inquire about it. So then the Child
denied it.


L. C. J. Did he know this before he made the Boy sign the Paper?


Sarah Edwards. Yes, this was on the Tuesday after Mr. Braddon had been first
there. And I spoke to him, said I, Billy say nothing but the Truth be sure, and
don't tell a lie to save your Breech. So Sir, as soon as ever the Child denied
it Mr. Braddon came in again the same day, and coming in found us, my Mother
and all of us, daunted hearing the Boy deny it; but he asked the Child and bid
him speak the Truth, and told him it was a dreadful thing to be a Liar, and bid
him read the fifth of the Acts, telling him he would find there two were struck
dead for telling of a lie, and several other such expressions that I cannot
remember. Upon Wednesday about noon he comes again, and then my Brother did own
it again, and he writ down what the Boy owned, and went away, saying he would
go to Sir Henry Capell and the Countess of Essex. And on Thursday he comes
again and brings a Paper written over again, not the same he writ at our House,
and then the Child set his hand to it. The Child was something unwilling, so
says he to him, it will be no harm to you, if any danger does come of it, it
will come to me and not to you.


L. C. J. The Child was unwilling to sign it you say, but by his persuasion?


Sarah Edwards. Yes, Mr. Braddon told him it would be no harm to him, all the
harm would come to himself.


Mr. Braddon. When the Child had owned to me what he first said, and upon your
saying that he denied it, I asked him the reason why he denied it, pray will
you tell what answer he made to that question. Pray tell the truth, and nothing
but the truth.


Sarah Edwards. Upon my word Sir, I cannot recollect that.


Mr. Braddon. Pray Mistress, what answer did he make?


Sarah Edwards. I have told you what I know, to the best of my remembrance.


Mr. Braddon. Did not you hear your Brother run to his Mother, and cry out I
shall be hanged?


Sarah Edwards. Yes.


Mr. Braddon. What was the reason of his crying out so?


Sarah Edwards. Why the Child had that fear and dread upon his Spirits, knowing
it was a Lie I suppose he had told.


Mr. Braddon. What was the reason of his fear?


L. C. J. She tells you, it was the falsehood of the story.


Mr. Wallop. Mistress, did not you tell him that his Father would be in danger
of losing his Place?


Sarah Edwards. Yes Sir, we did.


Mr. Wallop. Did you tell him, the King will Hang your Father if you do not
deny it?


L. C. J. Why, you have a mind to have it believed that it was true then Mr.
Wallop.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, the Boy best knows that.


L. C. J. But do you believe that if it had been true, that the King would Hang
his Father, or turn him out of his Place if he did not deny it, as though the
King would force people to deny the truth?


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, I do not say nor believe any such thing.


L. C. J. But your question seems to carry it so.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, I ask the Question of her, whether she did not say so to
him, I ask Questions according to my instructions.


L. C. J. Nay Mr. Wallop, be as angry as you will, you shall not Hector the Court
out of their understandings. We see plainly enough whether that question tends.
You that are Gentlemen of the Robe, should carry your selves with greater
respect to the Government, and while you do so, the Court will carry themselves
as becomes them to you.


Mr. Wallop. I referr my self to all that hear me, if I attempted any such
thing as to Hector the Court.


L. C. J. Referr your self to all that hear you, referr your self to the Court,
it is a reflection upon the Government, I tell you your Question is, and you
shall not do any such thing while I sit here, by the Grace of God, if I can help
it.


Mr. Wallop. I am sorry for that, I never intended any such thing, my Lord.


L. C. J. Pray behave your self as you ought Mr. Wallop; you must not think to
huff and swagger here.


Mr. J. Withins. Mr. Braddon, you hear what the reason was of his crying out
so. She said he was afraid, because he knew he had told a Lie.


Mr. Wallop. Pray Mistress, who told him the Family would be ruined by it?


Mr. J. Withins. Mr. Wallop, I asked this Gentlewoman, whether she did say it,
and she said she could not tell.


Sarah Edwards. Indeed I cannot tell my Lord.


Mrs. Edwards. She did indeed say so my Lord.


Mr. Wallop. Pray let it go my Lord as it is, what was it she said? Did she
speak about turning her Father out of his place?


Mrs. Edwards. I cannot say that, but she said, when the Boy asked whether
there would be any harm by it, she could not tell, but it may be her Father and
Family might be ruined.


L. C. J. And is not this reflection upon the Government, to say the King would
Ruin any one if they did not tell a Lie.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, for a false Report he might be Ruined, but it seems upon
this saying he did deny it.


Mr. J. Withins. Was there a word said of his being turned out of his Place?


Mrs. Edwards. I cannot say there was.


L. C. J. No not a word, but only Mr. Wallop is so impetuous in the worst of
Causes.


Mr. Wallop. I am in the judgment of the Court, whether I do any thing but what
becomes an Advocate for his Clyent, according to my instructions.


L. C. J. Yes, you are so, and shall know that you are under the Correction of
the Court too.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord I know where I am.


L. C. J. Ay, you know well enough, but you would do well to carry your self as
you should do.


Mr. Wallop. With humble submission my Lord, I appeal to all that hear me.


L. C. J. Appeal to whom you will, I know the business of the Bar is to appeal
to the Court.


Mr. J. Withins. What is the matter with Mr. Wallop, that makes him so earnest
in this Cause.


L. C. J. There is such an heat in this Cause, I wonder whence it should come,
I am sure it is not from the honesty of it.


Mr. Braddon. Young Mrs. Edwards, if I suffer any thing by reason of the
falsity of your Testimony it will return upon you.


Sarah Edwards. Sir, I do tell you all I know.


Mr. Braddon. Then I desire you to answer me this Question, whether or no when
the Boy did own what he first said, and I asked him the reason of his denial,
whether the falsity of the thing, or fear caused him to deny it, did not he say
it was fear through your discouragements and threatenings?


Sarah Edwards. No he did not say it, did he Mother?


L. C. J. Why we are got into a way of appealing and appealing, here is
appealing to the people, and appealing to the Witness, pray keep to the
business, and within the bounds of decency. Before such time as the Boy denied
it, did you desire him to speak truth?


Sarah Edwards. Yes, I did.


Mr. Thompson. And when Mr. Braddon Examined him, did he desire him to speak
truth?


Sarah Edwards. Yes he did.


L. C. J. But he knew before he Examined him that he had denied it, did not he?


Sarah Edwards. Yes, the Second time before he came into the House.


Mr. Braddon. I desire the old Gentleman may be asked this Question.


Mr. Thompson. Call Mr. Edwards again.


L. C. J. The Spirit of the Clyent was got into the Counsel I think just now,
and now it is got into the Clyent again. It Is an hard matter to Lay it I
perceive.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, I am here of Counsel for Mr. Braddon, and I only ask
Questions as they are in my Breviate.


L. C. J. But Sir, if you have any thing in your Breviate that reflect upon the
Government, you ought not to vent it, nor shall not be permitted to vent it as
long as I sit here.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, with submission, I hope I never did, nor never shall let
any such thing come from me.


L. C. J. Nay be as angry, or as pleased as you will, it is all one to me, you
shall not have liberty to broach your Seditious Tenets here.


Mr. Braddon. Mr. Edwards pray will you answer this Question? Did not your Son
when he was asked why he denied it, say that it was fear and discouragement,
through his Sisters Threats, was the cause? Pray speak the truth.


Mr. Edwards. I cannot tell whether the Child did say so, something of that
nature he did say.


Mr. Thompson. Call Anne Burt.


L. C. J. We have got such strange kind of notions now a days, that forsooth
men think they may say any thing because they are Counsel. I tell you Mr.
Wallop, your Questions did reflect upon the Government, as though the King had
a mind to turn a man out of his employment if he did not swear a falsity. What
can be a greater reflection than that? But all the matter is, what has been
done must be avouched and justified, though it be never so ill. But we plainly
see through all. This was the design from the beginning, the King and the Duke
of York were in the Tower at that time, and it must be thought and believed
that they had designed this matter, and so then all people must be ruined in
case they would not say the Earl murdered himself, tho indeed others had done
it.


Mr. Wallop. Mr. Edwards did not delight to have such a Report as might create
trouble first come out of his House.


Mr. Braddon. My Lord, As to the making such an inference, or any reflection as
your Lordship mentions, I am as far from it as any body here.


L. C. J. We must give a wonderful deal of countenance to such barbarous and
horrid practices, and I warrant you, must suffer the Government to be reflected
upon at the will and pleasure of every man. No, let us hear the Truth, but not
in the face of a Court permit men to asperse the Government as they please, by
asking such Questions.


Mr. At. Genesis And the Witnesses say nothing to it neither.


L. C. J. No, nothing at all like it, but it is aspersion for aspersion sake.
And we must sit still and hear it.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, I think it is for the honor of the Government to have all
things fairly inquired into.


L. C. J. And it is for the honor of all Courts of Justice not to suffer
reflections upon the Government, let them be by whom they will. And in
Gentlemen of the Bar it is worse than others.


Mr. J. Withins. Truly I do not see, where there is any countenance for asking
such a Question.


L. C. J. No, but some people are so wonderful Zealous. --


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, Zeal for the Truth is a good Zeal.


L. C. J. It is so, but Zeal for faction and sedition I am sure is a bad Zeal.
I see nothing in all this cause, but villainy and baseness. And I believe no man
that has heard it, but will readily acknowledge that it appears to be an
untoward malicious ugly thing, as bad as ever I heard since I was born, on
purpose to cast an indignity upon the King and Government, and set us all in a
flame.


( Then Anne Burt appeared and was Sworn.)

Mr. Braddon. Mrs. Burt, I desire to know what discourse you had with Mrs.
Edwards? and that Family?


Mr. At. Genesis I beg your pardon for that, Here Mrs. Edwards is her self to
tell what she has said.


Mr. Braddon. I desire to know what discourse she had with any of the Family.


Mrs. Burt. I went to make a visit to Mrs. Edwards, and I had not been there
half an hour but in comes this Gentleman, now I had asked no Questions about
the business, but in he comes and desired to speak with Mr. Edwards, Mr.
Edwards was called, and when he came in with Mr. Edwards the Gent. sat down in
the Room, and told Mr. Edwards he had heard a Report of something his Son had
spoken, but he desired to have it from his Sons own mouth, and the Boy was
called in (this is a real Truth Sir, for I do not know whether I may stir from
this place where I am alive or no;) And when the Boy came in, the Gentleman
said to him, if it be true that you have reported, own it; if not, do not own
it; for said he it is a dreadful thing to be found in a lie, I would have you
Read the fifth Chapter of the Acts, where a man and a woman were struck dead
for telling a lie. Sir said the Boy it is true, and what I said I will speak it
before any Justice of peace in the World. And then he asked him what he had
reported, and the Boy made a Repetition of what he had seen and said before,
that he went into the Tower: and came to the first Row of Houses that goes
along. And at the first House he saw no body look out at the Window, nor at the
second House, but he looked up at the third House, and he took his hand and
showed thus, said he I saw, a man's hand he did not say, but an hand throw a
Razor out, of this fashion, and he imitated it with his hand. Said the
Gentleman was it not the wrong Window, or the wrong House? I will not take the
thing upon this credit, take your other Brother down that was a bigger Boy than
this, and says he, go down to the House and show your Brother the Window where
you saw this. The two Boys went down, and he showed his Brother the place where
he saw the hand. --


L. C. J. Were you present at his showing?


Mrs. Burt. Will your Lordship please to give me leave. --


L. C. J. And pray give me leave too, I ask you, Were you present? for you tell
it as if you knew it your self.


Mrs. Burt. Both the Boys came up and said so.


L. C. J. You should have said so then, that they told you it, for you are upon
your Oath, and must affirm nothing but your own knowledge.


Mrs. Burt. If I do misplace my words I cannot help that. --


L. C. J. You misplace your Evidence woman, you must not swear, that to be true
that you don't know to be true.


Mrs. Burt. My Lord, I heard what I say with my own Ears.


L. C. J. But you talk of a thing you did not see with your own Eyes, as if you
had seen it.


Mrs. Burt. I beg your pardon my Lord, I cannot tell how to place my words so
exactly.


L. C. J. I care not now thou placest thy words, tell thy own knowledge.


Mrs. Burt. I tell what is Truth, what I heard and saw; for said Mr. Braddon, I
believe it was not the right window, when the Boys came up and said he had
showed the window. And this Gentleman, I cannot hit his name right (he is a
stranger to me) he and Mr Edwards went down with the Boy, to see whether it
were the right window of the House where my Lord died (which where it is I
cannot tell any otherwise than has been reported, or whether there be one room
or two of a floor I don't know;) and when he came up again he called for a
Sheet of Paper that he might write from the Boys mouth, and that he might not
differ one word from what the Boy had said himself. And when I saw Mr. Braddon
begin to write I went away, for I thought it may be the Gentleman might expect
I should set my hand to it as a Witness, and I did not desire any trouble.


Mr. Braddon. I desire this Question may be asked her my Lord, do not you
remember it was said the Boy denied it?


Mrs. Burt. Yes, it was said, The Boy did deny it.


Mr. Braddon. What did his Sister say was the reason of his denying it?


Mr. Thompson. Ay, what did you hear the Sister say?


L C. J. I told you before that was no Evidence what another body did say.


Mr. Wallop. Mistress, the Boy denied it, for what reason?


Mrs. Burt. Because his Sister, as his mother told me, had been talking to him.


L. C. J. As his mother told you, prithee woman speak your own knowledge and
not what another body told thee.


Mrs. Burt. Pray give me leave my Lord. --


L. C. J. I tell thee I will not give thee leave to say what thou should not
say.


Mrs. Burt. I heard his Sister say --


L. C. J. It is not Evidence if thou did hear never so many people say it.


Mrs. Burt. My Lord, I speak nothing but the Truth.


L. C. J. Shall we allow that in this Case for Evidence that we allow in no
other Case, for what reason pray? I do not see it deserves any such
extraordinary favor.


Mr. J. Withins. Mr. Wallop, we must not hear what another said, that is no
party to this Cause. You know it is no Evidence, therefore do not press it.


Mrs. Burt. My Lord, I have done if that will satisfy you.


L. C. J. Prithee satisfy thy self good woman.


Mrs. Burt. My Lord, I have done. I come here to speak the Truth and so I do.


L. C. J. Nay prithee be not so full of Tattle, so full of Clack.


( Then a little Girl came into Court.)

L. C. J. What age is this Girl of? How old art thou Child?


Girl. I was thirteen last Saturday.


L. C. J. Do you know the danger of telling a Lie?


Girl. Yes.


L. C. J. Why what will become of you if you tell a Lie?


Girl. The Devil will have me.


L. C. J. Give her her Oath. What is thy Name Child?


Girl. Jean Lodeman.


( Then she was Sowrn.)

L. C. J. Child, do not be afraid of any thing in the World, but only of
telling any thing but what is true, be sure you do not tell a Lie, for if as
you say, you shall be in danger of Hellfire by telling a Lie, much more will
you be in danger if you swear to a Lie. Now what do you ask her.


Mr. Braddon. What did you see in the Tower that Morning the Earl of Essex dyed?


Lodeman. I saw a Hand out of a Window, but I cannot tell what Window it was,
but it was a hand throw out a Razour.


Mr. Braddon. And what did you hear after that?


Lodeman. I cannot well remember, but it was either two shricks or two Groans,
that I heard presently after.


L. C. J. What time of the day was it Child?


Lodeman. It was between Nine and Ten of the Clock.


L. C. J. Who was with you besides your self there?


Lodeman. There were more besides me, but they went away.


L. C. J. Who were they Child?


Lodeman. A great many that I did not know.


L C. J. And how came you to take notice of it?


Lodeman. And there was a Coach stood just at the door.


L. C. J. Tell us some of them Child that were there besides thy self, speak
the truth, be not afraid. Thou say^st a great many People were there, and all
the people must necessarily see it.


Lodeman. They were people I did not know.


L. C. J. But they all saw it as well as you?


Lodeman. So I suppose they did.


L. C. J. And you heard a shriek or two you say?


Lodeman. Two shrieks or two groans, I cannot well remember which.


L. C. J. How high was the Window?


Lodeman. Not above one pair of stairs high.


L. C. J. How high from the Ground might it be?


Lodeman. Not above one Story.


Mr. Thompson. Where abouts in the Tower was it?


Lodeman. Sir, it was a you go upon the Mount.


Mr. Wallop. Whose Lodging do you think it was?


Lodeman. I did not know whose it was, but Folks said it was the Earl of
Essex's.


L. C. J. Who did you tell this to?


Lodeman. I told no body till I came to my Aunt, and I told her.


L. C. J. What is her Name?


Lodeman. Margaret Smith.


L. C. J. Did you ever tell this to that Man?


Lodeman. Yes, afterward I did.


L. C. J. How came he to enquire of you about it?


Lodeman. He came and asked me, and I could not deny it.


L. C. J. Ay, but how came he to ask you?


Lodeman. There was a Gentlewoman that was at our house, and she heard of it,
and spoke of it at a Gentlewoman's at Dinner, and so he came to our house to
inquire about it.


L. C. J. Who is that Gentlewoman? what is her Name?


Lodeman. Susan Gibbons.


L. C. J. Let me see the Information of this Girl, that Mr. Braddon had taken.


Cl. of Cr. Yes, my Lord, there it is.


L. C. J. Do you know my Lord of Essex's Lodgings?


Lodeman. They said it was his.


L. C. J. Did you know it of your own knowledge?


Lodeman. No, Sir, I did not.


Mr. Thompson. Pray what became of the Razour that was thrown out of the
Window, after it was thrown out?


Lodeman. I saw a Woman in a white Hood come out, but I did not see her take it
up.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Girl, you say that when you were at this place in the Tower, and
saw this matter, there were a great many people there besides your self.


Lodeman. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did the Razour fall among the people that stood there, or did it
fall out in the street, or how?


Lodeman. Sir it fell within the Pales.


Mr. Sol. Genesis And was the Passage easy into the Pales?


Lodeman. Yes.


Mr. Sol. Gen What they must climb over must they?


Lodeman. No, you need not climb over, there is a door to go in. And when
people went in the Soldier opened the door.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Who went in with the Soldier? Did you see any body go in?


Lodeman. There was a Man went in, but I know not who he was.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did the Soldier stand at the door when this Razour was thrown
out?


Lodeman. I cannot tell that, a Soldier used to be at the door.


Mr. Sol. Genesis The Woman came out of the Lodging did she not?


Lodeman. Yes^


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did she go in again?


Lodeman. I did not see her go in again.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did she go into the Pale?


Lodeman. I did not see her go into the Pales.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you see the Razour after it fell upon the ground?


Lodeman. No.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was it bloody?


Lodeman. Yes.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Very bloody?


Lodeman. Yes.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you see no body take it up?


Lodeman. No I did not.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Come hither Child, are you sure it was a Razour or a Knife?


Lodeman. I am sure it was a Razour.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was it open or shut?


Lodeman. It was open.


Mr. Sol Genesis What color was the handle?


Lod. Sir I cannot tell, I see it but as it flew out.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was it all over Bloody?


Lodeman. No.


Mr. Sol. Genesis All but a little speck?


Lodeman. It was very Bloody.


L. C. J. Blessed God, what an Age do we live in! Girl you say you did not know
it to be my Lord of Essex's Window.


Lodeman. No, but as they told me.


L. C J. Nor you did not see any body take up the Razour.


Lodeman. No.


L. C. J. But are you sure you did not?


Lodeman. I am sure I did not.


L. C. J. But Child, recollect thy self, sure thou did see some body take it
up.


Lodeman. No, I did not;


L. C. J. I ask thee again, did not thou know it to be my Lord of Essex's
Window?


Lodeman. No, but as they told me.


L. C. J. Did you hear no body speak to the Maid that came out?


Lode. No body at all.


L. C. J. No, Prithee is that thy Hand Child? show her the Paper, the uppermost
part of it.


Lodeman. Sir, I cannot Write.


L. C. J. Who put thy Name to it?


Lodeman. Sir, I don't know no more than the Pope of Rome.


L. C. J. Whose Hand Writing is that?


Lodeman. I cannot tell, I never could Write in my Life.


Mr. Braddon. Those are the Names of such as heard her say it.


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, you have Cooked it up bravely.


L. C. J. You shall see what a brave Managery you have made of this poor Child.
Read the Information.


Cl. of Cr. Reads. -- The Eighth of August, 1683. Jean Lodeman Aged about 13
Years, did in the presence of these whose Names are Underwritten, declare as
follows, That the said Jean Lodeman was in the Tower on Friday Morning, the
13th of July last, and standing almost over against the late Earl of Essex's
Lodging Window, she saw a Hand cast out a Razour out of my Lords Window, and
immediately upon that she heard shrieks, and that there was a Soldier by my
Lords door which cried out to those within the House, that some body should
come and take up a Razour which was thrown out of the Window, whereupon there
came a Maid with a White Hood of the House, but who took up the Razour she
cannot tell. --


L. C. J. Here it is said the Soldier cried out, but now she says, the Soldier
she does not know was there, and she heard no body speak to the Maid.


Mr. Braddon. With Submission my Lord, I desire to ask her this question.


L. C. J. Prithee ask her what thou will. We hear what she says.


Mr. Braddon. Did you hear the Soldier cry out, or did you not?


Lode. No, I did not.


Mr. Braddon. Did not you say, you heard him cry out?


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, we cannot admit Mr. Braddon should ask such Questions,
they are leading Questions. Ask her a general Question, and you shall have an
Answer, but you shall not give her words to Swear to.


L. C. J. No, Upon my word, you have given her too many words to Swear to
already.


Mr. Braddon. My Lord, I only writ what she declared.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Were you carried by Mr. Braddon before any Magistrate, or any
Justice of Peace.


Lodeman. No.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did he take the Examination himself?


Lodeman. Yes.


Mr. At. G. Did not he desire you to go before a Justice of Peace to be Sworn?


Lodeman. No, Sir.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did he Write it himself?


Mr. At. Genesis Ay, he Writ it and took it, and this Woman that is coming here,
is a Witness to it.


L. C. J. What is this Woman's Name?


Mr. Braddon. This is the Aunt Margaret Smith.


( Who was Sworn.)

L. C. J. Well what say you to her?


Mr. Braddon. I desire to know, what this Girl said to you, when she returned
from the Tower the 13 th of July?


Mrs. Smith. She said to that effect that she speaks now.


Mr. Braddon. What was that? tell the Court.


Mrs. Smith, I chid her because she had been playing: That is all I can say.


Mr. Justice Withins, Did she tell you, the Soldier cried out for some body to
come and take up the Razor?


Mrs. Smith, I cannot say that.


Mr. Just. Withins, Did she say, she saw a Razor thrown out of my Lord of
Essex's Window?


Mrs. Smith, She said, she saw a Razor thrown out of a Window; I cannot tell
whether she said out of my Lord of Essex's Window.


Mr. Freke, Did you set your hand to that Paper?


L. C. Just. Were you a Witness to that Paper?


Mrs. Smith, There were others heard what the Girl said, as well as I.


L. C. Just. Who desired you to sign it?


Mr. Freke, Who writ that Paper, Mrs.?


Mrs. Smith Pray excuse me, Sir, I do not know.


Mr. Freke, Did you see it writ?


Mrs. Smith, No.


L. C. Just. No: it was one got ready drawn by Mr. Braddon.


Mr. Just. Holloway, Pray let the Boy's Information be read again; for I
observe there is a difference; she says, the Razor fell within the Pales, the
Boy says, it fell without.


L. C. Just. Ay, ay, the one says it was the inside, the other the outside of
the Pales.


Then the Information was read.

L. C. Just. Go on now, and ask your Questions.


Mr. Braddon, Did the Girl say, That after the Razor was thrown out, the
Soldier cried to some body to take it up?


Mrs. Smith, Sir, I can say no more than what I have said.


Mr. Braddon, Did she, or did she not?


Mrs. Smith, Pray, Sir, excuse me; I have spoken what I know.


Mr. At. Genesis You may see how he has managed this matter, my Lord, by his
urging the Witnesses with Questions they know nothing of.


L. C. Just. Yes, yes, we see he would fain put words into their mouths.


Mr. At. Genesis Mrs. Did you send to Mr. Braddon to inform him of what the Girl
had said? or did he come to you?


Mrs. Smith, Sir, I never saw him before in my days.


Mr. At. Genesis He came first to you then.


Mrs. Smith, Yes: he hearing of it, came as a stranger to me.


Mr. Braddon, Did I, directly or indirectly, offer you, or your Niece, any
thing?


Mrs. Smith, No, never in this World.


Mr. Braddon, Did I ever desire her, or you, to say any thing but what was true?


Mrs.. Smith, No, Sir: You ever encouraged the Girl to speak truth; and bid her
speak nothing but what was truth.


Mr. At. Genesis You need not pay dear for a Lie; you are like to pay dear enough
before you have done.


Mr. Braddon, My Lord, As to personal knowledge, I am as much a stranger to this
matter as any body here; and in all my Concern in it, I have done nothing but
what was very fair.


L. C. Just. Mind your Defense, Mr. Braddon, and leave commending your self; or
if you will, rather commend your self by your Actions than your Expressions:
One good Action is worth Twenty good Expressions.


Mr. Braddon, Swear William Glasbrook (which was done).


L. C. Just. Well, what do you ask him?


Mr. Freke, My Lord, We desire to know of him, whether he was by on the 13 th
of July, when the Girl gave this Report?


Mr. Glasbrooke, I was up two pair of stairs when she came in.


L. C. Just. What is your Name, Sir?


Mr. Glasbrooke, William Glasbrooke.


Cl. of Cr. Ay, here is his Information, among those that were taken about
Braddon.


Mr. Glasbrooke, She came in to her Aunt, that went out just now before me, and
I heard her very loud with her Aunt, saying, the Earl of Essex had cut his
Throat in the Tower. Her Aunt chid her upon it; and her Aunt chiding her, she
said, she was sure it was true; for she saw a bloody Razor, with a bloody hand,
thrown out of the Window.


Mr. Freke, Was this the day of my Lord of Essex's Death?


Mr. Glasbrooke, It was the day the King was in the Tower, and, as was
reported, the day he was killed.


Mr. Braddon, Were you present when I first discoursed the Girl?


Mr. Glasbrooke, Yes.


Mr. Braddon, Had you ever seen me before, or no?


Mr. Glasbrooke, No.


L. C. Just. Did she say, my Lord of Essex cut his Throat at that time?


Mr. Glasbrooke, Yes.


L. C. Just. Are you a Witness to this Paper? Did you set your hand to this
Paper?


Mr. Glasbrooke, To the Paper Mr. Braddon writ, I did: I am a Witness to that.


L. C. Just. Then read his Information.


Cl. of Cr. Reads, -- Mr. William Glasbrooke does declare, That one Jean
Lodeman, aged about Thirteen years, inhabiting in the same house where he, the
said William Glasbrooke, lodged, did on Friday, the 13th of July last past,
between Ten and Eleven in the morning, in the presence and hearing of him, the
said William Glasbrooke, declare to her Aunt, That the Earl of Essex had cut
his throat; upon which her Aunt was very angry with her; whereupon she, the
said girl, did declare, That she was sure of it; for she saw him throw the
Razor out of the Window; and that the Razor was bloody; and that she heard two
groans or shreeks (which of the two words she used, he, the said William
Glasbrooke, is not certain): Of this he, the said William Glasbrooke, is ready
to make Oath.


L. C. Just. Now my Lord of Essex cut his own Throat, and after threw the Razor
out of the Window.


Mr. Glasbrooke, It Is what the Girl did declare.


Mr. At. Genesis Does not this Girl usually tell Lies?


Mr. Glasbrooke, I have before that time taken her in a Lie.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you acquaint Mr. Braddon with that?


Mr. Glasbrooke, I cannot tell that I did.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember that you told Mr. Braddon, That she was a Girl
that told Truth?


Mr. Glasbrooke, No, I never did that; for I was always of another persuasion
about her.


Mr. Sol. Genesis He never was of that Temper, to praise her; he was always of a
contrary persuasion.


L C. Just. I Will assure him, that I am of his Opinion too: I do believe she is
a lying Girl, and has told us a company of Lies now.


Mr. Braddon, These Two Children told me, they never saw one another till they
were examined at Council.


L. C. Just. Well, well: go on with your Witnesses.


Mr. Braddon, Where is William Smith (who appeared, and was sworn)? I desire to
know of you, Mr. Smith, what you heard the Girl say, when I was there?


Mr. Smith, I heard the Girl tell us, That she saw a hand cast out a Razor, and
either the hand was bloody, or the Razor, I cannot tell which; but she said it
was out of the Window, where she said the Earl of Essex lodged.


L. C. J. Did she say the Earl of Essex did it himself?


Mr. Smith, She said, she saw an Hand cast out a Razor.


L. C. J. Did she tell you, it was the Earl of Essex's Lodging-Window?


Mr. Smith, She said it was that Lodging.


L. C. J. Ay, but she says now, she does not know it to be his Lodging.


Mr. Braddon, My Lord, she says she was told it was his Lodging.


L. C. J. But you have made her to say positively, it was his Lodging, and that
he threw out the Razor.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray Sir, where did you first hear this Report of this Girl?


Mr. Smith, There at the house, where she was.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Were you alone, when you went to the Girl the first time?


Mr. Smith, No, I went with Mr. Braddon.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you hear any thing of it before? What did induce you to go
along with Mr. Braddon? What were the Arguments that prevailed with you to go
with him?


Mr. Smith, I did not know where he was going; Mr. Braddon called me at the
Shop, as I stood at the Door, and asked me if I was busy, or would go with
him? so I went with him to the Tavern.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You never heard one word before of the Girl's report?


Mr. Smith, No, I did not.


L. C. J. What else did the Girl tell you?


Mr. Smith, I cannot say what else she said. This I remember that I have told
you.


L. C. J. Did she name the Earl of Essex's Lodgings?


Mr. Smith, I am sure she said, the Lodging where the Earl of Essex lay.


L. C. J. Did she name the Earl of Essex?


Mr. Smith, She did name the Earl of Essex's Lodgings.


L. C. J. Did she in so many words say, That it was the Earl of Essex's
Lodgings?


Mr. At. Genesis Your Lordship sees they give one Evidence, and she another.


Mr. Smith, I cannot say, whether she did in so many words say so, or no; but
she said, That she saw a Hand toss out a Razor, and either the hand was bloody,
or the Razor, and it was where my Lord of Essex's Lodgings was.


L. C. J. But did she name my Lord of Essex's Lodgings?


Mr. Smith, Yes, she did.


L. C. J. Well, what else did she say? Tell us all she said.


Mr. Smith, She said, there was a man stood below, and she heard two shrieks,
and the Man did say, Here is a Razor; and a Woman came out, or one in Woman's
cloths, with white headcloths. Mr. Braddon asked if she see any Body take it
up, and she said, no; but she heard a Man say, here is the Razor, and she saw a
Woman come out.


L. C. J. You are sure that is all you heard her say?


Mr. Smith, I think so.


L. C. J. Recollect your self, pray good Mr. Smith.


Mr. Smith, I do not know, that I heard any thing else.


L. C. J. Pray read his Information.


C. of C. Here is William Smith subscribed.


Mr. Smith, Mr. Braddon writ down what the Girl said, and we did read it over
all, and then set our hands to it.


L. C J. Well, Sir, Read the Information then.


C. of C. Reads the Information as before --


L. C. J. You hear what you have affirmed in this Paper that the Girl said; you
have forgot in your Evidence now, this long business about the Soldier.


Mr. Smith, My Lord, I have told all I did remember.


L. C. J. Why, you have set your Hand to it.


Mr. Smith, I did read it over, and it was nothing but what the Girl said, I am
sure.


L. C. J. Where do you live?


Mr. Smith, In Throgmorton-street.


L. C. J. What Trade?


Mr. Smith, A Barber.


L. C. J. A notable Shaver upon my Word! a special fellow I Will warrant him!


Mr^ Braddon, Call Mrs. Mewx (who appeared and was Sworn.) Pray what day was
it, you went from London to Barkshire?


Mrs. Mewx, The day before my Lord Russel was tried.


Mr. Braddon, What Expression did you hear from a Gentleman in the Coach?


L. C. J. We must not suffer such a Question to be asked, that is not Evidence.


Mr. Braddon, My Lord, I ask the Question in general terms, what she heard such
a day?


L. C. J. Does she know any thing of her own Knowledge?


Mr. Braddon, She can tell what she heard, my Lord.


L. C. J. It Is no Evidence.


Mr. Braddon, Will your Lordship please to hear what she says.


L. C. J. No, I will not hear what I should not hear; let her speak what she
knows.


Mr. Braddon, She knows this, that a Woman told her --


L. C. J. Ask your Council, whether that be Evidence. If you will not be
satisfied with what I say, ask them.


Mr. Wallop, She proves a Report.


L. C. J. I ask it of you, Mr. Wallop, Is what another said to her, Evidence in
this Case?


Mr. Wallop, My Lord, If really there was such a Report --


L C. J. Is that Evidence?


Mr. Wallop, It Is Evidence there were such a Talk, and that is Evidence of the
probability of the thing.


L. C. J. I Will leave it to your self, If you as a Lawyer say it is Evidence, we
will hear it, because you say so; but I believe you nor no body else will offer
to say any such thing.


Mr. Wallop, My Lord, we lay it before the Court as part of the Ground upon
which we went in our being concerned in this business.


L. C. J: Is that a Justification of Mr. Braddon?


Mr. Wallop, Upon these probabilities he engaged in this matter, and to prove
this Report he brings this Gentlewoman to tell what she heard.


L. C. J. Why, is what the Woman told her, Evidence? She reported a Report to
me, can that be Evidence?


Mr. Wallop, My Lord, with submission, we think it justifies Mr. Braddon, that
he went upon these grounds.


L. C. J. Where is the Woman that told her? why is not she brought?


Mr. Wallop, They say, She is so big with Child, she cannot come.


L. C. J. Why, if that Woman were here her self, if she did say it, and would
not Swear it, we could not hear her; how then can her saying, be Evidence
before us? I wonder to hear any man that wears a Gown, to make a doubt of it.


Mr. Braddon, I desire Jeremy Burgis may be called, ( who appeared and was
Sworn.)


Mr. Wallop, What can you say about the Report in the Country?


Mr. Burgis, I was at From about my business on a Friday --


L. C. J. Why Gent. what are we doing all this time? Do you think we sit here
for nothing? Is not this the first time that a Report was given as Evidence in
Westminster Hall?


Mr. Freke, My Lord, We are necessitated to use this sort of Evidence.


L. C. Just. I tell you, Sir, It is no evidence, be necessitated what you will.


Mr. Freke, My Lord, They have produced this man's Letter that was taken about
Mr. Braddon, that is produced in Evidence against him: now this man comes to
give an Account how he came to write that Letter.


L. C. Just. But he shall not give an Account by a Report in the Country.


Mr. Burgis, It was written to the Landlord of the house where I quartered,
that he might give notice to Mr. Braddon of a Discourse that passed in his
house that Friday, of a Report that was there concerning the Earl of Essex's
murdering himself.


Mr. At. Genesis Had the Master of the house told you any such thing?


Mr. Burgis, No, he had not told me so; but I heard it in the house.


L. C. Just. Of whom did you hear it? who told you so?


Mr. Burgis, Sir, I was a stranger there.


L. C. Just. They can never tell, any of them, who it was first reported it,
nor particularly who told it them; but it was reported by some body, we don't
know who.


Mr. Beech, Under favor, my Lord, I rode directly to the Postmaster at
Froome, whither this Letter was directed; and by the way, there is a Remark in
the Letter of an alteration of the Figure, it is interlined the 13 th: it was
not so before* to hit the day exactly of the murder of the Earl of Essex; and
when I came thither, the Post Master told me, There was no such Report in his
house, nor in the whole Town at that time.


L. C. J. I desire to know, upon your Oath, who told you that Report?


Mr. Beech, Sir, I do not know; I was a stranger there.


L. C. J. Was it a man or a woman?


Mr. Burgis, He did not tell his discourse to me.


L. C. J. But thou could guess by the Habit, whether it was a man or woman.


Mr. Burgis, It was a man.


L. C. J. Who did he tell it to?


Mr. Burgis, The Company in the house.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray let him tell how Mr. Braddon came to speak to him about it.


L. C. J. Show him that Letter. Look upon it, friend: is that your hand?


Mr. Burgis, Yes, it is.


L. C. J. When did you put that figure of 13. in? There was another figure
before, and that is blotted out.


Mr. Burgis, It was a mistake in me: I mistook the day, and I corrected it.


L. C. J. When did you correct it? How soon did you correct it?


Mr. Burgis, Presently.


L. C. J. What day had you put in first?


Mr. Burgis, The 6 th day.


L. C. J. Ay, but that was not the right day, man.


Mr. Burgis, It was a great while after, and I did not expect to be brought in
question for any such thing.


L. C. J. How long after?


Mr. Burgis, Six weeks.


L. C J. How came thou to recollect, to make it from the 6 th to the 13 th,
Six weeks after?


Mr. Burgis, Mr. Braddon was there when I had writ it.


L. C. J. And he corrected it; did he?


Mr. Burgis, He said, That that was not the day of my Lord's Death.


L. C. J. You had written it the 6 th, and he put you in mind of the 13 th.


Mr. Burgis, Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis And he was to be the messenger that carried the Letter himself.


Mr. Burgis, Yes, he was.


Mr. Sol. Genesis That is very well. I suppose Gent. you hear what he says, He
says, Mr. Braddon was there and told him, that was not the day.


L. C. J. Ay, Mr. Braddon said, You have mistaken the time, that will not do
it, it must be the 13 th.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray let me know one thing, Who recommended Braddon to you?


Mr. Burgis, Indeed I cannot tell.


L C. J. Who did he say he came to you from? Tell the truth upon your Oath.


Mr. Burgis, Sir, I was at work at my business, and knew nothing of his coming.


L C. J. What Trade art thou?


Mr. Burgis, A Pinmaker.


L. C J. Where do you live?


Mr. Burgis, At Marlbrough.


L. C. J. How came Mr. Braddon and you acquainted?


Mr. Burgis, Sir, I will tell you: I was at work at my Trade, and there came
down a Gent. that lives in our Town to me, and asked me --


L. C. J. What is that Gentleman's name?


Mr. Burgis, Mr. Butcher.


L. C. J. What is that Butcher.


Mr. Burgis, A Gentleman that lives in Marlbrough, a Grazier by Trade. He came
and told me, There was a Gentleman come from London, about the business now in
dispute -- --


L. C. J. Prithee, what was spoke of?


Mr. Burgis, It was concerning the Earl of Essex's Death. And he desired me to
speak what I heard at such a time.


L. C. J. Who had you told what you heard first, to? You must have told it to
some Body; who did you tell it to first?


Mr. Burgis, Indeed I cannot directly say, who I did tell it to.


L. C. J. Had you told that Gentleman of your Town, Butcher, as you call him?


Mr. Burgis, No, not that I know of.


L. C. J. Well, when he came to you, what then?


Mr. Burgis, He desired me to go to Mr. Braddon, to the White Heart. And so I
went up to the White Heart; and when I came to Mr. Braddon, I told him what I
had heard at Form.


L. C. J. And what then?


Mr. Burgis, Then Mr. Braddon asked me the same Night, Whether I would go down
along with him to From: and I could not; so then he desired me to write a
Letter to recommend him to the house where I had heard it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis And you did write that Letter?


Mr. Burgis, Yes, I did so.


Mr. At. Genesis Your Lordship observes, this House was the Post House, to be
sure, to have it spread in public places.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you tell Butcher of your knowledge, before he carried you to
Braddon?


Mr. Burgis, Yes, Sir, I did.


Mr. Sol. Genesis When?


Mr. Burgis, Then, at that time.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did he ask you of your Knowledge, or did you tell him voluntarily?


Mr. Burgis, He asked me if I remembered any such thing as I had spoken?


Mr. Sol. Genesis Why, had you spoke of it before?


Mr. Burgis, Yes, I had.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did he tell you upon whose recommendation he came to you?


Mr. Burgis, I do not know upon whose recommendation he came.


L. C. J. When you writ this Letter, did he dictate it to you, or did you write
it of your self?


Mr. Burgis, I writ it of my self.


L. C. J. Did he tell you what you should write?


Mr. Burgis, I showed him what I had written?


L. C. J. And when you writ it of your self, you put in the 6 th day?


Mr. Burgis, Yes, I did so.


L. C. J. What did he say then?


Mr. Burgis, Mr. Braddon said, it was the 13 th day.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Why did you show Braddon your Letter after you had written it?


Mr. Burgis, He came to my house before I had sealed it.


L. C. J. But why did you show him the Letter?


Mr. Burgis, He desired a Letter to recommend him to that man at whose house I
heard it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What was he to be recommended to him for?


Mr. Burgis, It was to desire him to enquire, who brought the News first to
Town.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You say, He desired a Letter of Recommendation?


Mr. Burgis, Yes; it was to recommend him to that man


Mr. Sol. Genesis That you may not be in a mistake, pray recollect your self; for
there is not one word of Recommendation in the Letter. Tell the true Reason,
why you showed him the Letter?


Mr. Burgis, I cannot tell any other, but only he came before I had sealed it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did he desire to see it?


Mr. Burgis, No: but the Letter lay writ upon the Table.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was the Master of the Post House at From, present when that
Report you talk of, was made?


Mr. Burgis, I cannot rightly say whether he was or no.


L. C. J. How come thou to put it in thus? This bears date a pretty while
ago, Marlbrough, Aug. 21. and that was a good distance of time from that Report
that thou talkest of: How comes thou then to say, These are to desire you to
call to mind, That I was at Froom such a time, and heard such a Report: If he
was not there, why should he call to mind? What did thou mean by that
calling to mind?


Mr. Burgis, I would have had him called to mind my being at his house at that
time.


L. C. J. But if he was not there, why did thou ask him to call to mind that
Report?


Mr. Burgis, He might hear of it from some other at that time, tho he might not
hear it in that Company where I was.


Mr. Sol. Genesis There is a Riddle in it, if we could but solve it.


L. C. J. No, no. Mr. Solicitor, the Riddle is unfolded; it is a plain
Contrivance.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, from whom did he tell you he was recommended?


Mr. Recorder, How came you to talk so to a stranger, Sir, whom you never see
before, about such a business?


Mr. Burgis, He was recommended to me by Mr. Butcher, as I told you, who
carried me to him.


Mr. At. Genesis But who, as Braddon, or Butcher told you, did recommend him
first to come down thither to you?


L. C. J. Upon your Oath, Sir, who did Butcher tell you he came from?


Mr. Burgis, I have forgotten, Sir; I do not remember.


Mr. Recorder, Was it not a Nonconformist Parson, Sir, upon your Oath?


Mr. Burgis, Sir, I cannot remember.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Beech, Do you know any particular person that Braddon said
he came recommended from?


Mr. Beech, I can tell what Account Braddon gave of his Journey himself: He
said, he had a Letter that came particularly from this man to London, to bring
him down into the West: Said I, When came you out of London? I came on
Thursday, said he: Where did you lodge a Thursday Night? At Ockingham? Said I,
That is not your way to Marlbrough: Where did you lie the next night? He told
me, at one Venables; and the next Night at Salisbury, I think.


L. C. J. Did Braddon tell you, he had a Letter from that man?


Mr. Beech, He said, A Letter from that man brought him down into the West.


L. C. J. Burgis, Did you send him e're a Letter?


Mr. Burgis, No: I did not.


Mr. Beech, He said, he came down purposely upon this Report.


Mr. At. Genesis What said the Postmaster to you, Mr. Beech?


Mr. Beech, If you please to give me leave to speak, I Will tell you: I did
desire, that Mr. Braddon might have no Pen and Ink, and presently I rid away to
Froom, to this Post-Master's house, and spoke with the Postmaster, and all his
Family: We then examined them all, and there was no such Report in that Town
till the Sunday after.


Mr. Sol Genesis He was persuaded, sure, all people would say just as he would
have them.


Mr Thompson, Well, Mr. Braddon, Who do you call next?


Mr. Sol. Genesis Nay, I desire this man may go on; for methinks he mends e're a
step he goes.


Mr. Braddon, Mr. Burgis, Do you remember how it was that you came to recollect
your self, and to know it was the 13 th, and not the 6 th?


L. C. J. He says, You told him.


Mr. Braddon, Pray, Sir, remember your self, whether you did not say your self,
You remembered the true time; for you came from Froom to Marlbrough on the
Saturday night, and then you heard there the Earl of Essex had cut his Throat
the day before; and when they told you so, you cried out How can that be? It
must be done before; for yesterday I heard it at Froom before Five of the Clock.


Mr. J. Withins, Did not Mr. Braddon himself tell you, You had mistaken the day?


Mr. Brad. Sir, It was from this, He told this whole Story that I just now
repeated, that the Saturday night he was told, That the Earl had cut his
Throat, and replied to them, that he had heard at From, the day before that he
was murdered, and then I said, that must be the 13.


L. C. J. How came you to tell that man, You had a Letter from Burgis?


Mr. Braddon, No, My Lord, I did not tell him any such thing.


L. C J. Mr. Beech, Did not he tell you he had a Letter from Burgis?


Mr. Burgis, He told me he came down upon the Information of this Burgis.


L. C. J. And he Swears he never saw him before nor never writ to him.


Mr. Brad. You ask me, whether I had received any Letter from this Burgis, I
told you I had a Letter of Recommendation to Mr. Butcher, thinking he had been
the Person that had reported it, and Mr. Butcher went to this Person and
brought him to me, and he told me what he heard:


Mr. Beech, I never heard of the name of Butcher, till now he mentioned it.


Mr. Braddon, My Lord, I will call no more Witnesses.


Mr. At. Genesis Your Lordship and the Jury observe, I suppose, his confident
Behavior.


L. C. J. Ay, He is no more concerned at it, than if he had been doing the most
justifiable thing in the World.


Mr. Thompson, My Lord, I have but one word to add on the behalf of Mr. Speak,
who is likewise joined in this Information. Truly, Mr. Speak is a young
Gentleman of some quality, his Father is of very good Quality, Mr. Braddon was
of his Acquaintance, and being his Acquaintance, and thus concerned, as you
have heard in the Prosecution of this business; he hearing of these Reports,
and resolving to go down into the Country about it, desired Mr. Speak to lend
him his Man and his Saddle, for he was going into the Country. Mr. Speak
inquires what his business was, thereupon he told him it was to inquire about
some Persons that had reported something relating to the Earl of Essex's Death.
And being to go into the Country where Mr. Speak, who was that Country man, had
some Acquaintance, upon this he desires him to write him a Letter to recommend
him to some Persons of Credit. He did write that Letter, but was never
concerned in this business, either before or after; and this is the whole of
the Case, as to this Mr. Speak.


Mr. Speak, My Lord, I desire* I may speak one word for my self.


L. C. J. Ay, say what you will.


Mr. Speak, My Lord, One day, sometime after Mr. Braddon had concerned himself
in this thing, I met him casually and accidentally, and he was telling me
somewhat of the matter. And after this, one night as I was going to Bed between
10 and 11 a Clock at night, some Body knocked hard at my Door. My man went to
the door, and opened the door, and Mr. Braddon comes in and tells me, he
desired the favor of me, that I would lend him my man, and lend him my Saddle.
He being my Acquaintance, and I knowing him, I was willing to do him that
kindness; and asking him, whither he went? He told me he was going down to
Marlbrough, and he told me he had heard that my Lord of Essex's Death was
discoursed of there in the Country, that day it was done; besides other things
of a Boy, and of a Girl, that could prove such and such things. Said I, this is
a thing of great concernment, and I would have you take good advice in it,
before you proceed, because otherwise it may be a Reflection upon the
Government; therefore, said I, I would not have you proceed to concern your
self further in this thing, but take the Advice and Judgment of some prudent
and discreet Person or other, that you may do nothing but what is according to
Law. I was never at all concerned, nor knew any thing of the business, but what
I heard from Mr. Braddon at first. And before he came into my Chamber, I knew
nothing of his coming; and I writ this Letter, because he should not concern
himself without the Advice of some Person, that I thought was able to Advise
him, that he might do nothing that might bring him within the danger of the
Law, or reflect upon the Government.


Mr. J. Holloway, And you advised him to go by the name of Johnson, not Braddon.


Mr. Speak, It was late at Night, and I had been at the Tavern drinking a
Bottle of Wine or two with a Friend, and might not so well consider what I did
write.


L. C. J. But Mr. Speak, You hear what you writ, We row against stream, and we
thank you for the Countenance you have given to us. And here is a worthy
Gentleman, Mr. Braddon, who is a very proper man for the design he has in hand,
and none better than he, and when you are with him, you may discourse freely,
and he is true a man, and a stout man, and fit to be trusted; but he must not
go by the name of Braddon, but of Johnson.


Mr. Speak, My Lord, the Reason was, because he was not personally know to Sir
Robert Atkins; and for him to go down directly and to have it reported one of
such a name came to Sir Robert Atkins, who was a man that had retired himself
into the Country from all public concern, I thought not so well


L. C. J. Why did you trouble him, if he was so retired?


Mr. Speak, I had particular Concerns of my own, that Sir Robert Atkins was
pleased to concern himself for me, and I knew him a prudent man that would
advise him nothing but according to Law.


L. C. J. You should not have disturbed him in his privicies, Mr. Speak.


Mr. Speak, My Lord, I never was any other way concerned, I knew nothing of the
matter.


L. C. J. You had done well if you had not concerned your self about it at all.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Most here do fear, you say, that he will be either Stabbed or
Knocked on the head, and therefore you lent him your man to guard him, I
suppose.


Mr. Speak, He desired me to lend him my man, because he did not know the way
so well himself.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But why was there such fear about him?


Mr. Speak, I know nothing at all of the matter, but what I had from Mr.
Braddon.


L. C. J. Ay, we live in such a stabbing Age, that such an extraordinary
Genteleman as Mr. Braddon, that is such an extraordinary good Protestant, cannot
walk the streets for fear of being murdered.


Mr. Speak, My Lord, I writ it at such a time of the Night after I had been at
the Tavern, that I knew not well what I writ.


Mr. J. Withins, Mr. Speak, You see what a sort of man he is, upon the Evidence
that has been given.


Mr. Speak. Truly my Lord, I never knew any thing, but what I had from him.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But to make the Country believe, that there were such endeavors
here to stifle any thing that might give light into the Murder of the Earl of
Essex, there must be great caution used to conceal his Name.


L. Chapter Just. Yes, being such a Virtuous Man, as Mr. Bradden, there was great
need of all circumspection and care to preserve him, Why did not he get his
Lifeguard to keep him from the danger, that was thought so near him.


Mr. Sol. Genesis They had not raised them as yet, but he was contented at present
with Mr. Speke's Man.


Mr. Speak. My Lord, I am wholly innocent in all this matter.


L. Chapter Just. Would to God you were Innocent. You are a Man of Quality, Mr.
Speak, I know; I should be glad you were Innocent with all my heart* But when
Men forget their Studies and their own Business, and take upon them the
Politics without being called to it, That puts them into Frenzies, and then
they take all opportunities of showing themselves men of Zeal.


Mr. At. Genesis We need but read the Letter which Mr. Speak has owned, and you
will say it is ten times worse than what Mr. Bradden has done.


L. Chapter Just. Nay, I will not have Mr. Bradden topped upon for all that, I
assure you.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, if you read it once again, you will find that he
therein owns it all, and pins the Basket upon himself.


L. Chapter Just. Indeed, Mr. Attorney, I will not have such a Reflection put upon
Mr. Bradden, That any man should be a greater Actor in the business, than he.


Mr. Speak. My Lord, I writ it at night after a Bottle of Wine, and other
people may be mistaken, as well as I.


L. Chapter Just. If some of these Gentlemen, that now and then think themselves
better headed than others, and that are so extraordinarily concerned to
preserve our Religion, but are generally much mistaken, were, and I observe
their mistakes are always on the wrong side, I wish you could have gone and
recollected your self next Morning Mr. Speak, and then the mistake had been
more pardonable.


Mr. Speak. I writ nothing as to matter of Fact, but what he told me, and I
could hardly recollect it next Morning, when he was gone away.


Mr. Record. My Lord, We shall prove he has bragged, that is Mr. Bradden, That
he was the only inventer of the Protestant Flailes, an Instrument you have
heard of, Gentlemen, and for what use designed.


L. Chapter Just. But, Brother Jenner; that is nothing to the purpose now, what he
was before this business, or what he was after. You are, Gentlemen, to Try him
upon this Indictment only, and are not to mind any other thing at all.


Then Mr. Speke's Letter was read again.

Mr. At. Genesis You see, Gentlemen, in what Strain it runs, We and We, He makes
himself a considerable Party in the Design.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, We thank you for your kindness toward Us, and We hope to
bring on the Trial of the Earl of Essex, before they can any of those in the
Tower.


Mr. Speak. He told me, Sir Henry Capel said it was a thing too great for him
to meddle with. And I knew nothing, but what I had from him.


L. Chapter Just. He was a man of Integrity, and could tell you nothing but what
was true, Mr. Speak.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, All I can say for Mr. Speak is this, He did believe Mr.
Bradden's Grounds, as he told him, were probable to go upon, but he knew
nothing himself, and concerned himself no further. I hope the Jury will
consider of it, that there is no contrivance proved against him.


L. Chapter Just. Nay, Mr. Wallop, though we interrupted you in making Remarks upon
every Witness, yet now make what Remarks upon what has been said that you will.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, I shall leave it to your Lordship and the Jury, how far
they think the Defendant Guilty of this Information.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We have indeed given as great an Evidence as ever was
given I think of any Offense. But to clear up the matter, that it was
impossible for any man, unless the most maliciously and villanously inclined
against the Government and Peace of the Kingdom, that can be, to imagine such a
thing, much less spread such a Report, we will call you two or three Witnesses
to prove, that the Earl of Essex Murdered himself.


L. Chapter Just. It Is necessary, Mr. Attorney, I think for you so to do, to
satisfy the World, though to a discerning Eye there is enough given from the
Evidence this day, to make it appear to be a most Malicious and Scandalous
Contrivance, to hawke about for every idle Rumor, to pick up Children of such
tender years, and make them swear any thing to serve a turn.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We do not call these Witnesses, as if there were any
doubt of it in the World.


L. Chapter Just. But we live in an Age, when Truth passes for nothing in the
World, and Swearing and Forswearing is taken for a thing of course. Had his
Zeal been half so much for Truth as it was for Falsehood it had been a
commendable Zeal. But when men are so zealous and fierce for such vile things
as these are, it is time of my word for the Government to interpose.


Mr. At. Genesis It Is not to satisfy the Court nor the Jury, who I believe are
all of them already sufficiently satisfied, but it is to satisfy the World,
that may have entertained some prejudices from this Conspiracy. Call Mr.
Bomeney in.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Not as if there were any doubt, whether Mr. Bradden were the
malicious Inventor of this Report at the beginning, and went down into the
Country to spread it. The Evidence has been full, and by his own management of
his Defense, he has proved it himself, and seems by his Confidence to justify
it. But we shall, to give the World some satisfaction, call some that waited
upon the Earl in the Tower, and others that saw him when dead, that will give a
plain Confutation to any thing that could be supposed, as if my Lord of Essex
had not Murdered himself.


Then Bomeney was sworn.

L. Chapter Just. Did you wait upon this unfortunate Gentleman, my Lord of Essex?


Mr. Bomeney, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. Just. Well, what do you know of his Death?


Mr. Bomeney. I went with him from White Hall, and I stayed with him all the
while he was in the Tower.


L. Chapter Just. How came he by that unhappy End, pray?


Mr. Bomeney. When we were at his Lodging, my Lord used to call for a Penknife
to cut his Nails of his Hands and Feet, and he then had long Nails, and said he
to me, give me your Penknife to cut my Nails; said I, My Lord, I have none, I
came in haste, but I will send to morrow for one; and therefore I sent our
Footman, one William Turner; to whom I gave a little Note for Provisions, and
among other things which I writ directions to the Steward to send, there was a
little line; Pray send a Penknife for my Lord. He brought some Provisions, but
he did not bring a Penknife on the Thursday, because he said he had none, but
he would send one the morrow after; I sent William Turner the Morning after
very early, and gave him another little Note for Provisions; and, among other
things, I writ in the Note, Do not forget the Penknife for my Lord. He went,
and when he was in the way, my Lord sent the Warder to me to call me. I came to
my Lord, and my Lord asked, Is the Footman come? Has he brought the Penknife?
No, my Lord, said I, but I hope he will not stay long, because I sent him
early. Then I was turning to come down from the Chamber, and I saw my Lord
walking in the Room and picking of his Nails with the Penknife. --


L. Chapter Just. How? with a Penknife?


Mr. Bomeney. No, with the Razour that I gave him. For I went to my Lord, and
when my Lord asked me, if I had gotten him a Penknife. I said, the Footman was
not come, but I hoped it would come immediately, because I sent him early. And
I was turning from the Chamber, thinking I had done with my Lord, and my Lord
called me again, Hark you, Bomeney, said he, I can do it with one of your
Razours. My Lord, said I, I will fetch one, so I went into my Closet and
fetched one. And I went to my Lord, and when he had it, he did as if he picked
his Nails with it, and was walking in the Chamber. I looked a little while upon
him, and turned out of the Chamber into the Passage, where I talked with the
Warder, Russel his Name was, and when I looked out of the Window, His Majesty
was in the Tower, and there was a great bustle in the Street; and when I had
talked a little with the Warder, I went down into my Closet again, and at the
same time that I was in my Closet, there came the Footman, and one with him,
that brought the Provisions, and he gave me the Penknife, and gave me a little
Note, that he had brought with the Provisions, which, he said, Mr. Billingsly,
that was our Steward, bid me to show that to my Lord. I took it, and went up to
show it to my Lord; I found no body in my Lords Chamber, There was a Closet
there, in which was a Close Stool; and that I found shut, and thinking my Lord
was there, I would not disturb my Lord, but came down again and stayed a little
while, in so much as I thought my Lord by that time might have been come out. I
went up again and found no body in the Chamber, but the Closet Door shut still,
I went against the Door, and knocked three times and said, My Lord, My Lord,
and no body answered: Then I looked through the chink of the Door, between the
Door and the Wall, and I could see blood, and a little part of the Razour. Then
I called to the Warder and the People of the House, and they came up and found
him there.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you much ado to open the Door, or could you open the Door
easily?


Mr. Bomeney. No, the Door could not be opened easily, I know not how they
opened the Door, but I think Russel the Warder, when he came up, pushed at the
Door, but could not open it very far, because my Lords Foot was against the
Door, and so they had much ado to open the Door.


Mr. At. Genesis Which way does the Door open out of the Room, or into the Room?


Mr. Bomeney. Inward, into the Room.


L. Chapter Just. And so, his Feet being against it, it could not easily be opened.


Mr. At. Genesis How big is the Closet?


Mr. Bomeney. A very little Closet, I believe, no wider than that; and the
length of a Man, and a Close Stool at the upper end would fill it up My Lord
lay all along on his side.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe your Lord melancholy, Mr. Bomeney?


Mr. Bomeney. Yes, he was melancholy. But we took no notice of it, for he was
used to be so, and we had no reason to suspect any thing more than ordinary.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you find the Razour?


Mr. Bomeney. Yes, it lay by him.


Mr. At. Genesis What became of the Razour?


Mr. Bomeney. The Coroners Jury had it.


L. Chapter Just. Was there any Window in that Room, where the Close Stool was?


Mr. Bomeney. Yes, there was a Window.


L. Chapter Just. Was there a Casement to that Window?


Mr. Bomeney. Yes, I think there might.


Mr. Just. Withens. Which way does that Window look?


Mr. Bomeney. I cannot very well remember, my Lord.


Mr. Just. Withens. Which way do you think?


Mr. Bomeney. I believe it is upon a yard.


L. Chapter Just. He says, he does not well know. But, Mr. Bomeney, you saw Mr.
Russel the Warder in the same place, as you came up again, that you left him in
when you went down?


Mr. Bomeney. My Lord, I went down but a little while.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Where did you find Russel the Warder, when you came up again?


Mr. Bomeney. At the Guard.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you find him in the same posture, when you went up again,
that you left him when you went down?


Mr. Bomeney. Yes.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you hear of any body that went up else?


Mr. Bomeney. No, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then we will call Mr. Russel the Warder he speaks of. (Who was
sworn.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, will you give my Lord an account at that time where you
were, and what was done.


Mr. Russel. I was in the Chamber next opposite against my Lords Chamber, there
is but a little step betwixt the Doors, the Stairs come up betwixt the two
Doors, no body could pass backwards or forwards, but I must see them; for I was
then Waiter at that time, and stood upon the Guard; and my Lord asked Mr.
Bomeney, Whether the Penknife was come; and he told my Lord, No. Then, says
he, lend me your Razour, that will do it. And my Lord took the Razour in his
Hand, and the Door was open, and he went two or three turns in the Room with
the Razour so. This I saw, the Door being open, as I stood in the Passage. My
Lord, by and by Mr. Bomeney goes down, and my Lord shut the Door to him, and
Mr. Bomeney staid below a little while, and afterward comes up again. And my
Lord was gone to the Closet to Stool as he supposed. So away he comes down
again, and staid about a quarter of an hour or there abouts. And this I see all
my self, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. Had any Person been there from the time Bomeney went down to the
time he came up again?


Mr. Russel. No, my Lord, there was no body went up or down all the time, but
Bomeney. He came up, and seeing my Lord was not come out of his Closet, (this I
did stand and hear) so he puts by the Hanging, and looks in, and sees my Lord
in his Blood lying in the Closet; and he makes an Oration, a great noise, with
that I stepped two or three steps, hearing him make such an Oration, and I
found the Key was on the outside of the Door, and I opened the Door, and saw
him lie in his Blood.


L. Chapter Just. Could you open the Door with ease?


Mr. Russel. Yes, I could put it a little way open, and there saw him.


L. Chapter Just. But you could not put it quite open?


Mr. Russel. No, for his Legs lay against the Door.


L. Chapter Just. Was it a narrow Closet?


Mr. Russel. Yes, a very narrow Closet.


L. Chapter Just. In what posture did my Lord lie?


Mr. Russel. He lay all along on one side.


L. Chapter Just. Where lay the Razour?


Mr. Russel. By him. But I did not take so much notice of the Razour, for I was
surprised with the sight.


Mr. Just. Holloway. Was there any Window in the Closet?


Mr. Russel. Yes, that looks into Captain Hawley's yard. And the Window is
quite Northward.


L. Chapter Just. Which way does that Window look?


Mr. Russel. Quite the other way, into the Back-yard.


L. Chapter Just. Then there is no Way out, nor Light, nor Casement out into the
Fore-yard.


Mr. Russel. No, my Lord, it is backward, and it is Paled in, only into the House
there is a Door.


M. At. Genesis Was there any Door out of the Street, that way?


Mr. Russel. No, there is one Door that goes out from the Entry to go into the
Yard.


L. Chapter Just. Has any body else access to come to the Yard, but what must come
through Hawley's House?


Mr. Russel. No, no body.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We will call Captain Hawley himself.


L. Chapter Just. Warder, Do you remember there was any Coach that stood there?


Mr. Russel. No, there was no such thing.


L. Chapter Just. I ask you for this reason, because here was a Girl that spoke of
a Coach, that came through the House I suppose, and so through the Entry out of
that Door into the Yard.


Mr. At. Genesis Where is Lloyd the Soldier? For, my Lord, as there was a Warder
above, so there was a Soldier that stood at the Door below. And while he
stayed there, there could not any one come in, nor near, but he must observe
them.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray, my Lord, be pleased to ask Mr. Bomeney, how long he lived
with my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. How long had you lived with my Lord of Essex?


Mr. Bomeney. Six years.


Mr. Just. Wythens. You waited on him in his Chamber I suppose?


Mr. Bomeney. Yes, in the Nature of his Valet de Chamber.


Then Lloyd was sworn.

Mr. Recorder. Hark you Lloyd, you were the Sentinel. Give an account where you
stood that day, that my Lord of Essex Murdered himself?


Lloyd. At my Lords Door.


Mr. At. Genesis Which Door?


Loyd. At my Lord of Essex's Door.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you above Stairs, or below at the Street Door?


Lloyd. Below at the Street Door.


Mr. Just. Wythens. Did any body come into the House that morning?


Lloyd. No body came in, all the while I stood there, that I knew of.


Mr. Just. Wythens. Were you there at that time, when my Lord killed himself?


Lloyd. I was there, when the noise was made of it above Stairs.


L. Chapter Just. Did you see e're a Coach there?


Lloyd. Not to stand at the Door at all.


L. Chapter Just. Did thou see e're a Coach in Captain Hawley's Back-yard?


Lloyd. No, no.


L. Chapter Just. Why, could not the Coach go through the Door and the Entry into the
Yard?


Mr. Sol. Genesis Had you seen my Lord of Essex that morning?


Lloyd. Yes, he spoke to me, and asked me, What a Clock it was?


Mr. Sol. Genesis Where was he?


Lloyd. At the Casement.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What did he say to you?


Lloyd. He said Centry, What a Clock is it?


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see him, when my Lord Russel went by?


Lloyd. Yes, I saw him then.


Mr. At. Genesis How long after was the Cry of my Lords having killed himself?


Lloyd. I believe, not half an hour after.


Mr. At. Genesis Did any Maid go out of the House?


Lloyd. None at all.


L. Chapter Just. What, not in a White Hood?


Lloyd. No.


L. Chapter Just. Why, did not thou call to the Maid to come and take up the
Razour, that was thrown out of the Window of Captain Hawley's House?


Lloyd. There was no Razour at all thrown out, that I saw?


L. Chapter Just. Did not you open the Pales for her to go in, and take up the
Razour?


Lloyd. No.


L. Chapter Just. Was there any other Soldier there besides you?


Lloyd. No.


L. Chapter Just. Then, you must be he that cried out, or no body?


Lloyd. I saw no Razour, nor did not cry out to any body.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Could you open the Pales? Is there a Door to the Street-side out
of the Pales into the Yard?


Lloyd. It Is no Yard, but there is a Door that all pass through that come to the
House.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What else did my Lord of Essex say to you?


Lloyd. He only examined me, what a Clock it was? that was all.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We have here two Women, who were the only Women that
were in the House, they will tell you, what they saw.


L. Chapter Just. Pray, Gentlemen, do not mispend your time unnecessarily, because
I am to sit this afternoon at London.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We will then only call Captain Hawley, (who was sworn.)


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray, Captain, tell what you know of this matter?


Capt. Hawley. My Lord; All the account I can give, is, That about 4 or 5 a
Clock in the Morning, I went to open the Gates, that being the usual hour to
open the Gates. And I was at the Gate then when a Warder came, and told me, my
Lord of Essex had killed himself, and that was between 9 and 10 of the Clock.
When I came into the House, I went up Stairs, and saw no body in the Room, nor
no Blood; said I, to the Warder, What do you make a Fool of me? here is
nothing: Says one of the Warders, look into the Closet, I went to the Closet,
and could not open the Door above this wideness, and I looked in, and saw the
Razour all in Blood, and my Lord lay on his Arm in this fashion. I could not
tell, Whether he was dead or no, but I thought it was not my business to stir
him. Then my Lord Constable was Ordered to come and Scour and Examine all the
Servants.


L. Chapter Just. Pray, Captain Hawley, where does the Casement look into?


Capt. Hawley. The House, ever since I came to it, is just as it was; and the
House having settled, the Casement will not open above thus far; and it is so low,
and the Pales are 9 or 10 Foot high, that it is impssible for any one to throw
any thing out of the Window 3 Foot hardly. It is one of the horridest Reports
that ever was heard of, and the unlikelyest thing, they cannot throw any thing
out of the Window to be seen.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I think it is not necessary to call any more Witnesses.


L. Chapter Just. Have they any thing to say further, on the other side?


Mr. Speak. I desire, my Lord, to call my Man.


L. Chapter Just. Call your Man, for what purpose?


M. Speak. My Lord, If your Lordship please, I will call my Man to prove, that
I knew nothing of Mr Bradden's coming to me.


Then Mr. Speke's Man was Sworn.

L. Chapter Just. Ask him, what you will?


Mr. Speak. Did you ever see Mr. Bradden with me?


Servant. Never but once, before that time he came to my Masters Chamber, which
was the night before he went out of Town; and when he came, after he had been
there a little while, my Master Ordered me to get me ready to go in to the
Country with him. And after I had been with him a little time, he got another
to go with him, and sent me home again.


Mr. Speak. I was going to Bed, was I not?


Servant. Yes, you was.


L. Chapter Just. Have you done of both sides?


Mr. Speak. Was it not a Surprise to me, when he came to me?


L. Chapter Just. How does he know that?


Mr. Speak. I tell you, why, my Lord, I ask it; Because when I go out of Town,
I always tell him, to prepare himself.


Servant. It was a Surprise to me; I knew nothing of it.


L. Chapter Just. Well, have you done now? Have you a mind to say any thing to the
Jury, you that are of Counsel for the Defendants; or you, Mr. Bradden?


Mr. Bradden. No, I will say nothing.


L. Chapter Just. Have you, Mr. Speak?


Mr. Speak. My Lord, I have proved it here, That I had no hand in what I am
Accused of. It is put down in the Information, that I Conspired, with Mr.
Bradden, to endeavor to procure false Witnesses. I have proved, I never had
any hand at all in any thing of it. It was an Accidental thing, his coming to
me; and it was a great Surprise to me, when he came; and I never concerned my
self in it more, than the Writing of that Letter: And I had no ill intent in
it; I did it not designedly; for I knew nothing of his coming; and I had not
writ the Letter, if he had not come to me. And it is plain, it was a Surprise,
for I always give my Man notice, when I go out of Town, beforehand to prepare
himself. I thought nothing at all of ill in the Letter: I writ it late at
night, when I had been with some Company at the Tavern. And if he made me
believe that to be True, which was not, I hope the Gentlemen of the Jury will
consider that. I have nothing to say of the thing, I did not concern my self in
it any further at all, than Writing the Letter, which I did not well know, what
I Writ.


L. Chapter Just. Well, have you any more to say, Mr. Speak?


Mr. Speak. No, my Lord.


L. Chapter Just. Have you any more, Mr. Bradden?


Mr. Bradden. My Lord, I have only this to say for my self. It has not been
proved directly, or indirectly, That I used any evil Arguments, to persuade
these Witnesses to testify what was false; but I dealt with them with all the
Candor, that any Person in the World could use; and used all the Caution that
I could, to hinder them from speaking any thing that is false. There has been
nothing proved of evil Practice used by me; and I desire the Gentlemen of the
Jury to take no other notice of any thing that has been, or shall be spoken,
but what has been Proved.


L. Chapter Just. Gentlemen of the Jury. The Evidence has been very long, that has
been given, both for and against the Persons, against whom this Information is
exhibited. It Is an Information exhibited by the Kings Attorney General, in His
Majesty's Name, against Lawrence Bradden, and Hugh Speak. And the Information
does set forth, That the late Earl of Essex Murdered himself in the Tower, and
that thereupon there was an Inquisition taken before the Coroner, that did find
that he had so Murdered himself, he being before that time Committed for High
Treason, in Conspiring the death of the King, and levying War to disturb the
Government. And these Persons did render that Inquisition, as though it had been
Fraudulently and Irregularly obtained; and also to breed ill Blood, and spread
false Rumors among the Kings Subjects, by endeavoring to persuade them to
believe, That the Earl of Essex was Murdered by some other hand, and had not
Murdered himself, and had procured false Witnesses to testify some such matter,
in order to the spreading about that false Rumor. This is the Substance of the
Information. To this Information they have both pleaded, Not Guilty; and the
Evidence, as I was telling you, has been somewhat long; but according to the
best of my Memory, and for the assistance of yours, I will mind you of as many
things, as occur to me, that have been said against them, and what has been
said on their behalf, I mean so much of it, as is Evidence. For I must tell
you, all Hear-says, and common Discourses of other Persons is not Evidence, and
I will give you that Reason, that is sufficient to satisfy any man, that is
Unbiassed, That if in case the Person, that so told the Story had been here, if
he had not told it upon Oath, you could not have believed that Person:
Therefore, surely there is less credit to be given to him, that tells a Tale
out of another bodies mouth. And I tell you this, because there has been great
Allowances given and ought to be, when people are accused of such great and
weighty Crimes; for these are monstrous Crimes, that these Gentlemen are
accused of; but it is you, that are to try, whether they are Guilty or not:
Certainly there is scarce in Nature a greater Crime that can be committed, than
This, that is now before you; for I think Robbery, or any other such Felonies,
are not such monstrous Crimes in their true real Weight, though, in consideration
of Law, in respect of Punishment they are greater; yet in point of Crime, they
are surely less, for to spread false Reports, in order to raise Sedition,
Ill Will, Heart-burnings, and Jealousies in the Kings Subjects against the
Government, and to suborn Witnesses to that evil purpose, is surely a much
greater Crime, than robbing on the Highway. Now, Gentlemen, it is not unknown
to most of you, what endeavors have been of late made, to possess the minds of
the King's Subjects, of great Injuries designed to be done them by the King, or
His Authority: And in order to foment Differences and Misapprehensions between
the King, and his People, and among the People between one and another, all
Arts have been used, to Proscribe People that they are minded to Expose. Those,
they bare ill will to, must be called Papists, or Papists in Masquerade; but
They and their Confederates are the Sober Party, the true Protestants, as if
there were none Sober or True Protestants, but such, as are Factious and
Troublesome in the Government. But by these things they bring an Odium upon the
Name of a Protestant, their aim is by distinguishing to divide us; whereas if
they were Protestants in truth, the true Church of England Protestants, they
would have another behavior, they would learn to obey, and submit to
Authority, and not go buzzing from House to House, and spreading false Reports,
but study to be quiet, and do their own business. And though Mr. Bradden made use
of the 5 th Chap. of the Acts, to the Child, he would have done well to have
taken notice of some other parts of Scripture, that are as much Scripture, as
That, that enjoin Obedience and Submission to the Magistrate; and, being quiet
and minding his own business, it is odds, he had never come to that trouble, he
is now likely to meet with. But the Crime he is accused of, carries all the
Venom and Baseness, the greatest inveteracy against the Government, that ever
any Case did, that I have met with. For its insinuated, That because the King
and the Duke were walking in the Tower, that day, and near that time, when this
unfortunate thing happened, now it must be whispered, as though the King and
the Duke had designed this Murder. How Base? How Devilish, and Hellish a Design
is this? But yet, this must be spread about and endeavored to be distilled
into the minds of the Kings Subjects. But besides, Gentlemen, you are to
consider, as was opened by the King's Counsel, to what this thing tended; for
in as much as there was an horrid bloody Conspiracy to take away the life of
the King, and of his Dear Brother, his Royal Highness the Duke of York. And
forasmuch as several persons have been duly executed for that Conspiracy, who
were concerned along with this unfortunate Lord; (I cannot help the naming of
it, though I am sorry for his misfortune, for the sake of that Honorable
Family) but rather than he would abide his Trial, God knows what other reason
he had, but the probability of the thing speaks it, he being conscious, the
great Guilt he had contracted in being concerned in such a Conspiracy made him
destroy himself. And it is easy to imagine how far that might prevail upon him,
it being done immediately after my Lord Russel, who was one of the Conspirators
with him, was carried to his Trial. It cannot be thought, but it was to prevent
the methods of Justice in his own particular Case. And, Gentlemen, there was
Digitus Dei in it, and it is enough to satisfy all the World of the
Conspiracy; though we live in an Age wherein men are apt to believe only of one
side, they can believe the greatest Lie, if it makes for the advantage of their
party, but not the greatest Truth, if it thwarts their Interest.

But because Mr. Attorney has produced his proofs to manifest that this Lord
murdered himself, I will take notice a little of it, because it may have some
good effect to undeceive some that have been imposed upon. Not for my own
satisfaction, I thank God I am satisfied, and so I believe are most honest men:
but that silly people may not be imposed upon by every busy fellow for the
future, that takes the liberty to run about and spread false News, and that men
may be aware of such fellows, and may not be decoyed any more by such false
pretenses; it was therefore fit that Evidence should be given of the truth of
the Fact, that that Gentleman did murder himself. And the Evidence is this.

Besides the Inquisition, which was taken upon the Oaths of several persons of
Quality (as you hear upon the reading their Names, several of them were
Esquires, and men of Note) it is here also proved by the Testimony of his
Servant that attended him, how he came to his untimely end. And, Gentlemen, I
would observe, it is Sworn by his Servant, one that had lived six years with
him, not an upstart, or a wandering fellow, but one whose integrity and fidelity
to my Lord was confirmed by six years experience of his service. Then here is
the Wardour that was at the Door, here is the Soldier, here is the Master of the
House, who are all the persons that probably can give any account of the
matter, and they tell you positively that no one did go up and down, but this
Frenchman, who was his Valet de Chamber. And the Wardour tells you, that he
coming to the Door, and knocking at the Door, and hearing no one Answer, did
endeavor to open the Door, but it was so fast by my Lords feet, that he could
open it but a little, and looking in, discerned blood, and that made him make
Acclamations, as the Wardour calls it, Orations, which brought all the people
in the house thither, and they gave the same account that he does.

And it is likewise fit to be taken notice of, that the window of this Closet
looks into a private Yard, where no strangers usually come, and where no Coach
could come; and that the Pales were so high, that in case a Man were desirous
to throw any thing out, it were impossible to cast it above three Foot. And if
there could no Coach at all come into the Yard, as it is plain there could not
(for there is no door save only a back house door) then this must needs be a
lie, that was spread abroad. And it is beyond all peradventure true that my Lord
of Essex did murder himself.

Now to have so great a truth as this to be perverted, and to reproach the
Government with falsities, is the most malicious thing in the World. If in case
the Law has made it penal for any man to scandalize any one private person as
it has; and if it be by Law, much more penal to scandalize a Noble Man: how
much more ought it to be, when the King and the whole Government is thus
scandalized.

Now to come to the Fact, as near as I can recollect, I will give you an
account of what Evidence has been given of the one side and of the other. But
this I thought fit to premise, because there will some Circumstances fall out
fit to be taken notice of in the Evidence, especially about the Window in
Captain Hawleys Yard and House, which may be cleared this way.

In the first part of the Evidence for the King, they call a Witness to prove
the Earl of Essex's Commitment, which is part of the Inducement in the
Information.

But for the Information it self, there is this Evidence. First, Evans he comes
and tells you, how that he had heard at the Custom-house from Edwards the
Father of this Boy, as though there had been a report came to him from home, at
ten a Clock that morning my Lord of Essex cut his Throat, of a Razour thrown
out of my Lord of Essex's Window; That he came to him in the afternoon again,
and in the afternoon told him, He had examined the matter further, and his Boy
confirmed the truth of it. He says that after this, Mr. Bradden and another
man, one Mr. Hatsell, if I am not mistaken in his name, came to the place where
he was in Essex, and there they had some discourse about my Lord of Essex's
death, and there Hatsell took out of his Pocket a printed Copy of the
Inquisition; and Mr. Bradden was then in the Room, but he says he thinks Mr.
Bradden at that time took no manner of notice of it, but walked about the Room.
But he says the Inquisition was read while he was in the Room, and Evans said
something about the report he had heard, which did seem to contradict that
Inquisition. But some time after, he says that he being at the Coffee house,
Bradden and Edwards came to him into the Coffee-house, and there they began to
talk: Edwards said, that Bradden had been with his Child to examine him, to
bear Testimony about flinging the Razour out at Window. He was very full of the
word [Matter], and tossed that to and fro, but at length the Substance of his
Matter was, that Report of the Boys, and he advised them to forbear talking any
farther to him about the Matter, for it might do Edwards and Bradden both an
injury; and he had read the Inquisition which was quite contrary. That was all
he could say.

Then comes Edwards, and the Substance of what he says is this, That he first
heard it from his Family, and afterward the Boy confirmed the truth of it; but
then afterward he heard he had denied it, which was after Bradden had been
there to inquire about it. And then he says Bradden came to him again, and then
he had got a Note dictated by himself and not by the Boy, but at first he
tendered it to the Boy, and the Boy refused to put his hand to it, and Mr.
Bradden came again another time (though he was told the Boy had denied it as he
heard) and then the Boy did set his Hand. This is the Substance of what Edwards
says. He does say indeed, the Boy used to tell lies very often, to make excuses
when he played Truant, and that his Family told him, the Boy was often guilty
of telling of lies.

Then the next Evidence is the Evidence of the Boy himself. He it seems is
thirteen years of Age: certainly any man that had been of an upright mind and
Conscience, as Mr. Braddon pretends to be, and would have you Gentlemen think
him so; would have it thought that he was full of honesty and integrity to the
Boy, when he baited his Hook with a Text of Scripture, about the danger of
telling a Lie, and, Have a care, Child, of telling a Lie; if he had done no
more, but given him this advice, it had been worthy of commendation: but when
the Boy had refused to sign it, for him to go and make such a stir without
examining further into the particulars, but only taking a slight report from
such a Child, and to make such a disturbance in the Nation, and such a Noise
not only here but abroad, as this has done, sure argues neither uprightness nor
Conscience. Had the Boy stood in it and persevered in it, it had become him, in
regad of the tenderness of the boys age, to have been more inquisitive into
Circumstances, before he gave such credit to what he said, as to make all this
ado.

But what says the Boy, when he comes here, he is now upon his Oath, and he
tells you, He did tell his Mother so at first, and he did tell Mr. Braddon so
at first; but afterward when his Sister spoke to him, and bid him be sure to
tell nothing, but what was truth, then he said truly, it was not truth. He
tells you Mr. Braddon offered him the Paper to sign, but he would not sign it;
and being asked the Question, Why he would not sign it: He says, because it was
not true; and being asked, Whether Braddon had notice of this, the Mother and
Sisters all tell you, He had notice the Boy had denied it.

How came Mr. Braddon, what Authority had he to take this Examination? He is no
Justice of Peace, no Magistrate, that had any authority to take Examinations.
What concern had he in it more than other people? The Boy could tell him there
were abundance of people there besides himself, though it was a Lie he told
then, and that the Girl told now. Why did not he stay to have it confirmed by
some of those people? Why did not he carry these Children before some
Magistrate, or Justice of Peace, some body that had authority to take
Examinations? There was a Spirit that prevailed with Mr. Braddon to engage and
make a stir in this business; and you may easily guess what a kind of Spirit it
was which gave him this authority that he had not before.

Gentlemen, Another thing is this, It Is plain, and the Boy now swears it
directly, That whereas he put it into his Information, How that he told him he
was going to see my Lord Brandon Gerrard's Lodgings, but now he is upon his
Oath, he swears directly, he never told him any such thing, and yet he has put
it into the Paper he made him sign.

He tells you a second time, Mr. Braddon came to him, which was after the Boy
had refused and declared himself unwilling, and that then he was persuaded by
Mr. Braddon, who told him there was no harm in it; if there be any harm, it
would be to him, and not to the Boy, and so by virtue of that, he insinuated
himself, and got the Child to sign that Paper, which is every Tittle of it
false, as the Boy now swears directly. And he tells you, How he was imposed
upon by Mr. Braddon, pretending there was no harm to him, all the harm would
come to himself, and by reason of these Insinuations he was prevailed upon, to
put his Name to that which was notoriously false.

The next Witness (to make it appear that it was notoriously false, not only by
the Boy himself, but by other Circumstances) is Hawkins the Ministers Son, Dr.
Hawkin's Son of the Tower. And he tells you, I played Truant as well as he that
day, and I saw the King and the Duke at the Tower, and when I had seen them I
went about as they did, and afterward I went home, and there came a Report,
that my Lord of Essex had cut his Throat, which made me go back again to the
Tower, and there was I a considerable time gaping among other people, and there
did I see this Boy Edwards; when he came there, I was there; I was there all
the time that he was there, and we went out of the Tower together, and there
was no such thing, nor any pretense or ground for such a story. And Edwards
himself being asked the Question, upon his Oath, does likewise say, Hawkins was
with him all the time there. So that that shows not only by what the Boy says,
that it was false, but it is also proved false by the Testimony of this other
Witness Hawkins.

Then next comes Mr. Blathwait who was present when Mr. Braddon was before the
King, and what does he say? He says there was the Boy fetched, and the Girl
fetched, and all persons examined there, and then it is told him, all the Boy
had said to him was false, and it was told him with all its Circumstances. So
that notice sufficient, if you will believe Mr. Blathwait, was given to this
Mr. Braddon, That the Boy had denied it then, as he had before to his Sister:
So he knew it was false.

But what does Mr. Bradden do now? He is so far from being satisfied in the
Matter, that instead of stopping there, his Zeal transported him to pursue it
further: And so he tells you, that Mr. Braddon confessed he would have got some
Justice of Peace to have the Boy examined; and he applied himself to Sir Robert
Clayton, and Sir John Lawrence. There were many Justices of the Peace besides
them, in London, to whom he might have applied himself. But when he comes to
Sir Robert Clayton, and acquaints him with the matter, he would not do it
alone; it was thought a Matter of that Importance. Then says Mr. Bradden, you
shall not do it at all. He must have the kindness of having it done in private; to
have it examined when any body was by, was not so well for his purpose; which
shows you still, Gentlemen, his design was to contrive privately, to effect
that which the light should not easily discover.

Then the next thing is the Evidence of Mr. Monstevens, And he gives you an
account, That he came to him, and he read the Information, and gave him a
Caution, that he wondered at him: says he, Why do you concern your self about
this business, there is Sir Henry Capell, he does not concern himself: Then he
pretended to come in his Name, but at length, when Mr. Monstevens began to
dispute it with him, why Sir Henry did not appear himself in it; Then truly Sir
Henry Capell was very ill, and could not possibly come himself, but I am to go
to him, and give him satisfaction about what I do, and so also to the Countess
of Essex. No, says Mr. Monstevens, that cannot be, for Sir Henry Capell is not
so ill, but that he has been with my Lord Sunderland, and with the King too,
since the death of my Lord of Essex. To which he made him no Answer. So that
that was but an excuse and a Subterfuge; but yet notwithstanding all this
Caution, he continues on his Zeal in the thing: whereupon Mr. Monstevens
brought him to my Lord Sunderland, and what discourse has past between them, he
has given you an account of. The next Evidence is Sir Henry Capel, who tells
you, That Braddon comes officiously and tells him, He had some discovery to
make about the death of the Earl of Essex, and you hear that poor Gentleman
being related to this unfortunate Noble Lord, was at the first time very much
under surprise (being in such great affliction as one Brother must needs be for
another, Nature obliges People to a great concern for such Accidents) and he
says, he is not able to give an account what he said, or did, at that time, or
what Braddon did particularly say to him. But when he came the second time to
him, he was a little more sedate and calm, and then (he does remember) he told
him, If you have any thing of this nature to say, Go to a Secretary of State,
it is his business to inquire into this Affair, and it is not the business of
every particular private man, because these are Matters that concern the
Government. But Braddon pretended (forsooth) it was his Zeal and his great
Conscience that made him to be thus transported, and to be so eager for
carrying on this Prosecution.

The next Witness, Gentlemen, that you hear of, is the Gentleman that seized
upon Mr. Braddon in the Country; and that is Mr. Beech, who brought him before
a Justice of Peace (one Airs that it seems is since dead) and in his Pocket he
found a Letter from the other Defendant Speak, which is the only thing indeed
in the Evidence that does affect that Gentleman; and what that Letter is, you
have heard it read, and for your better satisfaction, because the Language of
the Letter is pretty extraordinary, if you have a mind to have it to peruse
while you are here in Court, you may have it with you. I suppose you remember
the substance of it, commending the great Integrity, Courage, and Magnanimity
of this Gentleman Mr. Braddon, thanking the Person to whom it was writ, for his
great kindness to him and his Friends, how they did hope to be able to get the
Murder of my Lord of Essex tried before any in the Tower could come to their
Trial; That the Tide ran strong against them: And, pray, you must take notice,
I have given him a hint he must go by another Name, by the Name of Johnson, and
not by the Name of Braddon; for a lack-a-day he would be stabbed, in these
dangerous times, or knocked on the head, if he be known by his own Name. Mr.
Braddon would be thought a man so considerable in the World for his Zeal for
truth, and the Protestant Religion, that there was very great hazard of his
being murdered, we live in such perilous times.

Gentlemen, This is to amuse and affright people, and to put odd thoughts and
jealousies and fears into the minds of the Kings Subjects, which was the
beginning and rise of the late Rebellion, which we have all reason to remember
with horror; that Rebellion that in the Issue of it brought the late King of
blessed memory to the Scaffold: And therefore we must have a great care of such
things growing upon us now.

And pray, Gentlemen, mind the Style of the Letter: We have many thanks to give
you, for your care of Us, and countenance you have given to Us, and We don't
doubt We shall be able to carry on the business of the Earl of Essex,
notwithstanding that the Tide runs strong against Us; We hope this, and We hope
that, and the other, and so makes himself a Party. And he recommends him in
particular, to Sir Robert Atkins, to whom the Letter was written, to advise him
in the matter he went about (which by the way, you see, was to pick up false
Evidence) to carry on this wicked design. And I must tell you, Gentlemen, If
Mr. Speak was given to believe a Lie, and did write that Letter, with a design
to have that Lie spread abroad, he makes himself a party, and he is as guilty
in every Circumstance as the other, as to the design in general laid in the
Information, though not equally guilty about the management of the Witnesses:
And it is the Letter only that particularly affects him. But I tell you, If in
case you think he was surprised in the thing, or did it ignorantly or
innocently, without any Concern (though he seems to have a wonderful concern in
his Letter, and very zealous he seems to be in the prosecution of this
business) you are to acquit him. But, if he did contribute to the design of
spreading this false report, he is as guilty of that part as Mr. Braddon,
though he be not guilty of Suborning the Witnesses. But the Evidence against
Braddon goes farther; There is not only the Evidence of this Letter, which
speaks plain enough, as to this design, but you find also about him all the
Informations that have been read. The Information of this Boy of thirteen years
of Age; the Information of the Girl of thirteen years of Age: There was also
taken in his Pocket a Letter from one Burgis a famous Pin-maker of
Marleborough, written to one Cumpen a Postmaster at Froom, in this manner:
Pray call to mind such a business of hearing such a report, of my Lord of
Essex's cutting his throat, upon Friday the thirteenth of July last. Pray
recollect such a thing, and impart it to this Gentleman the Bearer. This
likewise was entrusted with Mr. Braddon: But it seems the man had gone and writ
his Letter, and had put in the sixth day, which happened to be a week too soon,
and this must be rectified by Mr. Braddon himself, he being a great Companion
of Mr. Braddon's; for it seems he had such a confidence in him, that upon his
Report, he came down from London to Marleborough, though now indeed, they
pretend they never knew one another before: But it is proved he confessed he
had such a regard to his report, that that brought him down from London. He had
(as I was saying) put it down the sixth at his first writing; and I believe as
to the thing it self, it was as true the sixth as any other time, and the
sixteenth and the twenty sixth is all one to such people. And this Letter he
tells you himself was written six weeks after, but Mr. Braddon must correct it:
No, says he, you mistake, it must be the thirteenth, it must not be the sixth;
the sixth would not do the business, for the thirteenth was the day that he was
murdered, and so he was forced to interline it, the thirteenth, to make it to
humor the story; for the Lie would not pass so well if it had been put upon a
day so long before: but to make the Lie a correct Lie, and to humor the rest
of the Evidence, Mr. Braddon comes and informs him, it must be the thirteenth.

That was the next piece of Evidence that was given, and I think the substance
of the Evidence of the whole matter given against the Defendants for the King,
except it be some remarks out of the Evidence that has been given on the other
side, which it will be material for you to take notice of.

Now, Gentlemen, For the Defendants they bring this Evidence: First, they bring
a man, I think his name was Jews, to whom they gave the Money before he would
give his Evidence. And he says one day he was going up a Hill near Andover, and
going up the Hill, he heard the News of my Lord of Essex's cutting his throat;
but what Day, Week or Month it was, he cannot tell that he heard this. And,
Gentlemen, Let me tell you, it is as bad as the case it self, and worse if
possible, the endeavoring to pick up Witnesses to put a Color and Countenance
upon so black a Villainy as this is. Then the next Evidence is Fielder, and he
tells you, that at their Town of Andover the Wednesday before my Lord murdered
himself, it was all the talk about the Town, that he had cut his throat; it was
in every bodies mouth, the Market people, Men, Women and Children, all over the
Town had it, when the Earl of Essex did it not till the Friday following. We
asked him to name any one, no truly he could not, the Town was so full of
people, and yet, he cannot remember one, whence he had it: but Gentlemen here
is the malicious design of the matter: It Is to make it believed it was a
designed business to murder my Lord, and cast it upon himself, and they knew of
the design at Andover, two days before the fact was done: As though the persons
that designed to murder him, would go to make it public, as such a Report was
likely to do. But the design of this, besides the falsehood and baseness of the
thing it self, does speak malice and sedition, and all the distempers of a
disloyal man's Heart; and to go about to get Witnesses to support the
credibility of a thing that is notoriously false, is ten times worse than the
spreading of such a Report it self.

Then comes Mrs. Edwards the Mother, she is the next Witness, and she tells you
at first, the Boy did tell this strange Story, but afterward denied it, but
she likewise tells you, how Mr. Braddon came, and how he dealt with the Boy. He
is a busy man, you see, a great Reformer that does mightily concern himself in
the Reformation of the Government. I never knew that Mr. Braddon had any great
share in it: He has not such a prodigious Estate I suppose, that for fear of
losing his great Estate he should be so wondrous busy and active in reforming
the Government; but I have always observed it for a Rule, that your beggarly
inconsiderable fellows are the warmest people in the business of Reformation,
and for defending Liberty and Property as they call it; and then they put it
under the disguise of Religion, when alas those that have no Religion are
generally the greatest pretenders of taking care of it; and those that have no
Estates nor Properties, are usually the fullest of noise about Liberty and
Property. But the meaning of it is plain, if they can but exasperate the people
into a Rebellion, that is the way to get a property: And if they can but have
Liberty to do what they please, that is all the Liberty they contend for. They
are such mean inconsiderable fellows only that make all this ado among us: For
no persons of any interest or quality will offer to engage in any such thing.
But I hope the Snare is seen, and we shall avoid it; for God be thanked we live
under a regular Government, where the Laws are duly exeecuted; we need not be
afraid of wrong from the Government. The Courts of Justice are open where they
may have security; and the best security to good Subjects, is that which the
Law gives them.

Mrs. Edwards, she tells you, When Braddon came to inquire about it, it made
them all a little concerned; and the Daughter was affrighted, and she comes to
the Boy, and says, Billy, Billy, here has been a Man about such a thing, pray
speak the truth: Why, says he, will any harm come of it? Says she, I cannot
tell, but tell you the truth. And then when the Boy comes to tell truth, he
then says, All the story was false. Besides this, says she, we told Mr.
Braddon, before the Boy signed it, That he had said it was false; and he was
told it again before the King and Council, that it was false. But nothing would
serve him, but he must have a Horse and a Man, and he must go his Circuit to
pick up ridiculous stories. Letters must be contrived from one to another to
give a color to the matter, and all this to spread about his malicious Reports
and false News.

And by this means, Gentlemen, I must tell you, The matter is fixed as to the
second part of the Information, which is the corrupting of Witnesses; for
though he did not get any Witnesses sworn, and so it is no Subornation of
Perjury, strictly, yet however it is a Misdemeanor to labor any one, much more
such a Child, into a falsity, as apparently he did; for as the Boy swears now,
He never did make mention of going to my Lord Gerrards Lodgings.

The next Evidence is young Mrs. Edwards, Sarah the Daughter, and she comes and
gives an account of the same. That the Boy did tell such a story at first, but
says she, I knew him to be such a lying Boy, and I had so often found him in
Lies, that I did not mind what he said. And he used to tell Lies when he had
been playing Truant. Then comes Mr. Braddon to inquire about the business, and
when he began to prosecute it, the Girl began to be affrighted, and she calls
the Boy to her, and engaged him to tell her the Truth, and then immediately
upon that, he did say, it was all a story, and invention of his own.

And then it is very material to observe, That the Boy in that Paper of
Information (which is all of Mr. Braddons handwriting) makes the Circumstance
of the Razors falling down, to be cast of the inside of the Pales, and the Girl
says, it was of the outside, and there was a Coach, and abundance of People by,
and a great many fine Circumstances, and not one of them true.

The next piece of Evidence is, she does say, That after he told her it was
false, she gave notice to Braddon, and being asked, Whether she did not
frighten him by threatening his Father would be turned out of his place? she
swears, No. But all those kind of Questions were by a side wind, to make
Reflections upon the Government; as though the King would turn men out, because
they would not swear what was false. It carries, I tell you, a sting toward
the Government still, and shows the malice of the design. But, Gentlemen, you
hear what is said about that, there was no such thing said; They did apprehend
some fear, but from whom their fear came, that they cannot tell. But she
positively swears, when the Boy had denied it, he had notice of it; and when he
refused to sign it, yet he pressed him, by telling him, there was no harm in it
like to come, but only to Mr. Braddon himself, and so he was persuaded to sign
it.

The next Witness is Mrs. Barton; She comes and tells you, that she was at Mr.
Edwards's house, and what she tells you of her own knowledge, you are to take
for Evidence, and nothing more. She says Braddon did engage the Boy to tell
truth, and put him in mind of that Chapter in the Acts, of the great
displeasure of God against the two Witnesses that forswore themselves, and bid
him speak nothing but the truth. And after he had talked thus awhile, she
observed he was going to take Pen, Ink, and Paper, and she was afraid she might
be drawn in for a Witness, and so she went out of the Room. But before that
time, Mr. Braddon did go to see the Window, and the place where the Boy said
the Razor was thrown out.

Then there is the Evidence of the little Girl, who is the next Witness, Jane
Lodeman I think her name was, and that is likewise written by Mr. Braddon. Now
you hear what that young Wench says. She comes and would give some sort of
Countenance to the thing, How she was looking up at the Window of my Lord of
Essex's Lodgings, and that there was a bloody Razor thrown by a hand out of the
Window, but whether it was half bloody, or all over bloody, she cannot tell, but
bloody it was; and it was, as she says, thrown on the outside, though the Boy
said, it was thrown of the inside. But the Wench being asked, Whether she knew
that was my Lord of Essex's Lodgings? She answered, No, she did not, when they
come and make her swear in her Information, that she saw the Razor thrown out
of my Lord of Essex's Lodgings: And then she says, she heard no Soldier speak
a word at all: but in the Information, it is set down, that the Soldier cried
out to the people of the House, Go and fetch up the Razor. And this was all
done in open day, and there were abundance of people, but she could not tell
any particular body. So that of one hundred people, which, if she say true,
were there, Mr. Braddon could not satisfy himself to inquire after some of
them, but only he must pick up a Child of thirteen years of age, to practice
upon, in this villainous manner. And it carries the greater venom, and malice,
and virulency, and baseness, to endeavor to corrupt young people, to that
height, as to come and say, and swear those things in the face of a Court,
that are impossible to be true. It is impossible to be true, that she saw a
Coach in the yard; for you hear what account Captain Hawley gives of his house.
It is impossible to be true, that there should be a crowd of people, because
that there was a Sentinel at the door, who must see all that go out, and that
come in; and there is no way to go into the Yard, but through the Backdoor,
and the Pales are so high, that nothing can be flung over, that could be easily
discerned. So that the very thoughts of such a thing as this are ridiculous in
themselves, and not only the falsity of the story is apparent, but there is
also apparent, a great villainy, in endeavoring to get Witnesses to prove that
falsity. For you see who Mr. Braddon employs; he gets a Barber to go along with
him on purpose to testify what idle Reports he could pick up. But this Barber,
and the other Witnesses, when they come here cannot tell any thing. For the
Barber, he says, she said, There lay a Razor; but the Information says, (to
which he is a Witness) that the Soldier cried, Take up the Razor: and she now
upon her Oath denis any thing of that.

The next Evidence is the Aunt, and she tells you, she does not remember such
and such particulars, but somewhat to that purpose she does; but whether she
named my Lord of Essex, or no, in particular, as to his Lodgings, she cannot
give an account.

Then you have Glasbrooke, that comes to give an account concerning this Girls
story, and he plainly is quite different from what the others had testified
before; for his Evidence is, That the Girl had said my Lord of Essex cut his
own Throat, and afterward flung the Razour out of a window: After he had
committed this horrid Murder upon himself, he got to life again, and threw away
the Instrument he did it with, that is plainly his Testimony, that this Child
should say so. So that as in the Case of Susanna, which I heard cited here upon
another occasion, the wicked Elders were discovered by the different
Circumstances of time and place; so here you have Circumstances of time and
place, and of all things in the World that can contribute to prove the falsity
of this Report, and to prove the malicious design of these people that were
engaged in this business.

The next Witness is one Smith, and he speaks much to the self same purpose. He
was the Barber that went with Braddon to examine this Girl.

Now, Gentlemen, You are to consider of these Contrivances of Braddon, in
busying himself to solicit these Children to testify these stories, after a
denial by the Boy to sign the Paper, To tell him there was no harm could come
to him, to dictate what he should say, and put words into his mouth, about
going to see my Lord Gerrard's Lodgings, which he never spoke of; for him to
dictate to the other Witness the Pin-maker of Marleborough, what the right day
should be, to set up such a senseless story that he heard such a thing at the
Posthouse, but he cannot tell from whom, or name any one that heard it or spoke
it besides himself: it is strange how he should meet with this man, for even
the man himself tells you, he knows not who he had discoursed of it to; and
never saw Braddon till that time he writ the Letter. But you may observe that
to be sure the report might be spread, it was so contrived that the scene
should be laid in the Posthouse, and then it was like to run abroad quickly;
for alas it was not their business to make truth of it, but to make the
discontented rabble believe it to be a truth. And so they began to consult with
themselves where it was best to lodge it, and upon deliberation the place must
humor the design as well as the time, and that must be at the Post-Masters
house, in order to disperse the noise of it, and then Mr. Braddon takes his
Circuit to Salisbury unto Sir Robert Atkins at Stow in the Hold, and to other
people, filling the Country with his braded Ware; and it is time to look after
such Pedlars, for they vent the worst of Ware.

Then, Gentlemen, you may observe this fellow is easily persuaded to swear any
thing, for he gives no manner of account how he came to hear what he speaks of,
or from whom, or how Mr. Braddon came to him: He had never seen him before that
time, he says; (though Mr. Braddon had such a value for this worshipful
Pin-maker, whom he never saw, that he came from London upon the least
intimation of this man, so zealous he was for the carrying on this weighty
affair, which I may call this impudent and intolerable Lie).

Gentlemen, I must tell you, if any proof in the world be sufficient to prove
malice, you have sufficient proof of it before you now. If it had been a thing
of indiscretion only without malice, if there had been nothing of Caution given
to him about it as a thing that concerned not him, there might have been
something said to alleviate it; but for him to come as if he had Authority from
the Countess of Essex, and Sir Henry Capel who denies it, shows the malice of
his design.

Gentlemen, it is a concern of an High nature, and if you do belive these
persons that are Defendants, or either of them to be guilty; such as you
believe to be guilty, you must find Guilty, and of so much as you believe them
Guilty. And if in case they shall by you be found guilty, the Court is to take
care to inflict a punishment, if it be possible, suitable to their Offense.


Then the Court arose, and the Jury afterward gave in a private Verdict, which
the next morning was repeated in Court and recorded. And by that Verdict they
found the Defendant Laurence Braddon guilty of the whole matter charged upon
him in the Information, and the Defendant Hugh Speak guilty of all but the
conspiring to procure false Witnesses, and of that they found him Not Guilty.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IN the Trial of Sir Samuel Bernardiston Baronet, lately published, you are
desired to correct this mistake in Page 16. line 33. for No, read Yes.

The Trial of John Hamden Esquire is now in the Press, and will be shortly
published.

Luna 21. Aprilis, 1684. Termino Paschae, 36. Carolus Secundi Regis. B. R.
Dom. Rex versus Bradden and Speak.

Mr. At. Genesis MY Lord, Here are two Persons to receive your Judgment.


L. Chapter Just. Who are they?


Mr. At. Genesis Bradden and Speak. But it being late, I know not whether you
will give it now, or appoint some other time.


L. Chapter Just. No, no, let them come in, They will say we are afraid of giving
Judgment else.


Then Mr. Bradden and Mr. Speak came into Court.

Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We pray your Judgment for the King, that you will set a
good Fine.


Mr. Williams. We are retained to move in Arrest of Judgment.


Mr. At. Genesis Judgment is entered already, and there is nothing but a Fine in
the Case.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, If it be entered, it is entered but this Term, and it is
in the Breast of the Court, if they please to admit us to speak in Arrest of
Judgment.


L. Chapter Just. When were the Rules out?


Mr. Williams. My Lord, it was put off by consent to this day.


L. Chapter Just. But when were the Rules out, I ask?


Cl. of Crown. The Rules were out the last day of the last Term, and then
Judgment was entered.


L. Chapter Just. Well then Judgment is entered, what say you against a Fine?


M. Williams. We were retained to move in Arrest of Judgment, I am sure I was,
and instructed to that purpose.


L. Chapter Just. I cannot tell what you were retained to do, but now Judgment is
entered, what say you as to the Fine?


Mr. Williams. We cannot say any thing as to that, we are not instructed; I am
sure, I am not.


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, we took it, and I was told so, That it was put off by
consent to this day.


L. Chapter Just. I know nothing of your Consent, nor what you consented to. If you
consent among your selves at the Bar, that is nothing to the Court. Here we
find Judgment entered, and we must proceed upon what is before us.


Mr. Wallop. Your Lordship will please to remember, what the Evidence was.


L. Chapter Just. I do remember it very particularly.


Counsel. My Lord, Mr. Speak is found Guilty of nothing but Writing that Letter.


Mr. At. Genesis He is found Guilty of all but the Suborning.


L. Chapter Just. We do very well know there is a difference between them.


Then the last Rule was read.

L. Chapter Just. Well, Judgment is regularly entered, what say you to it for the
Defendants?


Mr. Wallop. My Lord, we conceive we have very good matter upon the Verdict, to
move in Arrest of Judgment.


L. Chapter Just. Yes, no doubt what you have to say is extraordinary material, but
you come too late, we cannot hear you. Sir Samuel Astrey, is Judgment entered
according to the course of the Court?


Cl. of Cr. Yes.


L. Chapter Just. Then we must proceed to fine them.


Mr. Bradden. Pray, my Lord, Let Mr. Ward be asked, whether they did not agree
we should move to day?


Mr. Ward. That was only an agreement on Saturday that they might appear to
day, and I would not take them in Execution.


Mr. Bradden This was the day, I was to move in, my Lord; Mr. Burton knows very
well, he agreed to it.


Mr. Burton. I know nothing more of it, my Lord, but that indeed I did consent
on Saturday, that whatsoever they could move then, they should move on Monday.


Mr. Ward. That was only that they should appear to day, instead of Bradden's
being taken up by a Capias pro Fine.


L. Chapter Just. Well, well; I know nothing of your agreements, here is Judgment
entered regularly as we find it, you had best bring your Action against Mr.
Burton, if he have done you any wrong, but I did not know that Mr. Burton was
the Kings Attorney. But I find here is Judgment against you, and it is for a
very foul Offense, as notorious an Offense as any Person, under that which is
Capital, could be guilty of; base aspersions of the Government, in order to
promote Sedition, and Faction, and for that End made use of all Villainous means
to corrupt Infants, and then justify that Vilany with a brazen Face, to that
degree of Impudence as I never before saw, That all the Justice of the Nation
must be affronted by such audacious Fellows, for it seems his Confidence has
not left him, but here he smiles, and seems as if he had done no harm:


Mr. Bradden. My Lord, I know my own Innocence, and therefore have no reason to
be troubled.


L. Chapter Just. Your Innocence! your Impudence you mean. I tell you, had you been
in any other Country, but this, the Innocence you brag of, would have sent you
to the Galleys.


Mr. Just. Wythins. Then you think, Mr. Bradden, you have done very well in
what you have done.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, I assure you does he. And the Zeal of his Party has gone so
far, that at Winchester, when I was there in the Circuit, I was told that his
Doctrine had obtained so much in that Country, especially about that place
whence some of his Witnesses came, I mean, Andover, that there was a Woman that
was here the other day, Mrs. Drake, being at Conventicle, held forth, that my
Lord of Essex was murdered, while the King was in the Tower, and that God was
the Avenger of Murder, and had found out a proper Person for the Prosecution of
it, that was Mr. Bradden; and this snivelling Cant prevailed at the
Conventicle. It is no such smirking matter as you make it, Mr. Bradden, I
assure you.


Mr. Bradden. My Lord, if I did know my Self to be under any Guilt, I would
very readily and humbly acknowledge it.


L. Chapter Just. Well, I see a great many of the Party about you, I can spy them
out, though they think they are not seen; but they shall know we will not
suffer such Monsters as these to go without due Punishment.


Mr. Just. Wythins. He stands upon it, he is innocent still, notwithstanding
all that was proved, and the Juries Verdict.


L. Chapter Just. Yes, alack a day, he wipes his Mouth, and has not so much as
eaten, I Will warrant you.


Mr. Just. Wythins. I expected you would have been sorry, Mr. Bradden, for what
you had done, and expressed some Penitence, but, it seems, you are very
innocent.


Mr. Bradden. I did not directly, nor indirectly, offer any thing to induce the
Children to give their Testimony, nor was any such thing proved: I know my own
Innocence.


Mr. At. Genesis The Jury have found it otherwise.


L. Chapter Just. And that upon a fair, a full, and a convincing Evidence, and no
man in the World can make any doubt of the truth of that Verdict; but he that
had a share in your Guilt, or in that that it had a tendency toward, I mean
that Horrid Conspiracy. And I assure you, Mr. Bradden, you tread upon the very
heels of it; smirk at it, and be as merry about it as you will.


Mr. Bradden. If I did not know my own Innocence, then I had reason to be
troubled.


L. Chapter Just. Your own Innocence! If you did not know your own Impudence, you
mean; it is that only that makes you Smirk and Smile at such things as these.


Mr. Just. Wythins. Mr. Bradden, when you were advised by Sir Henry Capel to
take a prudent and a good course, to go and leave it with a Secretary of State,
you would not take that Advice, but you would go your own way, and you would
turn Examiner, and Prosecutor your self; when he that was the Earls Brother,
and was sure more concerned than you, thought it fitter to go that way.


L. Chapter Just. We remember what Sir Samuel Bernardiston, in his Letter, speaks
of this matter. Mr. Bradden, he was got off; why they dare not meddle with Mr.
Bradden, he is such a dreadful man, and his Party are so considerable that we
dare not meddle with them; and the TORIES are all cast down; alack a day!
because these Fellows cannot cast down the Government, therefore all honest men
must be cast down, and not dare to meddle with them; but they shall see we are
not so much cast down, but we are able to reach the highest of them. What
Condition is this man in? I speak in point of Estate, for his other Conditions,
we know what they are, his Trial will satisfy any man of that.


Mr. At. Genesis He is the Eldest Son of a Father that has a good Estate.


Mr. Williams. He is then but Heir Apparent.


Mr. Bradden. No, I am a younger Brother.


Mr. Williams. It seems he is but the Second Son, and a young Gentleman.


Mr. Bradden. My Father has an Elder Son alive.


L. Chapter Just. I remember particularly it is said in one of the Letters, That he
was a Man of 7 or 800 l. a year.


Cl. of Cr. That was in Mr. Speke's Letter. He says his Father had so much.


Mr. Bradden. That is in Mr. Speke's Letter; but that is not true.


L. Chapter Just. I don't know truly, that may be as false as any thing else you
went about to have these Children Swear, but I Will undertake it, if thou had
told the little Girl that he had 800 l. a year, she would have been as ready to
have Sworn it as the other.


Mr. Just Wythins. It Is a wonderful thing, Mr. Bradden, you could bring no body
to come and testify these things, but those two little Children.


L. Chapter Just. But oh! what a Happiness it was for this sort of People, that
they had got Mr. Bradden, an honest man, and a man of Courage, says Mr. Speak,
a man a propo; and pray, says he to his Friend, give him the best advice you
can, for he is a man very fit for the purpose, and pray secure him under a sham
Name, for I Will undertake there are such Designs upon pious Mr. Bradden, such
Contrivances to do him a mischief, that if he had not had his Protestant Flayl
about him, some body or other, would have knocked him in the head, and he is
such a wonderful man, that all the King's Courts of Justice must needs Conspire
to do Mr. Bradden a mischief; a pretty sort of a man, upon my word, and he must
be used accordingly; men that arrogate and assume to themselves a Liberty to do
such kind of things, must expect to fair accordingly.


Mr. Just. Wythins. Mr. Speak is not found Guilty of the Subornation.


Mr. At. Genesis He is found Guilty of all but the Subornation, he is found
Guilty of Conspiring to spread the Report. The Subornation will require another
sort of Punishment.


L. Chapter Just. Ay, but there is a difference between them. The Crime was very
great in Mr. Speak, though not so great as in Mr. Bradden, and I am sorry that Mr
Speak should be concerned in it, and should take such care about such a
business, with all that Piety and Zeal for Religion he expresses in his Letter
to Sir Robert Atkyns, (Mr. Justice Atkyns that was) that he should recommend
him to have a wonderful care of him, and then thank him for his kindness,
showed to Our Party: So he makes himself to be of the Party, and makes this the
business of the Party, and so makes himself to be a sharer in the business; for
it is We thank you for your kindness to Us, and the Tide is strong against Us;
and We hope we shall be able to bring the business of my Lord of Essex upon the
Stage, before they do any of those in the Tower. So Mr. Speak makes himself a
Party in the business. And I am mighty sorry that when he comes to be asked the
Question, How he came to Write this Letter, he should tell us, He had been at
the Tavern, and did not know what he Writ, but does not say he recollected
afterward It seems he used to be often at the Tavern, and had been there when
he writ this Pious Letter, and so his Saintship broke out in a fit of
Drunkenness, for most of our Reformers of Religion now adays, want common
Morality. And yet they are wonderfully Zealous, for Reformation and Religion.
All the Villainy that has been thought of, nay, more than ever could enter
before into the Imagination of Mankind, has been wrought by these Men, that
pretend to be Reformers of Religion, and amongst the rest Mr. Bradden; and
indeed I look upon Bradden, to be the Daringest Fellow of the Party, he and his
Brother Smith. If there were any Reluctance, or any Sense of any Guilt they had
contracted, and would show it, by acknowledging their being surprised into it,
and testified Repentance, by a Submissive and a Dutiful behavior, that were
something to incline the Court to Commisseration, but when we see, instead of
that, they are more obdurate and steeled in their Opposition to the Government,
they must be reclaimed by Correction, and kept within due bounds, by condign
Punishment, otherwise it will be thought by the Ignorant sort of People, that
all Courts of Justice are afraid of them.


Mr. Just. Wythins. Nay, Mr. Bradden's Zeal was very extraordinary in the Case,
going on in this business, not only without, but contrary to the Advice of Sir
Henry Capel, who surely was most concerned about the Death of his Brother.


Then the Judges between themselves consulted about the Sentence, which Mr.
Justice Wythins pronounced thus.

Mr. Just. Wythins. Mr. Bradden, You see what it is you are convicted of, It
was for as fowl an Offense, as any can be imagined, that is not Capital,
wherein the King is very much concerned, for the Insinuations were such, as
that the King was mightily concerned, for in as much as you say the Earl of
Essex should be murdered at that time while the King was in the Tower, it was
an implied accusation of the King, and an insinuation, that the King should
design to take away an innocent man's Blood, and so downright be guilty of
murdering an innocent Person, which how great an Offense that is, let any man
that has any Loyalty, or Reverence for the King in him consider, and you cannot
say you are innocent, Mr. Bradden. Your prosecution was most pertinacious, and
you would, proceed, even after the Boy had denied it, and proceed in such a
manner, when Sir Henry Capel had told you, what you should do; and what did you
go upon? You had got a little Girl, a Child of 11 or 12 years old, to tell a
story of I know not what, and no body else knew any thing of it, and this must
be a ground sufficient for you to go up and down, and spread such a Report,
when Sir Henry Capel gave you advise to go to a Secretary of State, and let him
examine it; indeed you did go to him, but would not rest satisfied with what
the King and Council did; no, Mr. Bradden, you thought that would not gratify
your own passion, and malice, against the King and the Government, but you must
take ways of your own. This is to scandalize the whole Justice of the Nation,
and not only make the King a Murderer, but you would have all the Plot hereby
by quite lose its Credit; and you would make it, as Sir Samuel Bernardiston
would insinuate, a sham Plot to take away innocent Protestants lives. But as to
the Plot, there has been fresh proof of it beyond all contradiction this day, a
man here in the Face of the whole Court has owned the whole thing, he would not
take the liberty of defending himself, that was offered him, if he would try
it, but Confessed that Conspiracy, which you had a great mind to be an
Instrument of making the World to believe was nothing but a Sham. I shall not
make any long Speech to you, The Court for this Offense,

Sets upon you, Mr. Bradden, the Fine of 2000 l. and order that you find
Sureties for your Good Behavior during your Life, and that you be Committed
till this be Performed. And for you Mr. Speak ( we have considered that you are
not so highly Guilty as Mr. Bradden, you are Guilty of a great Offense, but not
so Guilty as he, and therefore) we think fit to set upon you the Fine of 1000
l. and that you find Sureties for your Good Behavior, during your Life, and be
Committed till you perform it.


L. Chapter Just. Marshal take them in Custody, and use them as they ought to be
used.


Counsel. My Lord, Mr. Speke's Bail is discharged, I suppose?


L. Chapter Just. Ay, they must be, as to this matter, but nothing else but this.


Then they were carried away to the King's Bench.

FINIS.

