THE TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF Dr OLIVER PLUNKET Titular PRIMATE of IRELAND,
FOR HIGH TREASON, At the Bar of the Court of King's Bench, at Westminster, in
Trinity Term, 1681.

I do appoint Francis Tyton, and Thomas Basset, to Print the Trial of Oliver
Plunket.

Fr. Pemberton.



DUBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray at Colledge-Green, for Eliphal Dobson Bookseller
on Cork-hill. 1681.

The TRIAL and CONDEMNATION of Dr. OLIVER PLUNKET Titular Primate of IRELAND.
THE Third of May 1681. in Easter 33. Carol. Secund. Reg. Dr. Oliver Plunket
was arraigned at the King's Bench Bar for High Treason for endeavoring and
compassing the Kings Death, and to levy War in Ireland, and to alter the
Religion there, and to introduce a foreign Power, and at his Arraignment,
before his Plea, he urged for himself, that he was indicted of the same High
Treason in Ireland, and arraigned, and at the day for his Trial the Witnesses
against him did not appear, and therefore he desired to know if he could be
tried here for the same Fact? The Court told him, that by a Statute made in
this Kingdom, he might be tried in the Court of King's Bench, or by Commission
of Oyer and Terminer in any part of England, for Facts arising in Ireland, and
that his Arraignment there (he being never tried upon it) was not sufficient to
exempt him from being tried here; because till a Trial be passed, and there be
a Conviction or Acquittal thereupon, an Arraignment, barely, is no Plea: For in
such Cases the party is not put twice in danger of his Life, which only is the
thing the Law in such Cases looks after to prevent. He then desired time for
his Witnesses, which they told him he could not do till after Plea pleaded;
whereupon he pleaded Not Guilty, and put himself upon the Country for his
Trial; and after some consideration had about time to be allowed him to bring
his Witnesses from Ireland, the Court appointed the day for his Trial, to be
the first Wednesday in next Term, which was full Five weeks time.

And accordingly on Wednesday the 8th. of June, in Trinity Term, he was brought
to his Trial, and Proclamation, as in such Cases is usual, being made, it
proceeded thus.

Clerk. of Crown. Oliver Plunket, hold up thy Hand, those good men which thou
shall hear called and personally appear, are to pass between, etc.


Plunket. May it please your Lordship, I have been kept close Prisoner for a
long time, a year and an half in Prison; when I came from Ireland hither, I was
told by persons of good repute, and a Counselor at Law, that I could not be
tried here; and the reasons they gave me were, that first the Statute of Hen.
8. and all other Statutes made here, were not received in Ireland, unless there
were an express mention made of Ireland in them: So that none were received
there but such as were before Poyning's Act. So I came with that persuasion
that I could not be tried here, till at my Arraignment your Lordships told me
it was not so, and that I must be tried here, though there was no express
mention made of Ireland. Now, my Lord, upon that, whereas my Witnesses were in
Ireland, and I knew nothing of it, and the Records upon which I very much rely
were in Ireland, your Lordship was pleased to give me time from the 4th. of the
last month to this day; and in the mean time, as your Lordship had the
Affidavit here yesterday, and as Captain Richardson can testify, have not
dispatched only one, but two to Ireland: into the Counties of Armagh, Dublin,
etc. and where there were Records very material to my Defense: but the Clerk of
the Crown would not give me any Copy of any Record at all, unless he had some
express Order from your Lordship* So that whether it were that they were
mistaken, or wilfully refused. I could not get the Records which were very
material for me. For in some of those Records some of these that accuse me were
convicted of high Crimes, and others were Outlawed and Imprisoned, and broke
Prison; and there were other Records also of Excommunication against some of
them, and I could not get the Records, unless your Lordship would instruct me
in some way or other, how I can get over them that are most material for my
Defense. The Servants that I sent hence, and took Shipping for Ireland, were
two days at Sea, and cast back again, and from thence were forced to go to
Holly Head, and from Holly Head in going to Dublin they were thirteen or
fourteen days, the Winds were so contrary; and then my Servant went about to go
into the County of Armagh and Derry, that were a Hundred miles from Dublin, and
Mead, and other places; so that in so short a time, my Lord, it was morally
impossible for them to have brought the Witnesses over; and those that were
ready to have come, would not stir at all, unless they had a Pass from hence,
because some of them were Roman Catholics, and they had heard that here some
were taken Prisoners that were Roman Catholics, and that none ought to come
without a Pass; and they being Witnesses against the King, they might be
clapped up here, and brought into very ill condition: so they sent one over
that made Affidavit.


L. C. J. It was the Affidavit was read here yesterday.


Plunket. So that, my Lord, I conceive your Lordship will think I did it not
out of any intent to put off my Trial; for Captain Richardson is here, who
knows that I writ by the Post, and desired them to come with the Pacquet-Boat,
and they writ over to the Captain after they were landed; so that I depended
upon the Wind and the Weather for my Witnesses, and wanted your Lordships Order
for the Records to be brought over, and that their Examination might be brought
into Court, and their own original Examination here might be compared with it.
So I humbly beg your Lordships favor, the Case is rare, and scarce happens in
five hundred years, that one should be in my circumstances. I am come here
where no Jury knows me, nor the Quality of my Adversaries; If I had been in
Ireland I would have put my self upon my Trial to morrow without any Witnesses,
before any Protestant Jury that knew them and me. And when the Orders went
over, that I should be tried in Ireland, and that no Roman Catholic should be
upon the Jury, and so it was in both the Grand and other Jury; yet then when I
came to my Trial, after I was arraigned, not one appeared: This is manifest
upon the Record and can be proved.


L. C. J. There was no Prosecution of you there.


Plunket. But, my Lord, here is no Jury that knows me, or the quality of my
Adversaries; for they are not a Jury of the Neighborhood that know them, and
therefore my Case is not the same with other Cases. Though I cannot harbor,
nor do not, nor will not, nor ought not, the least conceit of hard measure and
injustice; yet if I have not full time to bring my Records and Witnesses
altogether, I cannot make my Defense. Some were there then, some afar off, so
that it was a miracle that in six or seven Counties they could do so much as
they did: But they got in seven or eight of them, yet there were five or six
wanting: Therefore I beseech your Lordship that I may have time to bring my
Records and Witnesses, and then I will defy all that is upon the Earth and
under the Earth to say any thing against me.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Plunket, it is in vain for you to talk and make this
discourse here now; you must know, that by the Laws of this Kingdom, when a man
is indicted and arraigned of Treason or Felony, it is not usual to give such
time; it is rare that any man has had such time as you have had, five weeks
time to provide your Witnesses: If your Witnesses are so cautions, and are such
persons that they dare not, or will not venture for fear of being apprehended,
or will not come into England, without such and such cautions, we cannot tell
how to help it; we cannot furnish you with Witnesses, you must look to get your
Witnesses your self; if we should stay till your Witnesses will come, perhaps
they will never come here, and so you will escape out of the hands of Justice.
Do not be discouraged in this, the Jury are strangers to you peradventure, but
they are honest Gentlemen, and you shall have no other upon your Jury; and you
may be confident, that if there be not some Fact proved against you, that may
amount to Treason, you shall be discharged; they are persons that understand so
much, and we will direct them so much. You shall have as fair a Trial as if you
were in Ireland; but for us to stay for your Witnesses, or send you back to
Ireland, we cannot do it: Therefore you must submit to your Trial. We heard
your Affidavit yesterday, and we did then tell the Gentlemen that moved it, as
much as we tell you. You are here to be tried, look to the Jury as they are
called, and except against them if you will.


Plunk. My Lord, I desire only to have the favor of time, some time this Term.


L. C. J. We cannot do it.


Cl. of Cr. Swear Sir John Roberts.


Plunk. I humbly present this to your Lordship, I am then in eminent danger of
my Life, if I cannot get ten days to have my Witnesses over: I desire I may
have but to the 21th. of this month, and then if they do not come you may go on.


L. C. J. We cannot do it, you have had five weeks time already.


Plunk. I desire but a few days.


Crier. Sir John Roberts, take the Book, look upon the Prisoner; You shall well
and truly try, etc.


Plunket. My Lord, I desire to know whether they have been of the Juries of
Langhorn, or the Five Jesuits, or any that were condemned?


L. C. J. What if they have? that is no exception.


Then the Jury was sworn, whose Names follow. Sir John Roberts, Thomas Harriot,
Henry Ashurst, Ralph Bucknall, Richard Gowre, Richard Pagett, Thomas Earsby,
John Hayne, Thomas Hodgkins, James Partherich, Samuel Baker, William Hardy.


Cl. of Cr. Oliver Plunket, hold up thy Hand. You of the Jury look upon the
Prisoner and hearken to his Charge.

HE stands indicted by the Name of Oliver Plunket, late of Westminster, in the
County of Middlesex Dr. of Divinity, for that he as a false Traitor against the
most Illustrious and most Excellent Prince our Sovereign Lord Charles the
second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King,
and his natural Lord, the fear of God in his heart not having, nor weighing the
duty of his Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the
Devil, the cordial Love, and true and due natural Obedience, which true and
faithful Subjects of our Said Sovereign Lord the King, toward him our said
Sovereign Lord the King do and of right ought to bear, utterly withdrawing, and
contriving, and with all his might intending the Peace and common Tranquillity
within the Kingdom of Ireland, as also of this Kingdom of England to disturb,
and War and Rebellion against our said Sovereign Lord the King in the Kingdom
of Ireland, then being the Dominion of our said Sovereign Lord the King in
parts beyond this Seas; to stir up and move, and the Government of our said
Sovereign Lord the King there to subvert, and our said Sovereign Lord the King
from his Regal Power and Government there to Depose and Deprive, and our said
Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, to Death and final Destruction to bring
and put, and the true Worship of God within the said Kingdom of Ireland, by Law
established and used, to alter to the Superstition of the Romish Church; the
first day of December, in the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles
the Second, now King of England, etc. the 32th, and diverse other days and
times, as well before as after, at Dublin in the Kingdom of Ireland, in parts
beyond the Seas, with diverse other false Traitors unknown, traitorously did
compass, imagine, and intend the killing, Death and final Destruction of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, and the ancient Government of his said Kingdom of
Ireland to change, alter, and wholly to subvert, and him our said Sovereign
Lord the King, that now is, from the Crown and Government of his Kingdom of
Ireland aforesaid to depose and deprive, and the true Protestant Religion to
extirpate, and War and Rebellion against our said Sovereign Lord the King,
there to move and levy. And to fulfill and accomplish his said most wicked
Treasons, and Traitorous compassings, imaginations and purposes aforesaid; he
the said Oliver Plunket, the said first day of December, in the abovesaid 32th.
Year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, with Force
and Arms, etc. at Dublin, in the Kingdom of Ireland, then being the Dominion of
our said Sovereign Lord the King in parts beyond the Seas, maliciously,
devilishly and traitorously did assemble and gather together himself, with
diverse other Traitors unknown, and then and there devilishly, advisedly,
maliciously, subtly and traterously did consult and agree our said Sovereign
Lord the King, that now is, to Death and final Destruction to bring, and from
his Crown and Government aforesaid to depose and deprive, and the Religion of
the Romish Church into the Kingdom of Ireland aforesaid to introduce and
establish; and the sooner to fulfill and perfect his said most wicked Treasons
and traitorous imaginations and purposes, he the said Oliver Plunket, with
diverse other false Traitors unknown, then and there advisedly, maliciously and
traitorously did further consult and agree to contribute, pay and expend diverse
great Sums of Money to diverse Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King, and
other persons unknown, to procure them the said persons unknown, our said
Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, traitorously to kill, and the Romish
Religion into the said Kingdom of Ireland to introduce and establish. And that
he the said Oliver Plunket and other Traitors unknown, afterward, to wit, the
said first day of December, in the two and thirtieth year of the Reign of our
said Sovereign Lord the King abovesaid, at Dublin aforesaid, in the Kingdom of
Ireland aforesaid, within the Dominion of our said Sovereign Lord the King,
with Force and Arms, etc. unlawfully, maliciously devilishly and traitorously
did receive, collect, pay and expend diverse great Sums of Money to diverse
persons unknown, to persuade and induce diverse other persons also unknown, the
said false Traitors in their said Treasons to help and maintaintain, against
the Duty of his Allegiance, and against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord
the King, that now is, his Crown and Dignity, and against the form of the
Statutes in that Case made and provided. To this Indictment he has pleaded,
Not Guilty.


Mr. Heath. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, This is
an Indictment of High Treason against Dr. Oliver Plunket the Prisoner at the
Bar, and it sets forth, that in the 32th. Year of the King, at Dublin in the
Kingdom of Ireland, he did compass and imagine the Death of the King, and to
deprive the King of his Kingdom of Ireland, and to raise War to extirpate the
Protestant Religion in the Kingdom of Ireland, and to establish the Romish
Religion there. And it sets forth further, That for the accomplishment of these
Treasons, the Defendant with several others did meet together at several places
at Dublin in the Kingdom of Ireland, and elsewhere, and at these several
meetings did consult and agree to put the King to Death, to raise War, to
extirpate the Protestant Religion, and set up the Romish Religion. And the
Indictment further sets forth, that to accomplish these Treasons, the Defendent
did raise great Sums of Money in the Kingdom of Ireland, and did get several
persons to contribute several Sums for these Treasons: and that the Defendent
with others did disburse several Sums of Money to several persons, to persuade
them and entice them to be aiding and assisting in these Treasons, and to
recompense them for them. To this Indictment the Defendent has pleaded, Not
Guilty. If we prove these things, you are to find him Guilty.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. My Lord, we will quickly come to the Evidence. But in
short, You have heard his Charge is as high as can be against the King, and
against the Nation, and against all that is good. The Design and Endeavor of
this Gentleman was the Death of the King, the Destruction of the Protestant
Religion in Ireland, and the raising of War: And to accomplish this, we charge
him, that there was a Confederacy made, Assemblies and Consultations had to
these ends, and raising Money to accomplish it. Gentlemen, Dr. Plunket was made,
as we shall prove to you, as they there call him, Primate of Ireland, and he
got that Dignity from the Pope upon this very Design. He did by Virtue of that
Power, which he thought he had gotten, make out Warrants, Significations, I
know not what they call them, to know how many men in Ireland could bear Arms
from sixteen to forty; he raises Taxes upon the People and the Clergy there.
But, my Lord, the particulars will best fall from the Witnesses that we shall
call and prove it by, and we need not make any aggravation; for such a thing as
this cannot be more aggravated than it is.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, the
Character this Gentleman bears, as Primate under a Foreign and usurped
Jurisdiction, will be a great inducement to you to give credit to that Evidence
we shall produce before you. We shall prove, that this very Preferment was
conferred upon him upon a Contract, that he should raise 60000 men in Ireland,
for the Pope's Service, to settle Popery there, and to subvert the Government.
The Evidence that we shall give you, will prove how it leads to destroy the
King, and I take it according to the resolutions that have been, to raise War
in the Kingdom, and to introduce a Foreign Power; will be certainly Evidence of
an Attempt and Machination to destroy the King. As Soon as he was in possession
of his Primacy, he goes about his work. There are two great necessaries to be
provided, Men and Money. For men, having this great spiritual Jurisdiction,
whereby, indeed, all that are under it are become Slaves, he issues out his
Warrants to all the Clergy of Ireland, to give an account, and make return from
the several Parishes, of all the men in them above fourteen and under sixty.
And Returns were accordingly made by them, that he might accordingly take a
measure what men to pick out for the Service. The next thing was Money, my
Lord; and your Lordship takes notice, that when the Mind is enslaved, the
Purse, nay all the Body bows to it. He issues out his Warrants to his Clergy,
to make a Collection of Money, in all parts great Sums were levied, and when
they were levied, we shall give you an account by our Proofs, that several Sums
were issued out, and sent into France to further the business. There was also
provision made of great Ammunition and Arms, and we shall prove in particular,
several delivered out by this Gentleman's Order, to carry on this thing; and to
go through stitch with this business, he takes a view of all the several Ports
and places in Ireland, where it would be convenient to land: for they were to
have from France an Auxiliary Force, and upon his view he pitched upon
Carlingford as the place. We shall prove the several Correspondencies between
Rome and him, and France and him, and several Messengers employed, and Moneys
issued out from time to time for their maintenance. This will be the course of
our Evidence; and we shall begin first with some that do not speak so
particularly to this Doctor, but prove there was a general Design in all parts
of the Kingdom of Ireland, to bring in the King of France, and extirpate the
Protestant Religion: And then we shall call the particular persons to the
particular Facts against him. First we call Florence Wire. [Who was sworn.]


Mr. Sol. Genesis Are your sworn, Sir?


Wire. Yes, Sir.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray give the Court and the Jury an account of what you know of
any Plot in Ireland, to introduce the Romish Religion, or to bring in the
French King.


Wire. Yes, I know there was a Plot, both before Plunket's time, and in his
time; for it was working in the years 65. and 66. but it was brought to full
maturitie in the Year 1667. For then Col. Miles Rely, and Col. Bourne was sent
to Ireland from the King of France, with a Commission to muster as many men as
he could, promising to send an Army of 40000 men with a Commission, upon St.
Lewis day in August next following, to land at Carbingford, to destroy all the
true Subjects, to destroy the Religion as it was established there, and to set
up the French Kings Authority and the Roman Catholic Religion. And one Edmond
Angle that was a Justice of Peace and Clerk of the Crown, sent for all the
Rebels abroad in the North to come up into the County of Longford, and they
marched into the head Town of the County and sired the Town; the Inhabitants
fled into the Castle: then they came up to the Gaol, thinking to break it open,
and by seting the Prisoners free, to join them with them; but then Angle was
shot, received a deadly wound, and dropped off his Horse, and they fled. So then
when they were without the Town, one Charles Mac Canell alighted, and took away
all the Papers out of his pocket; which, if they had been found, would have
discovered all. This occasioned Col. Bourne to be suspected; and being so
suspected, he was taken Prisoner, and turned to Newgate in Dublin. Then Col.
Reiley sled away again to France, and the Plot lay under a cloud during the
life of Primate Reiley the Prisoners Predecessor. This Primate Reiley died
beyond Sea. Then many of the Popish Religion would have had the Primacie
conferred upon one Duffy; but the Prisoner at the Bar put in for it; which
might have been opposed, if the Prisoner had not engaged and promised that he
would so manage affairs, that before the present Government were aware, he
would surprise the Kingdom, provided the Pope and King of France would send a
competent Army to join with theirs for the effecting of it. So the first Year
of his coming over, I was in the Friery at Armagh: I was an acquaintance of the
Friars, and they invited me. And one Quine told the Prisoner, that they thought
Duffy would have been Primate. Said he, It Is better as it is; for Duffy has
not the Wit to do those things that I have undert^ken to do; meaning that he
did undertake to supplant the Protestant Religion, to bring in Popery, and put
the Kingdom under Subjection to the King of France.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How do you know that?


Wire. Those were the words, and the meaning I knew before, because I had heard
it talked of.


L. C. J. Who was the first of these Primates you speak of?


Wire. Edmund Reiley. He set this business on foot first.


L. C. J. About what?


Wire. About calling the Rebels together out of the North when they came to
Longford.


L. C. J. What Year was that?


Wire. It was in the Year (67.)


L. C. J. When died he?


Wire. He died a little while afterward.


L. C. J. Then Duffy would have it conferred on him?


Wire. Yes, after Reileys decease he would have had it conferred upon him; and
there was a contention between him and the Prisoner, who did engage he would
bring things to that full maturity, that before the present Government were
aware he would do the work.


L. C. J. How do you know this?


Wire. I know this, because I had an account of it from certain Schoolfellows
that were with me in Ireland, then studying in Rome; they wrote this to me,
desiring me I would take a good heart with the rest of my Countrymen, and
assuredly in a short time the Kingdom would be relieved, and the Irish restored
to their former patrimonies.


L. C. J. This you speak of their information. What do you know of your own
knowledge?


Wire. All that I know of is, he coming into the Friery of Armagh --


L. C. J. About what time?


Wire. It is either 10 or 11 years ago, and there was a Fast there, and I was
invited by the Friars, being their acquaintance; one Quine one of the Friars
told him --


L. C. J. Told whom?


Wire. The Prisoner, that he did expect Duffy should have been Primate? but the
Prisoner made answer, It Is better as it is; for Duffy had not the Wit to manage
the things that I have undertaken for the general good of our Religion.


L. C. J. Now tell me this? What things were those he had undertaken? did he
explain himself?


Wire. No further than those words: But I did conceive this was his meaning;
because I knew partly of it my self, knowing of the former Plot.


L. C. J. I ask you only what words came from him; and you say they were, That
Duffy had not the Wit to manage what he had undertaken for the general good of
their Religion.


Wire. Yes; and then again in his Assembly, kept by him, he charged his
Inferiors to collect such several Sums of Money as he thought fit, according to
the several Parishes and Dignities, to assist and supply the French Forces when
they came over.


L. C. J. How know you that?


Wire. I have seen the Money collected; and I have seen his Warrant sub poena
suspensionis to bring it in, to redeem their Religion from the power of the
English Government. Again, there were those Rebels that went to Longford --


L. C. J. What time were those Collections?


Wire. From time to time since he came into Ireland.


L. C. J. About what time?


Wire. 9 Year, 8 Year, 7 Year ago, and the last Year of all.


L. C. J. Then it was several times, you say?


Wire. Yes; and he procured the Macdonels a piece of Money out of the Exchequer,
pretending to do good Service to his Majesty; but he sent them for France,
meaning they should improve themselves and bring themselves into favor with
the King of France, and come over with the French King to surprise Ireland.
This one of the said Rebels told me. So I have seen the Prisoners Letter
directed to the grand Tory Flemming, desiring that they should go to France,
and he would see them, in spite of all their enemies in Ireland, safe ashore.
And Flemming should return again a Colonel, to his own glory, and the good of
his Country.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know his Hand?


Wire. Yes, I do as well as my own. I have seen Capt. O Neal, Son of General O
Neal, coming every year into Ireland, and carrying three Regiments to the
French King into France; and he used to come over to Ireland every year to get
a recruit; and he did get my Brother to go with him, and so much importuned me,
that I could hardly withstand him; but I did not yield to his desire: He told
me it was to improve me for my good; to improve my self in Military Discipline,
and then I should return for Ireland a Captain under the French King, to
surprise the Kingdom and settle the Popish Religion, and then I should be
restored to my Estate.


L. C. J. Who told you this?


Wire. Oapt. O Neal. And in the mean while, says he, I hear Dr. Plunket is the
only man entrusted in Ireland to make these preparations, and get things ready
against the French King's coming, who is to land at Carlingford.


Mr. At. Genesis How often were you in the Doctor's company?


Wire. Not very often.


Plunket. I never saw him with my eyes before in all my life.


Wire. I have seen him in the Priory the first year that he came over to
Ireland; and you know the meetings held at George Blykes house in the Fives;
and I have seen him in his own house.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How came you to know the Prisoners hand?


Wire. Because I was well acquainted with his hand, seeing his hand amongst the
Priests.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Did you ever see him write?


Wire. Yes, in the Priory, and in his own house.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How often?


Wire. Not often.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How often?


Wire. Ten or a Dozen times: I should know his hand from all the writing in
London, if it were among never so many. Let me but see it; I will know it.


L. C. J. Have you ever heard him own himself Primate?


Wire. Yes, my Lord, he writes himself Oliverus Armacanus Primas and
Metropolitanus totius Hibernioe, That is his Style.


L. C. J. Who did he say made him Primate?


Wire. The Pope, my Lord.


L. C. J. Have you heard him say so?


Wire. Yes, I heard him discourse of it in the Priory.


Mr. At. Genesis He was a public Officer, and they might well know his hand.


L. C. J. I believe any body that has seen us write but a little, would soon
know our hands.


Wire. His hand is as well known over Ireland, as mine is among my acquaintance.


L. C. J. Well, go on.


Wire. During the time of his Imprisonment, I have seen his Commands to some of
his inferior Dignitaries, commanding them sub poena suspensionis, to bring in
the Moneys assessed for bringing in the French Army; and that there was no
better time than the time of his Imprisonment to bring it in.


L. C. J. Who were they, you say, that were commanded sub poena suspensionis?


Wire. Since his taking, I have seen in the time of his Imprisonment his
Commands to his inferior Dignitaries, not to be forgetful of the Moneys that
were assessed toward the supplying the French Army; and that there was no
better time to bring in the French, than when he was in Prison.


L. C. J. How long ago was that?


Wire. The first of February (79.) The second and last of it was in July and
November last.


L. C. J. And this was to bring in the Money?


Wire. Yes, to supply the French Army. And that there was no better time than
during his Imprisonment, and they should not be so much suspected.


L. C. J. And these Mandates you have seen under his hand?


Wire. Yes, I have, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of his summoning or issuing out these Warrants
for Lists of men?


Wire. I have not seen any of the Warrants; but the Priests have told me they
were commanded by his Warrants to let him know how many there were in all their
Parishes from 16 to 60.


Mr. At. Genesis You say you never saw the Mandates?


Wire. No, I did not.


Mr. Scrj. Jeff. What do you know about the Prisoners viewing the Ports?


Wire. I have seen him going about from Port to Port, to Derry, to
Carriefergus, Castle Down, and Carling ford, and all about.


Mr. Scrj. Jeff. When he went to take a view of those Ports, can you tell to
what purpose he did it?


Wire. Yes, I heard it among the Church, That he went on purpose to view the
Seaports to know the strength of all the Garrisons, and to see which was the
most convenient way to bring in the French Army.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Did you ever speak with the Prisoner at the Bar about his
going?


Wire. No.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. What place did he pitch on as most convenient?


Wire. Carling ford.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you in the Prisoners company when he viewed the Ports?


Wire. I have seen him go to and fro; I did not go all the Circuit round with
him.


Plunket. Did you ever see me at Carlingford?


Wire. No


Plunket. Did you ever see me at any other of the Ports?


Wire. I have seen you at Hamiltons coming back from Derry. Do you not remember
that you lodged at at Sir Geo.


Plunket. I never lodged there in my life.


Sir Fr. Withings. Have you any thing more to say concerning the Plot in
general?


Wire. No, in general I have not.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. He has not only given an account of the general, but fixed it
upon the Prisoner.


Mr. At. Genesis Dr. Plunket, will you ask him any questions?


Plunket. You say you remember you saw me at my first coming as Primate 10
Years ago, and that you were at the Priory when I was there?


Wire. Yes.


Plunket. You were invisible to me.


L. C. J. If you will ask any question, do; but do not make these kind of
observations.


Plunket. Tell me this, Why did not you acquaint some Justice of the Peace then
with what you knew, that which you had heard 7 years ago?


Wire. When I first kn^w it, I was as willing to have it concealed as they.


L. C. J. What is your question, Dr. Plunket? pray tell it us.


Plunket. He says, my Lord, that 10 years ago I had such a design in hand, and
he knew the Money was collected for these very ends, and he knew of the design
from that same Capt. O Neal whom I employed and sent abroad; and that I had a
design to bring in the French at Carlingford, and went about to all the Ports
in Ireland, and pitched upon that as the most convenient; and yet it is so
inconvenient for the bringing in a Foreign Force, that any one that knows any
thing of the Maps of the World, will easily conclude it otherwise. But, I say,
my Lord, why did not he tell some Justice of the Peace that I was upon such a
design, but let me live in Ireland 10 Years after, and never spoke of it till
now?


L. C. J. What say you to the Question?


Plunket. When he saw me all the time, and to the time of my taking Prisoner,
and never said one word; for I was a Prisoner 6 months only for my Religion,
not one word of Treason spoken of against me for so many Years: why did not he
acquaint some Justice of the Peace with it before?


L. C. J. What Religion were you of then?


Wire. I was a Roman Catholic.


Plunket. And are you not so now?


Wire. Yes, I am so.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Therefore it will be no wonder that you did not discover it.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. But I ask you, Why did not you discover it all this time?


Wire. Because I was a Papist my self: The first that did discover it, he and I
did consult about it, I had charged him so to do, and I set him on work; but he
was ill paid for having discovered it: you got him to be trepanned, that he
has gone in danger of his life for it.


Plunket. Who is that man?


Wire. Moyer.


Sir Fr. Withins. Call Henry O Neal. (who was sworn.) What know you of any
design in Ireland to introduce the Popish Religion?


O Neal. In August (78). Bishop Tirril came with 40 odd Horsemen to
Vicar General Brady's house, and alighted at the door; and he gave them there
an Oath, which they took willingly and freely from hand to hand, to forward the
Popish Plot against the Protestant Religion, to make an end of them all in one
hour from end to end in Ireland; and said he, I will come within two days with
an Order from the Lord Oliver Plunket; and you need not be afraid, for the Lord
Oliver Plunket and I have sent some Gold and Money into France to get men and
bring them from France over Sea: and do not fear, this will go on in one hour
through all Ireland from end to end. In September (78) a little while after,
the same meeting was in a place which they call Virginia, in the County of
Connaght, where they took a Priest, he is here, and he was with me, and desired
me to come up to Dublin and discover this; and there I did discover it to Sir
John Davis; which is all that I can say: for this Plunket I never saw him in my
life.


Mr. Jones. You were a Papist then?


O Neal. Yes, I was.


Mr. Jones. Are you a Roman Catholic still?


O Neal. Yes, I am.


Mr. Jones. And were you acquainted with all these Orders?


O Neal. Yes.


L. C. J. How came you to know of this Oath?


O Neal. I was in the house with them; I was concerned to take my Oath with
them, and I durst not but take the Oath.


L. C. J. Had you the Oath of Secrecy given you?


O Neal. Yes: and so this Priest commanded me to go along to Dublin and
discover it.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. What is his name?


O. Neal. John Macklegh.


Sir Fr. With. Do you know of any other transactions about the Plot?


O Neal. No, I will not swear for all the World more than I know.


Sir Fr. With. -- Then call Neal O Neal. (who was sworn.) What do you know of
any design carrying on in Ireland against the Government and the Protestant
Religion?


N. O Neal. I will tell you all I know: I was at Vicar Bradey's house the 21.
of August.


L. C. J. What year?


N. O Neal. (78.) And Bishop Tirril came with 40 Horsemen to the house, and
went into the house, and discoursed a little while; and they took their Oaths
every one round to keep secret the Plot, to destroy the Protestant Religion and
the Protestants, that they might have their Estates again. And he said they did
not need to fear: for, said he, you have a very good man to assist you, and
that is the Lord Oliver Plunket, and you need not fear but it will go through
all Ireland.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any questions?


Plunket. Why did not he discover it before?


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Were you a Roman Catholic at that time?


N. O Neal. Yes, and I am so still.


Mr. Paget Jury-man. I desire he may be asked how he came to be there?


L. C. J. You say, I think, this was at Vicar General Bradey's; how came you to
be there?


N. O Neal. I was there several times before that; for my Nurse, or my
Foster-mother (I don't know which you may understand best) was Housekeeper to
him.


L. C. J. Were you required to take the Oath?


N. O Neal. No, my Lord, I was acquainted in the House, I had been there two or
three weeks before.


Plunket. Why did not you tell it to some Justice of the Peace?


L. C. J. He was a Papist, and so he is now.


N. O Neal. There were many that were wiser than I, that did not discover it.


L. C. J. How old are you?


N. O Neal. I believe about two and twenty years old.


L. C. J. And this was but in (78.)


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Owen Murfey. (which was done.) Come, what say you?


O. Murfey. Mr. Edmond Murfey discovered the Plot; he went to one Lieutenant
Baker and did discover the Plot to him, that there was a design to bring in the
French.


L. C. J. Speak out aloud, I cannot hear you.


O Murf. All I know is from Mr. Edmond-Murfey*


L. C. J. What do you know of any of your own knowledge?


O Murf. Mr. Lieutenant Baker told me, that he did hear of the French*


L. C. J. Speak what you know your self.


O Murf. If it please your Lordship, this is more: I saw that Evidence that
Edmond Murfey did produce in Ireland, when he was sent to the Gaol there; but
without Trial or any thing.


Mr. At. Genesis Then swear Hugh Duffy (which was done.) Speak aloud, and tell my
Lord what you know of this Plot and the Prisoner. You know the Prisoner, don't
you?


Duffy. I know him, yes, I know him well enough.


L. C. J. What say you more of him?


Duffy. My Lord, I say, I have seen this Dr. Oliver Plunket raising several
sums of money to carry on this Plot; sometimes 10 s. per Ann. sometimes 20.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Of whom.


Duffy. Of all the Priests in Ireland; of every Priest according to his Pension
and Parish.


L. C. J. In all Ireland?


Duffy. Yes.


L. C. J. And toward the proceedings of the Plot?


Duffy. It was to give to his Agent which was at Rome, and for the carrying on
the business.


Mr. At. Genesis How come you to know this.


Duffy. I was Servant to Dr Duffy, who was infinitely beloved by this man: he
was Father Confessor to the Queen of Spain: there was nothing that happened
between them, but I was by all the time.


L. C. J. Were you Chaplain to him?


Duffy. Yes.


L. C. J. You are a Papist then?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis This is a Friar, my Lord.


L. C. J. Were you in the company with them?


Duffy. Yes, I was.


L. C. J. What did pass there?


Duffy. About the Plot, how they could confirm the Plot: And this man Plunket
said he could prevail with the King of France and the other with the King of
Spain.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray acquaint my Lord particularly when this was, and in what
place, and what they said.


Duff. It was in (73) (74) and 75) at his own house; and at he kept 3 or 4
Jesuits there, and a matter of a hundred Priests.


Mr. At. Genesis What passed in the company?


L. C. J. Who else was there?


Duffy. The discourse, my Lord, was always about the Plot, how they could
contrive the matter between them; and so they did conclude afterward to raise
so much Money upon several Priests, all the Priests in Ireland, sometimes 20 s.
sometimes 40.


L. C. J. Apiece, do you mean?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What discourse had they about the French at any time?


Duffy. Yes a hundred times; he talked several times, that he did not question
but he should prevail with the King of France not to invade Spain: And I have
seen his Letter to Cardinal Bouillon to expostulate with him about the King of
France, why he should wage War with the King of Spain who was a Catholic, but
rather should come and redeem Ireland out of its Heretical Jurisdiction.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see the Letter?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Why, do you know his Hand?


Duffy. Yes I know it as well as I know my own; I know it if there were a
thousand papers together.


Mr. At. Genesis And what was the import of it, pray?


Duff. That Cardinal Bouillon should prevail with the King of France not to
invade Spain: and the Contents of the rest of the Letter were, That he did
admire he should not rather wage War with the King of England, who has been an
Apostate, and help their poor Country that was daily tormented with Heretical
Jurisdiction.


Mr. At. Genesis How came you to be in France? were you employed?


Duff. I went to France to live there in a Covent.


Plunk. Did Cardinal Bouillon show you my Letter?


Duff. Yes.


Plunk. What year?


Duff. (77.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir, you were speaking of raising of Money?


Duff. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see any Precept about it?


Duff. Yes, I have seen several Procepts; I was Curate to one Father Murfey;
and while that man was with Dr. Oliver Plunket, and other Jesuits, I did
officiate in his place, and he sent his Letters to me to raise 40 s. and 20 s.
a time, several times.


L. C. J. You your self?


Duff. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What for?


Duff. It was to send to Dr. (...). who was at Rome.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you send any Money that you know of?


Duff. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell what time you gave the Money your self.


Duff. In (73) (74) and 75.


Mr. At. Genesis Where?


Duff. At his own dewlling place at (...)


Mr. Just. Jones. Of what Quality was the Prisoner amongst you?


Duff. He was Primate of all Ireland.


Mr. Just. Jones. Under whom?


Duff. Under whom? under the Pope.


Mr. Just. Jones. How do you know he was so?


Duff. We had it in his Writings.


L. C. J. Did he style himself so in his Letters?


Duff. Yes, if he writ but to the least man in the Country, he would write,
Oliverus Armacanus Primas totius Hibernioe.


L. C. J. And so you always understood him?


Duff. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you present at any of the general Consultations or Meetings?


Duff. Yes, I was.


Mr. At. Genesis What number might meet at that time?


Duff. Five hundred men and women.


Mr. At. Genesis Where was this?


Duff. At Clouds.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the occasion and design of that meeting?


Duff. Confirmation from the Bishop.


Mr. At. Genesis And what was done there besides?


Duff. The second thing was, that the Gentlemen of the three Counties should
conclude together about this matter.


L. C. J. About what?


Duff. About joining the French and Spanish together.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Where was that meeting?


Duff. In the County of Monaghan.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Was the Prisoner there?


Duff. Yes, he was the chief man.


L. C. J. When was this.


Duff. In (71) to the best of my knowledge.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Were you there your self?


Duff. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the transaction of that day, besides the Sacrament of
Confirmation?


Duff. It was agreed that the Gentry of Armagh, Monaghan and Conaght should
join together; and then they went into a private Council to get a List of all
the Officers that were in the last Rebellion, and those that lost their Estates.


Mr. At. Genesis How do you know that; Did you go into the Consult?


Duffy. Yes, I was in the same Consult my self, and was as willing to proceed
in the matter as any one in the world.


L. C. J. Where was this?


Duffy. Within two miles of Clouds, at one Father house.


L. C. J. Was that at the time when there were so many persons met? Pray speak
what was done there besides Confirmation.


Duffy. Why, they were withdrawn aside into a Garden; some stood up, and some
sat down; and Oliver Plunket stood in the middle of them all as a Prelate, and
every one kneeled before him and kissed his hand.


Mr. At. Genesis What was then said?


Duffy. Then they did consult and gave special Order to some of them to get a
List of all the Officers in the late Rebellion, and that losed their Estates,
and that they should be more forward than others to proceed in that wicked
Design.


L. C. J. What was that Design?


Duffy. To destroy all the Protestants together.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it to mingle the Irish, and Spanish, and French Army
together?


Duffy. Yes, it was.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you hear the Prisoner speak about it?


Duffy. Yes, and he made a Speech before them concerning our own Faith and
Religion.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there any mention of Money at that time?


Duffy. It was, that every man of them that could dispose of Money should
provide some for those Gentlemen that would soon come into Ireland.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. Who were those Gentlemen?


Duffy. The French Army and the Spanish Army together.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you at any other meeting?


Duffy. No.


Mr. At. Genesis After he was taken, do you know of any Order he sent out to
gather Money?


Duffy. Yes, at the Assizes of Dalkieth, I think it was in June two years ago,
he was apprehended --


Mr. At. Genesis Indeed he was first apprehended as a very busy Papist.


Duffy. I have seen two or three several Ordors to raise Money, and for the same
purpose; and that it was the only time to bring the matter to an end when he
lay in Gaol himself.


Mr. At. Genesis Was that the effect of the Letter?


Duffy. Yes; and that the French and Spanish Kings should take this advantage
that now was offered whilst he was in Prison.


Mr. Just. Jones. You say some money was sent to Dr. Cray?


Duff. Yes.


Mr. Just. Jones. To what end?


Duffy. To comply with this design.


Mr. Jones. Where was that Dr. Cray?


Duffy. He was at Rome, he was made a Bishop there.


Mr. At. Genesis Who employed him there?


Duffy. This man employed him always,


L. C. J. What was his Name?


Duffy. Cray.


Mr. Jones. You say some of the Priests paid some 20. some 40.


Duff. Yes.


Mr. Jones. Did the Lay Gentry agree to pay nothing?


Duffy. I don't know for the Gentry.


L. C. J. But I think you paid something your self?


Duffy. Yes, I paid for two or three years my self.


L. C. J. And that was for the Design?


Duff. Yes, for the French and Spanish Army, and all the purposes together.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of any Precept to be given in of all sorts of
persons of such an age?


Duffy. I gave a List of the age of every person from 16 to 60.


Mr. At. Genesis By whose Order?


Duffy. By his Order.


M. Serj. Jeff. To whom did you give it?


Duffy. To Dr. Plunket.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. That is, to the Prisoner?


Duffy. Yes; out of my own Precinct.


Mr. At. Genesis Had you an Order from him?


Duffy. Yes, it was directed to the Parish Priest; and I being Curate in his
place, received the Order.


Sir Fr. With. To what purpose was it?


Duffy. To know what men in Ireland were able to bear Arms.


M. Just. Jones. What was the number contained in your List?


Duffy. 250.


Mr. Just. Jones. What in one Parish?


Duffy. Yes.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. What was the Parishes Name?


Duffy. Coghan.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know any thing of his going to view the Ports?


Duff. I accompanied him to Carlingford,


Mr. At. Genesis Did you?


Duff. Yes, in person I did.


Mr. Serj Jeff. What did he say?


Duff. He went round about the place where some of the Custom-Ships come in;
there was a great Castle there near the Sea, and he went to view the place, and
could not get a Boat: And there was a great talk of Carlingford to be one of
the best Havens in Ireland; there was no great Garrison at the place, and any
Ship might come to the Gates of the Town and surprise it, being a little Town.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he conclude upon that?


Duff. That he might get the French Army to land safely there.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of delivering any Ammunition and Arms?


Duff. He did send some of this money to get Ammunition into Ireland.


Plunket. You say you were Murfey's Curate; Can you show any such Institution
as you say came to you to raise Money?


Duff. I could have brought them, but I thought it needless.


Plunket. Can you name any other person I received money from?


Duff. I have seen your Paper of the County of Monaghan.


Plunk. Have you seen any of them pay any moneys?


Duff. Yes, I have seen Twenty of them pay money.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Why, you are acquainted with this man, are you not, Mr.
Plunket?


Plunk. My Lord, I believe I have seen him.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Don't you know he was Chaplain to Bishop Duffy?


Plunket. No; I never was in his company.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Pray tell him what time of the year it was that you were at
Carling ford.


Duffy. It was at the end of the Year (77) and the beginning of the Year (78.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, if you can recollect, was you once, or twice, or twenty
times in his company?


Duff. As I am a Christian, I have been a hundred times in his company. And
when you were creating Priests, you would always send for me to be present; and
I wonder how the man should forget himself?


Plunket. I do not say I have not seen him, or that I am a stranger to the man;
but in the company of Bishop Duffy I never saw him, nor I never sent him Orders
to pay any money: and if he did pay any money, he might show the Order.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. If he did pay any money, you did ill to take it.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray let him have fair play to ask any Questions.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Tell how you came to remember that you saw him at Sir Nich.
Plunkets.


Duff. Dr. Duffy did send me to Sir Nicholas Plunkets, and I met Dr. Plunket as
I was coming out of the City. I had been half a year at the Spanish
Ambassadors, and he sent me for Ireland again, and then I lived at the Convent
in Dublin; and then when I knew that he would come to Town, I went to Rings
end, where the Ships came in, to meet him.


Plunk. You say you were with him at my house?


Duff. Yes.


Plunk. If you were, you were invisible: But I ask you, why did not you tell
this to some Justice of the Peace?


Mr. Just. Dolben. Good Mr. Plunket, he tells you he was as willing to forward
it then as you.


L. C. J. How come you now to change your mind?


Duffy. I went into France in (77) and I was not a year there altogether; but
when I have seen how the poor people there are brought into such slavery by the
French King, I thought of it, and had rather the Devil should reign over us,
than the Frenchman.


Mr. Just. Dolben. He gives you a very good rational account why.


Duff. I have been at Sir Nicholas Plunkets, and Dr. Patrick Plunkets, where
there fell some variance about something this man had done to Father Duffy.
Says Bishop Duffy, I might have had you drawn and quartered, if I were as ill a
man as you: and I might have been Primate of Ireland, if I would have
undertaken those things that you undertook. Upon that, says Sir Nicholas
Plunket, What is that? Why, it was said it was to raise 60000 men in Ireland at
any time whenever the French or the Spanish King should wage War with England,
Scotland or Ireland. And this man did confess before my face to Father Duffy,
that it was not only to exalt himself, but all the Roman Clergy, and all the
Gentry that had lost their Estates.


Plunk. Mr. Duffy, one word with you; Is not this out of malice to me for
correcting some of the Clergy?


Duff. You had nothing to do with me, for I was a Friar.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Edmond Murfey. (which was done.) Tell your whole knowledge
of Dr. Plunket and the Irish Plot.


Murf. May it please you my Lord. I was one of the first Discoverers of this
Plot; but of nine Witnesses, I have but one in Town.


L. C. J. Well, tell your own knowledge.


Murf. Now I beg your Lordship as to Dr. Plunket, that you will respit it till
next Term, I could bring ten Witnesses.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you speak your own Evidence.


Murfey. I refer it to the King and Council what Evidence I have given.


L. C. J. Do not trouble your self, be directed a little; you are here now to
speak what you know concerning any Treasons, or any other matters against the
King, done by Dr. Plunket; speak your own knowledge; for as to other Witnesses
we do not call you.


Murfey. If I be called in question for this Evidence --


Mr. At. Genesis Come, Sir, you have been at the Spanish Ambassadors lately,
answer my Question: Have you ever been with Plunket in Ireland?


Murf. Yes, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you ever heard him own himself Primate of Ireland?


Murf. Yes, Titular Primate.


Mr. At. Genesis Under whom did he claim that Authority? under the King, or under
the Pope?


Murf. I think he could not be under the King at all.


Mr. At. Genesis Under whom then?


Murf. It must be either the King or the Pope.


L C. J. Answer me directly. Did he claim to be Titular Primate under the Pope?


Murf. I suppose he did.


L. C. J. Was he reputed generally so to be?


Murf. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Murfey, remember what you swore before the Grand Jury; pray
recollect your self whether that be true, and tell all.


L. C. J. You are upon your Oath, you must speak the truth and the whole truth,
you must not mince or conceal any thing.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Were you sworn before the Grand Jury?


Murf. I was sworn before the King and Parliament.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Did you give in any Evidence to the Grand Jury?


Murf. Yes, I did.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Was that you swore before the Grand Jury true, upon your Oath?


Murf. I cannot say but it was.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Repeat it, tell my Lord and the Jury what it was, and tell the
truth.


Murf. I have forgot it.


Mr. At. Genesis Why then I would ask you a little; you remember I was by, and
it is no laughing matter, Mr. Murfey, you will find it so. What do you know of
any Orders issued out by Mr. Plunket, to raise money from the Priests?


Murf. I know there was Orders, and I took the Orders my self in my hand.


Mr. At. Genesis From whom had you those Orders?


Murf. From another, and not from him.


Mr. At. Genesis Under whose hand were those Orders?


Murf. They were from the Primate.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see any Order under Plunket's hand for raising of money?


Murf. No, but under the Vicar-generals, by his authority, as I suppose.


Mr. At. Genesis Upon your Oath, did you not swear before the Grand Jury, that
you saw the Orders under his hand?


Murf. No, I did not: or I was mistaken, for it was only by his direction.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray had you any converse with O. Plunket about the raising of
money?


Murf. O. Plunket about the raising of money!


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, that is a plain Question.


Murf. It was about other matters I conversed with him.


Mr. At. Genesis But did you converse with him about money?


Murf. No, not about the money.


Mr. At. Genesis Upon your Oath, did you converse with him about bringing in the
French?


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Declare the truth, come.


L. C. J. Come, don't trifle; What discourse have you had with the Prisoner
about raising of money, or bringing in the French? either of them, Sir.


Murf. I know this, if the D. of York and D. of Ormond had proceeded according
to their Intentions, it was a general expectation at the same time, that all
the French and Irish would come and fall upon the English Nation, as I
understood.


L. C. J. Pray answer the Question directly, You must not come and think to
trifle with the Court, you must speak the truth, you are sworn to it; you must
not come to quibble and run about to this and that and the other, but answer
directly: Have you had any discourse with the Prisoner about Orders for raising
of money in Ireland?


Murf. Yes, I have seen Orders from his Vicar-genral for the raising of money.


L. C. J. Has he owned them to be by his direction?


Murf. Not before me, but others he has.


Mr. At. Genesis Have you seen any money paid to him?


Murf. To whom?


Mr. At. Genesis To Plunket.


Murf. To the Vicar General I have.


L. C. J. But to Plunket.


Murf. None to Plunket.


L. C. J. Have you had any discourse with him at any time about the raising of
money, which the Vicar General gave order for?


Murf. I have had discourse with the Vicar General.


L. C. J. Sir, don't trifle, have you had any with him.


Murf. With him?


L. C. J. Yes, with him.


Murf. Yes, I have had some discourse with him.


L C. J. Tell me what that discourse was?


Murf. I think it was about this. If the D. of York, and the D. of Monmouth
fell out together, that he had some men to raise about that matter, and if the
D. of Monmouth would raise the Protestant Religion --


M At. Genesis You see he has been in Spanish hands.


L. C. J. Were you a Protestant, Sir?


Murf. No, I am a Priest.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. He is to seek yet.


Murf. I am indifferent whether I be Protestant or a Papist.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, he is a Priest in Orders, and so has acknowledged
himself.


Murf. Yes, I am a Priest, but it makes me forget my self to see so many
Evidences to come in, that never knew Plunket.


L. C. J. Sir, you refuse to answer those Questions that we put to you here.


Murf. What I said before the Parliament I answer punctually.


L. C. J. You are asked questions here, and produced as a Witness, will you
answer directly or not?


Murf. Yes, I will.


L. C. J. Then let me hear what discourse you had with the Primate Plunket
concerning any money raised by him or his Vicar General.


Murf. May it please your Lordship, first of all I did not impeach Primate
Plunket, but the Officers and Justices of the Peace.


Mr. Jones. Had you any discourse with him, yea, or no?


Murf. That he should find so many Catholics in Ireland if the D. of York and
the D. of Monmouth fell out.


Mr. Just. Jones. Why it plainly appears what you drove at at first, to put off
this Trial if you could.


L. C. J. The Papists in England have been at work with you.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. I perceived this Gentleman was very busy looking upon his
Hat, I desire he may be searched if he have no Paper about him.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Solicitor and my self heard the Evidence he gave to the
Grand Jury.


Then he went out of the Court and would scarce be persuaded to come back
again.

Mr. At. Genesis We both heard him, and he gave the fullest Evidence, much suller
to all Instances, and particulars of this High Treason, much suller than Duffy
to the Grand Jury. Afterward about 3 weeks ago the Trial coming on, he ran
away and lay hid, I took a great deal of pains to find him out, and sent
Messengers about; at last I heard he was got to the Spanish Ambassadors, I
sent, and they spied him in the Chapel; but the Spanish Ambassadors Servants
fell upon the Messenger and beat him; the Ambassador was first sent to about
it, and his Excellency promised that he should be brought, and when he was
found he told me but the last night, that all he had sworn before the Grand
Jury was true, and he was ready to make it out again.


L. C. J. And now he says, he knows not what he said then, and pray take notice
of that.


Murfey. I told the Grand Jury this, that my Lord Plunket had a design to get
60 or 70000 men in Ireland, if the D. of York and the D. of Monmouth should
fall out.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you tell a word of that to the Grand Jury?


Murfey. Yes, Sir, or I was mistaken.


Mr. At. Genesis Not one word of that did he then say.


L. C. J. Do you own this man, Dr. Plunket, to be of your Religion?


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Do you know this Seeker?


Plunk. He says himself he is indifferent to be a Protestant or a Papist.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. I will only try you by one question more, for you are sought
out, and it may be you may be found; Do you know how many men he was to raise
in Ireland? remember what you said to the Grand Jury.


Murf. 70000 Men.


L. C. J. What were they to do?


Murf. For establishing if occasion should be --


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Establishing, establishing what?


Murf. Of the Romish Religion.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Well, so far we have got 70000 men to establish the Romish
Religion, what, was Plunket to do this?


Murf. As far as I understood.


Mr. Just. Jones. And you understood it by himself?


Murf. I received Letters from the Vicar General to get so much money collected,
and as soon as I got the Letters to my hands, I sent them to a Privy Councellor.


L. C. J. Do you not know that he was engaged to assist the French Army?


Murf. I do not know that by him, but by others.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Did you ever discourse with him about it?


Murf. I did discourse with him about several matters.


Mr. Just. Dolb. About the French Army?


Murfey. Yes.


L. C. J. Do you know that he did endeavor to bring them into Ireland?


Murf. I had a Correspondence in France at the same time --


L. C. J. With whom?


Murf. With one Mac Carty.


L. C. J. And do you know that he had correspondence in France?


Murf. Yes, I know that.


Mr. Just. Dolb. With whom had Plunket correspondence in France?


Murf. He had correspondence with Dr. Cray, and others in France as I
understood by others.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Was the end of that correspondence to bring men from France
into Ireland?


Murf. Yes, so far as I understand.


Mr. Just. Dolb. You understood the Letters when you read them, did you not?


Murf. I know not how these people come to swear this business, whether they
had not malice against him --


Mr. At. Genesis Well, Sir, pray give you your Evidence, we will take care of the
rest.


Mr. Just. Dolb. I reckon this man has given the best Evidence that can be.


L. C. J. Yes, it is Evidence that the Catholics have been tampering with him.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. I desire he may be committed my Lord, because he has fenced
from the beginning. [which was done accordingly.]


Mr. At. Genesis Swear John Mac Legh. [which was done.]


Sir Fran. With. Tell my Lord and the Jury what you know of any Plot in Ireland
to bring in the French.


Mac Legh. I was a Parish Priest in Ireland in the County of Monaghan, and Dr.
Oliver Plunket received several Sums of money in Ireland, and especially in the
Diocese where I am. I raised some of it, and paid him 40 s. at one time, and 30
s. another time, in the year (74) I paid him 40 s. in the year (75) I paid him
50 s. and it was about July, and it was for the better advancement of the
French coming in.


Mr. Jones. Did he tell you that the money was to be employed that way?


Mac Legh. Yes, that the money was to be kept for Arms and Ammunition for the
Roman Catholics in Ireland.


L. C. J. Before you paid it, did you receive any Order from him?


Mac Legh. Yes, I received an Order sub poena suspensionis, and there was a
public Order throughout Ireland, or we would not pay it? nay several would not
pay it, and they were to be suspended.


Plunk. Can you show any of the Orders under my Hand?


Mac Legh. Yes, I can show them, but only they are afar off, I did not expect
to have them asked for.


Plunk. Have you no Superiors of your own?


Mac Legh. Yes, but you being Lord Primate, you could suspend Bishops and
inferior Clergy together.


Plunk. When was this?


Mac Legh. In the years (74) and (75.)


Plunk. What is the reason you kept it secret all this while?


Mac Legh. In the year (77) I did discover it to one Mr. O Neal, who I sent to
Dublin to discover this Plot. I was in France my self, my Lord.


Plunk. How many years is it since you returned from France?


Mac Legh. In May in the year (78.)


Plunk. Why did you not speak all this while till now?


Mac Legh. I did send one Mr. Henry O Neal to Dublin, for I durst not go, lest
I should have been suspended and excommunicated.


Mr. At. Genesis This is the Priest that Henry O Neal speaks of.


L. C. J. Is not this a very good reason; if he had come to Dublin to discover,
you would have suspended him.


Plunk. But my Lord, then he might have shown my Suspension and brought me into
a Praemunire.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. If you please, Doctor, let us who are for the King have done
with him first. I would ask you another Question Sir, were you at one Vicar
Bradeys House?


Mac Legh. Yes, I was.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell what was done there.


Mac Legh. There was Bishop Tyrrel came there with 40 Horsemen well mounted and
armed, he came into the House about 10. in the morning, and staid till about 11
at night. I was very much among them, and was as willing to be of the Plot, as
themselves.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell what was done there.


Mac Legh. There Bishop Tyrrel said, that he had order from Dr. Oliver Plunket
and others, to partake of the Plot to bring in the French, and subvert the
Government in Ireland, and destroy the Protestant Religion and the Protestants.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there an Oath given?


Mac Legh. Yes, they were all put to their Oaths, which they did take willingly
to keep it private during their lives time, and the reason was they were to
have their Estates during their lives time.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Now tell us when this was.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, Henry O Neal and Phleem O Neal speak to the same
purpose.


Mr. Serj Jeff. Do you remember whether Henry O Neal was there? did he take the
Oath of Secrecy?


Mac Legh. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of any Letters from Plunket?


Mac Legh. In France I landed at Breast, and going through Britany, I met with
Bishop Tyrrel and Dr. Cray, who was my Lord Oliver Plunkets Agent, and Duke
John of Great Britany came into them; for he heard of these 2 Bishops being
newly come out of Rome, sent for them, and I being a Priest of Tyrrels Diocese,
I went along with them, and they were well accepted, and showed Dr. Oliver
Plunkets Conditions with the King of France, which was this; to get Dublin and
Londonderry, and all the Seaports into their own Hands, to levy War and
destroy the Protestant Religion, and that they should have him to protect them
during his lifetime.


L. C. J. Did you see those Conditions?


Mac Legh. A Copy of them I did, the Governor of Britany did show them to the
Bishop.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. What Language were those Conditions in?


Mac Legh. They were in Latin, Sir.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Was Edmond Murfey put out of the Diocese.


Mac Legh. Not as I know of.


L. C. J. What do you know of his being Primate? upon what conditions was he
made Primate.


Mac Legh. He was made Primate by the Election of the King of France. And upon
his Election, he made those Conditions with the King of France, to raise men to
join with the French, to destroy the Protestant Religion.


Mr. Just. Jones. You know that man, Dr. Plunket?


Plunk. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any Questions?


Plunk. None, but what I asked the others.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Then if that is all, he has given a good answer to that
already, he was as forward then as the rest.


Mr. At. Genesis Then swear John Moyer, (which was done.)


Mr. Just. Jones. What do you know concerning any Plot in Ireland, and Dr.
Plunkets being in it?


Moyer. I know him first, my Lord, to be made Primate of Ireland, engaging that
he should propagate the Roman Faith in Ireland, and restore it to the Catholic
Government, and I know the time by relation, that I came to Rome within two
months after his being made Primate of Ireland upon the same Conditions, that
have been related to you, and I was brought into the Convent of St. Francis in
Rome by one Father, and this Father was very intimate with Cardinal Spinola,
and when he used to go abroad he used to carry me along with him as a
Companion, and there I found several of the Roman Cardinals say, That the
Kingdom of Ireland should come under the Catholic Government by the way and
means of the Lord Primate Plunket.


Mr. At Genesis What do you know of your self?


Moyer. As I was coming then from Rome, I happened to come into a Convent of
the Order of St. Francis, and there came out of Ireland a young Gentleman of
the Family of the O Neals, who has been my Lord Primates Page.


Plunket. I never had a Page.


Moyer. You termed him so my Lord in Ireland, and as I came, this young man had
a packet of Letters with him, as though they were Commendations to enter him
into the College De propaganda Fide, directed to the Secretary of that
College. And thinking them to be Letters of Recommendation, an old Father,
called one Thomas Crawley, and I thought it not prejudicial to open the Seal;
and the Contents were these, I translated them 5 years ago, and here are the
Contents following, if you please they may be read, I will do my best to read
them in English, the Original were in Latin, and some Phrases in Italian. And
when I was surprised by Mr. Murfey the last year, and taken suddenly, all my
Papers were taken away before I could return back again, by the Soldiers and
the Tories, I only kept a Copy of this Letter I had in English as near as I
could, and if I did not diminish any thing by the Translation; upon the Oath I
have taken, I have not put any thing in it, but what the Contents of the Letter
were.


L. C. J. Was that Letter under his own Hand?


Moyer. My Lord cannot deny that.


Plunket. Do you know my own Hand writing?


Moyer. Does your Lordship deny, that I know your Hand?


Plunket. Pray Sir will you answer it.


Moyer. Yes, I do very well.


Plunket. When did you leave Ireland?


Moyer. I will tell you that, my Lord, it is some 14 or 15 years ago.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. You were giving an account of the Letter, read it.


Moyer. Here is the Contents, Illustrissime Domine, it was directed to Seignior
who is now Secretary of the College De propaganda Fide, (so then he read his
Paper.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You say, you translated that out of a Letter under the Prisoners
own Hand.


Moyer. Yes, I translated it immediately, and to prove it, I have Statutes
which his Lordship made in the general National Council, which are under your
own Hand, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis When did you make this Translation?


Moyer. Five years ago.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Where did you make it?


Moyer. I made it out of the Original in Ireland.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Where is the Original?


Moyer. When I was taken by Mr. Murfey and Mr. Hethrington the last year, the
Soldiers and Tories came and took them away with other Papers I had of the
same business.


L. C. J. Was the Paper you translated that from, of his Hand Writing?


Moyer. No, my Lord, the Paper I took this out of, was a Copy of the Original.


L. C. J. Was the Original of his Hand Writing?


Moyer. Yes, it was.


L. C. J. Where did you take it?


Moyer. In Caprennica, when I met with my Lords Page.


L. C. J. What made you take a Copy of it?


Moyer. It was in Latin and Italian, and I translated it afterward.


L. C. J. And the English Father, you say, made bold to open it.


Moyer. Yes, because he thought 'twas a Letter of Recommendations, but the
Original of the Statutes made at Clouds, I did take the Original and gave a
Copy to the Page.


L. C. J. Have you the Original here?


Moyer. Yes, my Lord, under his own Hand.


Plunk. That Is another thing.


L. C. J. But we would know that other thing.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. My Lord, I desire that he would produce it, it is his own Hand
Writing, see whether his Grace can deny it.


Moyer. The signing of it is his own Hand Writing, I got the Writing along with
the Letter, and thinking to have a Copy of the one as as well as of the other;
it was the Statutes I got, and I never knew I had them till I was in Madrid in
Spain.


Then the Paper was shown to the Prisoner.

Plunk. My Lord, it is my Hand.


Moyer. Indeed, my Lord, it is your own Hand.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. He owns it.


Moyer. And there is an Order in those Statutes, wherein Ireland was bound to
send so much money to Rome upon such a design.


The the Witness read the Title in Latin.

Mr. Just. Dolb. Look out that Clause for the raising of the money.


Moyer. My Lord, it is that I look for. Cum toti Clero in Hibernia necessarium
sit.


Mr. Just. Dolb. That is but negotia generally.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. That was to solicit their Affairs.


Mr. At. Genesis It Is 500 l. in the whole.


Plunk. Is it 500 l?


Moyer. It Is in Figures, a 5 and two [00.]


Plunk. My Lord, this is Counterfeit, it is put in by other Ink.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Like enough so.


L. C. J. Nothing more ordinary, yau leave a blank for for the Sum, and then,
may be, you put it in with other Ink.


Mr. Just. Dolb. How much do you say was the money, Dr. Plunket?


Plunk. My Lord, every Agent that is kept at Rome has a maintenance, as all
Countries have their Agents at Rome.


Mr Just. Dolb. How much was it?


Plunk. It was 50 l. a year.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Plunket, consider with your self, 50 or 500 in this
Case is not 5 farthings difference, but the money was to be raised by your
Order.


Plunket. Ay, but whether it was not raised to this effect; There is never a
Nation where the Roman Catholic Religion is professed, but has an Agent for
their Spiritual Affairs at Rome, and this was for the Spiritual Affairs of the
Clergy of Ireland.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. And the Letter was for Spiritual Affairs too, was it not?


Plunk. I desire nothing, that is a truth, every Nation has an Agent, and that
Agent must be maintained; and the reason is this, because we have many
Colleges beyond Sea, and so there is no Country of Roman Catholics, but has
an Agent in Rome.


L. C. J. You had better reserve your self till by and by, to answer that and
the Letter together; for this is but a small part of the Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis About this Letter you were speaking of, pray, will you tell what
fell out about it.


Moyer. I will tell you how it fell out afterward. Then I came along into
Marseilles in France, and there were 2 Captains that had as much notice as I
had in that Letter, for they were discoursing that they would advance
themselves in the French Kings Service, and hoped, that by the King of France's
help to have the Roman Catholic Faith set up in their own Country; why, that
discourse passed off, for I was mightily afraid of any such thing, because I
was of another opinion; for perhaps I might think the Roman Catholic Faith
would flourish as well as ever it did, and hoped so as well as any body else,
but not by the Sword. As I came to Madrid, there came one Hugh O Donnell, Son
to O Donnell, with Letters of Recommendation, and those Letters were to entitle
the young man Earl of Tyrone, and likewise that his Majesty the King of Spain
should help him for Ireland, according to the form of the Letters he had. And
then as I came for Ireland, speedily after there came Letters of Recommendation
to me, that I should present sent my self to my Lord Primate, to hear
Confessions, and be heard preach. I came to his Lordship at his own House the
9th. of December (74) and there he kept me several hours, and approved me; and
the Copy of the Approbation I have to show. And after a long dispute we went
aside, and went to look Father Patrick, and there he showed me such and such
things. And after a long discourse I told my Lord Primate, I see your Lordships
Letter, which you sent by young O Neal, in such a place, and he showed me the
Contents of it; and, said I, Ay, my Lord, it is a good Intention and Design, if
it can be done without Bloodshed; then my Lord mused a little, and, said he,
well Father Francis, (which is my name in Religion, my Christian name is John)
pray will you keep it secret, well my Lord, said I, you need not fear; for,
said he, what ever I have done herein was not for my own good, but for the
public good of the Catholics. Well, said I, it is well, Then does he commend
me into the Parish of where this Mr. Murfey here was to put in a Bull, that I
had from my Lord Primate, which Bull was brought here last year; and there he
proferod me high Promotions, if I would further such things, and solicit such
Gentlemen as I knew would be private in such a business, such as were old
Commanders among my Friends and Relations. Shortly after this I saw Plunket and
Bishop Tyrrel, and Captain Con O Neal practicing to bring Soldiers ready for
Ireland, as soon as they could get opportunity. This Captain Con O Neal coming
to the place where we kept our Priory, and he and his Brothers were Sons to
General O Neal. And there Captain Con comes in the night time and lodges with
us, and discoursed with his Brother and I, because I was his Companion beyond
Sea, about these matters, That he expected my Lord Primate and Bishop Tyrrels
coming thither that night, to make some proposals about the Church and other
Assairs. After ten a clock, or thereabouts, my Lord Primate and Bishop Tyrrel
came with others in their company, and there they and Father O Neal did consult
amongst themselves, that they should send Captain Con to France, and to
Barcellona, with such and such Instruments; and sending those Instruments away,
Captain Con departs the Country and goes for France soon after; and speedily my
Lord Primate undertook, that he and Bishop Tyrrel should view Munster and
Vlster, and other parts of Ireland, to see how Affairs stood. Soon after my
Lord Primate calls a General Provincial Council, and sends out his Orders to
levy such and such Taxes and Subsides, and Warrants to all the Parish Priests,
that they should give them new Lists to know whether the Numbers they had sent
to Rome before, would comply with that List. And then O Neal went to view the
Forts of Charlemont and Dun Gannon, whilst those Lords did collect the money;
the Orders I have seen with my own proper Eyes, and his own man confessed
before the Council in Ireland that my Lord gave them under his Hand.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. What year was this?


Moyer. It was in (76) to the best of my remembrance:


L. C. J. Look you Sir, was this at a Provincial meeting?


Moyer. Yes, my Lord, a General National Council, to send over Instruments to
tell them, that they were ready to assist any Foreign Army, that should help on
the design.


L. C. J. And to raise money?


Moyer. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Have you paid him any money?


Moyer. I was exempted my self; but I have seen others.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How many?


Moyer. I believe 30.


Mr. Just. Dolben. It was not then a secret thing, but openly done by them.


Moyer. Yes, I saw them when they came with Orders, there were four Priests,
and they had a great Cloak-bag going with Orders up and down.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Why were you exempted?


Moyer. Because I am a Regular Priest.


Sir Fr. Withens. You say you saw the Orders for raising of money, how do
youknow for what it was to be employed?


Moyer. It was there specified down.


Plunket. Can you show any of the Orders?


Moyer. I could not take them, they did not concern me.


Sir Fr. Withins. How was it specified?


Moyer. To Levy so much Money per Priest. I cannot remember the particular Sum;
but that every Priest should give so much toward an Agent in Rome to Solicit
their business and forward it.


L. C. J. What Year was it?


Moyer. (76.)


L. C. J. Was any of the Money specified for raising an Army or bringing in the
French?


Moyer. It was both for the Agent and to summon a National Council, to get
things ready prepared to entertain and accept the French Army when it should
come. I am not so good in expressing my self in English.


L. C. J. Your sense is good, it is no matter for your expression.


Mr. Jones. What more do you know?


Moyer. I know that he had the same Council, and that they did agree upon the
business, and this I know by one Patrick Borne, and I being willing that this
wicked Action should be hindered, sent to the next Justice to discharge my self
of it, which Justice was as favorable to the business as my Lord himself was.


L. C. J. Will you ak him any Questions, Mr. Plunket?


Plunket. I desire to know when he left Ireland?


Moyer. I cannot tell how to number the years, but I think it was in 62 or 63,
to the best of my remembrance it was 16 or 17 years ago.


Plunket. When did you return?


Moyer. I came back in 74, you know it, my Lord.


Plunket. Very well, when did you see the Letter with the young man in
Caprennica?


Moyer. In (72.)


Plunket. How then did you know my hand which you had never seen?


Moyer. I have seen it several times to several Instruments, to Seignior and I
have seen several other Letters of your hand.


Plunket. How did you know my hand?


Moyer. I cannot positively say, I then knew your hand, but according to
relation, I heard it from those Cardinals I conversed with at Rome.


L. C. J. But now you are acquainted with his hand, is it the same hand which
you have seen up and down in Writings with his name to?


Moyer. Yes, my Lord it is the very same hand.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. I ask you, Sir, when you came back again and told him you had
seen such a Letter under his hand with O Neal, did he own it to you?


Moyer. Yes he did own it, and that he did not do it for his own benefit, but
for the public.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Did he desire you to be secret?


Moyer. Yes, he did, and to be discreet, and he would see me highly promoted.
And, my Lord, you sent Proposals to me, to give me 100 l. that I should not
prosecute you, according as they told me, and they gave me one Guinny in hand
for it.


L. C. J. Some of it came to the hands of Murfey I believe.


Plunket. My Lord, I cannot say any thing to this, my hands are tied, because
my Witnesses are not here. My Lord, if I had my Witnesses and Records, I did
not care for all these Witnesses.


L. C. J. But you know, you had time to bring them.


Plunket. My Lord, I desire to know whether this be his hand, (showing the
Paper to Mr. Moyer.)


Moyer. Yes, I believe it is.


Plunket. I desire it may be read.


Moyer. Yes, I am very well satisfied it should.


Cl. of Cr. Reads. For my very Reverend Father Anthony Guardian of Armagh, Your
Letter and Citation -- It Is dated in July (78.)


Plunket. He can best read it himself.


Cl. of Cr. Read it right (the Paper being delivered him.)


Moyer. My Lord, I pity him with all my heart, that a man of my own Function,
should be brought into question for such things as these are, (he reads) Very
Reverend Father Guardian, it is dated 1 July (78.) Your paternities paternal
Letter and Citation homeward, I did instantly peruse. As for my Lord O.
Plunket, I wrote a Letter to him the day before I saw your Reverends last, that
he might cause my Fame, which is as dear to me as my Life, to be recalled; or I
should cause his Name to be fixed at every public place, which by the Almighty
I will do, Nature and all reason compelling me to do it.


Plunket. My Lord, I say this, he says he came to my house when he came over,
and I imparted this secret to him, yet you see I had denounced him throughout
my whole Diocese, and he here calls me by all those Names of Elemas, Simon
Magus, and Barjesus, and it is impossible if I had communicated such a secret to
him, that I would deal so with him.


Mr. Just. Dolben. He does not say, you imparted this secret to him, but he
says, when he told you of the Letter, you answered him, but you seemed
surprised and mused first.


L. C. J. You seemed to flatter him then, and told him you hoped to see him,
the best of his Order, highly promoted.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How came you to fall out, Moyer?


Moyer. When first they had this meeting at Brantry, seeing a Cloud coming, and
dreading a War, and the consequencies of it, I went and applied my self to Sir
Hamilton, one of his Majesty's Privy Counselors in Ireland, and I gave in all
my Informations December 7 (76.)


Mr. Just. Dolb. And thereupon he denounced you Excommunicate?


Moyer. Yes, and afterward, when he saw I was in communication and familiar
with these Privy Counselors, then he was certain I had discovered the matter,
and then he got a great many devices to get the Letters out of my hand.


Plunket. You shall see under his own hand all the Stratagem of this, if I had
my Witnesses here, you should then see under his own hand, upon what account he
fell out with me. Pray, my Lord, ask him if this other Letter be his hand.


Moyer. I believe it is my own hand.


L. C. J. Read it.


Moyer. (Reads) Very Reverend, Father Guardian (then speaking) My Lord, you
know that I was loath to discover my self, being among People knowing of the
Plot.


L. C. J. Well, read it over.


Moyer. (Reads) the 23. of April (78) I was somewhat comforted by your Letter.
But now I hope your Reverence has considered what wrong I have sustained, by
my envious Adversaries Calumnies, only for standing, as I have a Soul to save,
for your Rights and Privileges, as also for endeavoring to hinder my native
Countries ruin and destruction.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Read that again. (Which he did.)


Plunket. Observe, that I was his Adversary, for standing for the Rights and
Privileges of the Friars.


Mr. Just. Dolb. As also for endeavoring to hinder his Countries ruin and
destruction.


L C. J. The one and the other were the reason of your falling out.


Moyer. (Reads on.)


Moyer. My Lord, I was I confess a begging Friar, and stood up for the
Privileges of the Friars.


Plunket. Did you write any Process to Rome against me?


Moyer. No, I never did it.


Plunket. My Lord, does not he say I was in disgrace at Rome?


Moyer. No, nothing of that.


L. C. J. I don't hear it, but what if he did? what is that to the purpose.


Plunket. To show his Contradictions, now he says, I was great in Rome, and but
then in his Letter he says, I was in disgrace at Rome. Now he says, all that he
had against me, was for his Friars, and to hinder the destruction of his
Country; because I hindered the Friars to beg there, is the Destruction of his
Country. as he was doing there Upon that he fell out with me, and upon that his
own Superiors sent this Order.


L. C. J. We cannot meddle with your Superiors Orders, they are no thing before
us.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. My Lord, I think for the present we have done with our
Evidence.


Plunket. My Lord, to show what was part of the falling out, I would ask him if
he was Indicted for any Crime, and found Guilty by a Jury?


Moyer. That was for discovering, for I discovered it before.


Plunket. My Lord, he confesses he was Convicted for giving Powder and Shot to
the Rebels.


Mr. Just. Dolben. No, no, he does not say so; produce the Record, if you have
any of such thing.


Moyer. To satisfy the Court.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Look you, Dr. Plunket, if you will ask him any questions, that
by Law he is bound to answer, do it of Gods name, we will not interpose, but if
you ask him any questions that may tend to accuse himself, we must tell you, he
is not bound to answer them.


Plunk. He has been convicted and found guilty, he will confess it himself.


L. C. J. He is not bound to answer such a Question.


Moyer. It was a Tory swore against me, that you did absolve.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Don't tell us a story of your Tories.


L. C. J. Look you Mr. Plunket, don't mispend your own time; for the more you
trifle in these things, the less time you will have for your Defense, I desire
you now to consider, and well husband your time for your Defense; what have you
to say for your self?


Plunk. My Lord, I tell you, I have no way to defend my self, in that I was
denied time to bring over my Records, and my Witnesses, which are 10 or 12. And
if I had them here, I would stand in defiance of all the world to accuse me;
but I have not sufficient time to bring over my Records and my Witnesses, and I
am brought here from out of my native Country; were I in Ireland, there both I
and they should be known: but when I was to be tried there, they would not
appear; and it is all false and only malice. These men used to call me Oliverus
Cromwellus out of spite.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. You are very like him, a Destoyer of the Government.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Were not you acquainted with him?


Plunk. This is all I can say, if I had my Witnesses here I could make my
defense.


L. C. J. Here are some things, that if you can give an Answer to, you will do
well to do it; for they stick close to you. They do testify against you here,
that you did undertake to raise a body of men in Ireland, 70000 men they speak
of out of in your own Nation, and all these were to join with the French, for
the introducing the Religion of the Romish Church into Ireland, and settling
that again there. And that you, in order to this, did take a Survey of all
those Roman Catholics that were able to bear Arms, from 16 to 60; and there is
plentiful Evidence, that you did go a Circuit there to peruse all the Towns,
and see which might be most convenient for the taking in, and entertaining the
French, and landing their Forces; and Charlemont, you did design that for one
strong place to be taken, and Dun-Gannon for another, and that you did design
the French Army to land at Carlingford, and all that was with you, tells the
reason you gave, why that should be the place, that they might come up with a
burdened Ship to the very Gates of the Town, that you did, in order to the
entertaining these foreign Forces, raise money, that you did send out your
Orders sub poena suspensionis to all that were of the Roman Clergy, and that
this money was received, several of them testified that they paid it to you, and
this man has seen great numbers of persons pay money to you upon these
accounts. All these are Treason, what say you to them. It does import you to
consider what Answer you can give.


Plunk. My Lord, first as to the first point, I answer, that I never received a
farthing of money out of my own District, and but for my own Livelihood, and
that I can prove by those that have received it for me, that I never received
over threescore pound a year in my life, unless some Genleman would now and
then give me 10 s. for my relief. For, my Lord, this is the way in Ireland,
every Priest has so many Families allotted to him, and every Roman Catholic
Family gives 2 s. a year (as they that profess that way, know) and the Priests
give me who am Superior over them, in my own District, some 20 s. some 30 s.
and I never got so much in my life as to maintain a Servant, and this was
attested before the Council in Ireland.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Ay, but the Witnesses say, out of your own District you sent
into another Bishops Diocese to collect money.


Plunk. My Lord, I say I could never get so much as to keep a Servant, and till
now I never got a farthing out of my own Diocese, unless I have been called to
an Arbitration or some such thing, it may be for my Journey and Expenses 40 or
50 miles they would give me something for my maintenance; if you should find
any thing else, I will be content to suffer; and if my Evidence were brought
from Ireland, there is nothing but what would be made clear, both under their
own Hands and by Records, and that is all well known, and was attested in his
presence before the Council in Ireland, which threescore pounds was a very
small thing to maintain me, and I never had above one Servant, and the House I
lived in was a little Thatched House, wherein was only a little Room for a
Library, which was not 7 foot high, where once this fellow came to affront me,
because I had hindered him from begging, and that is for the Money. For the Men, I
defy any one that ever see me make a List of Men in my life, or can produce
any List made by my Order. I was never in my life at Kinsale, at Cork, at
Dun-Gannon, at Limerick, etc. or those parts of Munster which were the chief
Ports where the French should come in, and not in Carlingford, which is the
narrow Seas in Vlster, which any one that knows the World will judge to be a
very improper place for the French to land in. It Is all one as to say that the
French should come in at a poor place where they could get nothing, it being at
the narrow Seas, and they never saw me there in their lives.


L. C. J. Yes, one does say, he was with you.


Plunk. Well, one does say he saw me there, but if I had my Witnesses here, I
could prove he was a Friar, and declared an Apostate by his own Provincial, as
this Gentleman is, and because I hindered them to beg in my Districts, therefore
they have this malice against me, that is all. Well, my Lord, that is for that:
I was never in my life in Connaght; and they cannot say, I took any List in
Vlster, nor was twelve miles in Munster in my life: But thus, my Lord,
sometimes there would be, as our way is, so many Families assigned to every
Priest, (and this is the plain truth) this Priest perhaps complains to me of
the inequality, my companion near me has 150, and I have but threescore, which
I must rectify; though I never knew but one of these Complaints. And if I had
my Witnesses from Ireland, and the Records, I would defy all these Witnesses
together. For my sending to Rome, I had never an Agent in Rome for these seven
years past, because I was not able to maintain him, and indeed it was a great
shame to us; because there is never a Community of Friars, that has a College
beyond Sea, but has some Agent at Rome.


L. C. J. It Is a shame to have one there, not to want one.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Well, if you have Witnesses, I cannot tell what to say.


Plunk. If I had gotten but to the latter end of the Term, I had desied them
altogether. And your Lordship should have seen under their own hands what they
were.


L. C. J. You forget this all this while, your own Letter, wherein this matter
is, that you had searched the Towns and considered it.


Mr. At. Genesis He does deny there was such a Letter, he does not own there was
such a Letter.


Plunk. I my Lord, I never did write such a Letter. And that young man that he
speaks of, I could prove, if I had my Witnesses, that he never was in any
Service or Company in Ireland, nor writ any Letters by him.


L. C. J. Did you never send any Letter by one O Neal?


Plunk. No my Lord, but he went over a begging.


Moyer. This young man's Brother in Law will testify, that he was your
Lordships Page.


Plunk. I have 3 Witnesses that he came there begging, naked, and was sick 3
months, and went over a begging, and was at Rome as a stragler.


Moyer. Call Hanlet, (who came in)


Sir Fr. With. Did you know Neal O Neal?


Hanlet. Yes.


Sir Fr. With. Whose Servant was he?


Hanl. My Lord Plunket sent him to Rome; he was sent there with his Letters,
and I saw the young man and the Letters.


Mr. Jones. Did he come a begging there?


Hanl. No.


Plunk. Where did you see him?


Hanl. At Mant.


Plunk. Where is that?


Hanl. In France.


Plunket. And you saw him with my Letters?


Hanl. Yes.


Plunk. And this man says, the Letters were opened at Caprennica, because he
thought they were Letters of Recommendation.


Hanl. Why, he went that way afterward, and they were not opened when I saw
them.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Did you know he was the Doctors Servant?


Hanl. Yes, he was.


Plunk. Did you see him in my Service?


Hanl. I saw him in Mant.


Mr Just. Dolb. How do you know he was the Bishops Servant.


Hanl. Because he showed me his Letter.


L. C. J. Was he owned for his Servant, and was he taken for his Servant.


Hanl. Yes.


Plunk. Did he go on Foot or on Horsebak.


Hanl. He went on foot.


Plunk. He was in a poor condition in a place not above four miles from Rome,
that I can prove.


L. C. J. Did he beg as he went?


Hanlett. No.


L. C. J. Mr. Plunket, if there is any Question you will ask of the Witnesses;
or if there be any Evidence you would give your self, this is your time for the
doing of it; if not, we must leave your Case to the Jury, who have heard the
Evidence all along.


Plunk. Only this, my Lord, your Lordship sees how I am dealt with. First and
foremost, I have not time to bring my Witnesses, or my Records, which if I had,
I would not weigh one farthing to leave my Cause with any Jury in the world.
Besides all this, I am brought out of my own native Country, where these men
lived, and I lived, and where my Witnesses and Records are, which would show
what these people are. I sent by the Post and did all that I could, and what
can I say when I have not my Witnesses against these people, they may swear any
thing in the world; you cannot but observe the improbability of the thing in it
self, and unto what a condition I am brought. My Lord, my Life is in iminent
danger, because I am brought out of my own Country, where these people would
not be believed against me.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, I think this matter lies in a narrow compass, the
Evidence has been long; I would only repeat the short Heads of that which has
been given at large. He is indectid for a Conspiracy to kill the King, the
Overt act is an Endeavor to introduce a Foreign Power into Ireland, to raise
an Army, and levy War there; and the Proof of it has been very full. The Proof
in general, that there was a Plot to introduce the French, is plain by all the
Witnesses, and the Proof in particular upon this person at the Bar, has been
as plain as any thing can be. They prove to your Lordship in general, that
there was an Expectation that the French should come in, that there was an
Invitation of Florence Wire the first Witness, to go over into France, and
speedily he should have a Command upon his return, in Ireland, that there were
Preparations; for this appears by the Oath of Secrecy given to several men.
Forty men that came along with Bishop Tyrrel to keep it private during their
lives; and there was a farther proof of that general Conspiracy by Duffy, that
when there was a general meeting of so many thousand people for Confirmation,
there was by the Gentlemen at that meeting a secret Consultation how to carry
on the Design, and how to list men, and to look out the old Officers in the
late Rebellion, and to see what posture they were in, as to the management of
this Design, and this comes now particularly to the Prisoner who was by at this
Consultation, so the Witnesses do tell you. But that that comes nearer to him,
is, that he did issue out Orders for the raising of Money, and that he did raise
Money pursuant to those Orders, and did receive Money for that very purpose; this
is proved by three Witnesses, Duffy, and Mac Legh, who paid the Money, and by
Moyer the last Witness, who saw him receive it from several Persons. This is
positive upon him; nay, they say farther, that there was a List made of the
several men, in the several Parishes, that were able to bear Arms upon
occasion, from sixteen to sixty, and there was a List of a matter of threescore
thousand men that were ready upon any occasion to rise for the purpose, and
this List was delivered over into the hands of the Prisoner at the Bar. There
is one Witness, Duffy, that says farther, that he saw a Letter under his hand
in France to the Cardinal Bouillon, to invite the French King into Ireland, and
he did wonder that he should spend his Time and Blood in Wars against Spain,
which was a Roman Catholic, and not come into Ireland to extirpate the
Heretics. And this Letter is confirmed by another Letter, which was seen by
Moyer, a Copy of which is produced, which he translated from the Original in
Latin, and the Letter was sent to Rome by Neal O Neal, whom the Prisoner says
he had no concern for, but to give him some Recommendations.


Plunket. I gave him no Recommendations.


L. C. J. No, he says he did not give him any, nor sent any Letter by him.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Then he urged, that he went along begging by the way, but it is
proved he was sent by him, and sent with Letters, and that by his Brother in
Law, who met him at Mants. And it is proved by Moyer, who saw the Letter opened,
taking it to be but a common Letter of Recommendation, he read the Letter and
took a Copy of it, and translated that Copy, which Translation is enough to
verify all the matter which the Witnesses have sworn, for it is agreeing to
what he said to Cardinal Bouillon in his other Letter, that it was more proper
for the Catholic Princes to agree together to extirpate Heresy, than to vary
amongst themselves, that now was the time: for there were threescore thousand
Men ready to rise upon such an Invasion. This is the substance of the Letter,
and this proves fully the Conspiracy this man was engaged in, his receiving
Money, his Listing Men, and his Invitation of Foreign Princes. And this is fully
proved.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. And so his viewing the Ports too.


Mr. Sol. Genesis It was likewise agreed that Carling ford should be the Port, and
it is like enough to be the Port, for it is a very large Port, that Ships of the
greatest Burden may come up to the Town, and the Town it self but a weak Town.
This is the substance of the Evidence, and this is proof enough, we think, to
convict any man of this Fact.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. My Lord, I shall trouble you but with one word that has been
omitted. I think it is a Cause of great Example, and that thing which the
Prisoner seems to make his Excuse has been answered by a Favor and Indulgence
from the Court in a very extraordinary manner. For, in as much as this
Gentleman would make it a very hard case, That he is brought out of his own
Country, and has not his Witnesses; it is very well known that by a particular
Favor of the Court, which is not usual in these Cases, he had between five and
six weeks time for preparation for his Trial: so that truly as to what does
appear, I think all the Witnesses that have been examined, are Witnesses to be
credited, except you Gentlemen, of your selves can convict upon your own
knowledge these Persons of any Misdemeanor, which I think you cannot, much less
of Perjurie. But besides, the Witnesses we have produced, all which speak to
the Plot in general, and four of them fix it upon the Person at the Bar; they
speak particularly, and every one agrees in Circumstances, and that other that
spoke mincingly, I put it upon; it is the greatest Evidence that can be. For
that person that could come before a Grand Jury, and there be the main Witness,
but when he comes here, must be scru'd and pumped to discover the seventy
thousand men. And I suppose you did observe how difficult it was to know of
him, whether this Person was Primate of Ireland, or whether it were from the
authority of the King or the Pope, a very probable thing, that he should be
such a one as the King designed to be Primate and Superintendent of Ireland.
Further, my Lord, this I desire to take notice of too, that Wire, the first
Witness, fixes four particular things upon the Prisoner at the Bar, which have
not yet been taken notice of. First he fixes a discourse with another person
that was Competitor with him for this very Office, Bishop Duffy, and he gives
the reason why he was admitted into the Office rather than the other, because
he was a man of greater Ability to carry on the Design, and though he does not
give you an account of the Design; yet the rest of the Evidence do, and make it
to be the Design then carrying on. Another thing is, he tells you of the
sending one into France, that was to come back again in order to this Design, I
think his name was Mac Donnel, and then the great Tory Flemming and he were to
come back again Colonels in the Army that was to be raised. The next person,
that fixes it upon him, is Mr. Han O Neal, and he gives the plainest
Circumstances, That at a time in August when Bishop Tyrrel came to the House of
one Bradey with so many men well equipped with such and such Arms, and took the
Oath of Secrecy; he himself, but not only he, but the other Priest Mac Legh,
was present at the same time, and took the said Oath, and he does tell you that
that very Priest was sent to Dublin to discover it at that very time, and so he
has fixed the Person, and Time, and the Business they came about. Then Mac
Legh comes and tells you the same thing in every circumstance; Ay, but says the
Prisoner at the Bar, and he would make it to be a great Objection, How chance
that they have concealed this all the while, and not discovered it to some
Justice of the Peace? Why, says one, I was under your Jurisdiction in that
place, that is the very reason he gives wherefore he durst not, and says
another, I was concerned and as earnest as the Prisoner or any body else, but
going into France, I observed the slavery that all the Subjects were under,
under the Tyranny of that King, and apprehending that the same King was to come
into Ireland by the means of these Gentlemen; I was concerned at it, and had
rather the Devil should reign over us than such an one, and therefore I will
discover it. And he said very well I think, that he had rather have the Devil
to reign; for it seems to be him, or one in his shape that reigns after that
manner. And there are two persons that swear to the very year that they were
obliged to raise the money, and swear positively, they saw his Orders sub poena
suspensionis, I do not know whether they mean hanged or suspended from their
Office. But it seems it was so terrible that it made them pay twenty Shillings
a piece for three years successively. And there is another Gentleman that tells
you, that out of a small Living, wherein he was concerned only as Curate to a
third person it had been paid two or three times; and another, though he was
exempt himself from the payment, yet so great a Confident was he of the
Prisoner's at the Bar, that he was present when he saw thirty or forty pay
this Tax, and whereas the Prisoner at the Bar would make it thought a strange
thing, that he should raise so much money, who had but a house seven foot high,
it seems there is above that thatched house a Chapel.


Plunket. There is no Chapel.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. But now, my Lord, that which substantially proves what these
Witnesses say, is the Letter that is sent to Rome to the Secretary of the
College De propaganda Fide, which is the last Letter that the last Gentleman
speaks of, wherein he does particularly take notice, that he had taken care to
raise such moneys, and view all the Ports and places of strength. And, my Lord,
that which is a very great circumstance to back the Evidence of the first
Letter to the French Cardinal Bouillon which was taken notice of by the first
Witness, and there is such a passage in this too, that the Catholic Princes
should not spill one another blood, when they might better employ it here in
Ireland for the propagation of the Faith; this last Letter takes particular
notice of that very instance too, that instead of drawing their Swords against
one another, they had better come to promote the Catholic Faith in Ireland.
These four Witnesses are punctual and precise in every particular circumstance
of the Case, and against them there is nothing but the common Objection. If I
had such Records, and Witnesses here, I could make my Defense; that is, if he
had those things that he has not, he might appear to be another man than he is;
but I am sure, as it appears upon the Evidence that has been given by all the
Witnesses, there is a plain proof and a full proof of every Treason laid to his
Charge.


Plunket. My Lord, I desire these Witnesses may be called [giving in a Paper.]


Crier. David Fitz-gerard, Eustace Commines and Paul Gormar.


L. C. J. Who gave him this Paper, he had it not before?


Stranger. I was told that these were good Evidences for Dr. Plunket, and I
gave him the Names.


L. C. J. Where are they?


Stranger. They are hard by.


Mr. At. Genesis Where is Eustace Commines, for he was one that gave in Evidence
against the Prisoner.


[Then Paul Gormar appeared.]

L. C. J. What would you ask him?


Plunket. I desire to know of him, whether Mr. Moyer did allure and entice him
to swear against me?


Gormar. Indeed, my Lord, he never did.


L. C. J. Will you ask him any more?


Gormar. But this, my Lord, Mr. Moyer and I were in discourse, and he said if
there was Law to be had in Ireland, he would show Mr. Plunket his share in it.


L. C. J. Well, what of that?


Gormar. My Lord, I did come out of Ireland to reveal what Plots the Irish had
against the King, and as for this Mr. Plunket, as I have a Soul to save, I
never heard of any misdemeanor of him.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How came you here to day?


Gormar. I was summoned.


Mr. Just. Dolb. By whom? Was it the Attorney General or Plunket that summoned
you?


Gormar. Here is the Summons.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. It is a common Sub Poena.


Plunket. I never sent for him.


Gormar. It was not against you, they know I had nothing against you, I thought
you did more good in Ireland than hurt, so I declare it.


L. C. J. Have you any more Witnesses? if Fitz Gerard or Commines will come, we
will hear them.


Plunket. My Lord, I have not any more Witnesses.


L. C. J. Look you, Gentlemen of the Jury, This Gentleman here, Mr. Plunket is
indicted of High Treason, and it is for Conspiring the King's Death, and
endeavoring to bring the French Army into Ireland for to Invade that Kingdom,
and to plant the Romish Religion in that Kingdom. You have had Evidence against
him that has been fully examined. And these things do seem to be very plain by
the Witnesses, That he himself has taken a Commission, or a Grant, or what you
will please to call it, from the Pope to be Primate of Ireland, that he has
taken upon him to make Laws as the Provincial and that he has undertaken and
endeavored to settle the Popish Religion in that Kingdom, and in order to
that, he has invited the Aid of the French Army, and that he has for the
better landing of them, looked out what places were most convenient for them;
That he has set a Tax upon the Clergy within his Province for the facilitating
of all this, and for the making preparations for the entertainment of this
Army. This the Witnesses testify against him, and that there were some Towns,
as Dungannon and another Town, that were to be betrayed to the French. Now you
must consider concerning these Witnesses: If you believe the Evidence that has
been given, and which has been repeated by the Kings Counsel, and if you
believe that he did design to bring in a French Army, to establish the Roman
Religion there again, and that he took upon him to raise money for that purpose,
surveyed the Ports, and made such provisions, as the Witnesses speak of, and
was in that Conspiracy; you must find him Guilty, I leave it to you, it is a
pretty strong Evidence, he does not say any thing to it, but that his Witnesses
are not come over.


Plunket. I can say nothing to it, but give my own protestation, that there is
not one word of this said against me is true, but all plain Romance, I never
had any communication with any French Minister, Cardinal, nor other.


Then the Jury withdrew for a quarter of an hour, and being returned gave this
Verdict.

Cl. of Cr. Oliver Plunket, hold up thy hand. How say you, is he Guilty of the
High Treason whereof he stands Indicted, or not Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Plunket. Deo Gratia. God be thanked.


Then the Verdict was Recorded, and the Court rose. And the Keeper went away
with his Prisoner.

On Wednesday 15. Junii 1681, Oliver Plunket was brought to the Bar to receeive
his Judgment.

Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I pray your Judgment against the Prisoner Oliver
Plunket.


Cl. of Cr. Oliver Plunket, hold up thy Hand; Thou have been Indicted of
High Treason, thou have been thereupon Arraigned, thou have thereunto pleaded
not Guilty, and for thy Trial have put thy self upon God and the Country, which
Country has found thee Guilty, what have thou to say for thy self, why
Jadgment of Death should not pass upon thee, and Execution be thereupon awarded
according to the Law.


Plunket. My Lord, may it please your Lordship, I have something to say, which
if your Lordship will consider seriously, may occasion the Courts Commiseration
and Mercy. I have, my Lord, for this Fact been Arraigned in Ireland, and
brought to my Trial there. At the day of my Trial all the Witnesses voluntarily
absented themselves, seeing I had Records and Witnesses to convince them
evidently and show what men they were, and the prepensed Malice that they did
bear to me, and so finding that I could clear my self evidently, they absented
themselves on the day of my Trial no Christian appeared, but hither over they
come, and procure that I should be brought hither, where I could not have a
Jury that knew the Qualities of my Adversaries, or who knew me, of the
circumstances of the Places, Times, and Persons; the Juries here as I say were
altogether strangers to these Affairs, and so, my Lord, they could not know
many things that conduce to a fair Trial, and it was morally impossible they
should know it. I have been accused principally and chiefly for surveying the
Ports, for fixing upon Carlingford for the Landing of the French, for the
having of seventy thousand Men ready to join with the French, for collecting
Money for the Agents in this matter, for the assisting of the French and this
great Utopian Army. A Jury in Ireland consisting of men that lived in that
Country, or any man in the World that has but seen Ireland in a Map, would
easily see there was no probability that that should be a place fit for the
French to land in, though he never was in Ireland, yet by the Map, he would see
they must come between the narrow Seas all along to Vlster, and the Rocks, and
such places would make it very dangerous; and by their own confession it was a
poor Town, and of no strength, a very small Garrison, which had not been so, if
it had been a place of any consideration. And whereas I had Influence only upon
one Province, as is well known, though I had the Title of Primate of all
Ireland, as the Archbishop of Canterbury has of all England; yet the Arch
Bishop of York will not permit him to meddle with his Province; and it is well
known by the Gentry there, and those that are accustomed to the place; That in
all the Province of Vlster, take Men, Women and Children of the Roman
Catholics, they could not make up seventy Thousand. This, a Jury there, my
Lord, had known very well, and therefore the Laws of England, which are very
favorable to the Prisoner, have provided that there should be a Jury of the
place where the Fact was committed, as Sir Thomas Gascoine, as I have heard,
had a Yorkshire Jury, though he was tried at London. And then after my coming
here, I was kept close Prisoner for six Months, not any Christian was permitted
to come at me, nor did I know any thing, how things stood in the World. I was
brought here the third of May, to be arraigned, and I did petition your
Lordship to have some time for my Trial, and I would have had it put off till
Michaelmass, but your Lordships did not think sit to grant so long, but only
till the eighth of this month, when my Witnesses who were ready at the Sea
side, would not come over without Passes, and I could not get over the Records
without an Order from hence; which Records would have shown that some of the
Witnesses were indicted and found guilty of high Crimes, some were imprisoned
for Robberies, and some of the Witnesses were infamous people, so I petitioned
the eighth of this month, that I might have time but for twelve days more, but
your Lordship thought when the motion was made, that it was only to put off the
Trial, and now my Witnesses are come to Coventry yesterday morning, and they
will be here in a few days, and so for want of time to defend my self in, I was
exposed to my Adversaries, who were some of my own Clergy, whom for their
debauched Lives, I have corrected, as it is well known there. I will not deny
my self, but that as long as there was any Toleration and Connivance, I did
execute the Function of a Bishop, and that by the second of Elizabeth is only a
Praemunire, and no Treason. So that, my Lord, I was exposed defenseless to my
Enemies, whereas now my Witnesses are come, that could make all appear. I did
beg for twelve days time, whereby you might have seen as plain as the Sun, what
those Witnesses are that began the Story, and say these things against me. And,
my Lord, for those Depositions of the seventy thousand Men, and the Moneys that
are collected of the Clergy in Ireland, they cannot be true, for they are a
poor Clergy that have no Revenue nor Land; they live as the Presbyterians do
here, there is not a Priest in all Ireland, that has certainly or uncertainly
above threescore pounds a year, and that I should collect of them forty
shillings a piece, for the raising of an Army, or for the Landing of the French
at Carlingford; if it had been brought before a Jury in Ireland, it would have
been thought a mere Romance. If they had accused me of a Proemunire for the
exercise of my Episcopal Function, perhaps they had said something that might
have been believed, but my Lord, as I am a dying man, and hope for Salvation by
my Lord and Savior, I am not guilty of one point of Treason they have swore
against me, no more than the Child that was born. but yesterday. I have an
Attestation under my Lord of Essex's hand concerning my good Behavior in
Ireland, and not only from him, but from my Lord Berkley, who was also
Governor there, which the Kings Attorney saw; But here I was brought, here I
was tried, and having not time to bring my Witnesses, I could not prove my
Innocence, as otherwise I might. So that, if there be any Case in the World
that deserves Compassion, surely my Case does; and it is such a rare Case, as I
believe you will not find two of them in print, that one arraigned in Ireland,
should be tried here afterward for the same Fact. My Lord, if there be any
thing in the World that deserves pity, this does, for I can say, as I hope for
mercy, I was never guilty of any one point they have swore against me, and if
my Petition for time had been granted, I could have shown how all was prepense
Malice against me, and have produced all Circumstances that could make out the
Innocence of a person. But not having had time, and being tried, I am at your
mercy.


L. C. J. Well, you have nothing further to say in Bar of Judgment, you have
said all you can?


Plunk. I have nothing further to say, but what I have said.


Then Proclamation was made for silence, while Judgment was passing upon the
Prisoner.

L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Plunket, You have been here indicted of a very great
and heinous Crime, the greatest and most heinous of all Crimes, and that is,
High Treason; and truly yours is a Treason of the highest nature, it is a
Treason in truth against God an your King, and the Country where you lived. You
have done as much as you could to dishonor God in this case; for the bottom of
your Treason was, the seting up your false Religion, than which, there is not
any thing more displeasing to God, or more pernicious to mankind in the World:
a Religion that is ten times worse than all the Heathenish Superstitions, the
most dishonorable and derogatory to God and his Glory of all Religions or
pretended Religions whatsoever; for it undertakes to dispense with Gods Laws,
and to pardon the breach of them. So that certainly a greater Crime there
cannot be committed against God, than for a man to endeavor the Propagation of
that Religion; but you, to effect this, have designed the Death of your lawful
Prince and King. And then your design of Blood in the Kingdom where you lived,
to set all together by the ears, to destroy poor innocent people, to prostitute
their Lives and Liberties, and all that is dear to them to the Tyranny of Rome
and France; and that by introducing a French Army. What greater evil can be
designed by any man? I mention these things, because they have all been fully
proved against your, and that you may take notice, and repent of them, and make
your peace with God, by a particular Application for Mercy for all these
Faults: For it seems to me, that against God, your Prince, and fellow Subjects,
you have behaved your self very ill, designing very great evil to all these;
and now it has pleased God to bring you to Judgment.

I must tell you, peradventure what you urge for your self might introduce
pity, if it were to be believed, that is, that you are innocent, and had
Witnesses to prove it, but we cannot suppose any man innocent, that has had a
legal and a fair Trial, and a Trial with as much candor to you, as your Case
could bear, or as perhaps any man in such a Case ever had. You had time upon
your Request to send for your Witnesses, to help you in your Defense, and to
have proved your Innocence, if you could have done it; Time long enough to your
own Content, you your self thought it so, at the time it was given. To give a
Prisoner under your circumstances five or six weeks time to send for Witnesses,
is not usual, we could have put you upon a present Defense, and hurried you out
of the World by a sudden Trial, if we had had any Design against you; but we
go on in a fair way, and with legal Proceedings, and with as much Respect to
you, as in such a Case could be used, for we gave you all the fair Hearing and
Liberty that you desired to have.

Look you, as to what you urge, that your Trial was in this Kingdom, whereas
your Offense was in another, that is a thing that does not become you by any
means to object; for you have had a Trial here by honest persons, and that
according to the Laws which obtain in this Kingdom, and that too of Ireland,
which is by a Statute not made on purpose to bring you into a Snare, but an
ancient Statute, and not without Presidents of its having been put in execution
before your time. For your own Country will afford you several Presidents in
this Case, as O Rurke, and several others that have been arraigned and
condemned for Treason done there. So that you have no reason to except against
the Legality of your Trial. You say, now you have Witnesses that could prove
all this Matter, why that lies in the mouth of any man that is condemned to
say; but pray consider with your self, what Regard ought to be given to this.
We cannot help it, if your Witnesses don't come, you may remember they wanted
not Time nor Opportunity to come over, but you told us they would not come
unless they had a Passport.


Plunket. My Lord, they got a Pass to come over afterward, and so in eight
days they came hither.


Lord Chief Justice. You might have provided your self, if they wanted such a
thing. In the first place, no body is bound to give it them; much less could
you expect it for them without asking.


Plunkett. I could not get the Copies of the Records neither by any means,
unless I had an Order from the Council, and they would not give that Order,
unless your Lordship appointed it.


L. C. J. We cannot tell that, you should have petitioned in time.


Plunkett. How could any one foresee, unless he was God Almighty, that they
would deny it, or that he could not get out a Copy of a Record, paying for it,
without a Petition. All the Friends I had told me, upon Motion there it might
be had, but here I have it under the Lieutenants and Councils Hands, that they
would give no Copy of Records without Order from hence, which before I could
know it, it was impossible for me to have them ready against my Trial.


L. C. J. Look you Sir, I do speak this to you, to show you that those
Objections, which you seem to make against your Trial, have no weight at all,
but in this Case it is not the Jury that are so material as the Witnesses
themselves. I appeal to all that heard your Trial, if they could so much as
doubt but that you were Guilty of what you were charged with. For consider here
were persons that were of your own Religion, the most of them Priests, I think
almost all of them in Orders.


Plunkett. There were two Friars and a Priest, whom I endeavored to correct
this seven Years, and they were Renegadoes from our Religion, and declared
Apostates.


L. C. J. Look you Sir, they gave an Evidence very home to your matter; you had
liberty to examine them, and they gave you a rational Account of any thing you
asked. Let me but put you in mind of one thing. You made Exceptions to one's
Evidence, (and indeed that was very much of your Exception to all) why he did
not reveal this in all that time: Truly he told you he was of your mind, till
he went into France, and saw what a Slavery and Mischief you endeavored to
introduce upon his and your own Countrymen, and this his Spirit rose against,
to see what a condition Ireland was like to be brought into. And pray, did not
he give you a full Answer to that Question?


Plunkett. I had sufficient Witnesses to prove he was an Apostate, and was
chastised by me, and therefore had prepensed Malice against me.


Lord Chief Justice. Therefore I have spoken this to the Satisfaction, I hope,
of your self, and all that hear it. I do now wish you to consider, you are near
your end. It seems you have lived in a false Religion hitherto; it is not too
late at any time to repent, I wish you may have the Grace to do so; In the mean
time there is no room for us here, to grant you any kind of Mercy, though, I Will
tell you, we are inclined to pity all Malefactors: Who ever have done evil, we
are inclined to pity them, and wish heartily that they may repent, as we do,
that you may of what you have done. But all we can do now, is, to say what the
Law says, and that is to pass Judgment upon you.


Plunkett. May it please your Lordship to give me leave to speak one word. If I
were a man that had no care of my Conscience in this matter, and did not think
of God Almighty, or Conscience, or Heaven, or Hell, I might have saved my Life;
For I was offered it by diverse people here, so I would but confess my own
Guilt, and accuse others. But, my Lord, I had rather die ten thousand deaths,
than wrongfully accuse any body. And the time will come when your Lordship will
see what these Witnesses are, that have come in against me. I do assure your
Lordship, if I were a man that had not good Principles, I might easily have
saved my own Life; but I had rather die ten thousand deaths, than wrongfully to
take away one farthing of any man's Goods, one day of his Liberty, or one minute
of his Life.


L. C. J. I am sorry to see you persist in the Principles of that Religion.


Plunket. They are those Principles, that even God Almighty cannot dispense
withal.


L. C. J. Well, however the Judgment which we give you, is that which the Law
says and speaks.

And therefore you must go from hence, to the place from whence you came, that
is to Newgate, and from thence you shall be drawn through the City of London to
Tyburne; there you shall be hanged by the Neck, but cut down before you are
dead, your Bowels shall be taken out, and burnt before your Face, your Head
shall be cut off, and your Body be divided into Four Quarters, to be disposed
of as his Majesty pleases. And I pray God to have Mercy upon your Soul.


Plunket. My Lord, I hope I may have this favor, of leave for a Servant and
some few Friends that I have, to come at me.


L C. J. I think you may have liberty for any Servant to come to you, I know
nothing to the contrary.


Plunket. And some Friends that I have in Town.


L. C. J. But I would advise you to have some Minister to come to you, some
Protestant Minister.


Plunket. My Lord, if you please, there are some in Prison, that never were
Indicted, or Accused of any Crime, and they will do my business very well; for
they will do it according to the Rites of our own Church, which is the ancient
Usage, they cannot do better, and I would not alter it now.


L. C. J. Mr. Richardson, you may let his Servant come to him, and any Friend
in your presence, to see there be no Evil done, nor any Contrivances that may
hereafter have an Influence upon Affairs.


Mr. Just. Jones. Be you present, or some body.


Plunket. My Servant I hope may come, without his being present.


L. C. J. Yes, yes, his Servant may be with him alone. Well. Sir, we wish
better to you, than you do to your self.


Plunket. God Almighty bless your Lordship. And now, my Lord, as I am a dead
Man to this World, and as I hope for Mercy in the other World, I was never
guilty of any of the Treasons laid to my Charge, as you will hear in time; and
my Character you may receive from my Lord Chancellor of Ireland, my Lord
Berkley, my Lord Essex, and the Duke of Ormond.


Then the Keeper took away his Prisoner, and upon Friday the First of July, he
was Executed according to the Sentence.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Some Passages of the Life and Death of John Earl of Rochester, who died the
26. of July, 1680. By Gilbert Burnet, D. D. Are to be sold by Eliphal Dobson
Bookseller on Cork-Hill, 1681.


