THE TRIAL and CONDEMNATION OF Mr. Will. Staley FOR High Treason, AT The
Kings-Bench-Bar At WESTMINSTER, On Thursday the 21 st of Nov. 1678.

Who was there Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered for speaking of
Desperate, Malicious, and Treasonable Words against the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

With the particular Evidence given against him, the Defense he made for
himself, and all other material Circumstances.

LICENSED, 1678.



LONDON: Printed for R. G. 1678.

THE Trial and Condemnation OF Mr. Will. Staley A PAPIST.
THis Person that now received Trial, was by Trade a Goldsmith, and by
Profession, as to Religion, a Papist. He had been bred a considerable part of
his time beyond the Seas, and there, it is feared, by too much familiarity with
the Jesuits, had imbibed some of their desperate Principles. The Sum of the
matter upon proof against him, appeared to be thus:

Three Gentlemen that by their Garb, Behavior, and testimony of diverse that
knew them, appeared to be Persons of Worth and unreproachable Credit, gave
Evidence against him, That upon the fourteenth day of this instant November,
they being at a Cooks shop in the Parish of St. Gileses, the Prisoner at Bar
was with another man in a Room opposite to that they were in; and the door
being open, they had a perfect sight of the Prisoner, and were not above eight
foot or thereabouts distant from him, when they stood at their door: And that
the Prisoner being discoursing with the old man that was with him, the old man
said in French, That the King of England was a great Persecutor or Tormentor of
the people of God (meaning, as we must understand, Papists). In answer to
which, the Prisoner at Bar, stamping with his foot several times, and appearing
to be in passion, said (likewise in French) words too insolent and malicious to
be repeated and translated. And (stretching forth his Arm, and then clapping
his Hand on his Breast) speaking of His Sacred Majesty, said, I my self will
kill him. And that afterward they heard him say, That the King and Parliament
thought the business (meaning the Plot) was over, but the Rogues (so this
Villain was pleased to call them) were mistaken. Two of these three Gentlemen
well understood French, but the third did not: however, the other two at the
same instant expressed their Loyalty, by telling him, with much commendable
Zeal, that the person in the next Room spoke most detestable Treason, and that
they could not endure to hear it, repeating the sense of their words in
English: And as for the words Le Roy d'Angleterre, though he understood not the
Language, now deposed, he perfectly heard as well as they. But none of the
three at that time knowing the now Prisoner, nor having to their knowledge ever
seen him before, and he with his Companion just upon speaking the aforesaid
words, being about going, one of the Witnesses watched him to the place where he
went unto, being his Father's House, and upon enquiry learned his name, etc.
That next morning they came thither, and upon color of buying something,
carried him to the Cross-keys Tavern over against his Dwelling; where they
staid three hours or thereabouts, whilst one of them went to seek, and could
not in all that time procure a Constable, because he had no Warrant from a
Justice. But having at last got some from the Guard at White Hall, and a
Constable, they seized him; and after Examination, he was committed first to
the Gatehouse, and afterward sent to Newgate; from whence he was now with a
strong Guard conducted, having on the day before been Arraigned.

He had the honor to have a most worthy Jury, most of them Knights and
Squires, all Gentlemen of Quality: Nor had ever man a more fair and equal
Hearing; but the Defense that he made was frivolous; sometimes alleging that
the distance between him and the Witnesses was greater, yet owned that the Door
was not shut. He also much insisted that they mistook the French words he
spoke; and whereas they rendered it in English, I my self would kill him, he
affirmed that he meant and said, I would kill my self. But as well the
Witnesses testimony, as the sense of the foregoing and subsequent Discourse
took off that evasion. He further pretended that the Old man (whom he said was
one of his Workmen) did not speak French, but a Jargon, or kind of Italian; but
the two Witnesses being questioned to that, absolutely disproved it, affirming
what was then spoken was French, and that they well understood it; and several
times repeated the very words both French and the English thereof in Court. And
besides, though it was asserted that the Prisoner was offered to have what
person he had occasion for summoned to attend at his Trial; and that a
Gentleman was so kind, as to go to the Prisoners Fathers House with a note of
several persons names that he ^^sired should appear on his behalf; among^^ whom
was the aforesaid Old man that was with him at the time of speaking the Words,
and notice was given thereof to one of their Agents; yet the aforesaid Old man,
who it seems was a kind of Italian, did not think fit to appear; so that upon a
full discussion of all that the Prisoner had to say, the Crime appeared so
evidently proved, upon the Statute made in the Reign of our present Sovereign
for the preservation of his Royal Person, that without withdrawing from the
Bar, the Jury found him Guilty, and accordingly he forthwith received Sentence
to be Drawn and Hanged, his Bowels Burnt, his Body to be Quartered, and
disposed on the City Gates, etc.

FINIS.

