MOST Strange and Terrible ASTROLOGICAL PREDICTIONS AND Dreadful Presages For
the ensuing Year, 1684.

Foretelling what shall happen to several sorts of People in and about the City
of London.

Together with such mighty Wonders that shall happen in this Year, ^he (...)
not been since NOAH'S Flood.

With Advice to young men how they may escape the Danger.

^ewly Written, and Published for the good of all, By S. TRIGG.

LONDON, Printed by J. Harefinch in Mountague-Court in Little Britain, for the
Author. 1684.

Most Strange and Wonderful PREDICTIONS For the ensuing Year, 1684.
To the Readers, Gentle, or Simple.
SItting upon Dover Cliffs, to acquaint my self with the Art of Navigation, and
to know the course of Tides; (as the Dantz Crows gather on the Sands against a
Storm) there appeared on the Downs such a flock of Knaves, as by Astrological
Conjectures I began to gather, that this Year 1684. would prove Intemperate, by
an extreme heat in Summer, insomuch that the Stones in Cheap Side shall be so
hot, that many Persons will fear to go from St. Paul's to the Poultrey Compter;
whereupon I betook me to my Ephemerides, and erecting a Figure, I found that
many strange Accidents would fall out this next year 1684. As first, Mercury
being Lord and predominant in the House of Fortune, shows, that many Fools
shall have full Coffers, whilst wise men walk up and down with empty Pockets;
and that if Jupiter were not joined to him with a favorable Aspect, the
Butchers of East-cheap should have little to do all the Lent-time but make
Pricks: Seeing therefore the mighty Wonders that are likely to happen, I have,
for the benefit of my Contrymen, taken in hand to make Prognostication,
discoursing briefly of the Sun and Moon, and the Eclipses of both, with the
dangerous Effects that are like to follow, which if God prevent not, many poor
men may fast on Sundays for want of Meat, and such as have no shoes may go
barefoot: But yet Astrology is not so certain but it may fail; and therefore
many Hostesses, if they be not the more careful, shall chalk more this year
than their Guests wipe out in seven: So that I conclude, whatsoever is said by
Art, Sapiens dominabitur Astris.

Of the Eclipses that shall happen this Year 1684, to the mighty terrifying and
astonishing the Beholders.
IF we may give credit to the Authentical Censures of Albumazer and Ptolomy,
about the Motions of the Celestial Bodies, whose Influence does excite and
procure continual Mutations in the Lower Region, we shall find that this year
the Moon will be eclipsed, which shall happen in one of the twelve Months, and
in be totally darkened, so the Effects shall be the more wonderful; for Cancer
being the sole House of the Moon, does presage that this year Fruits shall be
greatly eaten with Caterpillars, as Brokers, Farmers, Flatterers, and other
such like Vermin, which, feeding on the Sweat of other men's Brows, shall
greatly hinder the Beauty of the Spring, and spoil the growth of good Herbs,
unless some Northerly Wind from Heaven clear the Trees of such Cankerworms and
Catterpillars: Cancer being a Watery Sign, and chief Governor of Floods and
Streams, fore-sheweth, that Fishmongers if they be not well looked to, will go
down as far as Gravesend in Wherries, and yet get but little profit, for their
Popish Customers hide themselves at present in Middletons-Pipes: Besides, it
signifies; that Brewers shall make havoc of Thames-water, and put a double
quantity of Liquor to their Malt, to the great detriment of many Crazy
Ale-Knights, and if it be not well looked into and prevented by the worshipful
Company of Ale-^^nners, may in time prove their fatal overthrow: but in this we
have great hopes, that because the Effect cannot surpass the Cause, diverse
Tapsters shall trust out more than they can get in, though they fill their pots
but half full, yet, for want of true dealing, shall dye indebted to the Brewer,
to his great grief and small satisfaction. Thus much of the Watery Sign Cancer,
only I do advise Seamen to carry two Shirts on Shipboard, for fear of six
legged Animals, which they must be forced to spend their time in hunting and
murdering to save their own Skins whole.

Of the Eclipse of the Sun.
THE Eclipse of the Sun, according to Proclus's Opinion, is like to produce
many hot and pestilent Infirmities, especially amongst Somners, Pettifoggers,
and swinging Evidences, whose Faces are combust, fiery, deathful, and inflamed
with the Juice of Barley; so that if a violent Death do not take away these
consuming Malt-worms Barley will be dear. Others shall be troubled with hot
Rheums in their Heads, and such hot Agues shall reign this Year, with strange
Fevers and other Calamities, that if the Sun were not placed in a cold Sign,
they would again raise the price of Wine before August; but many good Planets
being retrograde, do foretell Lemmons to be plentiful and cheap, that they may
be eaten to Bed-ward: and Mars being placed near the Sun, shows, that many
shall dye this Summer, old Men and Women, when they can live no longer; and
some also that might live longer if Jack Ketch did not put a period to their
Maladies. Some Young Men this Year shall rejoice, that have old rich Misers to
their Friends; for the Devil has made a Decree, that as soon as the Doctors,
their own Merits and the Priests have sent them to Hell, he will keep them there,
that they shall never return to trouble their Heirs for spending that on the
Devils Back that they pinched out of honest poor Peoples Bellies. The Soldiers
beyond Sea shall be so hotheaded as to quarrel for their Pay, and mutiny, and
kill one another; but here Man and Man shall quarrel, the Lawyers get their
Money and laugh at them for Fools, and those that quarrel most shall have the
Attorney's Blessing. And further, there will be grumbling as bad as falling out
amongst Churchmen; and diverse fond Sects in Religion like to be troublesome
both in City and Country. Self-Conceiters and over-holy Counterfeits, that
delight in Singularity, shall rise up and despise Authority, presuming even to
abuse the higher Powers, if Saturn with a frowning influence did not threaten
them with Tyburns Turns.

But whereas the Sun is darkended but by Digits, and that upon the South
points, it presageth great Misery in Spain and those South Countries: Friars,
Monks, and Jesuits, shall heat themselves so with Confessing Harlots, that
their Crowns shall wax bare of their own Debauchery, to the great impoverishing
of the Spanish Barbers; but those Surgeons that can cure the Pox may grow
rich: and such a pestilent hypocritical Company as there are of Mass-mongers,
are like to go to the Devil for G -- s sake as the Dog eat the Custard.
Further, the Eclipse falling out in hot Weather, there is like to be abundance
of Fleas, that Women will sit up till Midnight, and longer, doing Execution, in
their Smocks and Beds, upon that black Crew of light-heel'd Creatures, and
committing Murders upon them as the Spaniards did on the Moors, or People in
the West Indies, and without any Remorse: but they must remember, What measure
they made must be measured to them again suddenly.

But, as this Eclipse falls out in the Afternoon, it presageth, That men shall
go soberer into the Taverns than they shall come forth; and those that are
drunk and sleep on the cold Ground, need not fear to dye then in a Sweat. But
Gemini being combust and retrograde, shows, That some shall have so sore a
Sweating, that they may sell their Hair by the pound to stuff Tennis Balls
with. If the Beadles be careful this Summer, it may be hoped that Thieving-Lane
in Westminster may be cleansed from evil Faries, and that honest Women may live
there quietly, not fearing Whip or Cart. I find the like of the Altitude of
Whetstones-Park and Dog and Bitch Lane, as well as Southampton Buildings, the
which places, before the Restoration was moistened with such precious Water,
that the Whores cannot as yet depart, because Venus presageth the same; and she
being retrograde and slow, leaves them there to the Power of those Constables
that dare disturb them, before they have drawn in too many Young Men Novises,
to their utter Ruin and Destruction. And further, it is to be noted, Many
strange Children shall be born, who shall live so strangely, that when they
come to be Bishop't they have not Wit enough to know their own Fathers, but
from sympathizing, shall have their Fingers like Lime-twiggs, to get their
Livings with five an a Reach; and some shall have Feet like Hares, and shall
trudge from Post to Pillar till they take up Beggars Bush for their Lodging,
others shall have good Noses to smell Feasts of others Costs; likewise diverse
Women this Year shall have two Tongues, to the terrible Grief of them that
marry them, uttering in their Fury such rough-cast Eloquence, that Knave and
Slave shall be but Holy Day Words to their Husbands. Whereas this fearful
Eclipse does endure one hour and a half, it signifies Women's Love to their
Husbands shall be very short; and some so momentary, that it shall hardly
endure form the Church to the Bride-house, the Air is so variable this Year.
Also it is to be noted, that Hens, Capons, Geese, and Pullets, shall not
frequent Poor-mens Houses, but fly even roasted, from the Spits to rich Churls
and Gluttons, to pamper them up against next Christmas. Much more might be
said, but I end thus, desiring them that have good Clothes to wear them, and
those that have good Victuals, to eat, and those that have Money may take their
Ease and be quiet, and not meddle nor make, but live till they dye.

Of the second Eclipse of the Moon.
THE second Eclipse of the Moon will be before the 31th of December or not this
Year 1684. I conceive it will be seen but little in our Meridian, therefore the
Effects cannot be very prejudicial to us nor any of our Clime. But yet as the
Body of the Moon is never obscure either in part or whole, but it shows some
dangerous Effects to follow, so I mean to set down briefly what may be looked
for. etc.

First, let the Danes look to it, and be sure to steel their Noses well, and
drink good store of strong Liquor to heat their Blood, that they may well keep
out the French and cold Weather, for they are both bad; and the wary Hollander
must be careful, for they have been too bold, to meddle with such things as
have been too high for them. The Lion sleeps; he may wake: the French are
proud, and fear not; but their Time is nigh, and Plum-Porridge is good all the
Year, but in Fashion at Christmas, with the Pipes, Cards, Roast-Beef, and Dice,
and many a Song, and carousing Night and Day with some that their Wives and
Children suffers Hunger and Cold. But as the Eclipse is South, and in the
eighth House, so there is like to be in France a great Dearth of honest Men,
and few there left, but their. Hope may perish, and their Enterprise come to
Shame; for there was a Prophecy found in an old Book, which is likely to prove
true, viz. The Tree that God has not planted shall be rooted-up in a time when
least thought of.

Some curious Astronomers of late days, more prophetical than judicial, do
affirm, That after such Phiznomizes there shall strange Sects arise; as if some
of Goodman- Pope's old Saints should come again to set the People a madding
after new Whimsies in Religion, and with such fond Humors in their Brains,
that diverse Fools shall become self-conceited, and grounding their witless
Opinions on some heretical Fancy, shall seek to ruminate Authority; and so
firmly shall they stand, that though many of them are destroyed, their
Disciples shall grow up, like Grass, innumerable, that Tyburn will be hard put
to it; were it not that the Moon being in Taurus, that governs Neck and Throat,
shows that the Squinancy shall reign amongst them, and strangle many by
consequence, otherwise they would run retrograde to the year forty two, and
then run direct and swift in motion thereby thinking to increase in number: but
stay -- Capricorn is a Sign wherein Luna is often resident, which
prognosticateth great Mischiefs amongst horned Beasts, declaring that the
Butchers shall commit willful murder upon many Rams, Sheep, Oxen, and Cows,
without Repentance, if they did not pay too dear for them; but many that take
them where they find them, shall certainly come to make up their Accounts with
Jack Catch for their Honesty, (or for want of it) because they always say, that
plain dealing will dye a Beggar: but this we are certainly sure of, that for
want of it many hang like Dogs: observe likewise the Act made, That he that
wipes his Nose and has none, is to forfeit his plain Face; and all such who
are jealous of their Wives without cause, deserve the horns to make them amends.

And as the Eclipse is far from Pisces, it does prognosticate that there will
be great store of stinking Fish at Billingsgate, and at Quinborough their
Oyster-Boats shall go nigh to be as full of Knaves as honest Men: besides, a
great many fish-wives this Year are like to prove arrant Scolds, and some of
them drunken Wh -- s, and shall take Strangers into their Husband's Quarters by
daylight, and swear they may do it as well as Ladies; and commend their great
Freedoms, saying, They are the best Houswives that lie in bed to save their
Shoes; and that a Plaster of warm Guts, a Toast and good Liquor, with a good
Fire, is far better than to freeze with Cold: and that a Cup of good Ale, a
piece of old Cheese and a Tossed, or a piece of powdered Beef and a Bag-pudding
is very hearty, and Plum-pottage, Rost-beef, Minced Pyes, Turkeys, Geese,
Capons, and such like good Cheer, with a Glass of good Wine, is far better to
end the Year withal than a thump on the back with a Stone.

Now I shall speak something of Man's Inclinations and Dispositions for the
whole year, etc. And first, of the Winter-Quarter, so far as by Art I can
conjecture.
WHatever Ptolomy says, it matters not, for I say it begins sooner with poor
men than with rich: because of the malignant Influence of Saturn, whose
malevolent nature is such, that those who have neither Clothes, Money, nor
Credit, shall want not only Meat and Drink, but also Wood and Coals, and be
ready to starve with Cold, whilst rich men may sit by a good Fire, with Apples
and Ale and Ginger: And though the Season be cold and phlegmatic, some will be
afraid of the Cold, and sit all day long at Cards, Dice or Tables, whilst their
poor Wives and Children want Necessaries at home by reason of their Folly. But
in regard that I find two of the seven Planets in Capricorn, viz. the
Winter-sign, Sol in Pisces, Mars in Aquarius, it does certainly signify, that
many men and Women, for want of Wine and strong Drink, shall go sober to bed
sore against their Wills; and also that Seamen shall have very ill luck if
their Ships strike against Rocks, or stick in the Sands. Here likewise Saturn
being retrograde in Leo, shows, that many rich men may lose their Purses by
High-way-men, and the poor be weather-beaten by Usury and Extortion: But
Mercury and Venus being congragated in Sagittary, shows, that they that have no
Shirts in time will be lousy, and yet save the charge of washing: and Water
men for want of Fares may sit still and blow their Fingers ends,
notwithstanding the many thousands of French come hither of late, if they have
not saved a penny as well for a frosty day as a rainy: Also Eeles will in all
probability be dear, if there be but few taken: but Powts will be plentiful in
all places; especially in those Cities and Countries where Women cannot have
their wills, and maundring broth scolding hot, although it be cold Weather. Now
as far as can be ghess'd by the diverse Configurations of the Stars, and their
Significations, there is nothing more plain, than that they that have no Fire
this Winter-season cannot be very hot.

Of the Spring-Quarter.
THe Spring is comfortable to all Animals: the Sun is got out of Pisces, and
entered into Aries, the Ram, the House of Mars, and the Suns exaltation, by
which I find many Scholars to have dull pates for want of timely Preferment,
because the monied Blades have all the Livings, and he that has no Money shall
have no living, which makes some scratch where it does not itch, for kissing
goes always by favor: but Jupiter being now on his way to Sagittary, fiery,
and in his exaltation, shows, that when he is there he is resolved to mend all,
and that Reward shall no more go backwards, nor Honor upon his Head, but many
shall receive Preferments according to their Merits. And according to Proclus
his Opinion, Women are likely to grow wilful, yet their Husbands must be
content; and Butchers will sell their Meat as dear as they can, and many keep
their Sheeps heads so long that at last they are forced to throw them away,
though their Wives preserve their Horns; and some men shall be so wedded to
Swines Flesh, that they shall never be without a Sow in their House as long as
they live.

The Spring or Vernal Quarter is naturally hot and moist, which shows the
sprouting out of Trees, Herbs and Weeds also; it likewise shows old men to be
testy and froward, and that crafty Knaves need no Brokers; but the Sun being in
his dignities in Aries portendeth much evil to those who have taken the Fleet
and Kings Bench on purpose to defraud their Creditors, which Places were for no
other purpose but to relieve the oppressed, and poor in necessity, but of late
have been made as bad as a Den of Thieves, by the most abominable Cheats and
Cosenages daily committed, to the astonishment and admiration of all honest
men; that the Creditor may see his Money spent, the Jailer inricht, and himself
grow poor, without remedy; which in all honest men's thoughts is little better
than robbery, or as the old Saying is, Robbing Peter to pay Paul: but Jupiter
and the Sun being both just and kingly Planets, foresheweth the stopping up,
and ferretting these Foxes out of their holes, wherein they lie and upbraid
their Creditors, to their utter ruin oftentimes. Now because Aquarius has
something to do in this Quarter, it is to be feared that the Vintners will put
more Water in their Wine than formerly, to the great damage, if not utter
overthrow of many ancient red Noses: and out of the old stock of Heresy may be
broacht some new Schismatical Opinions, that may yet disturb some honest men
that mean well: but certain it is, that there is likely to swarm such a huge
swarm of Hypocrites, that an honest man will be hard to be found, especially in
White-Friars or the mint in Southwark. But oh! you generation of wicked
Ostlers, worse Vermin than any, who rob poor Horses, and grease their Teeth
that they cannot eat their meat when they stand at Livery; by all the foregoing
Configurations and Celestial Signs, this I prognosticate against you, That he
that dies amongst you dies a Thief, and he that lives lives a Knave; and if he
leaves not those cheating tricks he shall die a Beggar. I must not hide this
notable Secret, that Jupiter being in Aspect with Luna, discovers, that the
weather growing warm many shall drink more than they bleed, and Tailors shall
steal nothing but what is brought to them, Poulteres shall be much pestered
with stinking Fowl Conies, to the anoyance of their Neighbors, and their own
disprofit. Butchers Dogs hate Lent, and some Apprentices that have hard Masters
will be much trouble with the Shoulders ache, more especially when Sol enters
Gemini.

Of Comets in general.
IT has been the long received Opinion of all the famous Astrologers, That
Comets do always portend, to some Nations or Places in the World, where their
Influence shall happen, War, Fire, Famine, Pestilence, Tumults, Insurrections,
Invasions, inundations, or what ever else they please to imagine; but I say, so
far as by Art I lawfully may, That many People (if they do not leave drinking
and live temperately) shall have wonderful ruby Faces, and great red Noses,
which shall shine so powerfully, that in a dark night, if their Eyes be good,
they may serve instead of a Link to light them home; and be as necessary as
Touch-Wood in their Pockets to light their Tobacco: and many People that have
great store of Wood and Coals, may if they please keep good Fires at Christmas;
but those that are Frequenters of Whetstones Park, Dogyard, Lutenor's-Lane, and
such like Places, by reason of the excessive heat of that Climate, (although it
be cold Winter) yet shall carry Fire in their Tails, to the Destruction of
their whole Bodies if they do not in time call for the Assistance of an able
Surgeon.

Of Conjunctions.
BUt since we are now falling under the Effects of the most famous and
remarkable Conjunctions of the Superior Planets, that has happened many hundred
years, therefore we may well expect most wonderful Events in many Places, not
only of Europe, but elsewhere; that is to say, many Single People of both Sexes
shall be mightily desirous to be in Conjunction, and marry in haste, but they
may repent at leisure: Also those that are purblind or Moon-ey'd will hardly
ever look right forwards, and those that cannot hold their water will be
subject to piss in Bed; those that swear shall catch no Fish, and they that
angle in dirty Ditches may happily catch Frogs; those that have no money need
not fear robbing; but they that can get no Clothes, may certainly go naked, as
well as those that hope for dead Folks Shoes go barefoot.

I do likewise prognosticate from the various Configurations at the time of
writing these Predictions, There shall reign a cruel Disease in poor men's
purses, but it shall be with Emptiness; insomuch that some shall be ready to
cut out their pockets, greatly fearing they may never have more occasion to use
them. Those that have taken great Cold may be troubled with the Cough, and
those that are sick will have worse Stomachs than those that are well, although
neither the one nor the other can digest a Ten-penny Nail, or a Bag of
Tenterhooks, unless they are well buttered. There will certainly be many Scolds
at Billingsgate, and as many well qualified men at the Bear-garden. There will
be many Knaves belong to the Custom-house, Excise, Chimneys, besides the Knaves
that sell Quinborough Oysters, and those that fill the Oystersbarrels half full
of Weeds instead of Colchester Oysters. The Knights of the Post, if Mercury
prove true, may do great execution and get Money, and the Butchers make havoc
of Flies. Millers and Weavers shall be as theevish as ever, and Lawyers and
Physicians no changelings, that which soever walks first, as good comes after.
But woe to you Gold-laceseller, but that you only cheat them that have Money,
otherwise your Trade were next to that of Pick-pockets and Apothecaries, to get
eleven pence in the Shilling honestly. Woe to you Shoomakers, that make Shoes
little stronger than Paper, and plead for your excuse that they are for Misses,
that ride in Coaches, or lie on their backs Night and Day with their fore legs
upwards, and their Shoos off, if they be anything dirty: To these enchanting
Serpents many Gallants so often resort to pay their Courtships, that in small
time they are forced to go dine with Duke Humphry, and then the thoughts of
their Debaucheries increases their Miseries. A good Lesson for young men to
learn, that the wickedness of whoring, gaming and drinking, is the Destruction
of thousands: It takes away a man's Reputation, good Name and Credit, makes him
a scorn and a byword, hated and slighted of all: a Beast, worse than a Dog;
for a Dog does but according to kind, but what a shame is it for a man to
degrade his own Soul, to make the Temple of the holy God a Swill-tub, a
stinking nasty draugh-house, and his Mouth, that should praise the living God,
his Privy: through which you shorten your days in this Life, and endanger your
Souls in the life to come.

Therefore young men, learn to be wise, look to your ways, and take notice how
many, for not fearing God and serving him, have fallen to ruin, and Repentance
come to late; but let it be your care to lead such a Life that you need not
repent of that folly that many before you have committed; assuring your selves
that the hearty Sacrifices of those that are young and lusty, and in the prime
of their Youth, God will accept: Serve God while you are young, and he will
never leave you when you are old: and by this means you shall escape all the
Dangers that can threaten Mortals.

But Mars being exalted in Capricorn, and entering the first term of Venus,
stirrs up much Debauchery amongst Lewd People, and makes them hate to hear of
any thing that is good: And likewise denotes, that abundance of lusty young
men, that have very good Trades, and might live otherwise, if they were not
lazy, shall be suffered to keep Alehouses, and to bear Offices, to the great
encouragement of Idleness, and perhaps ruining of many thousands; which the
lower Stars may remedy if they please to be so benevolent: but in many places,
through their favorable Aspect, the Event of Licensing such People to lick the
Spiggot, only brings Profit to the Justices Clerk, and many the Halter;
Whereas, take away Idleness, and the Cause of it, all other inconveniences will
be removed, our Nation flourish, and all be happy: but the many private
Bottle-houses, and Gaming-houses brings sudden ruin and destruction to Youth:
At this Jupiter thunders but is not heard: because false Mercury having his
Fall in Pisces, denotes, that many Men will rather give credit to idle Livers
and false Testimonies, than to search out the Truth: and by their being
corrupted, the old Proverb is verified, That one man may better steal a Horse
than another look over the Hedge.

The World is drawing to an end with old men, and yet some will not amend their
Lives, though they are daily called upon, and alarmed, yet will not turn: but
let such men know, that the Constellations of Heaven do absolutely declare,
that there is a time coming when it shall be happy for those who are found
well-doing.

And now to conclude, Let us all both Old and Young depart from Evil and do
good, serve God to our utmost Power, love and honor our King, cheerfully obey
all that are in Authority over us, and love one another; this is a sure way to
be happy both here and hereafter. And thus I conclude my Predictions for the
Year 1684.

FINIS.

