TRIPLYS For Sir James Fowlis of Collingtoun, to a Paper entitled Duplys for
the Lady Castle-haven, given in by her, to my Lord Commissioners Grace, and the
Honorable Estates of Parliament.
THe Lady Castle-haven, being many years since married to the late Lord
Collingtoun, she was by a General Clause in her Contract of Marriage, provided
to the Conquest of what should be acquired during the Marriage, quoad an
Liferent thereof; and upon this Clause, she having pursued the now Sir James
Fowlis of Collingtown before the Lords of Session. They found, that Sums
acquired during the Marriage, which had been applied for payment of Debts,
affecting the Estate of Collingtoun, were not to be repute Conquest.

And my Lady having apealled from the Session to the Parliament, the
Interlocutor of the Lords was rescinded, and the Affair thereafter being moved
in Parliament, the same was remitted to the Committee for Fines and
Forfaultures, for taking Probation as to the Conquest during the Marriage, and
what of the effects were extant at the dissolution thereof; and a
Condescendence being given in for my Lady, as to what Debts her Husband was in,
anno 1656: This was sustained as probative, unless Sir James could redargue the
Condescendence, by proving that these Debts, or a part thereof were paid
before her Marriage, which was in anno 1661. And the Committee having proceeded
no further in the Affair, there was a Petition given in to the Parliament for
her, in order to a further procedure therein, toward a final Determination
thereof, and to which there are printed Answers likeways given in for the
Defender.

There is now a Paper come out, entitled Duplys to the said Answers, ushered
in with this Preamble, that the Answer contains nothing but a Narrative of what
does not concern the point in Question, and of the Lords of Session their
Injustice in repelling my Ladies Claim, and that this is a Reflection upon the
Estates of Parliament, who have reduced the Lords Decree, as also upon the
Committee of Parliament, who sustained the Condescendence as probative, whereas
in the Answer, the same is termed an extravagant and lubrick Conjecture.

To this it is Triplyed for the Defender, that the Drawer of the Duply, of
design it seems to support the weakness of the Pursuers pretentions and Claim,
by a willful Mistake, and unheard of Stretch would amuse the high Court of
Parliament; as if in the Answers there were any thing that could in the least
imply a Reflection upon the eminent Judicature, which is a willful breach of
Charity, as will appear to the impartial Reader, upon perusal of the Answers
themselves. For the Process before the Lords of Session, being founded upon a
general vagrant Clause of Conquest, running upon critical Points in jure, and
the Lords having determined according to the current of Decisions, in Cases of
this nature; albeit the Parliament by their power have rescinded the Lords
Interlocutor, yet this was no ground for the Pursuer in her Petition, by a long
extrinsick Digression, to level at that Judicatory in the most indiscreet terms
imaginable, as taxing them with palpable Iniquity and Injustice; although from
this, nothing further can be inferred, but that the Session are not infallible
in their Sentences, and that the same are subject to the ^eview of Parliament,
which is the Fountain of all Justice, and the Pursuer in prosecution of her
Claim, might have forborne to have taxed them with such palpable Injustice, and
with Expressions unbeseeming to have been used against the meanest Judicatorie
of the Kingdom, so that the Defender in his Answers, designing nothing ^ess
than any seeming Reflection upon the Parliament, but modestly charging the
Pursuer, as having too much bitter Zeal against the Session, in the carrying on
of her Process, which was very compatible with that Submission and Acquiescence
that is due to the Interlocutor of Parliament, in determining a critical point
in Law, there was no just ground to have ushered in this Duply with such a
groundless Challenge. 2. The Interlocutor of the Committee of Parliament,
sustaining the Condescendance as to the Debts, is not in the least quarrelled
by the Defenders Answer, but he therein follows the Pursuers own Method toward
the clearing of the Affair: But in as far as the Pursuer adds, that the
Defenders Father left an Estate of 10 or 12000 Merks by year behind him, and
which is absolutely false; as also that what he did leave was the Product of
the Acquisitions during the Marriage, which is likewise founded upon
Conjectures and Presumptions, liable to Mistake; this is not charging the
Committee of Parliament with doing Injustice in the least, but allen^arly that
the Pu^suers Condescendance, as to the free Estate, was extravagant, and that
the Consequence drawn from the List of Debts, to make up a free Estate at the
dissolution of the Marriage, was merely conjectural and presumptive ut supra:
and to stretch the design of the Defenders Answer any further, does truly
proceed from a wilful, if not a malicious mistake of the true scope and intent
thereof.

And whereas the Pursuer is pleased to term the Alledgance proponed by the the
Defender, upon the Obligments of his Mothers Contract of Marriage, and upon the
great Portion he himself brought with him, to be but a number of Stories,
nothing to the purpose, and that thereby the Pursuers Clause of Conquest in her
Contract, cannot in the least be weakened or prejudged.

It is Triplyed for the Defender, That he being a lawful and true Creditor, as
to a just Interest in the Estate of Collingtoun, upon the Obligments in his
Mothers Contract of Marriage, long prior to the Pursuers Contract, and which
was the onerous Cause of the Settlements made of this Estate in favors of the
Defender: It is no Story to found thereupon toward the evacuating the effect
of a subsequent general vagrant Clause of Conquest, in a just comparing of the
two together. 2. The great Noise the Pursuer makes in this her Process, arising
from the great Debts her Husband was in at the Marriage, and from the alleged
great In-comes during the Marriage, which are pretended to have been the ground
of the Acquisition of what Estate the Defunct left behind him when he dyed: And
this at most amounting but to a Presumption, is easily redargued by a special
Condescendance of the great Fortune the Defender himself brought with him to
the Family; and the greatest part thereof having come after his Marriage, from
the deceast John Boyd, his Father in Law, who was known to be a very
understanding and provident man in the application of this Access. This is a
Presumption much more pregnant than what is adduced in the contrary, and that
the Defenders Estate not exceeding 200 lib. Sterling yearly, was truly the
Product of his own Fortune, and not the extant Effects of the pretended
In-comes and Acquisitions during the Fathers Marriage; so that if the Drawer of
the Duply had seriously considered the strength of the Defenders Argument, from
the said Answers, he had certainly endeavored to have taken the same off,
otherways nor by a pretended general Duply, that the same contained nothing to
the Purpose, and were Stories of no Weight or Monient: And it is known, the
Defender, beside what he had from his Father in Law, had for Fifteen years also
a Sallary as one of the Lords of the Session, and so was not straightened to have
spent his Tocher, nor was he an unfrugal Liver, as the Pursuer injuriously is
pleased to Tax him, and this pretended Conquest arising but from a Presumption
as aforesaid, and it being clear from the Answers, and from the Position laid
down by the Pursuer her self, that there could be no free Conquest, whereof the
effects were extant at the dissolution of the Marriage, it necessarly follows,
the Estate now possessed by the Defender, was truly the Product of his own Money,
without burdening him to prove any special application thereof, to the payments
of the Debt, which presumptione juris is to be supposed, considering it was the
peculium adventitium from his Father in Law, who with a regard to his Daughters
interest, and that of her Children, in Charity, is believed, would see the same
was to be applied to no other end, but for disburdening the Estate, and there
was such entire confidence betwixt the Defender and his Father, that with a
regard to the honor of the Family, it was agreed to, that no Assignations but
allanarly Renunciations, were to be taken from the Creditors to their
Diligences, there being no prospect at the time, as to this unexpected and
unnatural Plea, so that the Renunciations indefinitely were taken, sometimes in
favors of the Father, and at other times in favors of both jointly, and the
Defender does humbly crave, that the High Court of Parliament, before Answer,
take Probation, as to the value of the Estate, which was Disponed to the
Defender, and what Sums he himself brought with him by his own Marriage; as
also, the way and manner of the Defunct, his keeping a separate Family of
Children and Servants, during the whole time of their Marriage upon his own
expenses, through her Default: And whereby, the greatest part of all these
prended In-comes during the Marriage, were necessarly spent and consumed;
Reserving to the Parliament in termino: And after Probation is led, to
determine the total Relevancy, in relation to the free effects, extant at the
Dissolution of the Marriage, as it arises naturally to be considered, from the
Presumptions adduced on either side, even without any necessity upon the
Defenders part to prove, that any of the Debts in the list 1656, were paid
before the year 1661, but making that list as the standard, in the way and
manner proposed for the Pursuer her felt, and as is more fully contained in the
said Answers. And upon the event of all which, it is hoped the High Court of
Parliament will still be convinced, that the Justice of the Pursuers Claim, is
supported rather from Presumptions and Conjectures, than upon any solid or
pregnant proof in jure^ or if the Important Affairs of the Kingdom, will not
allow the High Court of Parliament the time, to take so exact a trial of the
Affair, as it necessarly requires, that the same may be remitted to the Judge
ordinar to take trial thereof, and to discuss the other points of the Process,
which are not as yet either Debate or Determined.

And as to what is further urged in the said Duply, that it is not now competent
for the Defender to allege, he is not liable upon the passive Titles, seeing he
brooks his Estate, by virtue of a Disposition from the Father, which is
perceptio haereditatis, and has stated himself all along as a Contradictor in
this Process, which is sufficient to infer a Representation, after the
proponing of peremptor Defenses in causa.

It Is Triplyed for the Defender, that the state of the Process is opponed, and
the Pursuer it seems has wilfully forgotten the same, for by the Act and Remit
of Parliament to the Committee for Fines and Forefaultures, it is thereby
cleared, that the Pursuers Procurators did only insist declaratoriae juris, to
liquidat the Conquest, and did actually pass from that conclusion of the Libel,
as to the Defenders being passively liable, because otherways the Defender had
sufficient grounds in Law whereupon to have defended against any Representation
to his Father; and it is strange, with what confidence the Drawer of the Duply
can deny this matter of Fact, which is clear by the Act in the Pursuers
Procurators Hands, and to which the Defender mordicus Adheres.

In respect whereof, etc.

