A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A LATE Horrid Conspiracy TO BETRAY HOLLAND TO THE FRENCH.

And of the Trial, Confession, Condemnation and Execution of Jacob Martinet
Sheriff of the Town of Sluys, and Cornelius Reolands Master of the Ship called
the Argle of Amsterdam, who were Executed for the said Conspiracy the Sixth of
this Instant May, 1690.

Done off of the Dutch Copy.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey.
1690.

A True Account of a late Horrid Conspiracy to Betray Holland to the French,
etc.
THE unwearied Aims of the French, for a great many years, to swallow up the
States of Holland, are sufficiently known to all the World; and by their
Intrigues with the late unhappy Pensioner de Wit, they were once within an Ace
of overturning this Commonwealth for good and all. That the French continue in
their former Methods of Bribing with their Money such Villains as are destitute
of all Love to their Country, and who are willing to Sacrifice every thing to
their accursed greediness of Money, we have a fresh Example in the Treason and
Trial of these two Miscreants Jacob Martinet Sheriff or Scapen of the Town of
Sluys, and Cornelius Reolands Master of the Ship called the Argle of Amsterdam,
which was as follows.

On the Third day of April last, there was intercepted a Packet of Letters
sewed within the Wastcoat of a Seaman, going from Sluys to Ostend by Land:
which being opened by one of the Magistrates of Ostend, before whom the Fellow
was brought, they were found to contain a dangerous Conspiracy to Betray to the
French the strong Town of Sluys, and thereby a chief Key of Holland. Upon which
the Seaman being examined, Declared that he came from Sluys the day before, and
was designed to find some way to get thence to Dunkirk, and that he had
received the Letters found about him from Cornelius Reolands his Master at
Sluys, and was to deliver them to one Monsieur Rayon a Colonel of a Regiment of
French, lying in the Town of Dunkirk. He further confessed, That he had been
three weeks before with Letters from his Master to the same Colonel, and that
he had returned with Letters from the said Colonel, directed to his Master.

The Fellow, after this Confession, was kept close Prisoner, and an Express
immediately dispatched to acquaint the States with it, who thereupon ordered
the Magistrates of Sluys to secure the said Cornelius Reolands in close Prison,
and to Examine him secretly about this Treason. Reolands being taken, denied
all at first, but the Letter he had written to Monsieur Rayon being produced
against him, which had been taken at Ostend about his Servant, he not only
confessed it was his, but also that Jacob Martinet the Sheriff of the Town was
concerned in the Affair more than he, and that the Letter written in Ciphers,
found about his man, was written by Martinets own hand.

Upon this Martinet being secured, there was one Letter immediately directed to
the Marquess of Castanage General Governor of the Netherlands from the
Assembly of the States of Holland, to desire his Excellency would be pleased to
send the Seamen taken in Ostend with the foresaid Letters, immediately under a
Guard to the Town of Sluyce, which his Excellency was pleased to do.

All things being ready for the Trial of these two Traitors, Count Horn
Governor of Sluys was ordered to repair to the Town to be present at, and to
hasten the Trial. Upon the first day of this Instant May the Prisoners, Jacob
Martinet and Cornelius Reolands, were brought to their Trial in the Townhouse
of Sluys, before Judges appointed for that Effect, of whom Count Horn was one.
Cornelius Reolands being confronted with his own Servant, acknowledged, That he
and the other Prisoner had kept Correspondence with one Monsieur Rayon, Colonel
of a French Regiment in Dunkirk, and by his Means and Mediation with one
Monsieur de Perry, Secretary of War under the Duke of Luxemburgh, who was to
command the French Army in the Frontiers of Flanders this Summer. And that he
and the said other Prisoner had received several Letters from the said Monsieur
Rayon upon the same Subject, and in one of them a Line from the said Monsieur
de Terry, directed to him and the other Prisoner, wherein he assured them, if
they would promise to accomplish the Design in hand, he should cause to be paid
them in hand, each of them Ten thousand Livers, and upon the performing of it,
they should receive, each of them, Twenty thousand more, with an honorable
Retreat and Employment in any place of France they pleased. He likewise
acknowledged, That they were to receive the first Ten thousand Livers apiece at
the Return of his Servant they had sent upon that Errand, when he was taken
beside Ostend; and that the way of Returning the Money was by a Bill of
Exchange from a Banker of Paris upon a Jew in Amsterdam, payable to the said
other Prisoner Jacob Martinet. Adding, That his Servant knew nothing of the
Secret, but only was employed to carry the Letters betwixt Martinet and him,
and the said Monsieur Rayon. And that he knew nothing of the Design till
Martinet drew him into it, and assured him, that there was the like Design in
most of the Towns of Holland.

Being desired to give account of the Design it self. He gave it thus: That the
said Martinet and He were to let in a great many French by threes and fours,
under the notion of Deserters from the French Army, and that before hand, they
were to provide several private Lodgings for them to be ready upon call. In the
mean time he and Martinet were to provide a great many Firelocks, under the
pretense of buying them, in order to sell them again to the new raised
Regiments in Flanders. That when they had got into Town a competent number of
French in the manner above mentioned, they were to concert with the said
Monsieur Rayon a particular night, in which He with other two Regiments should
be in readiness to march from the nearest places of the French Conquests, to
Sluys, by such ways as was laid down in a plan agreed betwixt them. That at the
night and hour appointed, the said Martinet and He were to have all the French
in readiness with their Arms to fall upon the Garrison, there being ordinarily
but two hundred men upon duty at a time; And having cut them off, they were at
the same time to open the East Gate to the other French under the Command of
Monsieur Ra^on, and being joined together to take Possession of, and keep the
Town for the French King, whose Army at the same time was to fall down with all
diligence and force upon the Frontiers of Holland. He further acknowledged,
That he doubted not but the French were tampering with some in most of the
Towns of Holland to the same effect; and that he knew, there were several great
Sums of Money returned by Bill to Amsterdam to this end, and that there were
several Agents up and down Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Bergen, U^som, the Bush,
Utreght, Lyden, and all other Towns in Holland, who were busy in making
Intreigues to betray the respective Towns to the French for several Sums of
Money, and Promises of great Preferment.

Cornelius Reolands being found Guilty upon his Confession, was removed, and
immediately thereafter Jacob Martinet, the other Prisoner, was brought to his
Trial. Who stoutly denied he knew any thing of a Design to betray the Town of
Sluys into the hands of the French, or that he had ever entertained
Correspondence with Monsieur Royon, or Monsieur de Terry, to that or any other
Effect. Whereupon Reolands Servant, with whom the above written Letters were
found, was produced against him as an Evidence; who being sworn, deposed, That
he had received the Letters, which had been taken about him at Ostend, from his
Master Reolands, and that he the said Jacob Martinet, was present when his
Master gave them him, and that Martinet desired him to Return as soon as
possible, giving him half a Pistol to drink, saying, That if he got a good
Answer of some Money Business he had written about, he, the Deponent, should be
well paid.

Martinet briskly denied that he ever had seen this Witness, or had been in
Company with Reolands but once in his Life, about six years ago. The Evidence
immediately in open Court required two men, whom he knew, to declare, if they
did not several times see his Master Reolands and Martinet together at the
Maurice Head Tavern in Sluys; who upon Oath declared they had often seen them
both go into, and come out from that Tavern, they two all alone, and that
within less than these two Months. Notwithstanding all which Martinet stood
firmly to his Denial.

At length the Declaration and Confession of his Accomplice Reolands was read
before him, whereat he seemed to be much stunned, having often changed color
the time of the Reading it. But insisting in his Denial, and the Law not
allowing the Confession of one Accomplice to be sufficient proof, he was
adjudged to be put to the Torture. Whereupon all things being ready for it, his
Courage failed him, and he told the People appointed to put it in Execution,
that he would confess all he knew of the Affair he was charged with, before the
Judges.

Being thereupon called into Court, He freely confessed His being upon a Plot
with Reolands to deliver up the Town of Sluys to the French, after the manner
contained in Reolands Confession, with this particular Circumstance, That in a
Letter Written to him by Monsieur de Terry, Secretary of War under the Duke of
Luxemburgh, he was promised Ten Thousand Livers more than was to be given to
Reolands, together with a place in the Presidial Court of Sedan, worth Three
Thousand Livers per Annum. And thereafter being desired to decipher the Letter
written in Ciphers found about Reolands Man: He freely did it in these Words,
as was dictated by him from the Letter given him in open Court.

SIR,
WE have fully concerted the manner we are to act here in delivering up the
Town, and it rests only, that you be as ready to effectuate your part at a
precise time to be appointed, which both Mr. Reolands and I think to be most
proper sometime in the middle of May next, because the Army of the States will
not be in the Field till the end of that Month at soonest; You see what I
venture to serve so great and generous a Prince, and it is but a small part of
what I would do to serve him. Be sure you by the Bearer adjust the exact time
and way of your being in a readiness to accomplish your part of the Design, and
I think it were time, that some of these Soldiers should be stealing in, as
you know. After receipt of yours, we will be every day making one step or other
to forward the thing; And tho I doubt not but by the same Bearer you will send
the Bill as you promised; so I assure you, I am more persuaded of the
reasonableness of having a greater Sum ready in some hand, to make use of for
gaining others to our Interest, as perhaps the Affairs will require. I need not
say more, but commit my Fortune to your Conduct, who am

SIR, Your Faithful and Humble Servant, Ja. Martinet.
Sluys April 1st. 1690.

These Confessions of both Jacob Martinet and of Coruelius Reonalds being again
read in open Court, they both of them received Sentence in these words.

Forasmuch, as you Jacob Martinet, and you Cornelius Reolands, are by your own
Confession, and other legal Proofs and Letters, found Guilty of holding a
Correspondence with Monsieur Rayon Colonel of a French Regiment in the French
Kings Army, and with Monsieur de Terry Secretary of War under the Marshal Duke
of Luxenburgh, in order to betray the Garrison and Town of Sluys to the French
for a Sum of Money, agreed to be paid by the said Monsieur de Terry, to you
Jacob Martinet, and to you Cornelius Reolands for doing thereof. By which
Action the whole Province of Holland, and Neighboring Provinces would have
been in eminent hazard of being thereupon ruined by the French Army. Therefore
the Court does hereby adjudge you the said Jacob Martinet, to be taken back to
Prison, and thence upon the Sixth of May Instant, to be drawn upon a Cart to
the public Market place of this Town, and there to be hanged up by the Neck on
a Gibbet, and being near dead, to have your Bowels ripped up* and thereafter
being fully dead, to have your Body divided into four Quarters*, to be disposed
of as the Court shall afterward think fit, and your Head to be severed from
your Body, and affixt upon the very same Gate of this Town which you designed
to open to the Enemy. Likewise the Court adjudges you the said Cornelius
Reolands to be taken back to the Prison, and upon the said Sixth of this
Instant May, to be taken to the said Market place of this Town of Sluys, and
there to be hanged up by the Neck upon a Gibbet until you be dead. And this we
give for a final Sentence against you both, wishing God may show Mercy to your
Souls.

According to this Sentence, upon the said Sixth day of May Instant, the said
Jacob Martinet was brought to the Place of Execution, where he behaved himself
very impenitently, and refused to speak to the People, and had the Sextence
executed upon him as aforesaid.

After him came Cornelius Reolands, who both in Prison, and at the Place of
Execution, carried himself very devoutly and penitently: And asking leave if he
might speak to the People, he expressed himself in words to this purpose, a Copy
whereof he had given beforehand to the Sheriff or Scapen that attended him.

Good Christian People,
I Am brought here justly, for designing to betray my Country to a Foreign
Enemy for a Sum of Money; I confess my self Guilty of the Crime, and I beg
God's forgiveness and your forgiveness for it, and am willing to dye for it, as
I justly deserve. I must say, I did for some Months resist the Offers that were
made me by the unhappy man that is gone before me; but at length my Wants
prevailed with me to accept what I thought would rid me out of them. This I do
not say to excuse my self in the least; God forbid I should. And as I consented
to betray this Town, so I did promise to do another Villainy, which indeed I
forgot to tell my Judges at my Trial; and it was, to see if I could prevail
with any Captains of Ships, to betray their Ships to the French, for which I
was to receive Money from the French Secretary of War to give to those
Captains. I hope your Displeasure against me for so Villainous Designs will
end, when I have satisfied Justice with my Blood. I earnestly beg the
assistance of your Prayers for me in this my Agony; and I commit my Soul to
God, hoping to be saved by the Merits of Christ my Redeemer.

Having delivered himself thus, and heard the Minister that waited on him pray,
and having prayed himself, he was just going to be turned off, when pulling up
the Handkerchief that was over his Eyes, he said, Good People, there is one
thing my Conscience obliges me to tell you with my last Breath, and it is this;
I am afraid there are a great many such Designs in hand up and down this
Country like this for which I suffer; and I wish there may be some effectual
means to prevent them; for I assure you the French Agents are very busy every
where, and they spare no money to obtain their Ends I have no more to say, but
again beg earnestly the Assistance of your Prayers: And I commit my Soul to God.

Having thus said, he was turned over the Ladder, and his Body afterward, by
order of the Magistrates, was given to his Friends to be buried.

Thus we have one sad Example more of the ill Effects of the French Money
toward our Country and Commonwealth; but we hope God will disappoint all their
Designs, and bring their Accomplices to just Punishment.


FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Memoires of Monsieur Deageant: Containing the most secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Richelieu. To which is added a particular Relation
of the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for
the Advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that Affair:
which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully Translated
out of the French Original.

Reflections upon a Form of Prayer, lately set forth for the Jacobites of the
Church of England. And of an Abhorrence rendered by the late King, to some of
our Dissenting Bishops, upon his present Majesty's Landing.

The New Nonconformist: Or, Dr. Sherlock's Case in Preaching after a
Deprivation incurred by the Express Words of a Statute: Fairly Stared and
Examined. With short Reflections upon Mr. Cook's Sermon'^ February the 2 d.
1689-90. which was Licensed by the Archbishop's Chaplain.

The Anatomy of a Jacobite-Tory: In a Dialogue between Whig* and Tory,
Occasioned by the Act for Recognizing King William and Queen Mary.

A true Narrative of the Murders, Cruelties and Oppressions, Perpetrated on the
Protestants in Ireland, by the late King James's Agents, since his Arrival
there. Published for the Information of the Jacobites, that Endeavor his
Return again.

All these are to be Sold by R. Baldwin in the Old Bailey.


