Dublin, Printed by J. Ray on College green, 1683.

THE TRIAL OF WILLIAM HONE. FOR HIGH TREASON, For Conspiring the Death of the
KING, etc.
On Thursday, July 12. 1683. William Hone being set to the Bar, and after
having held up his Hand, the following Indictment was read. London.
THe Jurors for our Sovereign Lord the King upon their Oaths present, That
William Hone late of London Labourer, with many other Traitors, as a false
Traitor against the most Illustrious and Excellent Prince, our Sovereign Lord
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King, his natural Lord; not having the Fear of God in his Heart, nor
weighing the Duty of his Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the
Instigation of the Devil; and the true Duty and natural Obedience, which true
and faithful Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the King, toward him our said Lord
the King do bear, and of right ought to bear, wholly withdrawing; and with his
whole Strength intending the Peace and Common Tranquillity of this Kingdom of
England to disturb, and War and Rebellion against our said Lord the King to
move, and stir up; and the Government of our said Lord the King within this
Kingdom of England to subvert; and our said Lord the King from his Title,
Honor, and Kingly Name of the Imperial Crown of this his Kingdom of England,
to put down, and deprive; and our said Lord the King to Death and final
Destruction to bring and put; the second day of March, in the Year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second King of England, etc. the 35th, and
diverse other days and times, as well before as after, at the Parish of St.
Michael Bassishaw, in the Ward of Bassishaw London, aforesaid, maliciously and
traitorously, with diverse other Traitors, to the Jurors aforesaid unknown, he
did conspire, compass, imagine and intend, our said Lord the King, his Supreme
Lord, not only of his Kingly State, Title, Power and Government of this his
Kingdom of England, to deprive, and throw down; but also our said Lord the
King, to kill, and to Death to bring and put; and the ancient Government of
this his Kingdom of England to change, alter, and wholly to subvert; and a
Miserable Slaughter amongst the Subjects of our said Lord the King, through the
whole Kingdom of England, to cause and procure; and Insurrection and Rebellion
against our said Lord the King to move and stir up, within this Kingdom of
England. And to fulfill and perfect the said most horrible Treasons, and
Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations, and Purposes aforesaid. He the said
William Hone, and many other Traitors, as a false Traitor, then and there, and
diverse other Days and Times, as well before as after, Maliciously,
Traitorously, and advisedly, he did assemble, meet together, and consult with
diverse other Evil disposed and Discontented Subjects of our said Lord the King,
to the Jurors as yet unknown, and had Discourse, and did treat of, and for the
executing and fulfilling their Treasons, and Traitorous Compassings,
Imaginations and Purposes aforesaid. And that the said William Hone, (together
with many other Traitors) as a false Traitor, Maliciously, Traitorously, and
Advisedly, then and there, and diverse other Days and Times, as well before as
after, did take upon himself, and promise to be aiding and assisting in the
execution of the Treasons, and Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations, and
Purposes aforesaid. And in providing of Arms, and Men Armed, to fulfill and
perfect the said Treasons, Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations, and Purposes
aforesaid. And to fulfill and bring to pass the said most horrid Treasons, and
Traitorous Compassings, Imaginations, and Purposes aforesaid, he the said
Willam Hone (with many other False Traitors) as a False Traitor, Maliciously,
Traitorously, and Advisedly, then and there, did procure and prepare Arms, to
Wit, Blunderbusses, Carbines and Pistols, against the Duty of his Allegiance,
against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, etc. and against the Form of
the Statutes, etc.

Cl. of the Crown. How say thou, William Hone, art thou Guilty of this High
Treason whereof thou stand Indicted, or not Guilty?


Hone. In some measure I am Guilty.


Capt. Richardson. You must say, Guilty, or Not Guilty.


L. Chapter J. You must plead to this, and the way is to confess all, or deny all.


Hone. I know nothing of the Arms.


L. Chapter J. Are you Guilty of the Treason, in conspiring the Death of the King,
and providing of Arms for that purpose?


Hone. I never provided Arms, I am Guilty of the Conspiracy.


L. Chapter J. We can take notice of none of these odd kind of words you talk of,
but either plainly, Guilty, or Not Guilty.


Hone. My Lord, I can truly say I am Not Guilty, for I know nothing of it.


L. Chapter J. If you say so, you say as much as is required of you at present.


Hone. In that understanding of it, I am Not Guilty.


L. Chapter J Well, he says he is Not Guilty.


Cl. of Cr, Culprit, How will thou be tried?


Hone. By God and my Country.


Cl. of Cr. God send thee a good Deliverance.

Friday, July the 13th. in the Morning, the Court being met, and Proclamation
made.
Mr. At. Genesis Set William Hone to the Bar.


Cl. of Cr. You the Prisoner at the Bar, Hold up your Hand.


Hone. I desire I may retract my Plea, I would plead Guilty.


L. Chapter J. Do you confess the Indictment?


Hone. Yes, my Lord.


L. Chapter J. That is, that you did conspire the Death of the King, and in order
to that, that you did provide your self with Arms to do this wicked Act.


Hone. I never did that, my Lord, I never provided any Arms.


L. Chapter J. What were you to have done?


Hone. That Deposition I gave before Sir William Turner is true.


L. Chapter J. Tell us what you were to have done in this bloody matter.


Hone. I was asked by one Mr. Goodenough to go along with him, and I asked him
whither, and he would not tell me, but I understood it was to Kill the King and
Duke of York, but he did not tell me the place.


Sir Geo. Jeff. He does not confess fully, we desire to try him.


L. Chapter J. Look you, you have pleaded Not Guilty to this Indictment, the King
is willing, that if you be not Guilty you shall not be Condemned; and therefore
he does desire and command the Evidence against you should be publicly given,
that all Persons may see that you are not without Cause brought to Trial,
therefore swear the Jury.

The Prisoner challenged none, but the Jury that were sworn were, Nicholas
Charlton. Christopher Pitts. Robert Beddinfield. John Pelling. William Winbury.
Thomas Seaton. William Rutland. Thomas Short. Theophilus Man. John Jenew. John
Short. Thomas Nicholas.


Then Proclamation for Information, and for those that were bound by
Recognizance to appear was made.
Cl. of Cr. William Hone, hold up thy Hand (which he did.) You Gentlemen of the
Jurie, that are sworn, look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his Cause, he
stands indicted by the name of William Hone, etc. prout antea, in the
Indictment, mutatis mutandis; upon this Indictment he has been Arraigned, and
has thereunto pleaded, Not Guilty, and for his Trial, etc.


Mr. Jones. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jurie, the
Prisoner stands indicted for the most horrid Treason that ever was endeavored
to be committed in this Kingdom, for traitorously conspiring to Kill the King,
and consulting how and in what manner it should be done, and for preparing Arms
for the doing of it; we shall prove this to you, and then I hope you will find
him Guilty.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jurie; the
part the Prisoner at the Bar was to act in this Treason, was the Killing of the
King, he was one of the Persons that were to be assisting in Assassinating the
Kings person. We will not trouble you with the large Evidence of the Rising, as
we did yesterday; but we will prove these things upon him, that he undertook to
do it, that he was concerned with the rest of the Confederates: we shall show
you this is not a new thing, but he has been an old Rebel, for this has not
been a new Project, but has been acting several Years. Five Years ago, when
the King attended my Lord Mayors Show, he undertook to kill him off of
Bow-Church. We shall call our Witnesses, and prove it fully upon him.

Mr. Keeling, and Mr. West. Mr. Josias Keeling sworn.
Mr. At. Genesis Do you tell my Lord and the Jurie, what you know of this
Prisoner at the Bar.


Mr. Keeling. The first time I saw him was at the Dolphin Tavern, when the Arms
were agreed upon, he was there then.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was there then?


Mr. Keeling. Mr. West, Mr. Goodenough, and him I remember particularly, and
some others, whom I do not at present remember, and since that he has taken
notice of me.


Mr. At. Genesis Was Mr. Rumbold there at that time?


Mr. Keeling. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray at that Meeting tell the Jury what Discourse you had, for
many of these Gentlemen are not the same that were on the Jurie yesterday.


Mr. Keeling. It was discoursed then of the Kings coming home from Newmarket
the Saturday after the Fire. Mr. West told Mr. Rumbold, he heard the King would
come home that day; but, says he, I don't believe it; says Rumbold, I hear he
will come home on says Mr. West, I hear so too. They said, they hoped he would
not come home on Monday. Says Mr. West to Mr. Rumbold then, How many Swan
Quills, Goose Quills, and Crow Quills, and how much Sand and Ink must we have?
I think the Prisoner at the Bar must needs remember it as well as I. It was
agreed by Mr. Rumbold, I think I am exact in the Number, and he was by and
heard all the Discourse.


Mr. At. Genesis What did they mean by this?


Mr. Keeling. By Swan Quills, they meant Blunderbusses; by Goose Quills,
Muskets, and by Crow Quills, Pistols; and by Sand and Ink, Powder and Bullet.
He took Acquaintance with me after that Meeting (for I never saw him as I know
of, before) and after some time he told me, he was one of them that was to go
down to Rye to assassinate the King. And since that, at a Coffee house in
Swithin's Alley, he told me, it would never be well, till the Black Bird and
the Gold-Finch were knocked on the Head; they being Terms I did not understand,
I asked him what he meant, he said the King and Duke of York.


Sir Geo Jeff. You are sure that is the Man?


Mr. Keeling. I am sure that is the Man, William Hone.


Sir Geo. Jeff. What, is that the Man that talked of the Black Bird, and
Gold-Finch?


Mr. Keeling. I am sure that is the Man.


Mr. At. Genesis Now swear Mr. West.


Sir Geo. Jeff. If Mr. Hone has a mind to ask him any Questions, he may.


Hone. My Lord, this I deny: As to the Black Bird, I own it; as to the
Gold-Finch, I never heard a Word of it till this time.


Sir Geo. Jeff. You had only a design upon the Black Bird then.

Mr. West Sworn.
Mr. At. Genesis Tell the Court what you know of the Meeting at the Dolphin
Tavern.


Mr. West. I was there, and Mr. Keeling came in. There was several things said
of Swan Quills, Goose Quills, and Crow Quills; but this Man did not come in
till this Discourse was over; And I am sure I did not speak of any thing of
this Nature before this Man in my Life. But Mr. Goodenough did undertake to
provide the Men, and Mr. Goodenough said, he would try him, if he would make an
attempt upon the Duke without the King. And I asked him whether he had seen Mr.
Goodenough? he told me he had; says he, he spoke to me about a little Job for
the Duke. Mr. Goodenough said, he had spoke to him fully about the thing. And I
saw him often in the Company of Mannius, that was designed to be another of the
Assassinates. He was at my Chamber once; says he, Master shall we do nothing? I
think he used these Words, That if the Duke of Monmouth would be true, and
appear, he could bring fifty or threescore honest Men of to'ther side the Water
to do the business. I asked him what business? says he, either a brisk Push
(that I took for an Insurrection) for the two Brothers; says I, what Brothers
do you mean? Says he, the Captain and Lieutenant: those were the two Terms they
used since the Van herring was Printed. I think he was a pretty honest Fellow
before this time; he was deluded by Goodenough, I think, in the thing.


L. Chapter Just. (To Mr. West.) Do you come to justify these things?


Mr. West. My Lord, he has been deluded basely, and I am sorry for the poor
Fellow.


L. Chapter Just. It is a very unusual thing, for one in your Condition to use such
Expressions in such a Case.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Mr. West, you have been deluded.


Mr. At. Genesis Captain Richardson, and Sir Nicholas Butler.


Sir Geo. Jeff. I find he is not worthy of the mercy the King has showed him.


Mr. West. It was a Word I put from me unawares.


Sir Geo. Jeff. My Lord, We will give you an account of a design this man had
long ago to Kill the King.

Sir Nicholas Butler Sworn.
Sir Nicholas Butler. My Lord, I know the Prisoner at the Bar very well, I have
known him many years, I have always known him guilty of Plotting and
Contriving, and ready upon all occasions to embrace any thing for these
Purposes laid to his Charge. Particularly, when Sir Francis Chaplain was Lord
Mayor, his Majesty and the Duke stood at Mr. Waldoe's House. by reason of the
Angel House being shaken. And he came to my house and told me, he would
discourse me upon some private matter; I called him into a Closet, and he told
me they had a fair opportunity to take off the King and the Duke at once; I
told him that would do very well, but how will you do it? Says he, we will do
it with Cross-bows, we are to be half a dozen, and we will go into the Steeple,
where there is a Window just opposite to the Balcony, and a great deal of
Discourse we had to this purpose. My intent was to divert him from this Design,
and told him how impossible it was they should escape the Foot-Guards, and
Horse-Guards, and multitude of People: And if he did not do the Business
effectually, he would be undone, and all the Party. I rested satisfied he would
have desisted upon this. But I knew the Principles of these Fifth Monarchy Men,
and their Associates, and thought it not safe to trust to his bare say so, that
he would desist, but I went to the King and the Duke of York, into my Lord
Chamberlains Chamber, where they came to me, and I gave them this Account, and
desired them to set some to watch the place, and to search if any were got into
the Steeple before they came; and there was one Horsal appointed, that did
accordingly watch them, but none came: Upon which some Good-willers to it have
have reported that it was a Sham business, but I think that was not well done.
But the thing was real, and when he was examined before the King in the
Secretaries Office, he did confess all these things that I charged him with.


Mr. At. Genesis Sir Nicholas Butler, had you any Discourse of killing the King
at this time?


Sir Nicholas Butler. No; at last they did understand I kept a Correspondence
at Court, and then they would tell me no more.


Mr. At. Genesis Since he was taken, what did he say about this matter?


Sir Nicholas Butler. About this matter he did acquaint diverse, he was one that
was to kill the King and the Duke.

Captain Richardson sworn.
Captain Richardson. Sir Nicholas Butler asked him in my presence (I went along
with Sir Nicholas when he examined him) as to this thing, how he was concerned?
He said, Mr. Goodenough came to him, and told him, he wanted Laborers; he
asked him, for what; at last he did confess, that Mr. Goodenough did tell him,
it was to kill the King and the Duke of York; he did confess that he did agree
to it, and that he would be one of them. He did likewise say, That after, at
another Meeting, he was for killing the King, and saving the Duke; but
Goodenough was for both.


Sir Nicholas Butler. He said he was to have Twenty Pound.


Capt. Richardson. He said he did not desire to stir, and Goodenough told him
he should have 20 l. to buy him Horse and Armor: And told us the Business of
Rye; the Place he did not know, but said it was the place where the King was to
be murdered. This is the substance of the Examination taken.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Though the Prisoner at the Bar did partly make a Confession,
yet for the Satisfaction of the World, my Lord give us leave to call our
Witnesses.


Capt. Richardson. That which Sir Nicholas says about the Cross bows, he did
own, but --


L. C. J. What say you to this Treasonable Design of yours, in undertaking to
kill the King, in hiring your self out to be one of the Persons that should
have executed this Traitorous Design, this horrid Murder, to have killed the
King at the Rye?


Hone. I say, I did not know the place where, nor when, at the time it was
proposed about the Rye.


L. Chapter J. But what do you say as to the undertaking to kill the King? the
other (...) but a Circumstance, this is the material Point.


Hone. My Lord, I was drawn into it by Mr. Richard Goodenough.


L. Chapter J. You hear what Sir Nicholas Butler says of the Cross bows you
designed to kill the King with, what say you to that?


Hone. I say, there was a person told me of such a thing; and I told Sir
Nicholas immediately of it. The person that told me was a Shopkeeper, and I
don't know him.


Sir Nicholas Butler. You named three Persons to the King, that were
Confederates with you, but you came to me of your self.


L. C. J. Look you, your self was one of the wicked Undertakers in that
Traitorous, Design.


Hone. No, I did never design it, but I was told it.


L. C. J. Ay, that your self and some other good Fellows were engaged in the
Design.


Hone. I was not engaged, only as I was told by a Fellow, that there was a
Shopkeeper lived hard by that would do such a thing, and I immediately told
Sir Nicholas Butler.


L. C. J. Come, it is in vain for you to mince the matter, for here is a full
Evidence against you: The best you can do for your Advantage now, is, to
consider well with your self, and repent of this wicked Design. What Religion
do you profess?


Hone. Religion, my Lord?


L. C. J. Ay, any or none?


Hone. My Lord, I hear several sorts of Men, sometimes Baptists, sometimes
Independents, and sometimes the Presbyterians.


L. C. J. But regard none. Look you, Gentlemen of the Jury, you hear a plain
case of a barbarous Murder designed upon the King, one of the horridest
Treasons that has been heard of in the World, to have shot the King and the
Duke of York in their Coaches, as they were coming upon the Road. You have had
full Evidence of this Man's being one of them; and therefore I am of opinion,
that you must find him Guilty.

So the Jury brought the Prisoner in Guilty, without going out of Court. And on
Saturday July 14. Mr. Recorder gave Judgment against him, as follows;

That you be carried back again, to the place from whence you came, and from
thence be drawn upon an Hurdle to the place of Execution; where you shall be
hanged up by the neck, but cut down alive, your Entrals and Privy Members cut
from your Body, and burnt in your sight, your Head to be severed from your
Body, and your Body divided into four Parts, and disposed at the Kings
pleasure. And the Lord have Mercy upon your Soul.


FINIS.

