A True ACCOUNT of His MAJESTY'S Safe ARRIVAL in ENGLAND: As it was reported in
the House of Commons, Friday the 25th of May. With the Resolutions of both
Houses thereupon.
Friday, 25. May, at the House of Lords.
THe Lords received an Account from the Commissioners with his Majesty, viz.
That on Wednesday last his Majesty, after he had been several days
magnificently entertained by the Lords States General, took his leave of them,
and being accompanied with the Queen of Bohemia, the Princess Royal, the Prince
of Orange, and many other persons of quality, came unto the Road of Schevelen,
where the Cannons having spoken his welcome unto the Fleet, after some short
time of stay, the Queen of Bohemia with the Prince and Princess of Orange, and
all the rest of the Train took their leave of His Majesty.

Immediately whereupon the Fleet weighed Anchor, and left the Coast of Holland,
and yesterday at five of the clock made the North-foreland, after which they
made toward the Downs, and so for Dover.

VVhereupon their Lordships agreed a Letter of Congratulation unto His Majesty
touching his safe Arrival in England, also desiring to know his Majesty's
pleasure when they should wait upon His Majesty, the which Letter was
immediately sent away.

At the House of Commons.
THe House received a Message with a Letter from General Montague, signifying,
that on Wednesday the 23. present, his Majesty, accompanied with his Aunt the
Queen of Bohemia, the Prince and Princess of Orange, with the Dukes of York and
Gloucester, came aboard the Naseby in Schevelen Bay, and about 11 of the clock
the Queen of Bohemia, the Prince and Princess of Orange took their leave of his
Majesty, and about 3. in the Afternoon the Duke of York went aboard the London
Frigate, and the Duke of Gloucester the Swift-sure Frigate, and so weighed anchor,
and about 11. that night they were 7. Leagues from the Dutch Coast, at which
time the Letter was dated, and the Gentleman came away.

The said Gentleman being called into the House, he was told by the Speaker,
that the House did desire to know if he could accquaint them where he thought
his Majesty was, unto which he gave this account, That by the signal given him,
they had sight of Land yesterday at 5. of the clock, for the Guns were then
discharged, which was the signal: and at eight of the clock at night the Fleet
came to an anchor four Leagues off the North Foreland, and then was within nine
Leagues of Dover: whereupon the House ordered a Committee to draw a
congratulatory Letter to be sent unto his Majesty concerning his safe Arrival
in England, and to desire to know where the House might wait upon Him, and
when. The said Committee were likewise ordered, to make another draught of a
Letter to be sent unto the Commissioners of the House, which do attend his
Majesty, who then immediately withdrew, and brought in two Letters, which being
read, were agreed unto, and ordered to be sent away forthwith.

May 26.
This last night the Lord Mayor had certain notice of King CHARLES his Landing
DOVER, and commanded the Bells to be rung throughout the City.

Englands Glory is Returned, Soli DEO Gloria.

