The True ACCOUNT OF THE Behavior and Confession OF William Disney. Esquire Who
was Tried for HIGH TREASON By the KINGS Especial Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, held at the MARSHALSEA in Southwark, on Thursday the 25th. of June,
1685. Together with his LAST Dying WORDS At the Place of Execution at
KENNINGTON Common in the County of Surrey, on Monday June 29th. 1685.
ON Thursday June the 25th. 1685. William Disney, Esquire; being Indicted of
High Treason, for Printing and Publishing a most Vile and Traiterous Paper
against His most Sacred MAJESTY and Government: Entitled The Declaration of
James Duke of Monmouth, and the Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others now in Arms,
etc.

The Messenger deposed, That having a Warrant for the Apprehending of William
Disney, Esquire; he took some Files of Musketeers, and Two or Three Gentlemen
to his Assistance; when approaching to the House of one Tyrrel a Gardener in
the Parish of Lambeth, on Monday June 15th. 1685. between Twelve and One of the
Clock in the Morning, he broke into the Appartment of Disney's, where entering
his Chamber, he found the Prisoner in his shirt, who craved his Breeches, but
the Messenger replied no, saying, if he had a Nightgown he might put it on:
Immediately after, viewing his Breeches, there was found a Dagger in his
pocket, also some other things, likewise a brace of Pistols, and a great Hanger
in the nature of a Scymeter.

His Maid Mary Allett was supposed to be in Bed with him, by reason her Clothes
were upon his Bed: His Daughter about Eleven years of Age, or thereabouts, was
in another part of the Room a Bed alone: The Messenger farther deposed, that
getting into the Printing House, he there found the Forms (as Printers call
them) of the Traiterous Declaration in the Printing-Room, there being by
computation about 750 of them Printed on one side, and about Five of the said
Traiterous Declarations perfect. Upon the Messengers questioning how they came
there? he pretended Ignorance.

The Evidence appearing very plain, and he having nothing to say for himself,
was found guilty of High Treason, Sentenced to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered;
which was accordingly done, at Kennington Common, in the County of Surrey, on
Monday the 29th. of June, 1685. and his Quarters set upon the City Gates.

A True and full account given by the Minister of St. George, concerning the
Behavior, and last dying Speeches of William Disney, Esquire June, 29th. 1685.
BEtween Nine and Ten of the Clock in the Morning, I was sent for by the High
Sheriff of Surrey, to officiate as Ordinary at the Execution of the Prisoner at
the Marshalsea; before he was brought out, a neighboring Minister and I (upon
the Sheriffs motion) went into the Room where he was; when the Reverend Parson
(having seen him the Night before) asked him whether he had considered of those
things which he had formerly offered him, and did very pathitically press him
that he would give Glory to God by a full and ingenuous Confession of his
Crime, intimating to him the fatal consequences that might have followed if he
had perfected that evil work: How many Men's Lives might have been lost in the
quarrel: whose blood he was so far guilty of, as he contributed to the increase
of the Rebellion, by his Printing the Traiterous paper (or words to the same
effect.) To which the Prisoner answered (with some signs of discontent) to this
purpose: That he hoped, (he speaking to the Minister) did not come to press him
to burden himself now: That he had nothing to say that might bring any person
into trouble, and his time was short, so he desired not to be troubled about
any such matters; so that few words passed e're we parted; finding him resolved
not to make any discovery, I only told him I did intend to meet him at the
place of Execution, and he thanked me.

When he came to the Gallows and was in the Cart, I came to him and asked him,
how he desired to improve those few moments of his Life that were yet to come?
He answered in Prayer: I asked, will you pray for your self, or shall I pray
for you? He answered, I will pray, and desire you to pray for me. Whilst the
Executioner was prepairing the Rope, I showed him the Bible, saying Sir, what
comfortable Sentence do you remember out of this word of God for your present
use? He answered, Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I
am chief: And then he proceeded in general terms to acknowledge himself a great
Sinner against God; but affirmed that he had made his peace with God, that he
had confessed his Sins with humility and fervency, and had begged Gods pardon;
and did not doubt but God had for the merits of his Son Jesus Christ pardoned
all his Sins, and he was now under very comfortable hopes that he should soon
be happy, not upon the account of his own merits, but the merits of Jesus
Christ. I told him this was very good, if his hopes were well grounded: He
replied, his hopes were grounded on the Scriptures, which assured him that
Christ dyed to save Sinners. Whereupon I recounted to him some other Gracious
promises of God to true Penitents, as that of Ezechiel, If the Wicked man
turns away from his wickedness, and does that which is lawful and right, he
shall save his Soul alive, etc. After which he made his Address to God in
Prayer, That he would forgive him all his Sins, and sanctify this his
affliction to him; and prayed to God to bless the King, that he may be merciful
and kind to his Subjects, as well as just to his Enemies. He farther observed
how Gracious God was to him in giving him this admonition (as he called it) for
God might have taken him off by some sudden death, or deprived him of his
Senses, and then (he said) it must have been worse with me, but now God has
given me time to bethink my self: So that though the dolor and the shame of
this death having so many Spectators (upon whom he looked) may somewhat
discompose me, yet I have peace and comfort within. Afterward he desired me to
pray with him, which I did briefly according to his mind and present example:
And closing with the Lords Prayer, he answered every Petition deliberately, and
calmly. He declared that he lived in and did now die in the Communion of the
Church of England, were he repeated again in these words, The Protestant Church
of England. After Prayer, I asked him whether we should Sing some part of a
Psalm? he answered, no: Then I asked him whether he had any thing more to do or
say? he answered, I have nothing more but to return you thanks for your care of
me. And I pray God bless you and hear your Prayers for me, and mine for you,
and our Savior Christ for us both: And so I left him going to his long home.

This according to the best recollection of my thoughts, is the Sum, and as
near as I can remember, the words that passed between Mr. Disney and me ANDREW
WESTON.

This may be Printed.

R. L. S.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Sign of the Blue-Ball in
Thames Street, over against Baynard's- Castle. 1685.


