A TRUE ACCOUNT FROM CHICHESTER, Concerning the DEATH of Habin the Informer.

Whom, contrary to all Truth, Two Infamous and Impudent Liars, have published
to be barbarously Murdered: One affirming it to be done by the Dissenters at
Chichester: The other, by the Coachman of Richard Farington, Esquire.

With a Relation of the most Malicious Design to make Mr. Farington himself
guilty of the said pretended Murder.

Published for the sake of Truth.

LONDON: Printed for I. Pool. 1682.

TO THE READER.
THIS Narrative had never been exposed to public view, had not two notorious
Sons of the Father of Lies, more than once most falsely, and with unmatchable
impudence published two late accidents at Chichester; The one concerning the
Bishops horse, or horses, as killed by the Dissenters there; and as to one of
them, to try a strange and unheard of experiment with respect to Fireballs.
But whether one or both of them be so killed, it must be judged as a malicious
Massacring (to use the Observators term) of the Bishop in Effigy. I must
confess I never heard of a horse, or any brute creature before, to be said to
be Massacred; But I have heard and read of the Parisian and Irish Massacre; and
it is neither improbable, nor incredible, that that strange and Monstrous Lier,
who was forced not long since to abscond when credible Witnesses were ready to
prove before a Parliament, that he is a Papist, and impressed with deep and
indelible Roman Sanguinary Characters, should use no other word than that, to
express the killing of beasts by; When men of that stamp, make no more
conscience of Massacring Protestants, and those that profess the pure Reformed
Christian Religion, than of killing of brute creatures; and so he thinks it is
equally applicable to both. And likely it is, he was, and continues to be so
much a favourer of the Popish-Plot to Massacre Protestants, and that this has
been so often, and for so long a time revolved in his thoughts, that no other
word but this could occur to him, when most falsely he would declare to the
World that they were killed by such a sort of people.

As for the man that sent into the World, the Loyal Protestant, etc. I shall
say no more concerning him, but this; That if the Bishops horse had stood at
the same time as a convicted forger of lies, in the Pillory, as he did, he
would through shame (as a more generous creature, having a deep resentment of
that dishonor), so pined away, and grown so meagre and lean in a little time,
that no grease would have been found in his belly, if the Chichester Dissenters
had ripped it open. And it is no absurdity, according to the most deservedly
stigmatized man's sense, to assert, that a beast might have undergone the
Pillory-punishment with him as a legally convicted Criminal or Malefactor,
seeing he makes so happy and witty (though unheard of before) a conjunction and
connection of the killing of the Bishops horse, with that of reasonable
creatures; as if horses were of the same Species, and capable of Government by
the same Laws, that rational Beings in this World, are.

Had we not read and heard of, and known many grand and shameless liars besides
these two, I should have concluded them to be the first begotten of him who is
a Liar, as well as a Murderer from the beginning.

I will not now trouble my self, nor spend my time, to take all their audacious
and false reports asunder, and make an Answer to every part thereof. But this I
will offer to them, and to all the World, as a most fair and inexceptionable
thing, That whereas these two bundles of Lies, brag and boast much of their
Authentic and credible Intelligence from Chichester, as the ground and Warrant
of what they Print concerning the killing of the Bishops Horse, or Horses, and
the pretended bloody Murder of the Informer Habin; That if they will publish
the Names of them that send it to them, I will produce, side digni, many more
persons, who upon Oath either before the King and his Council, or in any Court
of Judicature where His Majesty shall be pleased to appoint the Examination of
this matter, shall make good and prove the verity of the ensuing Relation.

The Reason why it way published no sooner, is, That I, to whom it was sent,
judged it was most convenient to see how far these two Enemies to Truth would
proceed in their lying Relations; that so a plenary and complete Answer thereto
might be made at once, to undeceive and satisfy all sober and honest men, of
what persuasion soever, in whom they have been so industrious to create a
belief of the truth of that which is most false.

I would have the Reader to observe some things remarkable concerning this
Habin: First, That he was so profligate a wretch, and so prodigiously wicked,
that he made no Conscience of committing the sin of Perjury: For he swore, That
two or three persons brake Captain Bicklies Windows in Chichester, that never
were among the young men that brought the Pope before his door; by virtue
whereof they were Convicted as Rioters, and brought into great trouble. And
it is said, and (if I mistake not) can be proved, That he was the man that broke
them. Secondly, That he, with his brother Hasted, swore, That a Minister
Preached at Stockbridg, near Chichester, where the Dissenters meet every
Lord's Day; when I dare be bold to affirm, That they were never nearer to the
place, than it is from the Exchange in London, to the Bridge: and so could not
possibly either see, or hear a Minister Preach: Upon which a Conviction was
made. And this they continued to swear, in order to such Convictions for
several Lords-days, till Divine Justice arrested and seized him in the very
same day wherein for a long time he had acted so wickedly and villanously.
Thirdly, Whereas N. T. styles him a Gentleman; he was so far from that, that no
man upon earth can be more infamous, and farther from one. I despise no man for
his poverty; but when deep poverty, and high iniquity meet in one man, it
renders him most infamous and despicable. I know there are many true Gentlemen,
not only by their Birth (whom I always rank among the most inferior of that
kind, when abstracted and separate from what follows) but by their Breeding and
Education, which does truly enoble their minds, by the innate generosity of
their own Spirits. But none of these can be predicated of this Subject, he
being but the sink, the scum, and excrescene, or if I may so speak, the very
Excrement of Humane Nature. By his Employment he was a common Bailiff, before
he was an Informer; and so grand a Rogue in the management thereof, that none
in the Country was thought to equalize him, but his brother (in all Villainy and
iniquity) Hasted: And had not Death prevented, he would e're long have been
made so to appear to the World, he being put into the Crown-Office for many
prodigious Enormities and Rogueries, and would certainly have been prosecuted
for the abovementioned Perjury, when a convenient time should have happened
for it.

I will not undertake to be a bold and infallible Interpreter of Gods
Providence (they being a Deep that the short line of Humane Reason cannot
sound the bottom of, and fathom); yet as we are reasonable Creatures, falling
under the Conduct and Government thereof, so we are bound to observe them, and
keeping within the bounds of modesty, endeavor to pick out the sense and
meaning of them, and to know what they point at. And it is not unworthy of our
observation, That as this Hellish Miscreant, and Mirror of all impiety, had
perjured himself concerning the breaking of Captain Bickleys Glass-Windows, so
his real breaking of the Windows of another person (that never injured or did
him wrong), should prove the occasion of his Death, and that Death should hurry
him into Eternity, and to Judgment, on the Lord's Day, which he so much
profaned, and particularly, by being so much in the Alehouse, when he should
have been in Gods-house; and disturbing those that would serve and worship God,
while he did so much neglect the same. He was unexpectedly driven away that
day, by Death, in his wickedness, and had no time given him to repent. Let
Hasted, his brother, beware, left Divine Vengeance do not speedily overtake
him, and Death suddenly, as a grim and inexorable Sergeant, arrest him, and
irresistibly drag his reluctating wretched guilty Soul before the Tribunal of
Gods severest Justice.

THE Chichester ACCOUNT: OR, A Faithful RELATION of the DEATH of HABIN the
INFORMER there, etc.
THE unhappy Accident which lately fell out in this place, and the more unhappy
improvement that we perceive some virulent Minds and Pens make thereof, puts us
under a necessity thus to publish to the World the naked and impartial Truth of
that whole matter.

About Nine or Ten Weeks since, for the more effectual suppressing of the
Conve^ticles here, two persons were employed as Informers, the one called
Richard Habin, the other Henry Hasted. These persons posted themselves every
Sunday upon a public Road, which leads by the Door of one of the Conventicles,
and took the Names of such as they thought fit that passed upon that Road, and
that were either going to, or coming from the place where the Conventicle was
kept; and afterward did carry their Lists to some Justices, and make Oath, That
such persons were at the Conventicle; and Warrants issued out, by Virtue of
that Conviction, to the Constables, to levy the distress, which accordingly
they have done on many. But our business is not to accuse the Methods of their
Proceedings, tho somewhat extraordinary, and what the Law it self does not
command. We only wish, That persons not so notoriously scandalous, and such as
had been less subject to exceptions, had been employed in this work.

But to keep to our matter: This Trade they continued till Sunday the 6th of
August, on which day Hasted wore a Sword, and drew it on some Boys as they were
going on the Road, struck at them, and cut their Clothes. But upon the Boys
taking up stones, and threatening to stone him, if he sheathed not his Sword
again, he did return his Sword into its Scabbard: At which Habin was so angry,
that he would have had the Sword from Hasted, swearing he would hew the Boys in
pieces with it: but Hasted would not let him have it, tho he, as well as Habin,
were both most miserably drunk with Brandy.

The Boys seeing this savage and barbarous fierceness of Habin, threw some
stones at him, and with one of them hit him, and break his head: Upon which,
Habin entering in at the Gate of the City, next to which Mr. Farington dwells,
upp'd with his stick, and cried out, Farington should pay for all; and with
that saying, struck, and brake his Parlor Window, Mr. Farington and Three other
Gentlemen being in the Room. But Mr. Farington knowing there were many that
sought occasion to ensnare him, and believing this affront was done him on
purpose to provoke him to repay it with some passionate Behavior, would not so
much as open his Window, or wag out of the Room.

Mr. Farington's Coachman being unhappily abroad in the street, and seeing
this abuse to his Masters House, went to Habin, and asked what he mean'd by it?
who answered him only by holding up, and shaking his Cudgel at the Coachman.
Whereupon the Coachman immediately clapped within Habin, struck up his heels,
took away his stick, and with it hit him Four or Five blows over the Pate, and
so left him. After which, Habin rose up, and went away to the Mayor's, and
missing the Mayor, to another Justice, to complain, and then to the Bishop's
Palace; where, it is said, he mended his Draught; and after his Head was
dressed, was carried by the Bishop's Servants, and laid in the Stable, where in
two hours time he either died, or was so dead drunk, that he was taken for
dead. However, he was presently laid on a Bier, carried up to the High Cross,
and from thence to the Town Hall; where a Coroner's Inquest was immediately
impannell'd, and found H^bin Murdered, and the Coachman the Murderer, before
ever (as many do believe) Habin was quite dead.

Nay, It is the universal opinion of this City, That if his Lordships Servants
had not used this poor Wretch more like a Beast than a Man; but had, instead of
lugging him into a cold Stable, laid him in a warm Bed, got him to be let
Blood, and to have had other Remedies applied proper to his Condition, Habin
might, for any Mortal hurt he had, have been alive at this day. But to expose
him in this manner was enough to make him die, whether he would or no. And pray
God all this hasty dispatch was not done with a design to do more mischief by
his Death, than e're they could by his Life. For this is not the first Attempt
that has been made upon the Life and Fortune of Mr. Farington. But to return
to our Relation: The Coachman fled: And whether Habin was dead or no, we are
sure he was buried.

Thus matters continued till the end of the Week, and every man was so
convinced (from the multitude of Witnesses that saw the Fact), That instead of
Murder, all men jugd'd the poor Coachman would have Summum jus to be found
guilty of Manslaughter. For, for a Servant, upon so high a provocation as the
breaking his Masters House, to run up to the doer of the Injury, and in a
passion to snatch away his stick, and lay it Four or Five times over his Ears,
and it happening so that Death does follow; to find such a Servant guilty of so
much as Manslaughter, inclines certainly rather toward severity, than
clemency. But to talk of Murder, is such Nonsense, as you may as well call at
Blasphemy as Murder: for it has no one ingredient of Murder in it. For Murder
must have malice sore-thought: Then a lying in wait, or seeking all occasions
to execute the Malice: and then Weapons or Instruments fit to set home that
Malice to the Death of him to whom it is born. Neither of which can so much as
pretended^y be fastened upon this poor unfortunate Coachman. And yet in the
Proof of this matter, you will see, that not the Coachman only, but his Master
too, was strongly endeavored to be brought in guilty of Murder.

For on Saturday Morning, the Recorder (who had been all this while absent from
the City) returned; and then the Lord Bishop and he, caused Habin's Grave to be
opened, the Coroners Inquest to be new summoned to the Bishops Palace, and to
be new sworn again, super visum Corporis, with a higher aim now, and not so
much to make the Man as the Master the Murderer, for commanding his Man to do
it. In order hereunto, one Cressingham was gotten to swear, That he saw Mr
Faringt^n look ou^ at his Window and bid his Man beat Habin soundly. But the
Jury on inquiry could not find any body that saw Cressingham so much as in the
street where the Fact was committed. Nor could Cressingham name any person that
he saw there, tho the street was full of people, save only one, and he proved
so far from being in the street, that unluckily he did not so much as rise from
his Bed all that day, till after the Fact was done, as both himself, and
several others did testify.

Nay, diverse affirm, That Cressingham was asleep at his Mo^hers House, in
another qu^rte^ of the City, when this unfortunate F^ct was done; (...) that
Cressingham rose not up till it was told him what the ^oach man had done to
Habin. And among the rest, Cressingham's own Mother aver'd to Nine or Ten
substantial pe^^ons, That (...) her Son had sworn he saw the Fact, he was a
(...) R^gue, for that he was asleep at her house till some Neighbors came in,
and told him that Habin was dead; tho some say, That after old Gooddy
Cressingham had been (...) and Dined with the Bishop, she (...) to (...) her
Confession as much as she could. And Cressingham's Mothers House is at utterly
out of sight of any thing done at Mr. Farington's Door, as if it stood in
Cheapside. Wherefore after they had locked up the Inquest in the Bishop's
Palace from Eleven of the Clock till Four, and none permitted to go to them but
whom the Bishop pleased; nay some of the Jury threatened by the Bishop, that if
they did not find Farington Guilty, he would have them before the King and
Council: Yet notwithstanding the Inquest were of opinion to acquit Mr.
Farington, unless Cressingham's Testimony was supported by some other. The
Cause being thus just ready to fall, they desired the Inquest to Adjourn till
Eight of the Clock on Monday, which accordingly they did, and by that time
further Evidence should be gotten.

To have Evidence to get on Saturday night, that must be used on Monday
Morning, one would think requires great dexterity to gain them; and yet that
Night a little Prentice-Boy, of about 13 or 14 years old, was haled away from
his Masters House by two Publicans before the Mayor and the City-Iustices,
where we will not say by what Arts he was made, and made to Swear that he saw
both Mr. Farington and Cressingham too, when Habin was Beat. But of this we are
sure, that when the Boy was called before the Inquest, he better remembered
himself, and did upon his Oath deny that he saw Mr. Farington there, or
Cressingham either; and yet afterward the Boy was prevailed upon to unswear
that; and to swear that he saw Cressingham there, but not Mr. Farington: Some
honest-mindded people bid the Lad as he went by them, to consider what he
Swore, and to be sure to Swear the truth; which made his Mother run up and down
like one mad, raving and crying, My Son shall Swear for the Lord Bishop, My Son
shall Swear for the Lord Bishop; I would not for ten pound but he should Swear
for my Lord bishop: For I have the most part of my Livelihood from my Lord.
Which furious passion in the Woman made People stare and wonder at her, and the
Bishop both; and raised more doubts in men's minds, than it is convenient to
mention. For if English Ears hear any Body to Swear upon such occasions for any
others but for the King and Truth, they straight grow jealous, and fear foul
play.

The Inquest being greatly dissatisfied in their Judgments concerning the
Evidence that Cressingham and the Boy had given, as disagreeing with each
other, and neither of them well agreeing with themselves; and having a Cloud of
other Credible Substantial and Unsuspected Witnesses, that saw all the Action
from first to last, whose Testimony seemed more Concurrent and Agreeable to
Reasons. The Jury like discreet Men, and such as were willing to search every
thing to find out the Truth, Resolved they would go and view the place
themselves where this accident happened; which accordingly they did, and found
that in the place where Cressingham Swore he stood when he saw Mr. Farington
look out at the Window, and commanded his men to bear Habin, it was utterly
impossible for Cressingham or any Man else to see Mr. Farington (or any other)
look out at the Window. So that returning to the Town Hall, (where the Jury
that day sat) fully satisfied, they would not hear any more Witnesses (though
a great many more were present, and offered themselves to Swear), but
immediately gave in their Verdict, wherein every man did acquit Mr. Farington.
It appearing to them by the Oaths of Persons (against whom there was no
exception) that Mr. Farington was so far from commanding his man to beat Habin,
that he was Extremely angry with his man for doing of i^. Thus ended this
matter.

The next day this young Apprentice was taken from his Master, by the Bishop,
into his House; Whether for fear the Boy should blab the Threats and Arts that
have been exercised on him, to draw him to do what he did; or to be better
instructed in the new and modish science now in fashion, they best know that
did it; tho the Boys Mother does give out already, that her Son shall yet Swear
for my Lord Bishop against Mr. Farington for all this: We only can say, that
this we are sure of from several honest Persons, that the Child did nothing but
Cry, and say he was threatened to Swear what he did, till Mr. Farington was
acquitted; and that then he did nothing but leap and express an high passion of
joy for it; and if upon his coming under his Lordships Roof, the Boy assumed
another nature, it is only a proof, that miracles are not ceased.

Cressingham the Witness was formerly a Chorister; but having not honesty
enough to continue in the Office (which generally does not require overmuch)
he was expelled the Quire, and is now so indigent and Infamous, that his Credit
will not pass for Twelve pence; whether he be to be restored on this
performance, or that he is to succeed Habin in the Office of an Informer; Or
that some other way is to be found out to reward his merit in this matter, time
must show.

In the mean while all Wise and Sober Men wonder exceedingly, that my Lord
Bishop would meddle (with such eager and vehement concern) in a Sanguinary
Case, from which by Law that great Dignity is Exempted; and do think that his
Lordship had better consulted the honor of the Church, and his own Reputation
also, if he had showed himself more cool and temperate in this matter. For
though my Lord has a very great kindness for Sir John Farington (Mr.
Farington's Brother) yet to show it so mightily upon such odd occasions, has
done no great Service to his Lordship, nor Sir John neither. For people do
publicly say, That sub dio, or, in the Church Porch whitherto all persons
might freely resort, had been a much more proper place for a Coroners Inquest
to have sat, than under Lock and Key in a Bishops Palace; especially too in
such a Palace where the Bishop and his Predecessors have denied themselves to
be within the Liberty of the City, and refused to pay their Poors Tax;
whereupon many Suits and Differences have arose.

Wherefore upon the whole, we judge all men will see at little reason to lay
this Accident on Mr. Farington, as some Gentlemen had to lay the wounding of
his Lordships Coach horses, on our Dissenters. For the Horses were at Grass
seven Miles distant from this City, and in all probability were Goared by some
of the fatting Cattle among which they fed. For besides, that it is contrary to
the common Charity which Christianity obliges us to have for all men, to
believe so ill of any without some proof: So is it also manifestly opposite to
Reason to credit, that if any man's Rage and Malice should have carried him so
many Miles to have mischiefed his Lordships Horses, that he would not have done
it thoroughly, and killed them on the spot, rather than to have given them such
slight wounds as every silly Smith could Cure; for be it known to the World,
his Lordships Horses are alive again, and as well as ever, and the Persons that
wrought their Cure would think themselves jeered to be called by so much as the
Name of Farriers.

It Is true, there was an Oath about to have been made by a Right Irish
Evidence, That one Mr. Nevill had wounded his Lordships Horses. But just then
hearing that the Gentleman was above Fifty Miles distant from the place, he
held his blow, and we have unluckily missed that able Testimony; yet we are so
far from having that uncharitable thought, that this person had any particular
Malice in his Oath against Mr. Nevill, that we do believe in our Consciences
that for a Guinney more he would have Swore the Morocco Ambassador had done it;
and we do also believe that if he had Sworn so, he had said as much Truth, as
any of those Gentlemen that have published that matter. And so much for the
Horses.

But lest any should think that we speak this in favor of Dissenters, we must
crave leave to say, That we are, and are known to be for the Church of England;
and could heartily wish that Dissenters would leave off Conventicling, and come
to Church; as on the other hand we could also wish that there were less
bitterness in our Pulpits to invite them thither; and that our little dapper
Clergy-Wights would not keep such a Whigling, nor give them so just occasion
from their ill prating and worse living, to keep from thence: For this we may
say for our Dissenters, That abate their fault of not coming to Church, they
are dutiful and peaceable to the Government, and friendly and neighbourly to
their fellow Subjects; and in the general conduct of their Conversation, of
very good Morals.

This is the true and candid Account of this Matter; to all which if you add
the Bishops displeasure against Mr. Farington for Managing the Suits of his
Parish against him, and the Recorders rage for his being chosen a
Parliament Man for this City, and the mighty dearness that is beween both them
and Sir John Farington, and you will be so far from wondering that so
industrious a Venom was laid out against him, that you will rather admire that
any Innocence could preserve him. But God be thanked, to the great joy of this
City, we can apply the Words of the Royal Prophet, The Snare is broken, and he
is delivered.

FINIS.

