THE Duty of a Christian Toward his Neighbor Considered.

IN A SERMON Preached upon Occasion of the Huntingdonshire Feast, AT St.
Swithin's Church, LONDON, The 24th of June, being the Feast of St. J. Baptist.

By CHARLES TRIMNELL, A. M. Prebendary of Norwich, Rector of Brington in
Northamptonshire, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Sunderland.

LONDON, Printed for John Weld, at the Crown between the Temple-Gates in
Fleetstreet. MDCXCVII.

TO MY Honored Friends and Countrymen. Mr. Thomas Newman. Mr. Charles Bainton.
Mr. John Foster. Mr. Robert Purchase. Mr. Anthony Ashton. Mr. John Bromhall.
Stewards of the Huntingdonshire Feast. Gentlemen,
HAving Preached the following Sermon at your Request, To whom our Country owes
so much for the Reviving of an useful Society, out of a Charitable design, I
had no Room left to refuse the making it Public, when you were also pleased to
insist upon that. For if you (for whose Use and Service it was more immediately
designed) received any benefit from it, I cannot be without hopes, but it may
be of some advantage to others; and I have nothing to say against Communicating
what has the least appearance of turning to any serious Account, when I am duly
required to do it: I wish only it had been better prepared to have answered my
own and your design, however, you have it at your desire, such as it is. And
that it may not wholly fail of that success which (from your readiness to bear
an Expense at this time in Love to your Country, and the good Order observed by
you in the discharge of your Office) I am persuaded you wish it; I must entreat
you to join your earnest Prayers for a Blessing upon it, to the Imperfect
Petitions of

Your very Affectionate Countryman, and very Faithful Friend and Servant, C.
Trimnell.

THE Duty of a Christian Toward his Neighbor Considered, etc.
MATTHEW vii. 12. Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, do ye even
so unto them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.


AS we cannot but see in every part of the Christian Religion, the Concern of
God for the good of Mankind, so it must needs be a very comprehensive assurance
of his Fatherly Care, to find his Son justifying so much as he does, upon the
observance of this General Rule, which is here delivered in the words of the
Text: And it being the Foundation, on which the Happiness of Men considered in
any Society does so immediately stand: we shall do well upon the present
Occasion to allow it a place in our Thoughts, both that we may the better
fulfill its design, and also have the more honorable Opinion of that Religion
which does so strongly enforce it; in order to which we are to consider these
following things. 1. The meaning of the words as here given for a Rule. 2. The
Equity of the Rule in them given. 3. The Use and Perfection of it, for our
conduct with one another. 4. The Consequence of its being observed.


1. The meaning of the words as here given for a Rule; and this is commonly
thought to be obvious enough, as what appears upon the first reading of them,
without more ado; and yet taken in gross, and in an unlimited Sense, they seem
to want the clearness and force of a Law, whether we consider them Positively
as they are here delivered, or Negatively, to which the reason of them does
equally hold; that is to say, we ought not always to do to Men, as we have
expected, or might be apt to expect they should do to us, upon changing of
Places, because our Expectations may have been wrong, and we may be inclined to
give way to such still; nor can it be always fit to forbear such treatment of
Men, as we perhaps in like case would be glad to escape, because it might not
be fit that we should, to make these cases plain by an Instance or two.

A Man in Authority cannot be obliged to allow so much liberty to those that are
under him, as he expected when it was his turn to obey, and may be disposed to
do still, unless his Expectations were just, and fit for those to grant, who
had the Government over him; nor ought a Man to forbear punishing another,
barely for being conscious, he should himself in such circumstances desire a
Pardon, unless it was also fit he should have it; so that the Rule does not
purely depend upon Men's particular Wishes and Hopes, but the constant Reason
and Fitness of things; which Reason of things, is to determine the Sense of
these words before we can safely guide our selves by them, as it must do also
the meaning of those, wherein our Neighbors. are recommended to be loved as
our selves, these plainly appearing to be of the same force and extent.

And if it be hereon demanded, to what purpose they serve, it of themselves
they are not a Law, it is easy to answer, That, tho they are not a Rule
without more ado, they are very near to it, and put things not in such a light,
as we shall easily see what is fit to be done, and cannot avoid condemning our
selves, if we do not that which we thus come come to discover we should; nay,
thus far it is directly a Rule that we ought to do that to others, which we
think in like cases they should do to us, and forbear doing that, which we
think likewise they ought to avoid, because otherwise we make one Rule for our
dealing with others, and a different one for their treating of us, which can
never be right, when we stand in need of one another mutal support, and are
all under common subjection, which must needs lay the same Rule upon us, or no
Rule at all; for there is no end of letting every Man in this case be a Law to
another, unless he is willing to be the same Law to himself.

We may indeed have different thoughts of cases, when they are our own, and
when they stand as another's, but we ought to suspect our Judgments, when they
tend to excuse us from that, which we thought it the duty of others to pay, and
we can scarce avoid a plain contradiction, if at or near the same time, we fail
of doing that on one hand, which we expect, as our due on another; and such
cases do often occur, in which cases though we should be mistaken in what we
expect, as belonging in reason to us; yet while we think so, we are to deal so
with others, because we are to do what we think to be fit. Nay, tho we should
only be conscious, that in such cases we desire such advantage from others, if
we are not aware of any reason that forbids such desires, we can have no reason
against gratifying them, when they are in another, but shall have reason to do
it, because it is always reasonable to prevent another's uneasiness, when there
is no reason to hinder us; tho I am apt to think a case will seldom come to
this issue, in as much as we rarely, if ever, allow our selves to desire any
good from another, without thinking at the same time we have reason to do so;
which reason whatsoever it is, is of as much force to oblige us to answer other
Men's Expectations, as it is to warrant our own. From whence we are led to
consider,

2. The Equity of the Rule here given. And we cannot surely make any question
of our being obliged to act as we think others should do, because we do nothing
in discharge of such obligation, but what is fit to be done, our selves being
Judges, and it is not our being concerned can alter the case; a Rule of this
kind must oblige all alike, or not be any direction at all, for who shall say,
who is exempt? And who would not be excused, if it depended on them? Which
would plainly defeat the intent of the Law, and directly oppose that Equity
which is always impartial, and providing as well for one as another, does not
take its measures from any particular, but the common advantage, in which most
will find their Account.

If others took the same freedom as we, could we say they did ill, or at least
that they acted worse than our selves? For their Natural Right is as large, and
if they used it as far, as we could not pretend to restrain them, so we should
not be much the better for our's; what therefore is fit in one case is fit in
another; that is, as much the same as another can be, and that is the most
equal Rule, without all peradventure, which a like consults the good of every
one. Nor is it a less commendation, that it puts Men in such a way of promoting
it, as that they cannot, without affecting to be wilder themselves, be at all
in the dark, or at any great loss how to pursue it, for the Rule is as easy to
apply to our Actions as it is fit to direct them. Which leads us to consider,

3. The Use and Perfection of it, for our conduct with one another. By its Use,
I mean its being always at hand, and pointing plainly to what we should do, and
by its Perfection, its reaching every case in which one Man is concerned with
another: To have a sense of its use, we are to consider that was a Law in it
self never so good, that is, never so fit to be the measure of acting, yet if
it could not be easily applied, it would fall very short of attaining its end;
was it either hard to come by, or to understand when we had it before us, we
should not be much the better for its being well made in other respects; but
this Rule is difficient in neither of these, it is always at hand, and looking
on it, we cannot but see the way we should go.

It is not only easy to ask our selves the question, what we thought we had
reason to look for in any such case, but our thoughts are almost ever upon it,
we are still looking out for what should come to us, and having something to do
with others, in almost all the concerns of our Life we are in every thing that
occurs, laying Schemes to our selves, how we ought to be used, and this being
that which we are to consider, when we come to Act, it is more than easy,
having recourse to a Rule that is so constantly with us, we must be at pains to
avoid it, and can hardly help resolving upon it what we have to do, but shall
find our selves bound by the Laws we prescribe.

Perhaps our Expectations from others in matters of latitude may be too great,
but then we are to consider, that the allowance we shall of our selves be
disposed to make others, will be altogether as straight, which offers a fair
proportion between them, and it will be as easy as safe to take that which
comes nearest to what we expect; and a readier rule we cannot have in such kind
of cases, which have no established one of their own, for be it a matter of
receding from what is our Right, or of showing compassion, it will not be so
easy to see how far we should go, by abstractedly stating the case, or with
respect only to those, for whose immediate sake it is to be done, as if we put
our selves in their place, and think what we should hope at their hands: This
will carry us over many exceptions we should otherwise raise, and set all the
motives of Pity and Peace in their fullness of strength, our Hearts will
tenderly open to let in the whole force of the case, and we shall readily yield
to what its merits require.

In Causes of strict and rigorous Right, this Rule is yet of more immediate
use, as we have a quicker and ^^^arer sense of what is strictly our due; ill
than of what we can only hope to receive from Men's larger measures of acting,
it is easier much to distinguish between Right and Wrong, than it is to say
when Men do as they ought, where we cannot say that these are directly
concerned; and yet even in discerning of these, we see what obscurity Men's
Corruptions will bring upon the plainest Laws that are set to adjust them, nor
can these clouds be any way so quickly dispersed, as by putting our selves in
Expectation of that which other Men demand at our hands; this will help us
through all those distinctions, which our Partiality is apt to invent, and what
is just in it self, will so appear in our Eyes.

Men sometimes think indeed, they have a right to that which is no way their
due, but this is when their thoughts are only on that, and they do not consider
them from whom we expect it, but in the case which we put, they are first
engaged in thinking what they are to pay, and when that ^^s narrowed their
thoughts, there is no danger; that bare turning the Glass, just at that time,
to see what they would look for themselves, should enlarge them too far, where
it is well if they do not suppress their own Expectations as soon as they see
them, turning against them, to be sure, it will not do more than set things in
an indifferent view, and judging between themselves on each side of the case,
will be like judging between two other persons, equally unknown or equally
dear, and set to judge between either of these, we are not so very apt to
mistake.

For it is not so much the difficulties of things, as the prejudices with
which we come to consider them, that make them obscure, when once we are
divested of these, they appear to us for the most part as truly they are, and
our judgment is feldom vvrong, when it is perfectly free: A great instance of
this we have in David's ready condemning himself in another Man's person, as
the Prophet vvisely proposes the Case, whereas had he directly put him to
think of the ill he had done, he would hardly have got so clear a Confession,
some excusing or other might perhaps have crept in, and soft'ned the fault, but
now having passed sentence already, he left himself no way to escape, but is
humbled under the sense of his sin: Of such use is this Rule to Convince as
well as Direct, and we cannot indeed discover Errors, by any thing so well as
that, which is in all our goings, the best light to our paths.

For of that extent and perfection it is, that it reaches every case that can
rise between one Man and another, and on that account does highly deserve the
Character of a Royal Law, as it is called by St. James, though it self comes under
the general Rule of the reason of things, which must ever Regulate those
Desires of ours which are here laid as the ground of this Law; But though for
this reason it is not that last principle, into which the fitness of all our
Actions is duly resolved, yet it always is our more immediate direction, and
stands alone for a Rule where we have no better view of the fitness of things,
so that one way or other by means of this we have always a Guide.

For it takes place as has been already supposed by the way not only in those
cases, which strict Justice decide, but also in those, which common Humanity,
Kindness, Forbearance, or Charity recommend to our care, it likewise extends to
the bearing of Just inconveniences from others, when they do nothing to bring
them upon us, but what we should think our selves obliged to do, if we were in
their place; and this includes the entire mutual commerce of Men, in every
Instance of which there is a particular way of Acting, that, in the opinion of
all when they are free to consider, does most tend to advance their common
design, which every one hopes to meet with, when it comes to his turn, and
which hoping so, he ought therefore to follow, when another receives the
benefit of it.

On this account we need never be at a very great stand, in any Occurrence, how
to proceed, we shall soon be able to answer all our own questions and doubts,
by saying what we think another should do, in the same state of enquiry; and
having no other Law we shall in every case be a Law to our selves, our
Consciences all the while accusing or else excusing one another, and the more
as we see the Effects of following or going against this excellent Rule, which
may well stand for the Law and the Prophets, that is, all that they direct us
to do, one toward another for our mutual Good. Which brings us in the last
place to Consider.

4. The Consequence of its being observed. And was this Rule observed, a happy
change would be made in our Thoughts, Conversations, and Actions, to the ease
of our selves, and the advantage of others, we should in the first place think
fairly one of another, and make in our minds, as kind allowances to whatever
they did as their Actions would bear, preserving for them as great an Esteem as
their Worth did require: For we know that we all expect this off others, and
think it our due, as truly it is, and did we pay it as fully as we always
demand it, we should live at an easier rate with our selves, and with others,
than at present we do; for sure it cannot be a pleasing Reflection to think,
that there is no goodness at all in the World, while we remember at least that
we are a part, and cannot pretend to be above all the rest, or exempt from
those Imputations which we charge on the whole; and yet we hardly think so ill
of our selves, as we often seem to do of the World, for did we do this, we
could never enjoy any peace in our minds which if we help to maintain, by
considering such things, as do with some justness lessen our guilt, having the
same considerations for others, would help us to think much better of them, and
of course to live more easily with them, for an ill opinion of Men robs us of
all the comfort we could hope to have in them, and therefore should be as
little encouraged as ever we could, in love to our selves, nor shall we give
any way to it, if we stand to this Rule.

Much less shall we Speak or Act without any occasion, upon such an opinion,
but shall give Men good words to their face, and speak as well of them, as
their cases will bear, and our duty allow we should never say any thing to the
great disadvantage of others for the pleasure of saying it, nor take delight in
other men's shame, for this we are so far from being willing they should do with
ours, that we hope they will cover our weakness wherever they can. And did we
all set our selves to do this, a great deal of ill will and contention would be
thereby prevented, and our own Reputations preserved more entire: For the
liberty we take of detracting from others, will provoke them to make use of the
same, as no Injuries are more rarely forgiven than those of the Tongue. Whereas
was that inoffensive, there would be less to stand in need of a pardon, as
there would be much less to inflame. The course of Nature would be very quiet
if that was still, which uses to set it on fire, much more if it moved to the
praise of all that fairly deserved it; if our answers were soft and our
language endearing, what Peace would abound in the Earth, and what good will
among Men? especially when we consider that that regard to this Rule which
keeps the door of our lips will carry us yet further than this, and make our
Actions as good as our Words.

We shall not do to others any of those things which we hate, but allow all the
treatment we love, we shall not go beyond or defraud our Brother in any matter,
not caring our selves to be overreached; we shall wrong none in their Bodies,
Estates, or Relations, but leave them as safe as we would have our own, giving
to all, what on any account is their due; we should be exactly true to our
trusts, and serve others as we wish to be served; we should judge rightly
between Man and Man, being called to decide any matter of doubt, and in all
rewards and punishments that belonged to our place, respect only the deserving,
of those over whom we were set, and the end of our Trust.

And was this but once the General practice, what comfort and ease should we
find in the World, and what pleasure in walking up and down in it? with what
security should we enjoy our several Portions, and how much would be added to
them by that? when Judgment runs down like Waters, and Righteousness like a
mighty Stream in the Prophets similitude. It has only the better likeness of a
flood, overturning nothing, but Enriching and Fencing the ground all along as
it goes.

And what is yet more for the praise of our Rule, and those that observe it,
is, that not only justice will be puctually done, but mercy also will freely be
shown, as what Men with reason hope for themselves, when they stand in need of
it, kind Admonitions will be given to those, whose slackness requires them, and
all the mildness be shown in punishing particular Persons, that is not cruel to
more. We shall forewarn others of any danger we see them incurring, and do what
we can to deliver them from it: We shall relieve the poor as far as our own
occasions without extending, will fairly allow, and lend all that Assistance
they lack, and which we have to give.

In this mutual supply of each others wants, none can fall into, or at least
not lie very long in any grievous distress, for God has made sufficient
provision for mankind in general, who cannot therefore suffer much unless from
themselves, which will be so far from happening, if all extend the pity which at
some time they ask, that by every Man's putting his hand to the Plow every
Man's Yoke will be easy, and every Man's Burden be light: there will be no
leading into Captivity, nor will any Complaints be heard in our Streets.

If any should notwithstanding their honest intention to walk by this Rule, yet
fail so much of it, as to incurr punishment for offending against any part of
it, their design to regard it will soon convince them of their having done ill,
upon trying their Actions by it, and make them patiently bear, what their
faults have deserved, without conceiving ill will against those, whose duty it
was to take cognizance of them; so that either there will be no occasion for
the Administrations of justice by way of Correction or Men will be quietly
mended upon them: And thus the words of the Saint of this Day will have another
fullfilling Every Valley will be Exalted, and every Mountain and Hill will be
brought low, the crooked will be made strait, and the rough places plain. Happy
are the people that are in such a case, yea, Blessed are the People who have
this Law for their Guide.

How ought we then to strive for this happy Estate? How should we labor to
partake of this Rest, which is to be had on this side the Grave, through that
effect this practice will have upon the Course of the World? And though it should
not prevail on so many, as to give it self an Universal extent, yet they who
maintain it are sure to avoid that self Condemnation, that cannot be parted
from acting against it, and must always have better grounded, and livelier
hopes of meeting with all that is equal and kind at other Men's hands.

But whither it immediately brings this advantage or no, or how much harder
measure soever we find, than our dealings deserve, we must not alter our
Course, nor learn frowardness from those that are froward; it is a great
instance both of the Wisdom and Goodness of God, that he has given us such Laws
of living together, as make to our present advantage, but we are not therefore
at liberty to set them aside, if we do not find them immediately turn to
account, for it has pleased God to establish them so, as to make it the
interest of all to observe them, under any sort of discouragement here, by
providing a further reward for all that obey them, than can be hoped from the
State of this World, and a greater punishment for those that transgress, than
that can inflict.

And well is it for us that such a Provision is made, without which our own
observation would hardly let us expect, those Blessed Fruits, which yet we
cannot but see would grow on this excellent ground, upon which let us therefore
proceed in whatever we do, and always be ready to pay this debt of our Natures,
that the common stock may be thereby improved to the profit of others, and though
out of this we should not have here the greatest and quickest returns, yet the
measure with which we have meeted, will be made up at the last and our Cup will
be full.

Let this prevail with us to go on in well doing, and abound in good works, of
which in due Season, if we faint not, we shall reap the advantage.

Let us of this Assembly especially (to whom the Place of our Birth does in
somewhat a more peculiar manner seem to assign a common concern) give proof of
our coming together for the Honor of God, and the advancement of all Sociall
virtues, by persuing these ends in all our Communications with Men, let us bind
this Law of our Gracious Redeemer, and Lord of us all, round about our necks,
and write it upon the Table of our Hearts, that it may be the Ornament and
Guard of our lives, and let it be our particular Guide in what relates to the
present Solemnity, that there may be no spots in our feasts of Charity, but
that others may be invited by our Friendly and Christian Conduct to use the
same means of promoting Compassion and Peace, and whatever else belongs to the
part of Brotherly Love.

Let Good will amongst us help to the better agreement of our Country in
General, and our particular kind Combinations add to the Peace of the Church
and strength of the state, so shall no heaviness come at the end of our mirth,
but this Days satisfactions will make way for higher Contentments and carry us
on with the more Pleasure to the fillling up of our Joy, Which God of his
infinite mercy grant for the sake of his Son Christ Jesus, to whom with the
Father in the Unity of the Spirit, be all Glory and Honor now and for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

