THE TRIALS OF THE PRISONERS AT THE Sessions House in the Old Bailey, Which
began there on Wednesday the 6th of this Instant September, and ended on
Thursday the 7th of the same. But more remarkably of the Pewterer, who was
Tried for Killing the Boy in Walbrook. Together with the Bailiffs Trials for
Killing a Man upon an Arrest. As likewise the Account of those Condemned, Burnt
in the Hand, and to be Whipped; with many other Remarkable Passages.
September 6. This Day the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer for London and
Middlesex began in the Old Bailey, where the Proceedings were these sequent.
ANN Parkinson was Indicted for Robbing Sarah Puzny of several pieces of Plate,
a Mantua Gown, pieces of Gold, and a considerable quantity of Silver Coin, all
amounting to upwards of 50 pounds; a great part of which was found in her
Custody, and at such places where she had pawned them; and it being evident
thet she Confessed the Robbery since her Imprisonment, she was found Guilty,
though she pleaded that they were given her to sell by a Woman that owed her
Money.

John Clifford received his Trial for taking a Queen Elizabeth Piece of Gold
out of the Pocket of John Pain, a Person who came to lodge at an Inn, where he
was under-Ostler, which he had disposed of to a Goldsmith for 25 Shillings, at
first he denied it, but afterward said he found it, but that availed him
nothing, for he was found Guilty.

Richard Trebarford upon his Arraignment for stealing a Tankard, laid in the
Indictment at 10 l. pleaded Guilty, he having been an old, Offender, once burnt
in the hand, and once pardoned.

Peter Hodges, and Robert Rogers were Tried for breaking open the House of
Richard Sares at Elm, and taking away Linen and Woollen, wearing Apparel,
Puter, Curtains, and other things of worth, upon which, being pursued on their
way to London, they were overtaken, one with the bundle upon his back, and the
other accompanying him; but being asked what they could say for themselves,
Rogers said that he accidentally overtook the other, not knowing what he had
got, and the other said that what he had, was delivered to him by a strange man
to carry to Brainford, for which he was to have 6 d. but being both trapp'd in
their Tails, they were Convicted of the Felony and Burglary.

Martin Aubery being brought to the Bar, and Arraigned, robbing his Lodgings of
Sheets, Napkins, Curtains and other things, ingeniously confessed the Pact.

Samuel Neve was Tried for stealing a Horse and Mare from two Persons at Beudly
in Glocestershire, which he, together with another Person who is since dead in
Prison, brought to the Black-Lyon Inn in Water-Lane, Fleet Street, and the
Ostler owned the Horse to be his, though upon his Trial he absolutely denied
that he had any thing to do with either of them, but that he traveling for
London, the Person deceased overtook him near Henly, riding on the Mare, and
leading the Horse, where upon he for two Shillings bargained with him to let
him ride to London, but the Jury would not believe his apology, but found him
Guilty.

Jeffrey Coleman was Tried for robbing John Fann of Hornzey on the 12th of
August last, of Iron and Cloth, part of which he confessed, and the whole
being proved to be taken about him, he was found Guilty of the Felony.

Mary Dakins, Alias Wilson, was Tried for having two Husbands, viz. Wilson, and
Hambleton, the former being the prosecutor, and the latter not appearing to
Wilson, as he declared she was first Married, it being about 7 years since, and
that to the latter she had not been Married above a year, but she being asked
what she could say for her self, utterly disowned the latter. Marriage, saying
her Husband prosecuted maliciously on purpose to take away her Life to espouse
one he loved better, and he on the other side produced her Examination, taken
before a Justice of Peace for the County of Middlesex, in which she had
confessed both Marriages, but she utterly denied it; so that the Jury upon
hearing both Parties, brought her in not Guilty.

James Farrel and Robert Hunly were Tried for Murdering one John Price a
Brickmaker at Hammersmith about the middle of the last Month, the nature of the
Fact being this. The two Persons Tried come into a Victualling House, and
called for drink, and afterward a pack of Cards, but the latter was refused
them, whereupon one of them pulled out a pack, and went into the next Room,
where several Persons were drinking, and invited them to play, of which
invitation some accepted of, which number the party killed was one, and after
some time playing, one of the Countrymen told the Prisoner they were Cheats,
and knew the Cards as well as themselves, which so iracitated them, that they
drew their Swords, and made several passes, amongst which one made by Farrel
entered to Inches into the body of Price, of which wound he then and there
instantly died; the Prisoners endeavored to excuse themselves by laying it
upon each other, and pleading no Malice, forethought, but the Fact being
attended with such evil circumstances, the Jury brought them in both Guilty of
Wilful Murder.

Thomas White was Tried for breaking open the dwelling House of one Mr. Hull in
the Parish of St. Clemants Danes, and feloniously taking away Puter, Brass, and
such like Household Goods to a good value, many of them as by Evidence it
appeared, being found in his Custody, or where he had disposed of them, so that
he having little to say for himself, the Jury found him Guilty.

Mr. Poltney pleaded his Pardon, and had it allowed, he having been Tried the
last Sessions for killing one Mr. Howard in St. James's Square, upon which
Trial, the Jury brought it in se defendendo.

Catharine Arnold was Tried for Robbing the House of one Finch her
Brother-in-Law, and in the Indictment things of great value specified, but upon
her Trial only two Puter Porringers being proved to have been found in her
Custody, and those she alleged her Sister in her life time gave her, and she
bringing proof of her reputation, the Jury acquitted her.

Simon Beale was Tried for picking two pockets on Shipboard, one of a
shilling, and the other of one shilling nine pence, but he pleaded he found the
Money upon the Deck, but appearing he had no business on Board, and that being
pursued, he fled; the Jury found him Guilty.

Ann Cross was Tried for stealing So Cony Skins from Andrew Davis on the 16 of
August last, the Evidence swore that the Prisoner coming to the Shop of the
aforesaid Andrew Davis, in his absence ticed a youth that he had entrusted
there to let her come in; which he at first refused, but being tempted with
some Money she gave him, he at last consented, and when she was in it, being the
dusk of the evening, she packed up the skins in a Bag, and carried them away,
several of her Neighbors likewise gave testimony against her, that she was a
naughty Woman, and had enticed Children often to Rob their Parents, but she
utterly denying the Fact, for which she stood Indicted, and there being no
proof but the Youths, and he in all likelihood her Confederate, she was
acquitted.

A Motion was made by Counsel for the King, that one Richard Reynolds Prisoner
in Newgate, for being Active in the late Scotch Rebellion, might not be tried
at this Sessions, it being intended that he shall be sent for Scotland, there
to be tried.

Thomas Gascone was Tried upon two Indictments for stealing Clothes, and other
things of considerable value on the second of July last, several of which were
found about him, but alleged that he bought them, but could nor prove of whom
he bought 'um; so that upon consideration of all the circumstances and positive
evidence, the Jury found him Guilty.

John How being brought to the Bar for stealing a Silver Tankard, and other
things of good worth, upon his being ordered to plead to his Indictment,
pleaded Guilty.

William Cook, and William Chapman, two Lytermen, were tried for stealing as
much silk as came to twenty shillings out of a Bale, which they were stowing in
their Lyter, to which they returned answer that they had no intent to steal it,
but that upon turning the Bale, it dropped out, and that they put it into their
Breeches only to secure it whilst they had done work, intending then to return
it, but it being apparent that they concealed it upon inquiry, they were both
convicted of the Felony.

Mary Aubry was Tried for stealing Silks and other things to a great worth,
which she sold in Long Lane, and other places, and being known a notorious
Shoplift, she was found Guilty.

Ann Iaxson was Tried for robbing a House in St. Dunstans in the East, on the
16 of July last, and feloniously taking away Gowns, Petticoats, pieces of
Plate, Spoons, Porrengers, Sheets, and other things, she being Servant in the
said House, and doing the Robbery in her Masters absence.

A Woman was Indicted for Marrying a second Husband during the Life of her
first, but only the first Marriage appearing on Evidence, and neither Minister
nor Sexton being there to prove the second, although it was alleged to be
contracted at St. Catherines Church by the Tower, she denying any Husband but
he that prosecuted her, she was acquitted.

John Cox being Indicted for stealing a Silver Tankard, valued at 3 pounds,
pleaded Guilty; there also was in the same Indictment one John Lacy, but upon
his pleading that he went away with it unknown to him, under pretense of going
down stairs to have it filled again, the Jury acquitted him.

Ralph Bentum the Pewterer in Walbrook, was tried for killing Andrew Williams a
Joyners Boy, the substance of the Trial as the Evidence deposed, was, that the
Lad in the company of some others came to take away the wood designed for a
Bonfire, on the 29 of May last, and Assaulting those that kept it, Mr. Bentum
came out with a Staff, and endeavored to disperse them, when amongst the rest
he struck this Williams over the head, giving him two wounds, of which he
languished for some time, but his wounds being healed up, he was sent into the
Country, and after that returning to London, fell sick of a malignant Feavour,
of which on the 28 of August he died, several able Physicians and Chyrurgions
were examined, some of which affirmed that the Feavour was occasioned by the
wounds, and others the contrary, each producing the reasons that induced them
to such their belief, when as the Jury going out, upon their return found the
Prisoner guilty of Manslaughter.

Fardinando Hews, Dorothy Watson, and Elizabeth Ways, were Tried for Clipping
of the Lawful and current Coin of England, it appearing upon Evidence that the
latter had often dealt with the Witness (who was a Saltars Man) for broad
Moneys, giving him in Exchange 21 s. and 6 d. of Clipped Money for 20 s. of the
other, but there being but a single evidence, which in case of Treason cannot
attaint any person, they were acquitted.

Thomas Stocdale was Tried and found Guilty for taking a Box of Clothes from a
Boy in the Parish of St. Bartholomew the Great, under pretense of helping him
to carry it, of which Felony he was found Guilty.

Ralph Saunderson was Tried for stealing a Tankard from John Wheatly in
Holbourn, on the 5th of August, for he coming to drink, took his opportunity to
set down a Pewter Tankard, and carry away the Silver one, for which being taken
some time after, he was committed, and on his Trial found Guilty.

Francis Finamo, John Pancas, and Mary his Wife were Indicted for the Murder
of Joseph Fenn, whom for being a Marshals Officer, having arrested him, and he
seemi^g unwilling to go with him, they all fell upon him, and throwing him
down, and bruised him, so that for several weeks he spit blood, and then died,
so that upon the Trial Pancas and his Wife were found Guilty of Manslaughter,
and Finamo Acquitted.

At this Sessions were nine Persons who received Sentence of Death, viz. James
Farrel, Rob. Hurling, Pet. Hodges, Rob. Rogers, Richard Wolley, Tho. Stocdale,
Hester Vareright, Mary Pancus, and Ann Parkason; 10 burnt in the Hand, 4 to be
Whipped. And so ended the Sessions.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis.


