A TRUE ACCOUNT, OF THE Behavior, and Manner of the Execution of six persons
viz. Henry Cornish, and Elizabeth Gaunt, Condemned for High Treason, Richard
Hooker, for Robery on the High Way. Samuel Presby, for Robery Edward Linsey,
for Deserting his Colors. Thomas Crompton, for Murdering Ed(...)g. Who were
Executed on Friday the 23th. of October (...)5.
Henry Cornish, at S^per-Lane End in CHEAPSIDE, Edward Linsey on TOWER HILL,
Richard Hooker, Samuel Presby, Thomas Crompton, Elizabeth Gant at TYBURN: The
said Elizabeth Gaunt Burnt, for High Treason.
IT is observed, that frequent Examples have not been hitherto sufficient to
deter some Persons from committing Crimes, which render them liable to the
severity of Justice; whose heavy stroke puts a Period to their Days with shame
and disgrace, as an Instance of which, more than heretofore has been observed;
I shall recite in the following Pages.

Henry Cornish, a Person well known in the City of London, if not throughout
the whole Kingdom, not weighing his Duty and Allegience to his lawful
Severeign, at a time he was in a Station to serve his Prince: Being brought
upon his Trial, upon an Indictment of High Treason, found against him at the
Sessions House in the Old-Bayly, and there pleading not Guilty; it was proved
by sufficient Evidence, that he was at a Meeting, where diverse Treasonable
Proposals were tendered; and that he was not only conniving, but consenting
thereto; to which, he only producing Evidence to prove his Behavior, etc was
upon full Evidence in that Case found Guilty, and received Sentence as in Case
of High Treason. On Monday the 19th. of this Instant October, 1685. at the
place aforesaid, after which, being reconveyed to the County Goal of Newgate,
he become very sensible of approaching Death; spending the time allowed him, in
order to prepare himself for a future State in Pious Devotions, appearing much
concerned at the misery that had befallen him; confessing that his sins had
provoked the Almighty to suffer him to run into those lawless ways, that had
brought him in the end, to shame and disgrace; and so continued very penitent:
When on Friday the 23th. of October, pursuant to a Warrant signed for his
Execution, he was conveyed by the Sheriffs Officers to a Gibbet set up for that
purpose, between Kings-street and Soper-Lane in Cheapside; and there after the
Repetition of some Prayers, and the like, Executed according to Law.

William Ring, being tried at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly the 19th of
October, upon an Indictment laid against him, for harboring, comforting, and
maintaining Joseph Kelloway, a Rebel and Traitor to his most sacred Majesty,
knowing him so to be; as being one of those actually in the Western Rebellion,
as likewise one Lawrence, another Rebel and Traitor; he knowing him so to be,
which being plainly made out against him, and he making but a slender Excuse or
Defense was found Guilty of the Treaon, according to the Statute in that Case
made and ptovided; after which, being rerconveyed to Newgate, he as the former
became very pensive, considering his Latter End, and acknowledging that he had
been a grievous sinner; yet he hoped God would in the abundance of his mercy,
pardon and forgive him, as he heartily desired to forgive all the World;
entreating such as came to visit him, (during the respit) to pray for him in
their retirements, hoping as he said, that in his last extremity it might
prevail with the Almighty, to support and strengthen him; and further proceeded
to acknowledge that for his sins the punishment he was to undergo had fallen
upon him; and that he desired nothing more, than to bear it with patience: He
was often observed to pray both publicly and privately whilst he was in
Newgate, and to ask Questions as to his eternal state of such as came to visit
him, and continued in a moderate temper, sensible of his offense; But his
Majesty was pleased, out of his Royal Clemency and and Mercy to grant him a
Gracious Reprieve.

Elizabeth Gaunt, being Indicted at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, upon an
Indictment of High Treason on the 19h. Instant, for harboring and comforting
John Burton Outlawed for High Treason, endeavoring to provide for his escape
and flight from Justice; and thereupon putting her self upon God and her
Country, it was proved that she had harbored the said Burton knowing him to be
so Out-lawed; to which she having very little to object, the Juriors upon the
return of their Verdict, brought her in Guilty of the High Treason as laid in
the Indictment, and she according to the Statute in that Case made, and
provided, received Sentence to be Burnt, after which, with a heavy Countenance
returning to Newgate, she as the former became very pensive, seeming much
desirous of Life at first, as it is supposed, flattering her self with hopes of
a Pardon; but finding her offense admitted of no mercy, she seriously reflected
on her Latter End, often lifting her Eyes toward Heaven, and extending her
Arms, desiring the God of infinite mercies to pardon her sins, and blot out all
her transgressions; giving him praise that he had taught her to number her
days, entreating him that she might apply her heart to Wisdom, and was often
observed to retire, as much as the convenience of the place would permit, and
pray to her self continuing that state, till the day according to its
specification in the Warrant came for her Execution: When being conveyed to
Tyburn, the common place of Execution, she was fastened with a Cord to a Post a
midst a Pile of Faggots, which being set on fire after she had been a while
strangled, she was thereby reduced to Ashes.

Edward Linsey, of the Parish of St. Alhallows Barkin, was Indicted the last
Sessions at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey for deserting his Colors; after his
having betaken himself to his Majesty's service, and received three shillings
sixpence Pay, which being proved against him, he was found Guilty, and
Sentenced to dye, when upon his return to Newgate, he for a time seemed
resolute; but perceiving that his offense admitted neither Pardon nor Reprieve
he became somewhat serious, and began to reflect upon his past ill-spent life,
saying, he had been a grievous sinner, and that for his many Enormities, God
had brought him to shame and punishment, which, as he said nevertheless hoped
might redound to his advantage in another life; and so continued a sense of his
condition, both in Newgate and at the place of Execution, which, that it might
deter others from the like disregard and disloyalty; whereupon a Gibbet Erected
on Tower Hill for that purpose, he suffered according to Sentence.

Richard Hooker, being tried and found guilty, for Robing one Arthur Anslow on
the Highway, and taking from him diverse things of value, received Sentence,
and with the rest being rconveyed to Newgate became more than ordinarily
concerned at the near approach of Death, being much desirous to live, asking
diverse that came to visit him, if they thought he should be pardoned; but
finding the day of dissolution at hand without any appearance of such Grace and
Favor; his Crime being of too high a Nature to admit his longer continuance on
Earth; he much bewailed his unhappy State, saying, that bad Company had enticed
and drawn him away by degrees of sin, till he became bold therein; but that God
by this affliction had made him sensible of his Latter End, and that he was but
Dust; therefore he earnestly advised all that heard him, or beheld the sad
Example he was made, in forfeiting his Life to offended Justice, thereby to
take warning, and make it their business to live honestly and not give heed to
temptations of the like nature: He said he was born of honest Parentage, and
had good Education, but that he misemployed it, and through his Obstinacy and
Disobedience, became improsperous in the World who, had he been ruled, might
have lived happy and comfortable.

Thomas Crompton, being tried for Killing one Edward Herring, on the 20th. of
August last upon a Rescue, giving him a mortal Wound, etc. and plain proof
being made out against him, he was found Guilty of wilful murder, and received
Sentence of Death: When returning to Newgate, in order to expect the Execution
of that Sentence; he appeared very much concerned at his misfortune and more
for the Blood he had shed; saying, he had been Guilty of Sabbath-breaking and
Profaneness; for which, he verily believed, that God being highly offended
with him, had suffered him to commit a Crime punishable with Death, yet he
nevertheless hoped for mercy at the hands of his Creator, and that he should be
saved, through the meritorious Death and Passion of his Dear and Compassionate
Savior, desiring the Prayers of his Visitants; that God would strengthen him
patiently to undergo the punishment which for his offense the Law should
inflict upon him, being observed at sundry times to give good heed and
attention to such expressions as were delivered, relating to his Eternal Well
fare, and so continued to the last.

Samuel Presby, being tried upon an Indictment the preceedent Sessions, for
stealing 119 Yards of Cloth value at 36 l. out of the Warehouse of one Mr.
Smith of St. Mary Hill, and upon proof that he had confessed it, was found
Guilty; he received Sentence of Death, having before been Burnt in the Hand: He
in Newgate during the respit, much exclaimed against bad Company, saying, that,
that had been his ruin; especially associating himself with Lewd Women;
desiring all Persons, but more especially the younger sort to shun and avoid
them, least by their means, they were taken in the snare of inevitable ruin and
disgrace: Continuing very penitent, not only in Newgate, but at the place of
Execution.

Catharine Brown of Twitenham, in the County of Middlesex, being tried at the
Old Bailey for Murdering her Bastard Child, on the 4th of this Instant October
and found Guilty, received Sentence as the former; she in Newgate, greatly
lamented her unhappy state, saying, she had been deluded and drawn away to
commit uncleanness, and by retiring to avoid the shame and punishment of that
offense she had fallen into a greater, but was heartily sorry for her
misdoings; looking upon the Sentence she lay under, to be the just reward of
her sins: She said she had been well Educated, and brought up by careful and
indulgent Parents, but being of a rambling Disposition; it was her misfortune
to be overcome with fair Words to yield to lawless Embraces, but hoped God
would forgive her that, and her other folleys; pleased out of his Royal
Clemency and Mercy, to grant to her a Gracious Reprieve.

On the 23th. of October, 1685. Richard Hooker, Elizabeth Gant, Samuel Presby
and Thomas Crompton, were conveyed to Tyburn; and there after praying a while,
and the usual Ceremonies performed, they were Executed according to Sentence.

The rest, whose Names are not herein mentioned, but were Sentenced the last
Sessions, received a Gracious Reprieve.

This may be Printed, R. L. S. October the 23th. 1685
LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, in Black-Horse-Alley, near Fleet-Bridge, 1685.


