A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A Strange and Wonderful RELATION OF ONE John Tonken. OF
PENSANS in CORNWALL, SAID To be Bewitched by some Women; two of which on
Suspicion are committed to Prison. He Vomiting up several Pins, pieces of
Walnut-shels, an Ear of Rye, with a Straw to it half a yard long and Rushes of
the same Length; which are kept to be shown at the next Assizes for the said
County.

This may be Printed, R. P.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball, in Thames Street, near
Baynard's- Castle, 1686.

A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A Strange and Wonderful RELATION OF ONE JOHN TONKEN, OF
PENSANS in CORNWALL.
VEry strange are the delusions of Satan, to get the Souls and Bodies of Men
into his possession; he leaving no ways or means unattempted, to accomplish his
ends: How dreadful then is it for such who give up themselves Voluntarily to do
his druggery, and sell their Souls to Eternal punishment, for a little
Momentany pleasure, or to fulfill their own Lusts here, and such may all those
truly be said to be, who are guilty of Witchcraft, which detestable Sin, God
himself abominates, and has expressed in Holy Writ, Thou shall not suffer a
Witch or Wizard to live in the Land. Of which Number, these two Women Committed
as aforesaid, are supposed to be; as the ensuing Discourse will make out.

One John Tonken, of Pensans, near the Mount in Cornwall, about 15 or 16 Years
of Age, was in April last strangely taken with sudden fits; And on the 4 th. of
May, 1686. as he lay in Bed, there appeared to him a Woman in a blue Jerkin and
Red Petticoat, with Yellow and Green patches, and told him, that he would not
be well before he had brought up Nutshels Pins, and Nails; which the Boy
afterward related to several People that were at his Chamber, though none did
see or hear the Apparition, but himself: soon after the Lad was taken with fits
of striving, or yoaking, insomuch, that two Men could scarce hold him, and
after several fits, he brought up three Pins, and half a Walnut-shell, and in
few days after, he brought up three Walnut-shells, and several Pins, some of
which were Crooked. The Woman very often appeared to him, sometimes in the
shape as before; at other times like a Cat; whereupon the Boy would shreik, and
cry out that he would not see her, laying his hands over his Eyes and Mouth,
and would say with a loud voice, she is putting things into my Mouth, she will
Choke me, she will Poison me. At other times he would say, I will not be
Tempted by thee, and in the Name of Jesus, I defy, thee and all thy works: for
a while he would ly as Dead, and on a sudden he would spring from the Bed,
three or four Foot high, from between two Men that usually sat upon the Bed by
him. At another time he said the Woman told him he had Straws in his Belly, and
in a short time after, he brought up four or five Straws, as also an ear of
Rye, with a Straw to it half a yard long; and for two or three days
Successively he brought up great quantity's of Straws and Rushes, some of them
being a yard long, with broad knots in them: The Pins he brought up were in all
16 or 17 and as many Straws and Rushes as would fill the Pole of a Man's Hat, if
they were thrown in somewhat lose, one without a Head and one turned like a
Fish-Hook, the Woman another time appeared to him and told him he should bring
up Nails, and that as they were insensibly put into him, so he should in like
manner bring them out, and in few Hours after, the Boy cried out he was pricked
in the Heel, the People that were then present, turned the Bedcloaths off, and
found a new threepeny Nail fast to his Heel, and another in the Bed; he also
brought up a piece of dry Bramble, and several pieces of flat Sticks, which put
together, made the form of a Breeting Needle, such as the Fishermen make their
Nets with. Some Persons to be satisfied of the truth of this, came to him, and
put their Fingers into his Mouth to search if he had any Pins or Rushes,
thinking he might put a trick on them, but found none, though some came every
day from him. On the 10 th. of May, was his violent fit, when he hardly had any
Cessation from his pulls or throws for several Hours, he started very much, and
being asked what the Woman had said to him, replied, she told him she would
kill him, if it were in her Power; but he said he hoped God would not permit
her. In one of his Staring fits, a person of Note observing his Eyes to be
fixed in the Thatch of the House, thrust his Sword into the Thatch twice, then
the Boy cried she is gone into the Corner like a Mouse: at that time he brought
up a Pin very rusty, and a little bowed, which was took up and kept. The last
thing that he brought up, was a piece of a Beeting Needle, half an Inch broad,
and an Inch and a half long, with two sharp points like pins, one at each end
which things have caused great Admiration: He would often cry out she had put
Poison into his Mouth, and call upon one Edward Plimrose, who was his Uncle, to
catch her, saying she was going out of the Window. Sometimes he would say to
her, when shall I be well? Make me well I will give thee five Shillings, I Will
give thee five Pound; and then turning his Eyes to the People, would say, she
will not tell me when I shall be well. Another time he said to her tell me your
Name, and where you do dwell? then turning to the People, would say, the Old
Witch will neither tell me her Name, nor where she dwells. The last time, there
appeared to him three Women, whereat he cried out, what a Cofederancy? What you
Old Witch more Confederates, and then she bad him farewell, and said she would
trouble him no more; two days after, the Boy was pretty well again, and goes
abroad with Crutches. Of this, Affidavit has been made before a Justice by
several Persons and they are sent to Lanceston Gaol, for Witchcraft, two Old
Women, one Jane Noal, alias Nickless, and the other Elizabeth, or more commonly
Betty Seeze. We live in hopes they will be found out at the next Assizes, and
so receive a reward due to their Merits. To the truth hereof we have hereunto
set our Hands.

Peter Ienken, Mayor. John Geose, Justice.


FINIS.

