AN APOLOGY FOR THE NON-CONFORMISTS, SHOWING Their Reasons, both for their not
Conforming, and for their Preaching PUBLICLY, though forbidden by LAW. WITH AN
Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon, and his Defense of It. So much as
concerns the Non-Conformists PREACHING.

By John Troughton, Minister of the Gospel.

Gal. 5. v. 15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consumed one of another.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and are to be sold at the Bible and
three Crowns in Cheap Side, 1681.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
THE first part of this Discourse was written last Summer, occasioned by Dr.
Stillingfleet's Sermon: but so many Answers to it came forth, and there was so
much discourse of his Reply long before it appeared, that it was laid aside,
till We might know what further strength the Dr. had to bring into the field,
which when I had considered, I found no reason to alter any thing considerable
of what was writ before, but only to add something in answer to a few things
suggested in the Drs. second Book, which therefore I have made a second Part. I
must beg pardon for some Repetitions, especially in the Historical Parts, the
Drs. Discourse enforcing me to them. I do not meddle with the many Questions
about Church Government and Ceremonies, which the Dr. and his other Opponents
have started; my design is only to show the most plain, and the most generally
prevailing Reasons of the Non-Conformists for their practice in dissenting from
the Liturgy, and in exercising their Ministry though ejected, and this I do
because the Dr. has endeavored to represent Us, especially in the latter of
these, as acting against our own Principles and Consciences, as if we knew it
was Schism, but dare not tell the People so. Therefore I have plainly given our
Sense of things, and shall leave it to the Judgment of the Readers. What the
Dr. has said against our practice I have considered, being unconcerned with
all the rest; and if He please at any time hereafter to give us his Arguments
directly to this Question; which he first proposed, viz. Whether the
Non-Conformists Preaching to their own People, when forcibly cast out; or to
other People that call them in this time of Confusion and Oppression of the
Church be Schism or Sinful? I say if He shall give us his Arguments, which He
may do in a few sheets, they shall be examined with as much impartiallity and
Candor, as He shall please to write them. In the mean time our Adversaries may
here see we have some Reason for what We do, and our Friends may see that we do
not own the Principles of Separation and Confusion.

Farewell,
Part First.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature and end of a Church, with the several sorts of Churches.
THat we may the more distinctly set forth the Persons and causes of our
Dissent and Separation from them, who appropriate to themselves the name of the
Church of England, as well as its revenues and preferments, it will be needful
by way of preparative, briefly to consider, what is the nature and end of the
Church? what the several sorts of Churches be? what Communion we must have with
them? and what Separation from them is Lawful or Unlawful?

First, Then for the nature and end of the Church, It is a sacred Society, or
Commonwealth, whereof Jesus Christ is the Head, King and Governor, united
unto him first, and then to each other, for these two great ends, viz to
Glorify God in him, and that they may be saved from sin and Satan, and at last
glorified with him. I call it a sacred Commonwealth to distinguish it from all
other assemblies, civil, or military, or natural, which may, and often and
signified by the Hebrew, Greek and Latin Names of a Church. The Church is a
society or Commonwealth, i. e. ordered and consisting of governor and
governed, not an accidental, confused Congregation of men: Christ is the head,
King and Governor of this Society; hence it is called his body, and his
fullness; as a People be to their King, Ephesians. 1.24. His Kingdom, his People,
yea his House and Temple, Ephesians. 2.21.22. And he is also called the Head of the
Church, or King, Prince, Lawgiver, Lord, etc. As Union is the bond of all
society, so the Church also is an united policy: the Union of societies is
voluntary consent and agreement among themselves; but whereas men in civil
societies may first unite among themselves, and then choose a common Head or
Governor, and unite with him; this society is made up of singular Members, of
whom each one singly and for himself, does first unite with Christ, his Head
and Governor, by agreement and consent, and then secondly does join with all
those that have, or shall subject themselves to the same Governor: order is
good for ends, and orderly societies do combine for proper ends, to be attained
by such combination; and as those ends are good or bad, so is that Corporation
of men to be adjudged good or evil. The Church is United for sacred and holy
ends, and therefore it is a sacred Commonwealth; the proper ends which this
combination of Christ and his Church respect are, that God may be glorified
through Jesus Christ, viz immediately and directly in acknowledging him,
worshipping and honoring him, seeking his Love, favor and blessing, etc. In
those ways and by those means which he the head and Lawgiver shall prescribe:
natural and civil societies if combined for honest ends, are for the Glory of
God, remotely in lower things, but the Church is immediately concerned in
gloryfiing him, and that not as a Creator only but as a Redeemer also by Jesus
Christ; and as the end of all good society is the good of the community, and of
every person in it, (as far as can be attained) and not of one part only; so
the Church is united to Christ, and every Member to the Church; for their own
spiritual good immediately and directly, viz that they may be every one
everlastingly happy in serving and enjoying him, which must be brought about by
recovering them out of the misery that they are in by sin, which is their
Salvation, and putting them into the possession of the Kingdom of Heaven, which
will be their Glorification: civil and natural societies are for civil and
natural good and advantage; but the Church is a spiritual Commonwealth, for
spiritual ends only; hence it has its name in the New Testament (...), a
company of men called out for some special end, called whence? out of this
world; not out of the place presently, but out of the concerns and designs of
this world; they are not of this World, as I am not of this world; John 17.16.
And to whom are they called? to Jesus Christ as their Head and King, to serve
him and be subject to him, and that not in managing the business and interest
of this world, but in obeying and honoring him immediately in order to the
world to come, leaving the management of worldly things to other societies, or
combinations of men under other Governors and other Laws; The Kingdom of
Christ is not of this World; i. e. as Mediator and Head of the Church; this
Kingdom comes not with observation, but is within us, Luke 17.20, 21. Hence it
follows, that Christ does not, cannot delegate this Power to any other, neither
in whole, nor in part; and who shall presume without his appointment to usurp
h^s dominion? he call's the Church to himself immediately, and not to men, and
they give themselves immiedately to him and not to deputies, they first gave
themselves to the hLord, and unto us by the will of God; 2 Cor. 8. ver. 5. And
as Christ is the only Head of the Church, so he only gives Laws to it, whereby
it shall be governed, and by his Spirit procures and maintains love, and
obedience to himself, and to his Laws. It follows also that all other
Governments and their Laws, with the designs and ends of them, are extrinsecal
to the Church, as such, and must not intermeddle in the spiritual peculiar ends
and government thereof: they may join their persons to the Church, by giving up
themselves to Christ, the King thereof, for the Spiritual ends of his Kingdom,
but they may not mix, or interweave the interest and ends of their Kingdoms or
governments, with those of Christ's in his Church; for so it would become a
Kingdom of this world, and the concerns of this world would greatly hinder, if
not swallow up those of the World to come, which the Church is designed for.
Moreover the Church consists of Members called indifferently out of all
Nations, Kindreds, Sexes, Ages, diversities of worldly interests, through the
succession of all Generations from the beginning to the end of the World,
whereof one part is in Heaven already, the Church of the first born which are
written in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. (for they yet wait for the coming up of their
Brethren, till when, they do not receive the complete benefit of their
association, and union to Christ, and each other) the other part is yet on
Earth pursuing the same general design of their Commonwealth, the Glory of
their King and their own Happiness; yea among these, some are yet Infaunts and
Children, capable only of the immediate influence government, and protection of
their Heavenly King without being able to do any thing for themselves; and
others there are yet unborn, who, though they are not actual Members of this
society, yet are known to the King of it, and their names contained in his
Role, and he will not reckon his Kingdom complete, or the ends of it
accomplished, till these also are brought into it, even to the last man: ( John
10.16.) what then are the Intrests and designs of this world? or the Princes of
this world? or the Laws, Methods and Instruments by which they pursue those
designs, to this Kingdom of Christ? they are diverse in every age; this is one
throughout all ages they are contrary to; and do subvert each other, and one
succeeds another; this is one uniform, most consistant government; they are
temporary but for the present, for the short lives of Governors, or for the
uncertain continuance of their Families, and then they pass to others, perhaps
their enemies; but the dominion of Christ is an everlasting dominion, and his
Kingdom an overlasting Kingdom; Dan. 2.24.

Thus we have the true definition of the Church of Christ, which is but one in
Heaven and Earth, dispersed throughout all Countries, and Ages, from the
beginning to the end of the world, Ruled by his Laws contained in the
Scripture, influenced by his Spirit according to those Laws, and protected by
his power against all their enemies: to this we must reduce all Discourses and
Notions of a Church, and examine them by it, as by the first truth in that
kind, the Rule and standard of the rest.

We are next to consider the distributions, or several sorts of Churches.

And First, the Church is distinguished into Triumphant and Militant, as a
whole into integral parts; the Church Triumphant is that part of the Church of
Christ which is already in Heaven, having got the victory over sin and Satan,
yet not fully Triumphant, because it waits for deliverance from Death, or the
Redemption of the Body; the Church Militant is that other part which is yet on
Earth contesting with all her Spiritual Enemies; both these make up the
Catholic Church, which we profess in the Creed, and is immediately subject to
Christ, and immediately governed by his Word and Spirit, and all the Members of
it as Members of this Church are equal, none having authority over others,
being all equally and immediately united to Christ, and guided by him to the
proper ends of this Society.

Secondly, The Church Militant is Universal or Catholic on earth, sc. all the
Christian Members of the Catholic Church, that live on Earth, dispersed
through all Countries, mixed with all societies of Civil Government; with whom
also are mixed many persons, who profess Christ, but are not really united to
him by consent, and real subjection of the heart, and therefore are not living
Members of the Church, but accidental accessions to it; as Foreigners that
live in any state or Commonwealth, in some general things conformable to their
Laws, seem to be Members of that Society, but indeed have their Relation and
Union to another: Or else this Church is particular, as it is distributed into
several lesser societies, for their convenience and edification; now these are
not distinct Churches, but distinct Considerations of the Church on Earth,
either as collectively considered, as one Company united by the same Bond to
Christ the Governor of all, though divided and dispersed in place; or
distributively in respect of place only, being divided into several lesser
Companies; these also thus considered, have all an equal Relation to Christ,
as their Governor; to his Law, as their Rule: to his Spirit, as there Internal
Living Guide; and to each other, as Brethren without any authority over each
other.

Thirdly, These particular Churches, if they be considered only in respect of
place and vicinity, may be, and are by some, distinguished into National, viz
all the Christians that live in one Nation, or under one constitution, or form
of civil government; or provincial, viz the Christians that live in one
Province or County; or City Churches, those that live in one City or Parish
Churches, viz the Christians that live in a lesser Neighborhood: yea thus
Churches may be distinguished or divided into as many sorts as there be
societies of men, any way divided or distinguished from each other: but all
these divisions are but accidental, and extrinsecall differences of the
several parts of the same Church, thus divided into diverse lesser parts, which
are all equally Churches, and that upon no other account then their Relation to
Christ, and to the universal Commonwealth to which he is Head. From hence we
infer 3 things.

1. All particular Churches being but integral, homogenious or equal parts of
the Catholic Church, they have all an equal intrinsecal power of forming
themselves into Congregations or lesser bodies, for their own spiritual
edification, according to the Laws which Christ has prescribed to that
purpose; for being all Brethren, equally and immediately related to Christ, and
the division betwixt them being merely accidental and external, (from the place
of their dwelling, or other circumstances,) they must all have an equal right
to all the ordinances and privileges of a Church, and equal authority to
dispose of themselves for their own good.

2. That the only end of Christians combining into several lesser societies is,
that they may serve Christ together, and help each other in their Spiritual
concerns; for they are a spiritual Commonwealth associated for Spiritual ends
only, when they are considered as one body under Christ; therefore if they
divide themselves into lesser bodies, it must be only that they may more easily
and conveniently attain the ends of the Whole Body, and general Association.

3. And that the designs of civil governors, Laws and interest, with the
conveniances of civil bodies, greater or smaller, ought to have no influence or
concern upon the constitution of these particular Churches; for if they imbody
themselves in lesser companies, only to serve Christ, and edify each other with
the best advantage to their Souls, then they are still in such incorporating
only to respect the honor of Christ, their own edification, and the best
execution of Christ's Laws among them, leaving other governors to prosecute the
ends of their Laws and Government, in ways proper to themselves and distinct
from theirs; and therefore if civil Governors model these Churches in
subserviency to their civil ends, they do really alter the nature of Churches,
and take them out of their immediate subordination to Christ, and his Spiritual
Government; or else they make Christ and his Government and Commonwealth
subservient to theirs, and the concerns of Men's Souls, to be not other ways
regarded then as they may promote worldly and temporary designs.

But further, that part of the Church which is on earth, being absent from
their King and Lord, and in a state of imperfection, has therefore need of
guides and helps, that it may understand the Law of Christ, and yield obedience
to it; though all are equally Members of Christ, yet all are not able to guide
and help themselves; from whence arises the necessity of Guides and Governors
in the Church; whence it is called an Organical Church, as a body consisting of
different organs, for different uses; thus the Church is made up of governors
and governed; but it is still the same Church under the same Head Christ, and
his word as its Law; only the interpretation and application of this Law of
Christ, is committed to some for the better edification of all, viz the
preserving and perfecting those that are present Members, and the continuing of
the Church by bringing in more that shall be saved, Church Governors therefore
are in no wise supreme, Christ being still the immediate head, both of power
and influence, both to make Laws and to make them effectual upon the hearts of
men; they are appointed only to expound and apply Christ's Laws for the good of
his People, for his Glory only, and to leave both the success and the account
to Christ of themselves and of the people.

Hence arises a Fourth Division of the Church, in respect of the Government
and order of it, into Ecumenical, National, Provincial, Diocesan, Classical,
Parochial or Congregational, but all these and each one alike, are taken in a
double sense, singularly or collectively; singularly for one individual Church
or Body under one Government, whether of one or more persons, and thus the
Ecumenical or Universal Church on Earth, must be but one great body of
Christians associated with the same Governors, for the edification of each
other; as Israel of old being one Family, multiplied into a People, and these
gathered into a great Assembly at Mount Sinai, was there framed into one
spiritual society, under the Guidance and Government of the Tribe of Levi, so
that when they were afterward dispersed over all Canaan, they were yet but one
polity, and accordingly thrice a year at least, all met to worship God
together, to testify their Unity, this the Pope claims, viz, that the whole
Church is one Congregation committed to him, as the only Pastor or Head of
all. In like manner a National Church thus singularly understood, is all the
Christians of that Nation making up but one Congregation and Polity, all
immediately under the same Governor.

Also the Provincial Church is all the Christians of one Province: the Diocesan
of one Diocese, or small circuit; and the Parochial or Congregational, the
Christians of one small Neighborhood, or that without respect of
Neighborhood, voluntarily gather into one small Assembly under the same
Guides or Governors respectively. The Church collectively taken; if
Ecumenical is the association of all Churches in all Nations under one general
Head and Government; the National Church is made by the Union of all the
Churches of several lesser Divisions, under the general National Officers; the
Diocesan is all the Churches of a Diocese or smaller circuit, as the Provincial
is those of a larger circuit, under one Common Head or Bishop. A Classis is the
same thing with a Diocese, saving that by common use the Diocese is
appropriated to one Head or Bishop, and a Classis to those Churches that are
governed by the common Consent and Council of the Ministers of the several
Congregations. And a Parochial or Congregationall Church is a society of so
many Christians, as living in one Neighborhood, or in some convenient
nearness may ordinarily meet together for the worship of God and all other
offices of a Church.

Here we must observe, that if the Church be taken for one individual
Congregation, immediately under the same Governors, then.

1. The Ecumenical Church was never instituted by Christ, he never gathered
them into one Congregation, as he did Israel, nor ever appointed one Governor
or College of Governors over them. For seeing the Church was to be called,
and gathered out of all Nations, and that successively, some at one time and in
one place, and some at another, one College of Governors (much less one
single person) could not take charge of it, to teach it or rule it; nor could
Christians so dispersed perform the duty of Fellow Members to each other.

2. Nor did Christ ever constitute a National or Provincial Church; Henever
called a Nation or Province at one time to the Profession of his Gospel, nor
can one person or society of Governors teach such a body, or administer the
Sacraments to them, or know their cases; nor can the people know and help one
another, or come to their Governors upon every necessary occasion, especially
not in times of persecution, which for the most part has been the lot of the
Christian Church; and should such a thing be necessary our Bondage would be
greater, and means of edification much less, then they were to the Jews, who
were confined to a little country, and were an entire people among themselves,
and all tied to each other by the Bonds of nature, as one great Family
descending naturally from one man and woman.

3. Nor did Christ institute Diocesan Churches, viz, that all the Christians in
some considerable circuit (less then a Nation or great province,) should be one
Congregation, ruled by one or more Governors immediately. There were no such
companies or associations of men called, converted, or formed into Churches, by
Christ and his Apostles; but the first Believers were scattered and independent
persons, called as God pleased; besides such a flock cannot ordinarily meet
together, know and help each other, or repair to their Governors, or be
acquainted with them as they ought; nor can the Governors know, teach and feed
them, and when we have once exceeded the bounds of a regular assembly, to make
up one Church of many Towns, of a whole County, or more, we may by the same
reason extend it without end, to a whole Province, a whole Nation, or Empire;
and so make the duties of Pastors and People impossible; and the ends of the
Church impossible to be attained, which is contrary to the nature of it.

4. A Parochial or Congregational Church, is the only Organical Church;
directly and immediately appointed by our Lord Jesus Christ. For thus the
Apostles collected the Believers in every City and place where they had
preached, into one Church or Society, ordaining them Elders in every Church;
Acts 14. ver. 23. If these Churches were companies of Believers in several
Cities and Towns, as the History in the 13 and 14 Chap. shows, and the Apostles
ordained them Elders in every Church, then they did constitute them several
Congregations, and no common Governors over them all; nor have we any command
to do so, when the Churches should be increased into multitudes of Members. It
must be remembered that the whole Church in Heaven and Earth is one
Commonwealth, because of its Union to Christ, and the same general end of that
Union; in like manner every particular Church being but a part of the whole,
must unite only to attain the special ends of the whole Church, with more ease
and convenience, and therefore they must be no more then the same Governors
may exercise a true pastoral care over, and as may perform the Offices of
Brethren ordinarily to each other; and also may assemble together in one place
ordinarily for the worship of God, and their mutual edification. To what
purpose is the name of a Church, or Society, to serve Christ together, and
edify each other, when the persons are so numerous, or so distant that they
cannot possibly perform these offices? such combinations are useless, yea
burdens and snares. Even our opposites confess this, viz, that the first
Churches, and those for 200 years after Christ at least, were but several
Congregations, which when the number of Christians were multiplied, they say
were called Diocesses; be it so, yet what warrant had they to keep the
Christians of one city or place to one Congregation, and one Pastor personal
or collective, when the number was so increased, that the ends of that society
could not be attained? it is the best construction we can make of the
proceedings of those ancient Churches in this ease, that out of desire to keep
up the unity of those Congregations which the Apostles planted in great Cities,
they still obliged all that were afterward converted in those Cities, to be
Members of the same Congregation, and then the converts in the Villages about;
And lastly, all the Christians that were within the civil jurisdiction of those
Cities, whether it was lesser or greater, provinces or whole Countries, till
they made government impossible to themselves, and to the edification of the
People, and made way at last for Primates, Patriarks and the Pope, and turned
the spiritual government of Christ by his Ministers and Word into a civil
government of their own, maintaining what they had gotten by their own Cannons,
and the Laws of Princes; and why must we not take warning by them? now if the
Churches appointed by Christ are only the Congregations of such Christians that
can ordinarily meet together, and with their Pastors, for the proper ends of a
Church, it follows that they must judge for themselves, what Congregation, and
how large or small is for their own edification; it is their own choice and
consent that makes them Members of the Catholic Church, and this Congregation
is but a part of that, to prosecute the same ends, therefore it is their
business and concern to frame their own society; also these Congregations have
the sole right of choosing their own Pastors, admitting their own Members, and
altogether of governing themselves; else they have not the power of a Church,
but are a company of Christians subject by right or wrong to those that
exercise this power over and amongst them; it also follows, that Congregations
cannot be justly compelled to combine or unite into larger associations, (as
Diocesses, Provinces, Nations, or the like) for the ends of civil governors;
for this alters the nature and design of a Church, and is a great dishonor to
Christ, that he must not Reign among his people but as men please; but if
several Congregations do associate for mutual help and strength, into smaller
or greater Congregations (as Classes, Diocesses, Provinces, or even all that
are of one Nation) yet they must unite, but as formerly the Cities of Achajah,
or at present the United Netherlands for great and common cases, and for
general defense, leaving the self preserving and governing power entire to
every Congregation, and they also are to be judges, how far it is for the good
and edification of the Church to enlarge or contract such associations, how
long to continue them, and when to break them off; for those associated
assemblies govern only by assent, and have not other authority over particular
Congregations farther then as they approve of it; we may illustrate this by the
civil governments of the world. There was at first but one Family, and but a
small one, all mankind was made of one blood, to dwell on all the face of the
Earth; Acts 17. ver. 26. was there any obligation when they were multiplied,
that they should still continue in one Family: or was it consistent with the
ends of Family Government? other Families had the same entire authority within
themselves, as the first had, and authority to sever themselves from the first,
when that was too numerous, and they a sufficient number to make distinct
families: again when families were multiplied, were they obliged to live all in
one Country? and to continue in one civil society? what then must have become
of all the other parts of the earth, which they were commanded to replenish and
possess; Genesis 1.28. Surely one company or a certain number of Families, had
full authority to remove and plant Colonies where they pleased, as well as
another; yea we see God compelled them to it by confounding their Languages at
Babel; and farther, when one colonie removed into another Country, were they
bound still to adhere to those they departed from, as a part of their society:
if so then all Nations must still have been parts of that society, from which
they first descended, and so at length the whole world must have been but one
Commonwealth, under one Government, which was impossible and would overthrow
all the ends of government; if then the race of mankind, which are one body in
some sense more then the Church is, viz, linked by the indissoluble Bond of
Nature, (whereas the Church is united by free consent,) I say if they having
the general gift of the earth and all that is in it to possess, have free
liberty and authority to share the world amongst them, to constitute various
societies greater or smaller as they please, for the end of civil Life,
(provided they wrong not one another, and so hinder the ends of civil
government,) why may not the Church, though it is one body, as united to
Christ, it being too great to live in one society, multiply it self into so
many, as are for it is own edification, and the ends it was made for? and not be
obliged still to adhere as parts, to those first Congregations that were
planted in every country, as it were the first Families, till they are a
burden to themselves, till their very society makes them a disorderly confused
multitude, and their government degenerates into Anarchy, especially when we
have neither command or Scripture example to the contrary?

By this we may Answer the Dr's Question, viz, What necessity there is to
reduce Churches to several Parishes or Congregations, any more then to reduce
Kingdoms to the several Families of which they were at first made up?

Answ. Because Congregations have an original right of governing and preserving
themselves, even as Families have a natural and unalterable right of government
within themselves, which he that takes from them, makes them slaves and
deprives them of their Birthright; he himself says upon the dissolution of
the Roman Empire, the Nations that before composed it, resumed their ancient
rights, and formed themselves into several Kingdoms and Commonwealths, yea and
as he would have it into National Churches also: grant this; have Nations such
an immutable right to their civil liberties and government, that they may
lawfully resume them, when they have opportunity without the guilt of
Rebellion? why then may not Parishes resume their right of government within
themselves, for their own edification, when they have opportunity or necessity
calls them to it? also wanting the benefit of protection and government from
them that undertake them? why should this be Schism in them, more then
Rebellion in the other? and that self Government is the right of every Parish
or Congregation, he confesses, when he says that anciently a Church and
Diocese was all one, under one Bishop and a company of Presbyters, for those
did officiate in common among the whole people, and when by reason of Multitude
they began to divide them into several companies for meeting together at the
ordinary times of worship, nevertheless they all met together at the same
Sacrament, and all made use of the same Ministers as occasion served, they
being not tied to any one, or any one to them, so that this Diocese was but a
great Parish or Congregation, and if the original right of Government were in
these, it is so still in our lesser Congregations, and to resume this right is
no sinful separation: nevertheless we deny not, but the Congregations may and
ought to unite for their mutual help and defense, especially in times of peace;
even as civil states combine for mutual defense and commerce; but then this
must be voluntary, and not to impose a yoke on the several Congregations, by
taking away their several liberties, or bringing them all to the same Liturgies
or Ceremonies, for this is all one as if confederate Nations or States, must
therefore oblige each other to the same form of Government, and the same rights
and customs of living; and why may not all the Parishes in one County with us,
combine for their mutual help and edification, in certain times of meeting
each other, by their Ministers or Delegates, yet every one reserving to
themselves the Government of themselves in their own customs and usages,
according as they find most meet for themselves? as well as the same County
have their Quarter Sessions for civil Affairs, wherein the Governors and
Country concerned have a general meeting, and yet every Town has its own
supreme Officers with several rites and custom, without any Breach of Peace or
Good Neighborhood among them?

CHAP. II. Of Church Communion, and the Nature of Separation.
WE are in the next place to consider, what Communion the Church is obliged to,
betwixt the several parts of it? and what Separation is contrary to that
Communion? and what is not?

For the First; The Church is a sacred Commonwealth united to Christ, now the
end of every Commonwealth or Polity is common good that they all promote the
good and welfare of that Body, and every Member of it, of which they are parts,
viz, that particular good in those particular cases, and things for which they
did combine together: this is meant by Communion: for hereby all the actions
and designs of that body are common, i. e. for the good of all: the Communion
then of the Church which is associated only for spiritual ends, consists in
this, that all design and endeavor the common good and welfare of all
Christians in general, and of themselves in particular, in furthering the
Salvation of their Souls, the service of Christ, in the use of those helps or
means which Christ has appointed to these ends: this Communion has diverse
degrees and does exercise it self several ways, according to the several
considerations of the Church, and the Relations Christians have to each other,
more General or Remote, or more particular and near:

The Communion therefore of the Catholic Church in Heaven and Earth is, that
they all hold the same Head Jesus Christ, and own each other as Brethren in
him, that they love each other, and all pursue and wait for that universal
perfection which they shall all have when they are all gathered to Christ at
the last day: This Communion cannot be broken without renouncing the Head, and
his Religion, and love to each other, which are the Rule and Bonds of this
Union; and therefore there can be no Separation from the Catholic Church but
what is not only sinful but damnable; as he that renounceth the common bonds
of humane society, (justice, love and all moral honesty,) and only pleases
himself, without regarding the good of any other, he does hereby break the
Communion of mankind, and becomes unfit to live among them: the two great parts
of the Catholic Church, that in Heaven and this on Earth, have a Communion, in
that they are both United to Christ; both worship and serve him, in those
particular ways that are proper for the state they are in; and both wait for
that complete Salvation, which they shall have at their general meeting:
besides this, we know of no Communion betwixt them, viz, that either part can
be serviceable to each other at present, only we that live on earth enjoy the
benefit of the Prayers and Examples, which they left us who are now in Heaven,
and of their endeavors to continue the Gospel to us; and so we succeed them in
the same offices, and endeavor to transmit the Knowledge of Christ, his Gospel
and Ordinances to those that shall succeed us, nor can here be any Separation
of one of these parts from another, without breaking of Christian Religion,
which is impossible to them that are in Heaven, and if any on earth thus
separate it is to their own damnation: The Catholic Militant Church on Earth
has a Communion in some more particulars; for besides their common
acknowledgement of Christ, and his Gospel, and the common love they are to bear
to all Christians on earth, as their Brethren; they are to perform all offices
of love, which in this their imperfect militant state, they are able and may
need from one another; such as to pray for all, to rejoice in each others
welfare, to sympathize in each others afflictions, to assist by council,
charitable relief, hospitallity, etc. and when ever there is occasion, to
receive each other to their worship, as brethren, leaving to every one the
liberty of their particular rites or opinions; and this is so indispensable a
duty, that no Separation can be lawful or tolerable, in those who separate
from the Catholic Church, who relinquish the profession of Christ, or cast of
all love to their Brethren, or that will not join with them in the worship of
God, or concern themselves in their common concerns:

Now for Organized Churches, that are associated for the exercise of their
Religion and their edification under Government o Pastors and Guides, their
Communion must be, that the Members of every such Church join with each other
ordinarily and peaceably in the same Acts of Worship, and perform all offices
of love to each other in some tolerable measure; that they be subject to their
Governors, and that their Governors do conscionably endeavor the edification
of the people committed to their charge, according to the Laws of Christ which
are the general rules of these societies, and according to any other particular
rules which they shall agree on amongst themselves, for their own edification,
as Circumstances may require; and so that both parts, Governors and Governed
do jointly promote the edification of the whole Body in Holiness and Peace:
Separation therefore from these Organized Churches is a Breach of this
Political Communion, and Order among themselves; which is done either by
breaking off from the Body to which they belonged as Members, (which is
Separation properly so called,) or by disturbing the Communion of it, or
withdrawing from some parts or acts of that Communion, though they do not
wholly break off from the body: such Separation is in many cases Lawful, in
some necessary, and a duty, and therefore must not be Universally Condemned,
but the causes of it be inquired into: For though all Christians must be
Members of Christ, and of the Catholic Church under him, for the general ends
of their Salvation; it does not appear yet that they must be Members of the
same Organized Society, or that they may not upon just occasions leave those
societies they were joined with, and go to others already in being, or
constitute new ones for their own edification; even as in civil government, men
may not only compose diverse Polities or Commonwealths, but may also make new
confederacies, or divide their Polities into lesser, and particular persons may
depart from them to others, or constitute new ones, yea may deny their
concurrence with many things done in the society they join with, and all this
without the Crime of Sedition or defection, till the causes and ends of such
practice prove it so.

Now to descend to the particular forms of Organized Churches: by what has
been said we may easily judge of their Communion, and Separation from them:

And First, For the Oecumenicall Church, the Political Communion thereof must
be, that all Christians in the World be subject to the same Governors under
Christ, and live as Members of the same individual society, either as a single
Congregation, or as of many united into one: Separation from this Communion
must therefore be either to interrupt the peace and order of this Communion, or
wholly to forbear joining with them; but such a Catholic unity of the Church
under one Government being impracticable, and inconsistent with the edification
of the Church, since it is enlarged and dispersed throughout the world, it is
needless to dispute about Communion with it, or Separation from it:

All other Churches that exceed the bounds of a single Congregation, and must
be constituted of many, are of the same nature with the Oecumenicall Church,
though not of the same latitude, as to the matter of Communion; which must
therefore consist in the performance of all offices mutually betwixt Governors
and Governed, as Members of the same society, whether it consists of several
Nations, as Patriarchial Churches, or of the people of one Nation, as National
Churches, or of the people of one Province, one Diocese, or Classis, as
Provincial Diocesan, or Classical Churches: Separation here must be either a
disturbing of the peace and order of these Churches, or a withdrawing from them
as to the political duties due to them; such Separation must often be lawful
and warrantable, seeing no command of Christ's binds men to particular Provinces
or Diocesses, nor always to continue in the same.

Finally, The Communion of a Parish or Congregation consists in this, that
Pastors and People mutually perform their respective duties to each other, and
amongst themselves for their daily edification: Separation from such
Congregations is either to interrupt their Government or Concord, or to
withdraw from them: now seeing no man is immutably bound to one Congregation,
nor any Congregation to one Diocese, or any larger combination, and all these
Churches are subject to corruptions, which the Members must oppose and contend
against, separation from them must not be censured till it be known whether the
cause be just or unjust.

And thus we are come at the last to enquire, What are just causes of
Separation? whereby we may judge also what are not. And that we may not speak
too generally and confusedly, we distinguish betwixt Separation of one Church
from another, and of particular Members from that Church whereto they did
belong. As all Churches are bound to Communion among themselves, being all
Members of the Catholic Church of Christ, though gathered into smaller bodies
for their own convenience; and this Communion consists in acknowledging each
other as Brethren, in performing brotherly offices of Love and Kindness, and
especially in admitting each other to their worship upon occasions; so
Sepetation betwixt Churches is a Breach of this Communion, when one Church
disowneth another to be a Church of Christ, excludes them from her Ordinances,
and from all Offices of Christian Love: This is just when it is upon great and
just causes, (such whereupon we refuse Communion with the Papists and
Socinians) if upon lighter causes it is Unlawful, and a great breach of
Charity, yet not to be aggravated as an unpardonable sin, or as that which
deserves more animadversion then those sins which destroy all Religion and
Humane Society, seeing men may be good Christians in Doctrine and practice,
good Subjects and good Neighbors, though they conceived such a mistaken
opinion concerning another Church: but this is not the Separation I shall
insist on; the causes that make this just, will make the other just also; but
all the causes that make Separation from a particular Congregation just, will
not reach our Comunion with other Churches, or concern our Separation from them.

We shall therefore enquire, for what causes Members of a Church may Lawfully
separate from it, i. e. contend for the reformation of the Church, and if they
cannot attain it, withdraw from, and either join to other Churches, or make new
ones themselves? And to clear this point, let us always Remember, that the
Church is a Commonwealth United to Christ as the Head First, and but
secondarily to each other; Faith and Obedience to God in Christ, with the
Salvation of their own Souls, is the end why men become Christians, and give up
themselves to Christ; and next they give up themselves to the Church, as a
Society that profess to design the same end, and to have given up themselves to
the same Lord, and therefore they hope, and intend by the Friendship of this
Church to be assisted and furthered toward the attaining of their great ends;
if therefore the Church prove otherwise i. e. to be no help but an hindrance to
their serving of Christ, and furthering their Salvation, Separation from it, is
not contrary to their Obligation as Christians, they are still Members of
Christ, yea may and ought to seek another Society, wherein they may attain
those great ends; it is true men are bound to bear with many things amiss in a
Church, because there will be always some things amiss in one kind or other;
and also for public peace, least by unseasonable reforming some lesser things
amiss, or withdrawing from the Church, while there is any reasonable hope of
amendment, they should make things worse; yet when they cannot worship Christ
aright, or can have no tolerable edification in the Church, the end of the
Church Society is destroyed, and Separation from it become necessary; and the
peace of a Church is subordinate to the great end of a Church, viz, that
Religion may be preserved and promoted among them; but when this is not
intended, but betrayed, peace then is no duty but a conspiracy against Christ,
and the good of his Church: Even as in civil Government, the end being the good
of the whole Society, so long as that end is tollerably pursued, in the
preservation of public justice and honesty, many things must be born with,
rather then to endanger the whole by unseasonable endeavors to mend lesser
things; but when the public good is not minded, or those conditions broken,
upon which men did associate, and there is no hope of redress, in this case
peace and quietness is to betray the Government: The causes therefore which
make Separation Lawful are, in general, when men cannot worship Christ
aright, in the chief parts of his worship, or edify their own Souls in the
Church, whereto they are joined, and when there is no reasonable hope of the
redress of these things.

Particular causes are such as these.

1. When a Church is idolatrous: for now it forsakes Christ the Head, for whose
sake and service we became Members of the Church, and therefore must now
forsake it for him; what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? 2 Cor.
6.16. Ye are the Temple of the Living God, etc. ver. 17. Wherefore come out
from among them, and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, etc.

2. When any known sin is made the condition of Communion, i. e. when a man
shall not be admitted or continued to be a Member of the Church, unless he
approve some error in Doctrine, corruption in worship, or himself commit some
sin in practice, or at least consent to it in the Church: For also this
destroys the end of a Church, which is to edify us in Faith and Obedience,
whereas here something against Faith or Obedience is to be the very entrance
into the Church.

Upon these 2 cases all agree, that Separation is Lawful and necessary; and
they both hold strongly against the Church of Rome: for she is manifestly
idolatrous, and imposes both False Doctrines, Superstitious Worship, and wicked
practices upon all her Members: nor will it serve to say, that that Church
denies her worship to be idolatrous, or the Terms of her Communion to be
sinful; but she must clearly prove it from Scripture, which is the Law of a
Church, and that to the capacity of every Christian concerned: for if there be
any reasonable grounds to suspect the Terms imposed to be Unlawful, a
Christian cannot with safe Conscience submit to them till he is satisfied to
the contrary; and the Church having no Authority from Christ to impose any
doubtful, much less sinful Terms of Communion, in this case the Church is
guilty of the breach, and not those who refuse to join with her, or withdraw
from her.

3. When there is no tolerable means of edification in the Church, though no
evil is imposed upon the Members. As when the teachers are Heretical in the
chief points that concern our Salvation; or so contentious, and such railers at
any that differ from them, that they cannot be heard with peace and composure.
For this cause the Dutch, both Ministers and People, and the then Prince of
Orange also forsook their Parishes, because their Arminian Preachers spent so
much time railing on the Calvinists, that they could neither hear them with
profit, nor bear them with Patience. Also when Ministers are grossly ignorant,
and unable to explain the necessary Doctrines of Salvation to the People; or
when they do not, or will not ordinarily preach to them, or endeavor their
instruction; or when their Lives are greatly contrary to Religion and
Godliness; or when the People are almost all corrupt in Doctrines or wicked
manners, and will not be reformed. For all these cases are directly contrary to
the ends of a Church, and we must rather forsake the Church that we may be
edified in Faith and Holiness elsewhere, then foregoe our Edification to keep
Peace with the Church.

The Dr hints at general Inconveniences that will follow, if people find Fault
with their Governors, and withdraw from them; and to such inconveniences all
things in this world are subject, and there ought to be the greater care to
prevent them; but must People bear always? still there is nothing left but the
name of a Church, and their Communion with that be a hindrance to their
Communion with Christ? besides, nothing would more awe both Pastors and People
to their duty, then if they knew that the soberest and most careful Christians
of their own Salvation would leave their company, if they would not mend their
manners; and this would be a more Universal Benefit to the Church, then the
inconvenience of now and then one unseasonably withdrawing out of prejudice or
finding too much Fault, can do hurt to any Congregation.

4. When a Church has neither the exercise nor power of Government. The
Catholic Church is a Society under the Government of Christ by his Spirit, and
every particular Church is a part of the Chatholick, gathered into a Political
Body, that it may edify and preserve it self, which is done by Government and
the exercise of Discipline, as well as by preaching the word and administering
the Sacraments; and indeed the latter will be as ineffectual without the
former, as a Charge at an Assize or Sessions, wherein the Laws are recited,
would be, if there were neither presentment nor punishment of Offenders: A
Church without Power of Government is no Church, but a Company of Neighbors
that meet sometimes to hear the Word, and receive the Sacraments together,
which Members of several Congregations may do: for power of Government is the
form of a Church, as of a Civil Polity, by which only it differs from a
confused, accidental conventing or cohabitation of persons: now it is no sin to
separate from that which is no Church but a Duty; as much as it is for every
one to be a Member of some visible Church: This case is too common with us,
where Ministers of Parishes are sometimes Deacons, at least for a while, who
have no Ministerial power at all; and if Presbyters, yet such as pretend to no
more then to preach and administer the Sacraments; all power of Government, as
they say, belonging to the Bishop; and whatever their private Judgment may be
of their power of Government; we know, they neither do, nor dare, exercise any
solemn admonitions, or suspension from the Sacrament, much less Excommunication
or Absolution; when this is the case that the Church has no power to govern
her self, has long lost it. and is out of hopes to recover it, nothing can
oblige men to live Members of it, though there may be reasons why we should
hear and receive with them occasionally, as with Brethren: If it be said that
the Bishop has a power of Government over all his Diocese, I answer, this
shuts out all the Parish Ministers from Government, and makes them but the
Bishops Curates, and makes all the Parishes cease to be distinct Churches, and
to become one general Church under a Bishop, who is utterly incapable to manage
the charge of such a Congregation; be it only to govern and not to preach, as
some men would have it; and so it is still destructive of the end of a Church,
viz, self-edification and preservation; but moreover the Bishop himself is
subject to the Metropolitan, and all causes in his Diocese admit of an appeal
to the Archbishops Court; so that neither has the Bishop supreme and full
power of Governing his Church; and therefore neither is the Diocese a Church,
but a part of the whole province, all under the Government of the Archbishop
alone, the Bishops being but his Deputies; and this still makes the Government
more impossible, and Separation more necessary.

5. A 5th. just eause of Separation is, when men are certainly and constantly
debarred of some Principal Ordinances of Christ necessary to their Edification
and Communion with Christ. The end of a Church is the joint practice of all the
Laws and Ordinances of Christ, in their proper seasons. It is possible there
may not be occasion for the exercise of some of them (as Church Censures) for a
considerable time; and it is possible some Ordinances may be carelessly
neglected, or for some reasons, for a time omitted; (as the Lords Supper) This
is no cause of withdrawing, at least not properly; but if there be constant
Bars put, that any of these Ordinances shall be excluded the Church, (as the
Sacraments are with many Sectaries:) or that they shall be made unaccessable by
sinful or unnecessary additions, alterations, interpolations, or any other
Corruption; so that the most conscientious Christians cannot Communicate in
them, this after a convenient waiting and seeking for redress will justify
Separation: for the people may not be contented with one part of the Worship of
God, and the means of their Salvation; this is to betray the Gospel and their
own Souls: nor have Church Governors power to add any thing, either essential
or circumstantial to the Ordinances of Christ, that may hinder the people from
Communicating in them; and if they have no such authority to enjoin such
things, there is no obligation upon the people, either to comply with them in
obedience, or to bear their usurpation, by continuing in Union with them. If it
be pleaded that the Jews never separated from their Church, when they could not
Communicate in the Sacrifices at the Temple, under Idolatrous Kings, or when
the Passover or other Ordinances were wholly neglected or little used: I
answer, this is not the case of Christian Churches: the Jews were one single,
though large Congregation, instituted by Moses to continue till Christ should
come, who should have power to new moddle the Church, as he should think fit:
they were all tied to one Altar, and one Temple, and might Sacrifice no where
else; they were also obliged to one Priesthood, the House of Aaron, and
therefore in what-place-soever they were, they must hold Communion with this
people and Priesthood at this Altar; and if public worship was neglected or
corrupted, they could in no case separate, or gather New Congregations, or
choose new Priests, or build new Altars, but must be content with private helps,
till things were reformed: but Christians though of one Nation or City, are not
obliged to one Congregation indispensably. (for then men may not move to other
Parishes,) nor to one place of public worship, nor to one Minister or company
of Ministers; the Christians Church, being tied to no Country, as the Jews
were; nor to any particular people nor kindred, nor having any promise to be
continued to the end, in any one place, or amongst any one people; it has
therefore power to distribute it self into diverse Congregations, and
consequently again to withdraw from any one of them, when there is need.

6. Gross infringement of Christian Liberty; we are commanded Gal. 5.1. To
stand fast in the Liberty with which Christ has made us free, and not to be
entangled again in the Yoke of Bondage; this was Liberty from the Ceremonial
Law, which being dissolved by Christ, the Church might suffer no man to impose
on them again; consequently the Church was freed from all Rites and Ceremonies,
but those which Christ had appointed in his Gospel, and she must maintain this
Liberty; now if the Governors of the Church, either by themselves alone, or
with one part of the people, will impose Rites and Ceremonies on the Church
against the consent of the whole, or part of the People, without showing
sufficient reason for such imposition, or any necessity from present urgent
circumstances, for such Rites and Customs; this is a great usurpation, and the
people are deprived of the Liberty Christ purchased for them, and bequeathed to
them as a singular privilege, and therefore it does greatly obstruct
edification, the end of a Church. Now though every such imposition will not
warrant separation presently, yet when they are multiplied and enforced with
Rigor, it overthrows the Peace of a Church, and so their edification; and
also tends to enslave the people to their Rulers, and to open a Door for all
the Rites and Ceremonies that Superstition or Tyranny can invent and therefore
this is to be timely withstood: enslaving the people, destroys the end of
Church Government, and therefore frees men from a necessary Obligation to that
Government.

To these causes of Separation, which are the principal and most weighty, we
may add, that when Parishes are grown so populous, that no one place will hold
them, to hear the word and receive the Sacraments together, that they cannot
know each other generally, much less perform the mutual offices of Fellow
Members, they may Lawfully divide themselves into more Congregations; and if it
can be done with general consent, it is most for peace; but if not, men are not
bound to hazard their Souls to gratify the Pride of others, who had rather
Thousands should perish Eternally for want of the necessary means of
Instruction, then their Dominion be lessened. This we see sometimes done by the
civil Magistrate, viz, large Parishes divided, and if he will not do it when
there is need, the want of his concurrence cannot make it a Schism for the
people to divide themselves.

These are the most ordinary and obvious causes of Separation from Churches,
and which will be most useful for the ensuing discourse. It is true, Church
Governors are as unwilling the people should have any liberty without them, to
provide for the edification of their Souls, as Secular Powers are jealous of
such a claim in their Subjects; and they tell us, as this Dr does, what
confusion it leads to, if the people should be judges of their Ministers,
Doctrines or Lives, or of the commands of their Governors; if they may in
every case, and according to their own fancies withdraw from them; etc. But
here they fight with a Shadow; no judicious man ever affirmed that the people
may according to their fancies, prejudices, suspicions or light scruples
withdraw from their Churches; but what then? must they withdraw in no case?
they gave themselves to Christ, and not to their Ministers, any further then as
they dispense the Laws and Ordinances of Christ; some inconveniences will
sometimes happen upon just separation, it may be always, as there is no public
change in any state, though from worse to better, but it is attended with some
inconveniences for a time, especially to particular persons; but if it be for
the lasting good of the whole, those inconveniences must be over-looked.

It was this Notion of not withdrawing from Churches and Governors, almost
upon any account, that suffered so many errors, corruptions, and usurpations to
grow upon the ancient Church, till at last they were all formed into the body
of Popery: for good men in those days complained of multitudes of Ceremonies,
pride and ignorance of Church Governors, and such like growing evils; but for
fear of being accounted Novations or Donatists, and out of an overweaning
reverence of the Church, they were afraid to make any effectual opposition
against them; and the same notion set's very fair to produce the same effect
again: we grant they must be very weighty cases that warrant Separation, and
such as do directly and necessarily overthrow the edificaion of a Church: we
grant also that people must wait a convenient time, and use all peaceable means
for reformation, with all due respect and reverence of their Governors; but if
after all, no reformation can be had, people must not hazard the Salvation of
their own Souls, and the honor of Christ, to please men; and the greatest
inconvenience that is like to follow upon such Separations is, that it is like
to make Church Governors more diligent in feeding the Flock, and more cautious
of imposing upon them, and of ruling them with Rigor; it will also make the
people more careful of their practices, least they often offend their Brethren
by their Scandals, and cause them to avoid them for disorderly walking; but
what if the people, having great offenses and stumbling blocks laid in the way,
and great obstructions of their edification, and instead of any Redress have
Rehoboams Answer, that more Burdens shall be added, or Pharoahs Compassion,
that it is want of more severity in Laws and Government that makes people cry
out for Indulgence and Relaxation? what if in such cases, the people sometimes
withdraw from a Church, either in part or wholly, sooner then in strictness
they should, or then the wisest men, who can bear longest, would allow? yet if
this be really done for the edification of their Souls, that they may enjoy the
Ordinances with more profit and peace, and they do not un-church those they
withdraw from, or refuse to own them as Brethren, or to hold Brotherly
Communion with them on just occasions; certainly this can be accounted but an
infirmity incident to the generallity of men: for all have not patience or
prudence alike, nor do all understand the rules of Government and Societies;
yet all serious Christians have so much sense and prudence as to love their own
Souls, and to feel when they want Spiritual Food themselves, and to pity and
love all their true Christian Brethren; and if God approved the defection of
the Ten-Tribes from Rehoboam, and forbad him to endeavor to reduce them by
violence, though they offended in the manner of their withdrawing; he will not
certainly condemn those, who conscientiously withdraw from those Churhes where
they cannot have edification, or Christian Liberty, though they may fail in
some circumstances of their withdrawing.

And how they will Answer it, who would have them reduced by the Sword, and
giving them over to the Devil, when in the mean time they will remove none of
their stumbling blocks, themselves cast in their way, let them seriously
consider.

CHAP. III. The general Reasons of the Non-conformists for their Dissent from
the Church of England, ever since the Reformation.
BEfore we come to apply the foregoing Rules concerning Churches, their
Communion and Separation, to our particular case; it is convenient to give the
World a true Character of Non-conformists, with the grounds of their
Nonconformity, that it may be the better judged whether they are guilty of
sinful Separation or not? and this I shall do.

First, In general, showing what were the reasons whereupon all that have gone
under the name of Non-conformists since K. Edw. 6th Reformation, have dissented
from the established way of the Church of England. Secondly, more particularly,
what is the case of the present Non-conformists, and the Reasons of their
Dissent and Suffering.
Of the First in this Chapter.

When Pious K. Edw. 6th, by the advice of the Council and some Bishops, about
the Year of our Lord 1549 and 1550, renounced Popery, and instituted a new
Liturgy, as a form of public Prayers, Administration of Sacraments, with other
Rites and Ceremonies, as also of ordaining Bishops, Priests and Deacons in and
for the Church of England, immediately many good and learned men, especially
such as had Traveled in Germany and Switzerland among the First reformed
Churches, were dissatisfied with this Model of reformation as imperfect and
short of what the Scriptures required, and most other reformed Churches had
attained to, and also as symbolizing too much with Rome, in the manner of
public Prayers, in Ceremonies and Church Government: they gladly embraced the
good beginnings of reformation, and heartily joined in the endeavor of
cleansing God's House; but they were sorry the work stopped almost in the
beginning, and that some out of ignorance of the Truth and too much respect to
the Romish Religion in which they were bred, did strive to recede from it as
little as might be, with whom others joined, some for fear of Tumults, thinking
they had gone as far as the people at that time would bear; others for reasons
of State, being willing to keep the public Order and Government of the Church,
as much as might be, under the command of the Civil Magistrate; and some as it
fares in all cases, being Popish in Heart, yet seemingly joined with the
Reformers in framing their Liturgy, only that they might undermine and hinder
them in making a through reformation.

The number of these who were dissatisfied with the present establishment,
daily increased as the Protestants multiplied; so that in Q. Mary's Reign, but
seven years after, there was a number of these at Franckford only, enough to
make up a Congregation, and to have Ministers of their own, and to keep public
Assemblies in a Church allowed them by the Magistrates; who thinking themselves
to be now at their own Liberty, laid aside the Liturgy of the Church of
England, and composed a new short one for themselves, after the manner of other
reformed Churches. In the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, the Dissenters increased, and
were called Non-conformists and Puritans; and now the Ecclesiastical State
began to take notice of them, to remove some of them from their preferments and
employments, and to encense the Civil Magistrate against them; nevertheless
they increased in number and reverence with the People; the
Divinity-Professours of both Universities, and many others eminent for piety
and learning were then reckoned Puritanes, and some suffered as such.

King James showed himself more displeased with them, and resolved to have
Rooted them out of the Church; yet in his time 750 Ministers subscribed a
Petition to him for reformation of things yet amiss in the Church. In his Sons
Reign, the Papists, who were now got to Court, and had both Favor and Power,
joined their interests with the Bishops to Root out these Non-conformists, as
those that were most contrary to them, seeing they disliked the Bishops and
their Liturgy for coming so near to them; and how many worthy Ministers and
thousands of the best people were driven into Foreign Countries, and those
that stayed at home were severely treated for the space of 16 years; and yet
like Israel in Egypt, the more they were oppressed the more they increased. Nor
have their numbers been diminished, or their cause disparaged ever since,
notwithstanding the great endeavors to cast odium upon the one, and suppress
the other. Dr Fuller wittily sums up this History thus, Nonconformity was
conceived and bred in King Edward s Day^, it was born at Franckford in the
Reign of Q. Mary; under Q. Elizabeth it was in its Childhood; in K. James s
time it grew to be a good tall stripling, and under Charles 1st. it grew to be
so strong a man as to unhorse its opposite prelacy, and to get into the Saddle.
thus He and I add, that the turning ont of 2000 Non-conformists out of the
Ministry and Universities in 1662 was no argument, that this man was past his
full Strength, or declining to deerepid age.

Now the reasons of the dissent of so many for serveral Generations, have been
principally these.

Rea. 1. The First taken from their dissatisfactions with, and objections
against the Liturgy: they disallow not a Liturgy, or Directory rather, viz, a
prescribed order and rule for the exercise of public worship, in which all
might agree, and generally conform to prevent confusion; yea, and to satisfy
their Episcopal Brethren, they could be content with a short Liturgy,
prescribing the Form of Prayer and Administration of Sacraments, and other
public offices; provided, nothing but an questionable doctrine and duty, and
necessary order, might be thrust into it; and Ministers, especially after they
come to some years and experience, might be left to use it at their discretion;
so that the Liturgy may be a Rule of Concord, a Testimony of the consent and
agreement of the Churches, in Doctrine and Worship, and a Guide to young men
entering into the Ministry, but not a Snare to any; much less to hinder the
exercise of the gifts of the Spirit, which are given to the Ministry on purpose
to edify the Church with, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. etc. And such as these are the
Liturgies of most reformed Churches, and to this purpose only. But against our
Liturgy they excepted.

1. That it obliged all Ministers, without limitation all the days of their
lives, to the same form of words, in all public worship, whether it would suit
with the condition of the people, or the circumstances of providence, or not;
also that it was so large as that it did mostly prevent the use of Ministers
own Gifts, or made them seem but superfluous additions; this they conceived to
be directly contrary to the institution and office of the Ministry, which was
appointed by Christ, and furnished by him with his Spirit, that they might to
the worlds end administer all his Ordinances to his Church, viva voce, as the
Spirit should give every man ability, and particularly fit him for the people
he was to take charge of: they are indeed by their office obliged to the Holy
Scriptures, the words as well as sense, as being the divinely inspired Law of
the Church, which they are to interpret and apply; but seeing interpretation
and application of the Scriptures is their work, and every ordinance does imply
this more or less, they ought not to be tied generally and strictly to certain
forms of words wherein to express themselves, unless they were of divine
inspiration; and if all that Ministers were to say to the people, was
prescribed them, as it might be in all, as well as in those things wherein the
Liturgy does prescribe to them, then the Ministry might be a calling as others
are, that men might in a common way take up to read all divine service, but
certainly there would need no solemn ordination or consecration to this office
with Fasting, Prayer and imposition of hands, more then to any other calling.

2. They object against our Liturgy, that the matter of it and words also are
generally taken out of the Service Books of Rome, viz, the Mass Book, and
Ceremoniale, and Pontificale Romanum; and that the form of it, viz. the manner
and order of the service is too much conformed to, yea little different from
the Popish Mass or Service: now they say God in the Law refused to be served
with any of the Forms, Modes, Ceremonies, Customs, Vessels or Utensils
wherewith Idols had been served; yea though the things were some indifferent
Rites and Customs, and which the idolatrous thought founded upon reason and
nature, and the vessels were of Materials of his own making. It is true, what
is Scripture, and from Scripture must be used though it was abused by Papists;
whatsoever is founded-upon divine institution comes from the word, not from the
Church of Rome; but to keep to their Words, Order, Method, etc. seems too great
respect to that Church, and that service: They knew very well, there was no
legal pollution upon the Words or Ceremonies, because they had been used by the
Papists, as there was upon the Idols Utensils under the Law, wherefore they
might not be converted to men's private use, but must be destroyed; but to
translate their service into our Church in things wherein we have the same
liberty of composing forms and methods for our selves, as any others have, this
seems too great a respect to that idolatrous Church, from whence they came, too
easy a passing by all the Pollutions and Tyranny, with which they had defiled
and tormented the Church of Christ; too great an acknowledgement of her, as a
worthy or eminent Church, from whom we should take a pattern of our worship;
all which were certainly displeasing to God; and by this symbolizing with Rome
in our worship, we harden the Papists, as if we differed from them but in
circumstantial things; we keep in mind there ways and worship, and so
continually expose the people to the danger of returning to Popery; and also
reflect upon the reformed Churches, choosing Rome for our Pattern, keeping so
near to her, whereas they have all utterly cast her of, and composed new forms
of worship for themselves, out of the Scripture: nor can there be any other
reason given, why England above all other reformed Churches, is so much
solicited to, and in danger of relapsing into Popery; from age to age, but
that her public service and Church Government is so much like to that of Rome,
that the Papists think they may easily persuade us to receive all the rest,
seeing we are so zealous to retain so much of their Religion.

3. They thought our Liturgy very defective in the public Prayers; partly in
that there are very few things mentioned in them, and those very generally;
either in the confessions of sinsor petitions for Mercies, especially
Spiritual; and the Letany, which is something more large and particular, (yet
comes not near the secret wants of men's Souls,) mentions things so briefly,
and suddenly passes over to others of a different nature, that there is no
time for men's thoughts to reflect on them, or their Hearts to be affected with
them, which is one special end of Prayer; and partly because of the abrupt
breaking off, and dividing one Petition from another into several Prayers; most
of the Collects containing but one single Petition, or two at most; this breaks
off intention and affection: neither is there any order among the Prayers, or
coherence of Petitions, and some Petitions are repeated often in the same
service; yea some whole Prayers; especially when the Letany is read, there is a
very needless repetition of almost all the Prayers; for if that be
comprehensive of all necessary things, what need other Prayers be used at that
time? these defects viz confusedness, incoherence, tautologies in words or
sense, going backwards and forwards etc. are objected as intolerable in the
Prayers of particular Ministers, who yet may out-grow such weakness and pray
with better method, and to better edification; they are not then to be excused
in the Church Liturgy, where no man has power to correct, or alter any thing,
and Rulers are very unwilling to yield to amendments, for fear of confessing
something to have been amiss before.

4. They were not satisfied with the Responses, that the people should audibly
speak after the Minister, or alternately with him; this lesseneth the gravity
and seriousness of the Service; hinders the exercise of Thoughts and
Affections in the people; and makes the worship more like a Dramatick Action,
(wherein every one acts their part and must wait for their Q., or time of
speaking and silence,) rather then like the solemn service of God.

5. They dislike the frequent repetitions of the Lord's Prayer, which in every
Morning and Evening service is twice used, and once for every office that is
added to them; as when the Letany is read or the Communion Service, or a woman
Churched, or a Child Baptized, or a Marriage Solemnized, or a Person buried; so
that it is not unusual to rehearse the Lords Prayer five or six times before
the Liturgy service be finished; and yet the Minister must use it in the Pulpit
after all. They could not conceive any reason or excuse to be given for this
custom; but a superstitious conceit of that form of words, almost turning them
into the Nature of a Charm; as if they could not be used too often, and the
very use of them made all other service the more acceptable.

6. The corrupt Translations of the Scripture used in the Liturgy: that there
may and ever will be impersections in, and doubts about Translation of
Scripture, whilst men's Knowledge is imperperfect and their Judgments diverse,
is granted by all, but the Translations in the Liturgy in the Psalms, Epistles
and Gospels are grossly corrupt, some contrary to the sense of the Text, and in
some places whole Verses omitted, and the Titles of all Psalms are left out,
which in the Hebrew are the first verse of the Psalms, and very necessary for
the understanding of them: therefore to oblige men to read these Translations
only in the Church Service, even when we have a better, and publicly
authorized Translation, they judged it a matter of no small Offense.

7. The Reading of the Apochryphal Scriptures as parts of the public worship,
and that without any distinction from the Canonical: They accounted it an
intolerable thing, that Fables and Fictions should be solemnly Read to the
People, with the same Reverence as the Word of God; and such are many of the
Apocryphal Books; and the rest being only of Humane Authority, the reading of
them ought not to be made a Solemn part of Divine Worship. The Conformists say
that Reading the Scripture is Preaching, and the Non-conformists say, it is not
fit, mere Humane or Fabulous writings should be preached to God's People, when
they meet to Worship him by hearing his word. Above all they were offended that
a great deal of the Holy Scriptures is left out of the Liturgy, and so never to
be Read in the Congregation, and Apocryphal Chapters put in their Room.

8. Holy Days or Festivals in the honor of Saints. They would not deny, but if
the Church thought fit, they might observe the days of Our Saviors Nativity,
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension and sending the Holy Ghost, as other
Protestant Churches do; provided they might be kept seriously, and not made of
the same necessity with the Sabbath; but when all divine worship of the
Creatures is Idolatrous, and the keeping of days in Honor of them, as well as
Building Temples to them, was ever reckoned a part of Divine Honor (and to be
sure is more Honor then ever God commanded or allowed to any of his Servants,)
They knew not how to excuse this practice, that it should be a part of a
Churches Liturgy.

9. Nor could they approve the Doctrines of the certain Regeneration of all in
Baptism, and that Infants dying after Baptism before the Commission of actual
sin, are undoubtedly saved; which are laid down in the Liturgies, as undoubted
Articles of Faith; whereas there is no Scripture that clearly proves either of
them; and at best they are points disputed on by Learned men on both sides. Nor
could they excuse the practice of refusing Parents to promise for their own
Children in Baptism, seeing it is upon their Account only, and Gods Covenant
with them, that the Children are admitted to be Baptized; and they are thereby
engaged to breed them up in Faith and Obedience; much less that Strangers
should receive the charge of the Baptized, who have no authority over them, who
neither care what they promise, nor are ever called to account, how they
perform their promise, for if they should, few would undertake the charge, and
so this custom would fall to the ground.

10. They excepted against the Ordination of Deacons to read Divine Service,
Baptize and Bury, and to preach with special License; this they say was to
create a new fort of office in the Church, which Christ never appointed, nor
gave his Ministers Authority to appoint it: Deacons were to look after the
poor, and that was all their work; and though the Primitive Christians
sometimes used them to read the Scriptures in the Congregation, yet they never
ordained them to this, as an office; yea though they should be admitted to read
Prayers, to Marry or Bury, yet this is no sacred office appointed by Christ,
that should constitute a distinct order of Ministers; and if, as grave and
prudent persons, they might be admitted to do these offices, either for want of
Ministers or to assist them; yet may they by no means be suffered to Baptize,
it being as peculiar to the Ministry, as to administer the Lords Supper; and
the admission of Members into the Church, as sacred and solemn a work, as to
confirm and Build up the Members of it.

These were the principal objections of the Non-conformists against the
Liturgy, which were, some of them at least, exemplified and confirmed by many
particulars, of lesser moment in themselves, but all tending to make their
desire of a Reformation of the Service Book to seem reasonable, and the work
necessary.

Rea. 2. The Second thing the Old Non-conformists disliked in the Church of
England was, the Government of it by Prelates, i. e. Bishops, with sole power
of Jurisdiction. Many of the Old Non-conformists thought Episcopacy utterly
unlawful, and an usurpation not to be born; but the rest, who looking upon it
as a humane constitution (as our Law does) thought it Lawful, and that it
might be submitted to, did yet dislike our Episcopacy; partly because of the
secular grandeur, power, and employments our Bishops were invested with; which
made them unable and unwilling to discharge the office of a Pastor in the
Church, partly because the Church has nothing to do in their election, except
an empty show, and therefore persons were most commonly preferred not for true
Episcopal Qualifications, but because they could make interest with Superiors,
but principally because the Bishops arrogated to themselves the whole power of
governing the Church, and excluded all the Ministers from any share therein, a
thing most unexcusable in them, who acknowledge themselves to be of the same
order with the Presbyters, and only in a degree of honor above them, and that
by the Authority of the Civil Magistrate. Whereas even those that with any
probability or sobriety maintain the Divine Right of Episcopacy, do
nevertheless acknowledge that he may neither ordain, nor govern without the
advice and consent of his Presbyters. This was looked upon as intolerable,
that the power of governing the Church which was committed by Christ to all his
Ministers, should be wrested from them generally by a few of their Brethren.
And that they who are thought fit to dispense the Word and Sacraments, the
chief keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, whereby men are brought to the Faith,
admitted into the Church and bnilt up in it, should not have power to censure
offenders, and to receive the Penitent again to Communion; which are things of
lesser moment and depending on the former, and yet without which, the former
could not be managed in a fit manner for Edification. By this means Ministers
are deprived of one half of their Office and Power; and are both discouraged
and hindered in the other half For who will regard their Preaching, who have
not Liberty to judge what persons are fit to be admitted into the Church, or
who in it deserves censure, or to be cast out of it. And the Bishops themselves
in undertaking the whole work of Governing the Church, took that upon them
which they never could, nor did manage for the Churches Edification.

R. 3d. The Non-Conformists, were much dissatisfied about the Discipline of the
Church, both in respect of the Rule of it, and the Officers that manage it. The
Rule they say is not taken out of the Scripture, which is the only Rule and Law
of Christ's Church; but it is the Roman Civil and Canon Law, which at best were
suited to their own times, and People, in many things very defective, and in
others, erroneous and superstitious.

There were indeed some appointed by K. Edward, to collect a body of good and
useful Rules out of the Canon Law, to be the Rule of Discipline for this
Church, but he dying that work was never finished, so that the Rule now is the
whole Canon Law, or so much as every Bishop pleases to use in his own Diocese.
The Bishops made a few Canons of their own 1603. but they are such as only
strengthen their own power in imposing and enforcing those things, which the
Non-Conformists had long desired might be amended. As to the Officers that
Administer the Discipline, They are Chancellors, and Commissaries and Civilians
by Profession; no Ecclesiastical Officers, yet these Rule over the Ministers of
Christ, Admonish, Suspend, Deprive them of their places, and Excommunicate both
them and the People when they please. This they have no power to do, nor can
the Bishop delegate his pewer of Governing to them any more, then his power to
Preach the Word, and Administer the Sacraments both being parts of the
Ministerial Office: This they thought was to change the Constitution of Christ's
Church at pleasure. They were also offended at the Administration or use of the
Discipline, (That, being such as the Officers were) because the Church in its
Constitution and frame kept so near the Roman model. Therefore the Bishops have
ever found it necessary to exercise Church Discipline mostly against those that
disliked or dissented from the Liturgy, and Government, and to connive at the
loose and profane, to hold them in some external obedience to them: Hence it
came to pass, where one Minister has been admonished, suspended, deprived for
Heresy in Doctrine, or Un-godliness of Life, ten have been so dealt with for
Nonconformity; and where one of the People have been censured for scandalous
sins, an hundred have been troubled and punished for going to hear a good
Minister out of their own Parish, when they had an ignorant drunkard at home,
for not having their Children Crossed in Baptism, for scrupling to kneel at the
Sacrament, and such other great Crimes against the Liturgy. What was this but
to alienate the Church of Christ to the Governors, and to make it to serve
them more then him, and only to use his Name and Authority to press their own
Laws, and maintain their own power.

R. 4. They were dissatisfied at the Ceremonies imposed in the Liturgy. In the
general they acknowledge, that it was lawful for any Church to consent to, and
lay upon her self necessary Rites and Customs, such as Circumstances of time,
and place, and other emergencies might make necessary for the present time; but
that such Ceremonies should be such whose necessity was apparent to all, and
whose lawfulness might be scrupled justly by none of common understanding, and
that should be taken up by the general Consent of the People as well as
commanded by Rulers, as the Feast of Purim was by the Jews, Esther 9.23.27. And
those necessary things enjoined, Acts 15, 23.25.28. And that when the necessity
cease, those Customs should cease also. But they thought it utterly unlawful
to devise Rites or Ceremonies for which there was neither apparent necessity,
nor usefulness, or to impose those upon the people, which from the beginning
were doubtful and offensive, especially to make them parts of Divine Worship,
or additions to it, as it were to render it more edifying; beyond the natural
and common Civil circumstances of Order, Method, or Decorum, and such they
thought it manifest our imposed Ceremonies were, which are declared to be
retained, some, because they served for decent order in the Church (for which
they were at first devised) others for edification. Pref. to the Common Prayer
Book.
And again that the imposers were content with those Ceremonies which do serve
to a decent order, and Godly Discipline, and such as be apt to stir up the dull
mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God by some notable and special
signification, whereby he might be edified.

Three Ceremonies were at first imposed. The Cross in Baptism. The Surplice in
Reading the Service. And Kneeling in Receiving the Lords Supper. Against these
they excepted severally.

1. Against the Cross, that it was abused to great superstition and Idolatry
in the Church of Rome, and particularly when it was used in Baptism, having
Divine power ascribed to it, of driving away the Devils, giving grace, etc.
Therefore being neither commanded of God, nor used in this manner in the
primitive Church, viz. To admit Members into the Church by it, it ought to be
rejected.

Also that it did reflect very dishonourably on Baptism it self, as if that
were not full and plain enough to set forth the blood of Christ, and Remission
of sins by it, or our engagement to Christ, and therefore it was needful to
add a more plain and direct sign of his death, and suffering for us, and of
what we must be willing to suffer for him, above all that the Cross was made,
and here used as a Sacrament, being declared to be a token of the Childrens
owning the Faith of Christ, Obedience to him, and perseverance to the end: Is
not this the nature and end of Receiving Baptism it self? Why is not that
sufficient, but the Cross is presently added without any note of distinction,
as it were to signify the same things more plainly and fully, and to lay a
greater obligation on the Child, then what was laid on it in Baptism, and this
is a Sacrament as much as man can make. Indeed it wants the promise of Divine
Grace, but this also is presumed upon, forasmuch as this seems chiefly to be
intended in those words [of some of the Ceremonies being apt to stir up the
dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty, by some notable and special
signification whereby hemight be edified.

2. Against the Surplice they object, that was a Ceremony on purpose devised to
add decency and splendor to the Worship of God, and therefore it must be used
in that Worship only, and such Ceremonies are unlawful additions to Gods
Worship. And those circumstances or accidents of the Service in their absolute
nature, yet relatively, in as much as they better the Worship and increase
Edification, they are made moral parts of Worship, even as it was a part of
Worship for the Priests of old to put on their Sacred vestments to sacrifice
in, though the vestments themselves absolutely and naturally considered were
but circumstances of the Worship. Also that the Surplice seemed to be taken
from the Ceremonial-Law, and to be at least an imitation of those Priests
Garments. As many other Ceremonies used in the ancient Church, were either
taken from the Jews, or devised to imitate and be like them. Now our Savior
having abolished the old Ceremonies gave no leave to his Church to devise new
ones, neither did he abolish them, as Types and Shadows of himself only, but
also as Yokes and Burdens, as carnal Ordinances and servile Customs, wherein
his People were kept in great Bondage till his coming in the flesh, Gal. 5.1.
Acts 15.10. Gal. 4.1, 2, 3. John 1.17. Therefore esuch Ceremonies were utterly
unnecessary since the full discovery of the Gospel, yea, they disparage the
Gospel, as if that was not plain and sufficiently apt to teach Faith or
Holiness without their help. And besides they take off men's minds from the
Worship of God, partly by pleasing their eyes, and fancies, with an external
show, and partly by busying their thoughts about the meaning of them, and how
to improve them, if they be serious in the use of them: They also bring the
People again into bondage, and fill the Church with carnal Ordinances and
beggarly institutions, and men are sensibly taught to content themselves with
outward forms and modes of Service, and to think God is content with them also;
and further the use of the Surplice in Divine Service, kept up too much
resemblance betwixt our Ministers and the Priests of Rome, and the ignorant
might be tempted to think there was very little difference betwixt our Church
and Rome, seeing we came so near them in their Service, and in the manner and
circumstances of the Service also. Nevertheless they accounted it not unlawful
to have continued the use of the Surplice till the People were weaned from it,
and accordingly many did use it, it being not in it self unlawful, as the use
of the Cross was.

3. Against Kneeling at the Lords Supper, they pleaded that it should by no
means have been retained in our Church being brought into the Church at first,
only upon the opinion of Transubstantiation and worshipping the Sacrament, and
very apt to continue the same opinion in the People: It is also certain our
Savior neither used, nor appointed that gesture, nor gave his Church Authority
to enjoin any other, then what he used, as a standing precept, for thereby, he,
and his practice should be taxed as not using the most fit gesture, nor is this
gesture at all proper to this Ordinance, but thwarteth the two main ends of it,
viz. Free Communion with Christ in the participation of his benefits; and the
Renewing of Love, and Strengthening Communion among the People, for it is a
gesture of great awe, reverence, and distance, not fit for Meditation on the
promises, or consideration of the death of Christ, or the incomprehensible love
that he manifested theerein. Also by Kneeling the People were severed from each
other, and could not be at the Table many together, very unlike to a feast of
Love, nay, the presence of many would be an hindrance, and not a furtherance of
Affection and Devotion. Both these inconveniences were greatly increased, when
the People were forced to come up to the Table at the upper end of the Chancel,
and there to kneel before the rails a few at a time (for they must come to but
one side of the Table) for this was much more unlike a Supper of Love betwixt
Christ and his Spouse, and betwixt fellow Members of the same body; yet they
accounted not this gesture in it self unlawful, but that they who would might
use it and it might be retained in the Church, till the People could freely
leave it off, but that it was unfit to be imposed and purposely kept up, much
more to be enforced with the highest penalty upon those that were dissatisfied
with it.

The Non-conformists were much strengthened in their dissatisfaction with the
Established Church way, because instead of obtaining any redress and
reformation, all the impositions were continued and things made worse, and the
imposers went backward, rather then forward, notwithstanding the
Non-conformists increased in number both in Ministers and People, and at length
became a very considerable part of the Church, whose complaints ought therefore
to have been considered and redressed. There is a passage in the 20th Aritic.
to be subscribed by all Ministers, that the Church has power in matters of
Faith.

This the Non-Conformists disliked unless more explained: Therefore the
Parliament in the 13 Eliz. which established those Articles by Law caused that
passage to be left out. Bishop Laud confesses that it was not to be found in
the Original of the Articles of that year, B. Laud's Speech in the Star Chamber.
viz 1570 yet the Bishop continued the passage in the Articles, and required
subscription to it. Also that Parliament ennacted that if any Minister was
admitted into our Church, having other Ordination than what was established
amongst us, he should declare his Assent, and subscribe to all the Articles of
Religion which only concern the Confession of the True Christian Faith, 13
Eliz. Cap. 12.
and the Doctrine of the Sacraments. By this they gave indulgence to those that
were not satisfied with the Episcopal Ordination, and could not subscribe to
the 39 Artic. absolutely, because the approbation of the Homilies and Book of
Consecration with the forementioned passage were included in them, being
content that they subscribed to the Doctrine of Faith, Artic. 35.36.
and of the Sacraments contained in the Articles, but the Bishops would not
allow this indulgence, at least not long, nor generally, but urged absolute
subscription to the great trouble of many Non-conformists. Nor could any
amendment of the Liturgy ever be procured, but on the contrary, some passages
left out that reflected much on the Papists, as that Petition in the Letany,
from the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, good Lord deliver us, and a whole
Prayer in the office for Gunpowder Treason expunged by B. Laud, wherein it was
said, that the Religion of Papists is Rebellion, their Faith faction, and their
practice the Murdering of Souls, and Bodies.

Nor were any of the Ceremonies taken away, or their imposition remitted, but
rather more added to them by the Bishops Cannons, though not by Parliament. The
Cross in Baptism was confirmed and enforced, Can. 30. Under K. James, and the
explication there given, increased the suspicion of the unlawfulness of it,
they also brought in bowing at the name of Jesus, Can. 18. And their dipping of
Children in Baptism, turning the Communion Tables into Altars, bowing toward
them, or toward the East, (for they agree not what it was they bowed toward,)
were brought in by B. Laud, and pressed with great Rigor, though never
established by Law. In Q. Eliz. Reign they were content that Ministers Read the
Service Book, without declaring their judgment concerning it, only it was said
in the 39 Articles, viz, Artic. 36. That the Book of Consecration contained
nothing that was in it self superstitious or ungodly. But Arch Bishop Whitgift
devised a subscription of his own, and imposed it upon all to be ordained after
that time which was at length turned into a Cannon, Can. 36. Artic. 2. In these
words, that the Book of Common Prayer, and of Ordaining Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, contains nothing in it, contrary to the Word of God, and that it may
Lawfully be used, and that he himself will use the form in the said Book
prescribed, in public Prayers, and Administration of the Sacraments, and no
other. The Bishop knew that the Non-Conformists thought the Cross in Baptism
(prescribed in the Common Prayer Book,) unlawful and against the Word of God,
and that some of them thought the order of Bishops unlawful also, and all of
them the order of Deacons as prescribed by that Book, and yet here they must
subscribe not only that they will use the book, and no other form in public;
but that it contains nothing contrary to the Word of God.

This subscription was not only imposed on those that should hereafter be
ordained, but it is also decreed that no man shall be suffered to Preach or
Catechize, or be a Lecturer, or read any Lecture in Divinity in the
Universities, Cathedral, or Colligiate Churches, or in City, Market, Town,
Church or Chapel whatsoever within this Realm, unless he first subscribed to
this Article; with two others contained in this Cannon, and by means hereof
many worthy Ministers were quickly turned out of their Livings, though the
Lawyers generally declared that it was against the Laws of the Land, that any
man should be turned out of his Freehold, (such as Ministers Livings are,)
without an Act of Parliament, and to make all sure, they ordained Cannon 55,
that Preachers before all Sermons, Lectures or Homilies, should only invite the
people to pray, naming a few heads of Prayer, which respect the public only,
and none concerning the people in particular, so that now no other Prayer must
be used in public, but those in the Service Book, which made the Burden more
intolerable. Moreover in this Book of Canons they ordain that Ministers shall
admit none to the Lords Supper that will not kneel, or that come not to the
Prayers, or that speak against the Book of Common Prayer or Ceremonies, or the
book of Consecration of Bishops, Can. 27.
etc. Till they acknowledge their Fault in word or writing if they can. That
Fathers shall not be Godfathers to their own Children, nor so much as urged to
be present at their Baptism. In a word all that the Bishops knew, that the
Non-Conformists were dissatisfied with, Can. 29.
in the Service Book were established by these Cannons, and they rigorously
prosecuted upon them from that time, viz, 1603 to 1640.

For the Government of the Church by Bishops, and administration of that
Government by Lay-Chancellours Commissaries, etc. in Q. Eliz. time the
Governors were contented with a peaceable submission from the Non-Conformists,
but under K. James the Cannons forenamed enjoined all Ministers to subscribe,
that there was nothing in the Book of Consecration of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons contrary to the Word of God. And now B. Billson and B. Andrews pleaded
for the Divine Right of Episcopacy, and B. Laud imposed an Oath (commonly
called the Oath and Caetera,) upon the Clergy, whereby they should promise, not
to endeavor to alter the Government of the Church as it was established by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, etc. And thus all the moderation that had been
used by the former Bishops in pressing things scrupled, was turned into the
most rigorious imposition of them, yea and of additions to them also, as if
Rohoboam's success should terrify no man from acting according to his answer to
the People, that he would add to their burdens, and change their Whips into
Scorpions, and this leads to the next reason of the Dissent of those former
Non-Conformists.

Rea. 6. The Tyrannical Imposition of the Lyturgy, and all that belonged to it,
was a great means to increase their dissatisfaction. There had been a passage
in the Preface of the Common Prayer book, that the first Reformers had gone as
far as they could, in reforming the Church, considering the times they lived
in, and they hoped those that came after them would, as they better might do
more. And indeed this was the Ground of the submission and patience of the
Non-Conformists, viz, a persuasion that the first Reformers at least the best
of them did not intend their moddle as a ne plus ultra, and therefore they
still hoped, that by Patience and peaceable endeavors, things might by begrees
be brought to a better pass; accordingly they presented an admonition to the
Parliament; Anno 1570. And again a Petition to K. James called the Millinary
Petition for ease and redress; but alas! as that passage of the Reformers is
left out of the Preface to the service book, so the expungers of it fixed a
just contrary mark to themselves, which they aim at to this day in all their
proceedings; viz, that there was no necessity of any farther Reformation, then
what was established by Q. Eliz. and that all must be compelled to approve of
that as sufficient, and to submit to the Rules of it.

The better to prosecute this design, they have ever labored to set the
Princes against the Non-conformists, and themselves have used the Spiritual
Sword chiefly against them, they did what they could to prejudice that
Excellent Princess Q. Eliz. against them so that in her Reign especially when
Whitgift, was Archbishop, the Non-Conformists were turned out of Universities,
as Dr Sampson Dean of Christs-Church in Oxford, Mr Cartwright Margarite
Professor at Cambridge, and many others, many were turned out of Livings, some
worthy men imprisoned, and Mr John Vdall Minister of Kingston upon Thames was
sentenced to dye for high Treason against the Queen, in Defaming her
Government, which says Dr Fuller was somewhat hard, being but a remote
consequence, for all that was alleged against him was, that in a Preface to a
certain book; he had sharply taxed the Remissness of the Bishops Government.
And now such was the Rigor of Prosecutions against the Non-Conformists, and
the remisness of Discipline toward the ignorant and scandalous, both Ministers
and People, that it gave occasion to many to separate from, and renounce the
Church of England as no true Church, who were then called Brownists, when K.
James came to the Crown, the Bishops so quickly incensed him against the
Dissenters, that in the conference at Hampton Court appointed on purpose to
hear their exceptions, he would scarce give them leave to speak, he sent them
away with taunts and threats, and often declared that were men never so able
and pious, yet the Church had better want their labors, then have her Orders
broken by their Nonconformity, which maxim I am sorry to find Dr
Stillingfleet to espouse, Under K. Charles the 1st, the Bishops had so wholly
engaged the civil power in their cause, that it was almost the only concern of
the Government how to bring all the Non-Conformists in England to submit, or to
leave the Land, and to bring Ireland to the same platform with England, and to
set up Bishops, Lyturgies and Ceremonies, in Scotland, and now Ministers and
People were driven many thousands into New England, Holland, and other Foreign
Parts, they were suspended, silenced, deprived of their Livings, imprisoned,
fined, set in the Pillory stigmatized, had their ears cut off, banished into
remote Islands, and many other such pressures were laid upon them, which many
living yet remember.

Nor were the Bishops ever ashamed to use their own power, and to appear in
person against these men, in what danger soever Church or State was, Conformity
must be urged, and Non-Conformists suppressed. In the very beginning of
Reformation Mr Hooper was imprisoned by B. Cranmer, and Ridley, for refusing
the use of some Ceremonies, when he was to be consecrated Bishop, and though
the King by his Letter under his own hand commanded them to dispense with him,
yet they would not condescend: when a Congregation of Exiles for Religion, were
settled at Franckford, under Q. Mary, because they had laid aside the English
Liturgy and Ceremonies; B. Cox of Ely, and his Company coming afterward to the
same City, first quarrelled with them, and disturbed them in the Church, and
then incensed the Magistrates against them, so that they were forced to leave
the City to find other refuge. The Mouths of all the Cannons almost are
Levelled against the Non-Conformists, none almost but they felt the Rigor of
the High Commission, and Star Chamber Courts, few were suspended, sileneeed, or
fined, or excommunicated, but for not using the Cross, not wearing the
Surplice, following Sermons abroad, for not kneeling at the Sacrament, etc. Mr.
Hildersham was suspended from preaching and benefice 12 years together, and
fined two thousand pound to the King, only for giving the Lords Supper unto two
of his Parish without kneeling, and the Communicants Mr. Holt and Mr. Ditton
were fined each of them 1000 pounds for receiving without kneeling. And how
Archbishop Laud exceeded all before him in prosecuting the Non-Conformists, is
fresh in Memory.

Now the usage of them, besides that it might exasperate the Spirits of men,
and alienate them from the things imposed, which is incident to all men, it did
also add weight to their Reasons against Conformity; because they saw that the
Bishops pressed their own Laws and Constitutions more then the Laws of Christ.
That they usurped authority without, and against the consent of the Church, not
only to enjoin things on their practice, but also to impose the approbation of
them upon their judgments, and consciences which they knew before hand were
dissatisfied in those things, and also that they were now become declared
enemies to further reformation, and thought they should rather abate of the
First Reformation, and go nearer to Rome then stir one Hairs breadth further
from her. This made Conformity justly more scrupled, when after 90 years
endeavors for reformation, they had Pharoahs Answer, and were beaten to their
burdens, and not ought of the tale of their brick to be diminished.

And now the case between the Conformists and Non-Conformists is quite altered,
viz: after the making of the Cannons 1603. before the question was, whether the
things imposed as Liturgy, Ceremonies, etc. might not be born with, especially
with help of some connivances of moderate Bishops in those things that they
most scrupled, because it was but the beginning of reformation, and the
Governors both Civil and Ecclesiastical, were not yet weaned from the old
Discipline and customs of their Fathers, nor were the people likely to bear
more purity, and to part with all their old customs at once, and upon these
grounds the Non-Conformists kept the Communion of the Church of England, and
generally submitted to the practice of most things imposed: but now since all
things before complained of, were turned into Cannons, and standing Laws and
must not only be practiced, but approved also under their hands, to stand upon
record in the Registers of the Bishops Courts, and all that would not subscribe
must be cast out, or kept out of the Ministry, and the People likewise were
generally weary of the impositions, as well as the Ministers, and disliked them
as too much symbolizing with Rome, and therefore all the Church Censures must
be bent against them whom the Cannons called Schismatics for this cause only.
Now I say the question was whether the first reformation was not complete? Can:
27.
and we ought not to go any further from Rome, in Liturgy, Ceremonies,
Government and Discipline, but take up with them as a perfect Church Moddle, at
least such as had no other imperfections in it, then all Constitutions in this
world are subject to?

This alteration of the state of the Question was much increased, when the
Court and our Princes took up new measures of Marrying with Popish Princes
abroad, and mixing interest with them, whereby they were necessitated to desert
the protection and assistance which they had hitherto given to Protestants
abroad, (which the German and French Protestants in their wars quickly felt the
effects of,) but also to remit their zeal against the Papists at home viz: to
suspend the execution of Laws against them, to entertain them at Court, to
receive them into offices, to suffer their Priests and Jesuits to come over in
multitudes, and quickly to seduce the people: and that which was a necessary
consequence of all this to discountenance and punish Zealous Ministers and
People, who found fault with these proceedings, as Puritanes, overhot,
indiscreet factious, and enemies to the State; for this practice of the Court
drew the Church along with it, as it usually does: and all men that had a mind
to rise must plead for the Lawfulness of Protestants Marrying with Papists, and
allowing them their worship, and of conniving at Papists amongst us, and at
last to study to gratify and meet the Papists as far as they could, and to
bring back more of their Doctrines and Ceremonies, till at length it was become
an indifferent thing, whether a man was a Papist or a Protestant, so he were
not a Puritan, and continued in that Church he was born and baptized in. Vid
Rushw. Col. Part 1. p. 213, The Parliaments Censure of Mr. Mountagues Papers.
This temper did the Church men fall into immediately upon the public attempt
for the Spanish match, and it spread more amongst them, till Archbishop Laud
being made head of the party, had almost made a second sort of Non-Conformists,
viz, Puritan Conformists, as they called them, i. e. Those that conformed to
the Liturgy and Discipline established by Law, but could not approve of the new
design of moderation toward, and Union with the Papists, which the Archbishop
and all his followers professed and owned.

And now the case was altered to purpose, for it was now Puritanism and Faction
to be an Anti-Arminian, to be zealous against Popery, to preach twice a
Sabbath, to pray before or after Sermon, to keep the Sabbath Holy, and in a
word to be seriously religious, in the people? and for the Ministers to preach
for it, this was Puritanism; and our Reformers were thought too nice and
strait-laced, our Articles and Homilies too strict, and fit to be qualified,
and our Martyrs Fools and Rebels. The Non-Conformists now thought they had
great reason to stand off from Conformity, seeing all their fears were verified
before their eyes; that our nearness to Rome would endanger our returning to
her again, and seeing Conformity it self, to Law and Canons would signify
little, unless a man would go beyond both, in obedience to his Superiors, to
promote the new design. This was the case of the old Non-Conformists till the
long Parliament stopped the stream: upon the whole we may observe, the case
betwixt our former Non-Conformists and the Church of England was the same in
substance, as betwixt the Brethren of Bohemiah and the Calixtines, the
Calvinists and Lutherans in Germany, the Bohemian Calextines, if the Pope would
grant them the Cup, in the Sacrament, and three or four more reformations of
abuses in the Roman Church, they thought it reformation enough, and that they
need go no farther, and they would compel the brethren who were for a total
desertion of Rome, to be of the same mind and practice with them, and that by
force of Arms. The Lutherans in Germany having only reformed the Doctrine of
the Church, and the Idolatry of the Mass, and cast off the Popes Tyranny and
some other corruptions of Rome, yet retained Adoration of the Sacrament,
kneeling to it, Surplices, Images, Holy days, and could not be content to do
this themselves, unless they could persuade and enforce all Protestants to do
so likewise. Hence they will not own the Calvinists as brethren, nor hold any
Communion with them, nor receed from any thing they had taken up, but rather
proceed to take in more of the Popish Doctrines, as those we call Arminianism,
and have often treated, seriously some of them, about reconciliation with the
Papists; but always frustrated, yea detested any endeavors of it with the
Calvinists: Thus the Conformists of England have contended so much for their
Liturgy and Service, and Government, etc. That they would compel all to be
content with the same moddle with themselves, and would not suffer any to be
Ministers or Members of the Church, that would desire any further reformation:
and at last come to this pitch, that they would rather take in more of Rome,
yea reconcile with her upon some terms, than abate any thing to their brethren.
Nor were these the actions of a few particular men, but of all the Heads of the
Church, Archbishops and Bishops generally age after age. The worst of their
principle and practices were never condemned by the Church, but made the way to
the highest preferments; so that the moderation of a few amongst them will no
more excuse the Church of England, then a few sober Papists may excuse the
Church of Rome.

CHAP. IV. The Non-conformists instified in their Principles by Scripture,
Antiquity, and the Example of all Reformed Churches.
THe Non-conformists as they gave the forenamed reasons why they could not
approve of, or subscribe to the Constitutions of the Church of England, so they
supposed that this their dissent was not grounded upon mere scruples and
weakness of judgment (though their Opposites love to impute it to such Causes)
but they alleged for themselves the Authority of Scripture, and the Examples
both of the Primitive and the late Reformed Churches.

1. From the Scriptures they pleaded, that there was neither command, example,
nor shadow of any Liturgy, i. e. prescript form of words, wherein all the
public worship of God should be administered, either in the Old or New
Testament, under the Law the externals and circumstances of Gods worship were
much more prescribed and limited than under the Gospel, as the place, the
Tabernacle or Temple time, Morning and Evening, yet was it never commanded that
all the Priests and People should use the same form of words in prayer, when
and where ever they met. There is indeed a form of blessing the people, when
the Assembly was to be dismissed, but that consisted in but a few words, nor
can it be proved that they used always those very words, or that it was so
intended in the command, ( Number. 6.22. to the end,) the same words are often
used in Scripture to signify the same sense, or to that purpose, not the same
Syllables, and so it is in all Authors, nor is there any form of words
prescribed wherein men should confess their sins over the Sacrifices, or
wherein Circumcision or the Passover should be administered, but on the contrary
we find, David, Solomon, Jehosaphat, Hazekiah, Ezra, the Levites in Nehemiah's
time and others prayed pro re nata according to the occasion, as their own
hearts directed them. And therefore it seems as God did not command, so neither
did the Jewish Church make and enjoin any stated Liturgy, unless any shall
unhappily take the Superstious and ridiculous Liturgy of the present Jews to
have been used amongst them from the beginning: Certainly there is no footsteps
of any such thing in our Saviors time, who duly kept to the rules of Gods
worship, and broke no good orders of the Church. The Apostles also as long as
they could, frequented the Jewish Temple and Synagogues, but of any Platforms
of Prayer or Service, other then the institutions of the Law, we find no
memorial; Now if the Jewish Priesthood were able to discharge their Office
without prescript forms of words, and that people might be safely committed to
their Priests in the exercise of each man's own gifts, how much better may it be
done, and such liberty granted, both to Ministers and People under the Gospel,
where the Spirit of God, and the means of knowledge are given much more
abundantly? Nor are there more evidences of any Liturgy in the New Testament,
then their was in the old either prescribed by Christ, or his Apostles, or used
by them, or commanded to future Churches. Nor any rule laid down whereupon
Churches might ground their practice of framing, and imposing such Lyturgies,
But we read, that when our Lord Jesus ascended into Heaven he gave gifts to
men, Ephesians. 4.16 etc. viz. Apostles Prophets, and Evangelists to lay the
foundation of his Church, and Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature in Jesus Christ, ver. 12, 13. from whence it seems
plain, that our Lord Jesus Christ thought it sufficient to appoint a standing
Ministry to take care of his Church to the end of the world, and to furnish
them with the gifts of his Spirit to edify the people, and to keep the unity
of the faith, with out requiring, or authorizing them, to make Lyturgies,
whereby to fetter themselves, or others.

Moreover the Scriptures give neither command, example, nor countenance, to the
peoples answering in Public worship more then Amen; only, at the close of
Public Prayer. It is probable that the Singers in the Temple standing Ward
against Ward, did sing alternately, i. e. one rank one sentence, and another
rank another, as they do in our Cathedrals, but this was not the people, and
they were an Order of men appointed by David by Divine inspiration, for this
work, and so the manner and method also, was appointed by God, and Art, and
rules of Music, were then acceptable, and part of the Ceremonial worship. But
there being such Offices, nor such service appointed in the Christian Church,
this is no warrant for our Responses.

Neither do the Scriptures give any warrant or example for observing days as
sacred in the honor of Saints, Or of instituting new Offices in the Church, or
new Ceremonies of worship, but on the contrary our Savior declares that men
worship in vain that teach for Doctriens the Commandments of men, Matthew. 15.9.
It seems then, That Decency and Order which men purposely devise to add
significancy or comeliness to gods worship is abominable in his sight, he has
no need of man's service, and therefore will accept of nothing but what is
appointed and carried on by his own Spirit.

Neither do the Scriptures appoint or warrant any superiority of Bishops above
ordinary Ministers, at least not such as that they should have sole power of
governing the Church. The high Priests of old had no such power of the Priests
as this Learned Doctor has proved in his Irenicum, They had some peculiar
things appropriated to their office, but were themselves subject to the
Sanhedrim. The Apostles were all of one Order, and had no authority over each
other, and governed the Church only by consent, Gal. 2.9. Nor is there any
distinction made betwixt ordinary Ministers, except what they see needful to
make amongst themselves, for the good of the Church. This all our old Bishops
acknowledged, and therefore pleaded for Episcopacy only as an humane
constitution; And those who of late wrote for its Divine-right, do yet, the
most learned of them acknowledge, that it cannot be proved from Scripture,
unless perhaps from the angels of the Church of Asia, which this Dr. has
solidly confuted.

It was always objected to the Non-conformists, that the Scriptures do not
forbid those things though they do not command them, But they replied that the
Non-command of any thing in Gods worship and Church is a prohibition, except of
those things only that occasionally become necessary, or that are naturally,
necessary circumstances of such actions as are commanded; for it would argue
great imperfection in the Law, if it should omit things that are constantly or
generally necessary for the good of the Church: And as Moses closed his Law
with this command that none should add or diminish it, so Christ having given
his Law to his Church, and appointed Officers with power to make, govern, and
cast members out of it as there was need, without giving them liberty to add
or alter; He also did virtually prohibit such additions or alterations, till he
shall come again, and their Commission being only to teach, baptize, and to
teach all that Christ commands to the end of the world, Mat. 28.18.19. This
does sufficiently restrain them from making or teaching cammands of their own,
all their authority being grounded on that Commission.

2. From Antiquity the Non-Conformists allege that the primitive Churches for
many hundred years had no stated Liturgies, prescribing the words as well as
method of worship.

Justin Martyr in his second Apoligy designedly gives an account of the
Christian worship, viz, the order and method of praying, preaching, admitting
of Members, administering both Sacraments, but has no word of a prescribed
form; but he says the Minister prayed (...) as he was able, Tertullian giving
the same account in his Apol. Cap. 39. says likewise, sine monitore quia de
pectore oramus they prayed by heart, and therefore had no prompter, much less a
book.

We read that Constantine the great, Eusebius. de vit: constant. l. 4. cap: 19.20.
having abolished idolatry, composed a form of Prayer for his Heathen
Soldiers, wherein t hey should pray to one God the Creator of all things, but
we read of no form imposed on Christians. There are indeed Lyturgies that go
under the names of the Apostle James, Basil, Chrysostom, and Ambrose; but they
convince themselves to be forged by later men, and so are an argument that
there were no such things in the primitive times, but when the Church was
overrun with errors and superstitions, it was appointed in Africa, that the
Ministers should either receive a form of Prayer from their Bishops, Cansil.
Milevet. 2 dum. Can. 12.
or show their own Prayer to them for their approbation, but this was above 400
years after Christ, the usurpation of Bishops, Lazines, and ambition of
Ministers, ignorance and superstition in the people bred Liturgies, and they
grew up together. Nor is their any mention of Responses in the Ancient Church,
a superstitions story of a vision of Angels singing an Hymn, in that manner by
turns, is pretended to be seen by Ignatius, dead long before, nor had the
ancient Church, days holy to Saints for 300 years and upward, we find only
mention amongst them of Easter Day, and yet that caused such division and
contentions that it might have been a warning to after ages for contending
about things that God has not commanded.

The Apocryphal Books were indeed read in the Christian Church very anciently,
though they never were amongst the Jews, but it was more excusable in them then
in us, because it was long e're the books of the Scripture, especially the
books of the New Testament were gathered into one Volumn, or it was agreed
among the Churches which were Canonical, and which Apocryphal, for some of the
Apocryphal were read in some Churches as Canonical, and some of the Canonical
were by some Churches rejected. The Cross in Baptism was so long unknown to the
Church that it is hard to say when it came in, though the sign of the Cross was
commonly used amongst them upon their Clothes, in their Hats, to distinguish
them from Heathens, and as a token that they were Christians, the Montanists
began to make a superstititious use of the Cross, and so did many others soon
after Constantine himself can scarce be excused, if Eusebius be credited, but
that it was annexed to Baptism, and made a symbol of men's embracing
Christianity, there is no record. Kneeling at the Lords Supper was not enjoined
till transubstantion was established above 1200 years after Christ, nor is any
general example for it pretneded in former ages.

The Surplice was much Elder then the Cross in Baptism, or kneeling at the
Supper, yet for 200 years and upwards there is no mention of it, nor is it
known when or how it came in; many Rites, Customs and Ceremonies were used in
the Primitive Churches, some being derived from the Jews, some from the
Heathens by the converts of both sorts, yet not imposed upon others, the
Apostles Rule being yet observed that no man should judge another in meats or
drinks, Col. 2.16. Romans 14.
or in respect of an holy day, i. e. the Jewish Festivals, which were once of
divine institution.

Nor did the first Churches pretend to make new Officers, or constitute any
Government other then Christ appointed, Presbyters and Deacons are the Church
Officers which they owned, indeed there is frequent mention of Bishops in
Ancient Authors: but Augustine 400 years after Christ, says, that a Bishop was
but titulus honoris a name of honor given to one Minister above the rest, but
that they were all alike, and his contemporary Hierome, olim Ecclesiae Communi
Presbyterorum concilio regebantur, that Churches were governed by the common
consent of the Presbytery; and of the practice of his own time he, says quid
facit Episcopus excepta ordinatione quod non facit Presbyter, nothing but
Ordination was appropriated to the Bishop, the Presbyters did every thing else
as well as he, Jerome. Epist. ad Evag.
diverse learned men (never yet answered,) have proved that all antiquity
acknowledged Bishops and Presbyters to be but one order of Ministers, and our
Dr thought it once impossible certainly to state what was the Government of the
Primitive Church, but this is certain that in Cyprians time, Anna Christi 250,
the Bishop did nothing in the Government without the consent of his Clergy, and
approbation of the people, and to them Cyprian ascribes even to the common
people the chief power of choosing and refusing their Bishops, Epist. 4.
and of withdrawing from them that were unworthy, so that all that has been
said in the defense, or excuse of our prelacy with sole power of government
administered by Laymen, is nothing to the purpose, when we dispute whether
Christ appointed, or the Primitive Church had Bishops; seeing all sides agree
that, That, Church never had such Bishops, and such Discipline, or any Bishops
at all but what were chosen by the Clergy and people for near a Thousand years.

3. Nor do the Reformed Churches retain those things which our Non-conformists
scruple; They all wholly laid aside both the substance and the Form of the Roman
service. Their Lyturgie, Responses, short prayers, repetitions, Ceremonies, and
use of the Apocryphal writings; also their Government and Discipline, except
the Lutherans, who retain many of their Ceremonies, and Holy Days, with some
of their errors in Doctrine. The Protestants have generally composed short
Lyturgies of their own, containing some few forms of Prayer, together with a
Method of Public worship, and directions for Visitation of the sick, etc. But
they neither put in things that may be serupled, nor imposed forms of words on
their Ministers, as our Lytourgy does in all Offices, Public and Private. The
Waldenses our first Reformers, and a Noble race of Confessors and Martyrs,
governed themselves by the Common consent of their Pastors and Elders chosen
out of the People. Hist. Waldens. lib. 2. cap. 2. and 4. as do all the Reformed
Churches at this day except the Lutherans. The Bohemians indeed, and some
Waldenses in Austria thought a Bishop necessary by Divine Institution, but that
he was to do nothing in the Church of himself, but all by the consent of the
Presbyters, Commend. Exhort.
and witthe approbation of the people, which is Cyprians Bishop, not an English
Prelate. The Lutherans have their Superintendents or Bishops, but by humane
Constitution and such as deprive not the Ministers of their Office.

Now seeing Scripture, Antiquity, and the practice of all Reformed Churches do
so much favor their cause; The Non-conformists thought they had a great deal
of reason to persist in their desire of further Reformation in the Church of
England, and in their dissent from those things for which nothing material can
be soberly pleaded, but the command of the Magistrate. So that all the blame of
want of Perfect Reformation, and of keeping up divisions in our own Church, and
turning its Ceesures against many of its best members, is from age to age laid
wholly upon the Kings and Parliaments by those who would yet be taken for the
greatest maintainers of reverence of Authority.

CHAP. V. The Reasons of the present Non-conformists, in Particular for their
dissent.
THe Non-conformists of the present Age, viz. such as cannot conform to the
Lyturgy of the Church of England, according to Act of Uniforty made 1662, have
all the same reasons for their Nonconformity, that their Predecessors had,
and some new ones peculiar to themselves, for both all the same things in the
Lyturgy and Government which were a burden to their Fathers, are imposed on
them, without the least abatement, amendment, or alteration; and also new
impositions are laid upon them, to make the yoke more intolerable, These are
such as follow,

1. That they were denied all Reformation of the Lyturgy and Government of the
Church. It was now somewhat above an hundred years that there had been
continued desires of amendment in the Lyturgy and Government, but none could be
obtained. King James in the beginning of his Reign made a show of hearing the
Non-conformists objections in the Conference at Hampton Court, But the issue
was only to make a greater pretense to enjoin Conformity more strictly, as
having heard all their Reasons against it, and found nothing worthy
consideration in them. In like manner the present Non-conformists were dealt
with, for as we are told in the Preface to the Act of Uniformity: First some
Divines both Conformists and Non-conformists were by Commission appointed to
review the Service book, and to make necessary amendments in it; next, a
Convocation of the Conforming Clergy was called to re-view the book, last of
all his Majesty had seen and re-viewed what they had done, and the issue of all
this was, that the Epistles and Gospels should be read in the new Translation,
and to amend two or three words, which by the fault of the Printers had crept
into the Book and spoiled the sense, and nothing considerable, and then the
Book passed an Act of Parliament, requiring more rigorous Conformity then ever
before. The Parliament not once reading the book, but with an implicit faith
(as a Member of the House of Commons said) passed, and confirmed (under the
highest penalties next to death it self,) that which they never saw, nor
examined. And yet now the Reasons for Nonconformity were stronger then before,
There had been sufficient time to wean the people from the Modes and Ceremonies
in dispute, yea and the body of the people were now sufficiently weary of them,
and the greater number of Learned and pious Ministers desired they might be
laid aside above all, they had been laid aside about sixteen years, and the
people were well content, nor was there any decay of knowledge, or piety
amongst them upon this alteration. Now was there a fair occasion to have
amended any thing amiss, and for the Bishops to have there Nonconforming
brethren gratified in any reasonable things, who were now as considerable as
themselves for Number, and interest with the People, and yet offered to consent
to any reasonable terms of accommodation; surely all this did neither encourage
nor oblige the Non-conformists to submit to that new Act of Uniformity.

2. But instead of amending any thing amiss, or disliked in the Liturgy, some
things were added to make it more offensive, viz, Sundays are more expressly
reckoned as Church-Feasts; than in the former book, the new book says thus, a
Table of all the Feasts that are to be observed in the Church of England
through the year, all Sundays in the year. The former book thus, these holy
days to be observed and no other, all Sundays in the year; The word Holy Day,
which was somewhat suspicious is now changed to Feast Day, and Sundays put in
the number of Feast-days, without any distinction, which makes it more evident
that they are accounted but Church Festivals. The 29 of September in the old
book is appointed a Festival to Michael the Archangel, the new book adds, and
to all Angels, so that this is a Festival in the honor of all the Angels as
the First of November. is in honor of all the Saints, also two new Holy Days are
added, never before enjoined by the former book, viz: St Paul's Conversion, and
St Barnabas. Moreover in the book of Consecration several passages are added,
declaring Bishops to be a distinct order from the Presbyters, and the 36th
Artic. is appointed to be understood of this book, herein they contradict the
Law, and the Judgment of all our first Reformers in K. Edw. and Q. Eliz. days,
and the very book of Consecration it self.

3. Nevertheless all Ministers are to approve this book, and that by a public
declaration in the Congregation, when they first enter upon their Ministry in
these words and no other, I, vid. Act. of unif. Ann. 14 Can. 2.
A, B do here declare my unfeigned assent, and consent, to all and every thing
contained and prescribed in, and by the book entitled the book of Common
Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church, according to the use of the Church of England, together with the
Psalter of Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches;
and the form or manner of making, ordaining, and consecrating of Bishops,
Priest and Deacons. It is said in excuse of this imposition, that it is only a
consent to the use, not an approbation of the truth, and goodness, of all
contained in the book, because the words immediate foregoing are, that
Ministers should declare their unfeigned assent and consent to the use of all
things in that book contained and prescribed. Be it so, and that the words
Assent and Consent signify the same things after the manner of Lawyers, though
some doubt it, and those words to the use, and c. are not expressed in the form
of a Declaration, which they ought to have been; yet we must observe. First,
That this was a further alteration of the Case of Conformity, to make it more
intolerable, Q. Eliz. Act of Uniformity, only required that Ministers should
be bound to read the book of Common Prayer, and no other Liturgies or forms of
prayer in public: The Canons went further, and did require they should
subscribe at their Ordination before the Bishop, that the book of Common Prayer
and of Ordination has nothing in it contrary to the word of God, that it may
be lawfully used, and that he himself will use that, and no other; but this new
Declaration is to be made publicly before the Congregation on forfeiture of
their Ministry and place, that so there may be no favor showed to any. Also it
requires unfeigned Assent and Consent, which cannot mean less then an hearty
approbation of the use of what is enjoined, which is much more then barely to
judge that nothing is contrary to Gods word, and that they may be Lawfully
used. This Assent and Consent is to be made to all, and every thing contained
in, and prescribed by the book of Common Prayer, etc. and then the particulars
are specified, viz: the Prayers, the Administration of Sacraments, and of other
Rites and Ceremonies, and the book of ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
and the Psalter or Psalms of David, as they use to be said in the Church of
England. Here is nothing omitted of all those things the Non-Conformists used
to object against, some as unlawful, and others as inconvenient, and not for
edification, yet now they must from their hearts allow the use of them each one
in particular, not omitting the corrupt translation of the Pslams, contradicted
by our own allowed Bibles, which how they could do, who long contended that
many of these things ought to be reformed, let all that have Conscience judge.
The Non-Conformists think no form of words could have been contrived more
spitefully either to keep them from conforming, or to make them lay wast their
Consciences, if they did conform, besides that, they know from the mouths of
the compilers, that they did design it for these ends, that they might either
root out every branch of Conformity out of men's judgments, or every
Nonconformist out of the Church.

4. The Act requires this Assent and Consent, not only of all that should
hereafter enter the Ministry, but of all those likewise that were already
Ministers, and were either Pastors or Lecturers in any Congregation, and this
Declaration to be made together with the subscription hereafter to be mentioned
by a certain day, viz, before the 24th of August, Anno 1662, whereas it is
generally known that the book of Common Prayer came not out of the press
abroad, till within two or three days of that said 24th of August, so that it
was impossible that it should be seen, much more that it should be considered
by half the Ministers in England before that day, and those that were resolved
to keep their Places, did a great part of them subscribe before they had read
the book; which practice does manifest a further design to root out all that
made any Conscience of what they said or subscribed, seeing they must do it
without consideration, or loose their places; however to devise and impose new
Terms of Communion upon men, that are in the quiet possession and practice of
their ministry is very unjust and contrary to all peace; and by this practice
men shall never be at quiet, for though they have conformed to all things
enjoined, they know not how soon a prevailing faction will enjoin them more,
nor what that will be, especially the things enjoined in the Declaration and
Subscription being such as was known before hand, many of the Ministers in
place could not subscribe to, with safe Consciences. It is apparent that their
design was, not the peace of the Church, but to remove them out of the Church.

5. It is further required, that all should have Episcopal Ordination, who
should in any sort exercise the Ministry, had this concerned only those that
should thereafter come to be ordained, it had been more tolerable (though it
would have been contrary to Q. Eliz. moderation, and reflecting upon all other
reformed Churches, An. Eliz. 13.
who have not Episcopal Ordination, and yet do receive and permit our Ministers
among them that are Episcopally ordained,) but to impose upon them that were
Ministers already, and had performed all offices as Ministers many years, and
many of them with good success, and who could not, if they would be ordained by
Bishops for near twenty years before, there being also no Law or Canon,
requiring all the Ministers of the Church of England to be ordained by a Bishop
as necessary to their Ministry. I say, now to impose upon these men, that they
must leave their places or be ordained by the Bishop, was purposely to cast a
stumbling block before them not easily to be passed over, for hereby they must
acknowledge Presbyterian Ordination to be unlawful, contrary to the judgment
and practice of all Ages and Churches, Vid. Blandel Apol. C. 2. and Masons
vind: of the Ordin. of Ref. Churches.
and particularly of our own till this time, and also acknowledge themselves
all this while, to have been no Ministers, and their Baptism to be no Baptism,
unless Laymen may Baptize which is contrary to the Common Prayer book reformed
by K. James in that point, who could do this that have not consigned over their
Conscience to the will of men?

6. The Act further requires that all Ministers, whether ordained or to be
ordained, should before the Ordinary make this following subscription. I. A. B.
do declare that it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take arms
against the King, and that I do abhor that traiterous position of taking Arms
by his authority against his Person, or against those that are Commissioned by
him, and than I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is
now by Law established, and I do declare that I do hold, there lies on
Obligation upon me, or any other person, from the Oath commonly called the
Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of Government
either in Church or State, and that the same was in it self an Unlawful Oath,
and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and
Liberties of this Kingdom. The two first clauses of this subscription are
merely civil, concerning Civil Government, and some circumstances of that
Government, not the substance of it, and things greatly controverted amongst
Lawyers and Statesmen. Now to impose such things upon Ministers of the Gospel,
that belong not to their office to know, much less to determine is very
unreasonable, and to impose things concerning secular affairs, as Conditions or
Terms of being ordained Ministers of the Gospel, is a great usurpation on the
Authority of Chirst, as if he must not have Ministers in his Church, unless
they engage at the same time to serve the particular ends of a State. Besides,
the first caluse, viz. That it is unlawful to take up Arms against the King
upon any pretense whatsoever, is doubtful in the sense, viz, whether it
respect the Law of the Land, or the Law of God, and therefore cannot with good
Conscience be subscribed. And if it be meant of the Law of God, it is against
the judgment of the best Lawyers, as well as of the best Divines, it has no
tolerable proof from Scripture. They that abuse the 13th to the Romans, to that
purpose, forget or are ignorant, that Nero whom they say the Apostle meant, was
adjudged a public Enemy of the Senate of Rome, and sentenced to dye: it is
therefore a most unreasonable thing that this should be imposed to be
subscribed by all young men entering into the Ministry, which may by the Canons
be at the Age of 24 years, (and by practice seldom exceeds) before they can be
fit to judge of such points.

The second clause, viz. I abhor, etc. in its full extent is against the
known Laws and practice of the Land, in diverse instances given by others, and
practiced in several Causes, in his now Majesty's Reign; And must Ministers be
turned out, and be debarred of the Ministry unless they will wound, their own
and their Countries Rights and liberties, and that for the most part before
they understand what they do? Moreover that the true meaning of these two
clauses is a snare to the people, and dangerous to their Rights and Privileges
(contrary to all the lax interpretations devised by some) appears beyond
contradiction, by the sense that the House of Peers gave of them, both the
words, and design of imposing, when they so vigorously opposed its being made a
Test for all Parliament men in all future Ages. And let it be remembered that
these were the Lawmakers, and most of them persons concerned in making this
Law, therefore best knew the meaning of those passages, and also had Authority
to declare the sense of them, and were yet sitting in that same Parliament,
that made the law.

The third clause in this subscription is, I will conform to the Lyturgy of the
Church of England; This was to oblige the young Fellows of Colleges, and
Tutors in the Universities, before they came to give Assent and Consent, and to
be a double cord upon the Ministry. But many who could silently conform, cannot
solemnly subscribe a promise to conform, whereby they pre-engage themselves
against all change of their judgments.

There fourth clause is, That I hold that there lies no obligation on me from
the Covenant, nor upon any other that took it, to endeavor any alteration in
Government in Church or State. There is scarce a parallel in all History to
this, That a man should be compelled to swear for others, that they are not
obliged by an Oath that they took; The imposers might as well have said, we
will make you swear to any thing we please, or else you shall not continue in
the Church: But the Non-conformists desire to be satisfied, how the King (to
pass by all others) who swore to prosecute the ends of the Covenant in a most
Public and solemn manner, and that before he had sworn to maintain Episcopacy,
and agreed to take it upon mature deliberation and advice, and that at Breda
when he was under no fear or constraint, how he should not be bound to the
Reformation he then promised, and what man can absolve him from that Oath,
especially an English Parliament, when that Oath was made to the Stots; it
being an unquestionable rule, That none can release another from a lawful Oath,
but those to whom the Oath was made, and into whose power the Jurer has put
himself by that Oath, This ought to have been first cleared, and not rigorously
imposed.

Lastly, It must be subscribed, That the Covenant in it self was an unlawful
Oath, which the Non-conformists dissallowing, our English Prelacy can by no
means assent to; And that it was imposed against the known Laws and Liberties
of this land, which few Ministers have law enough to know, and therefore it
ought not to be made a condition of the Ministry to subscribe it.

The Non-conformists find that this Act is wholly contrived to make them disown
and disparage that Reformation which they had been engaged in for twenty year,
and to make themselves transgressors, to reproach their Brethren that were
dead, to disparage all the Providence of God in their behalf, and to villifie
the success of their own Ministry, and the growth of Religion and Sobriety in
the Nation which they had seen, and been instruments of, and moreover to engage
them against all endeavor of Reformation for the future, and all those
principles which their pious Predecessors had delivered to them, And therefore
they think he that can do this is a servant of men and not of Christ.

They do not justify all proceedings in the endeavors for Reformation, never
any such thing was attempted without many infirmities in the best, and
transvers designs in selfish men. There were never more Heresies, Schisms, and
Superstitions in the Church, then were in the Apostles days, and those that
immediately succeeded, proportionable to the number of Christians, the Gospel
being then but setting up in the world; But the Reformation it self being good
and necessary, and the effects of it as to Religion manifest they cannot revile
or renounce, without condemning those principles, which animated them to bring
in the King, without regard of their own peersonal peace, or interest: It is
said that Reformation wanted Authority, it did so, such as should make it
National, but selves, and Rulers ought to protect them in it, and not to
trouble them for it, or force them from it.

CHAP. VI. The Judgment and Practice of the present Non-conformists concerning
Communion with, and Separation from the Church of England.
HAving given the Principle Reasons why many Ministers both formerly, and in
this present Age cannot conform, i. e. approve and subscribe to the Lyttergy of
the Church of England, as it contains all things belonging to Public Worship.
It is needful that we set down what are their thoughts concerning their present
case, and what their practice ought to be in reference to the Church of
England, that their friends may not mistake, and think they maintain principles
of Anarchy and Confusion (which if they did they would long since have come to
naught) and that their ill-willers may not have opportunity to slander them, by
misrepresenting them as enemies to all Government, and as inconsistent with
themselves, as this Dr. has done. Therefore,

1. The Non conformists conceive the case betwixt them and the Conformists
Clergy to be much the same as betwixt the Lutherans and Calvinists in Germany,
or betwixt the Papists and Protestants, since the Council of PTrent, i. e.
differences are come to the highest extremity under blood, (and that only,
because it is not in Clergy men's power,) and are utterly irreconcilable The
Lutherans formerly had some men amongst them of some moderation, and the things
in question betwixt them and the Calvinists were disputed and debated, and men
left to their liberty both in judgment and practice, but when they got strength
enough, then they imposed their subscriptions, deposed and imprissoned the
Calvinists, enveighed against them with all bitterness, will admit of no
treaties of Reconciliation, and finally are so obstinately fixed in their own
way, as that they will much rather go three steps backwards to Rome, then come
one forwards toward the Calvinists; the Papists also though they earnestly
opposed the Reformation, yet they maintained disputes and debates, held
conferences and consultations with our first Reformers, and forbore violence
(at least by means of the Princes,) a good while, so that there was hopes the
Church might have been reformed without any fatal breach, hCharles 5th then
Emperor, and Francis the 1st K. of France, and others carnestly endeavoring
to bring it about, but when after all, the Council that had been desired on
both sides met at Trent, and excluded the Protestants from voting amongst them,
and established all the errors and corruptions of the Church of Rome, which
the Protestants condemned, and cursed all the Doctrines and Practices of the
Protestants, point by point, that they should have heard and examined. And
finally, ordered all that should be ordained to the Ministry to subscribe to
this Council; There was now no more hope of Reformation of the Church, or of
pacification betwixt dissenting parties. Thus the Nonconformist; being of the
same date with the Conformists, Bishop Hooper, Bish. Coverdale, Mr. Rogers, Mr.
Bradford, with others of the first Reformers, being dissatisfied with the
established Lyturgy, and still more and more successively in after Ages, were
at first treated like brethren, and though the Lyturgy was established by Law,
by K. Edw. and Q. Eliz. yet they required not subcriptions to sit, or
approbation of it, being content with a silent practice of what was enjoined,
and very frequently passed over with silence, the omission or non-practise of
the Ceremonies, and other things enjoined, till Archbishop Whitgifts days;
all which time the Non-comformists had still hopes things might have been
accommodated, and they appplied themselves to Princes and Parliaments to that
end.

At length the Canons in 1605 made by the whole Convocation (but with as fair
play as those at Trent) and ratified by the King, established all things that
the Non-comformists complained of, and that not in the gross, but point by
point, and fortified them with the Censures of the Church against all
Dissenters, and finally required all Ministers to approve the Lyturgy by
subscription. Whereupon many werer turned out at present, and many kept from
the Ministry, nevertheless these subscriptions were private before the Bishops
and Ordinaries, who might and did frequently either omit, the subscription, or
qualify it, with such interpretations, that many who were in their Judgments
Nonconformists, could and did still get into and continue in places, and those
who were driven out of one Diocese, were frequently suffered to preach in
another, and they who could not be ordained by Bishops would procure Ordination
in other Protestant Countries; so that here was a little alleviation. There was
also one ground of hope elft, viz. these Canons were not Law, another King,
yea, the same that approved them, might have altered them, and therefore the
Non-conformists stretched their patience to the utmost, hoping that at last
their afflictions might be looked on by them that had power to remedy them, and
some appearance of it there was under the long Parliament, especially when the
King and they were upon terms of pacification, But behold the Conclusion, We
have at length the private subscription to the Common prayer Book turned into a
Public solemn Declaration in the Congregation, and that in prescript form of
words, that there may be no moderation. And this to extend to the unfeigned
approbation of the use of every thing contained in the Book. And these
Episcopal Canons turned into a standing law, which equally extends to all parts
of the Realm, and to all times and ages successively, as much as men can oblige
them, so that there can easily be no alteration. And besides all this they must
not only approve the Liturgy, but they must renounce and disown all their own
and their Brethrens former endeavors for Reformation, and engage themselves
never to endeavor reformation again, and whereas formerly they who by the
Canons were made incapable of Livings, were neverthless permitted to preach
Lectures, and might sometimes administer the Sacraments, It Is now enjoined that
no man shall preach, or read any Lecture, unless he has first made the
forenamed Declaration and Subscription upon pain of enduring Three Months
imprisonment in the Common-Goal, and besides that, to pay an Hundred Pounds if
he presume to administer the Lords Supper toties quoties. Also the former
Non-Conformists were wont to teach School, at least privately for the
subsistence of their Families, and that they might beof some use. But now none
must keep a public or private School without subscribing against endeavors of
Reformation, and promising to conform to the Liturgy. And all these impositions
are extended also to the University Collegiate Churches, Hospitals, that so
there should be no retirement for a Nonconformist, as formerly some have had
in such places, and that by pre-engaging the Youth before they understand what
they do, there might be no new Non-Conformists to spring up hereafter, finally
when by these men's they had turned out about Two Thousand Ministers out of
Livings, and Fellows of Colleges out of the Universities, and bolted the door
after them, that they could never return into either, and all this was born
with patience.

The Bishops procured another Act Anno 1665, to drive them out of all Towns,
where they might have any Society or Comfort, unless they would subscribe and
swear a Declaration to the same purpose with the former subscription, and
mostly in the same Language; and we add to all this, that these Declarations
and Subscriptions were at the same time imposed upon the Ministers of Ireland,
and Scotland, though Presbyterial-Government and Discipline was there
esttablished by Law, and their Constitution by the first Reformation, that so
there might be no relief, no retreat from one Kingdom to another, and that the
Principles of Nonconformity might be Rooted out of all-together, from hence I
say it is manifest that nothing would satisfy the Conformists but the Ruin of
the Non-Conformists then Living, and the extirpation of their Principles, out
of these Kingdoms for ever. And all this being settled by Law, there is no place
for the moderation of any particular men, either Bishops toward the
Non-Conformists, nor of Non-Conformists themselves that could go a great way
toward conformity, if they could not do all that was enjoined therefore the
breach is irreconcilable, and not to be made up, unless God incline King and
Parliament to take away these bones of Contention.

2. Nothing therefore now remains for the Non-Conformists, but that either they
set still as private men, and dye in silence, or else that they exercise their
Ministry against the Law, and to Congregations distinct from the Parish
Churches.

The Dr would persuade them to do the former, and that they sin against their
own Principles and Consciences, if they do the latter. But he must give us
leave to declare our own Principles, and then were are ready to hear what
consequences he can draw from them against our practice.

The Non-Conformists own these Principles as to the matter in hand.

1. That their ejection out of their Livings and Ministry was very unjust, both
in the thing it self, they having not deserved it of the Church or State, and
in the manner of proceeding, they being ejected not for any error in Doctrine,
or offense in manners, but only Terms were devised, which their Opposites knew,
they could not submit to, and imposed on them on purpose to turn them out of
their Ministry for refusing them.

2. They are satisifed that the turning out of so great a number of pious and
diligent Ministers at once, was a very great prejudice to the Church of God at
home, Prophanes, Popery, Atheism, and all that is evil presently breaking in
upon her as a flood, and a great scandal to the Churches abroad, to see their
Brethren of the same principles so dealt with by Protestants, for no other
reason but for holding and endeavoring the same things, that all reformed
Churches generally do.

3. Being unjustly ejected, their are satisfied that they have neither
forfeited their Ministry, and therefore ought not to lay it down nor lost their
right to their people and Congregations any more then a Civil Magistrate driven
out by an Usurper, and excluded by Laws, loses his Native Right to his People
and Government.

4. The people greatly wanting their Ministry, they are satisfied that as they
have a right to their Congregations, so they ought to make use of it for the
peoples good, where they desire it, and will accept it.

5. They also believe that Ministers having not given any just occasion for
their ejection, the People ought to stick to them, and to oppose any that shall
come in their room, on the account of this Act as Intruders and Usurpers,
unless special reasons alter the case in some places, and as to some persons.
Thus the Orthodox generally did when turned out by Arian Emperors, and Arians
sent in their room, the Ministers cleaved to their people, and the people to
them: They cause alters not the ease here, they did it against Law, and that
which warranted them, will warrant our Non-Conformists with advantage.

6. They believe that those Congregations thus deprived of their Ministers, may
choose other Non-conformists if they cannot have their own, or may choose others
in their room after they are dead, and that they ought to do so, unless in
singular cases, because else they loose their undoubted privilege of choosing
their Ministers, and lay themselves open to a perpetual usurpation, to have
their Ministers torn from them, and others imposed on them at the pleasure of
Superiors, and also they do at least tacitly consent to, and approve of this
ejection of their Ministers, subversion of Reformation, and establishment of
Conformity for ever.

7. They believe that the people of England having been generally engaged to,
and active for reformation with the Non-Conformists, and against Conformity
less then is now established, and having felt the benefit of it, are obliged
each one in their place to oppose and testify against this rigorous Conformity,
and not to submit to it, and that otherwise they disown their own former works,
and their Ministers, and give themselves and their liberties in Church matters,
and their Consciences all-together into the hands of Church Usurpers, when ever
they can prevail with the Civil Magistrate to join with them.

8. And that therefore the people who are sensible of this great Usurpation,
and of the great blow given to the Church by it, and how just the cause of the
Non-Conformists is, ought on these accounts to own both them and their
ministry, as there is occasion, though they never were their proper Pastors,
for the Communion of Saints extends to owning of their sufferings and
themselves in them, when they are for the same general or more particular cause.

9. They are sure that the Ministers and Peoples adhereing to each other in
such a case is agreeable to Scripture, which makes Mininisters the sole
Governors of the Church, as it is a spiritual Commonwealth under Christ, and
gives the people the sole power of gathering themselves into Congregations for
their own best edification, and to choose their own Ministers.

10. And they are sure that the practice is agreeable to the practice of the
Universal Church both before and after they were under Christian Magistrates,
till the Pope at once wrested from the Magistrates their supreme power in their
Dominions, and from the Churches all their authority of Governing themselves,
and as the ruin of Religion followed thereupon in the Church, all things being
disposed of by the Lusts of the Bishop of Rome, so there would be no way to
prevent the like, should all be left to the wills of the Civil Magistrate, or a
few Church men that guide and influence him.

11. As a people under Usupers in their Civil-Rights may and ought to provide
what they can for their own liberties and safety, till they can recover their
ancient privileges and rightful Governnours, still doing nothing against the
public good, so they think the people of England being under great usurpation
and oppression in Ecclesiastical Government, are bound to provide the best they
can for their own Souls, and the Principle Ends of a Church, till Right and
Truth may take place, still having respect to the general good and peace of the
Church.

Upon these principles many Non-conformists still keep to their own
Congregations, some gather new ones, and become Pastors to them, and some
preach to Assemblies of people, that voluntarily come to hear them, without
taking full pastoral charge of them; yet all maintain a brotherly communion
with the Parishes and Ministers of the Church of England, not forbiding their
people to hear and own them as brethren, and occasionally at least, to hold
Communion with them in all things that are not against their Consciences. Now
if from these principles, or this practice the Dr. can convince the
Non-conformists of Schism, or sinful separation or allowing that in the people
which they are not satisfied in themselves, They would gladly accept his
endeavors herein, but will not be concerned with such that have sold their
Consciences to get a poor livelihood, by defending what ever the Rulers say or
do.

CHAP. VII. An Answer to some passages in the Drs Sermon, tending to prove the
Non-conformists Preaching to be Schism by their own Principles.
WE will now briefly consider what the Dr. Rhetorically insinuates, rather
then argues against the Non conformists preaching in private, though they are
driven out of the Churches.

1. To object That they acknowledge the Church of England to be true in
Doctrine, Sacraments and Worship.

Sermon. p. 21. 2. That the Parishes of England, at least some of them are true
Churches.

3. That it is lawful to hold Communion with them sometimes, and upon occasion.

Answ. 1. All this will prove no more than that the Non-conformists ought not
to unchurch the Parishes of England, or to account their Ministers and
Sacraments Null, or to disown the people to be their brethren, as some of the
Brownists are said to do.

2. The Dr has given much occasion in his Writings, to many to think, that he
grants as much of the Church of Rome as he here says, the Non-conformists
do, of the Church of England, viz. that it is true in Doctrine, Sacraments, and
Worship, that the Parishes are true Churches, and that it is simply lawful to
hold occasional communinon with them, for they have the true Doctrine,
Sacraments and worship, for the substantials of them, though defaced in
circumstances and many corruptions added to them, yet he will not say that it
was not lawful, yea necessary to break off from her, and to oppose her.

3. The question betwixt the Dr. and the Non-conformists is whether the
Nonconforming Ministers and people are bound silently to bear the usurpation
of the Bishops over them, in imposing unlawful and un-necessary things upon
them, and casting them out of the Church for non submission, and not rather,
both to assert their own Rights and Privileges against such usurpation? The
Parishes being true Churches, and occasional communion in unquestionable things
being lawful, is nothing to this purpose. And if the Non-conformists are more
charitable and fair toward the Conformists (who are the great Schism makers,
by their rigorous impositions of things they confess un-necessary) than the
Conformists are to them, who are passive in the breach, and yet they will hold
no Communion with them; They think this should not be made an argument against
themselves.

Sermon. p. 30. 4. The Dr. has cited a pertinent example, though he thought to
anticipate us in it. The people of Constantinople he says when Chrysostom
their Bishop was thrust out and banished for doing his duty, and Arsaeius
imposed on them in his room, refused to join with him; This is the
Non-conformists case. But says he, when Atticus restored Chrysostom's name to
the Dipticks of the Church, then they returned to their ancient Communion, and
Chrysostom advized them to it. And when the Bishops will acknowledge as Atticus
here did, that the Non-conformists were wronged, and those that were put in
their places were intruders, and consequently take off the yoke of Conformity,
then they will do as the people of Constantinople did, till then this example
justifies the Non-conformists.

5. Though the Non-conformists allow Parish Congregations, and the Parishes of
England not to be disowned on that account, from being true Churches, yet the
Dr. knows, that those very men whom he quotes as most complying with him, do
deny those Parishes to be true Organical Churches, whose Ministers have not
power of Governing their people, or ought for their Doctrines and lives to be
expelled the Ministry.

6. The Non-conformists do not say, it is lawful to hold occasional Communion
in all things with the Parishes, but only in the substantials of worship; nor
with all Parishes, but with those only where they may join with some
edification. And because wise and learned men can distinguish the good from the
evil, they may join with many Ministers occasionally when the people may not,
for fear of their errors or because of their railing and reproaches of their
brethren or Godliness, by which this people will either be infected or
disturbed, so that they can receive no benefit.

2. The Dr. Argues, If occasional Communion be Lawful, it is hard to understand
that constant Communion should not be a Duty.

Answ. I allow him to mean amongst us who were once fellow Members of the same
Parishes, else his words have no force. But the Non-Conformists allow of
Occasional Communion to maintain Love and Peace amongst the People, and
Ministers that are peaceable, and to show that they do not esteem the
Impositions of the Church of England to be of so high a Nature as the
Corruptions of Rome, and that they should break off all Communion from them.
But if the ejected Ministers have still aright to their people, and the people
to them, and both are bound to oppose in their places the Uniformity imposed
with such Circumstances as it is, and as they maintain; it will not at all
follow that from occasional Brotherly Communion, they must become constant
Members of the Parishes, and be content with their Communion.

3. The Dr. frequently hints Authority and Government to which we must be
subject, and therefore if they eject Ministers, they must become Laymen, and
not Preach, In this he speaks sometimes of the Authority of the Church, and
sometimes of the Civil Magistrate.

Answ. And because this is a snare to many men's Consciences, We answer freely.

1. That the Authority of the Church of England as a Church has no Obligation
on the Consciences of Non-Conformists any further then prudence and peace does
direct them; for the Bishops, Deans, etc. which are the Rulers of it, supposing
them Lawful, yet being no way chosen by the People or Inferior Clergy, can
have no Lawful Ecclesiastical Authority over this Church, especially being
always protested against by a considerable part of the Ministers and People;
nor can the Lyturgy, or any thing else they impose oblige the Ministers and
People, being not advized with in such Impositions, nor heard speak for
themselves. Two Thousand Ministers as Orthodox diligent learned, and every way
considerable, as their Opposites, and pleading for no other things then many
such Ministers have pleaded for, from the beginning of our Reformation, are not
therefore bound in Conscience to submit to the Wills of the Bishops, because
they prevailed with the Civil Power to establish their Opinion.

2. The Civil Magistrate has Power to maintain and protect the Church, and to
see that she does her Duty, but to impose forms of Worship on her, without the
advice, and against the consent of those who are most concerned: He has no
power given him of God; much less to infringe her Privileges and Liberties, to
rend away her Pastors at pleasure, or to impose whom he please on her, and the
like; And where there is no Authority to command, that command cannot oblige to
obedience: Indeed where small things are enjoined that are not sinful, men may
obey, if prudential Reasons lead them to it; But if small things will usher in
great ones, and obedience will make way for more imposition. It was the
Apostles Judgment in a like case concerning the practice of the Jewish
Ceremonies, that such Imposers should be resisted. Gal. 2.11, 12.

Should our King of himself impose a Tax of a Farthing Pole, would not many
suspect, it might if peaceably paid, make way for greater Taxes, and so
undermine their Liberties in Parliament? Why should not men be as jealous of
the Liberties and Privileges of the Church, which concern the Honor of
Christ, and their own Souls good, especially knowing that the Western Church
was ruined and defaced by the Pope, merely by yielding and patient bearing of
gradual Impositions and encroachments in the better sort; and the worser sort
complying, and crying for Obedience to the Authority of the Church and
Governors.

Sermon. p. 19. 4. The Dr. says that we confess the case of the people is very
different from that of the Ministers, and therefore that they run into Schism
in hearing us, though we for some Sinister ends will not tell them of their
error.

Answ. Interest and passion will not suffer men to speak of such things as they
are concerned in, without uncharitable and un-scholer like reflections
sometimes, which I will pity, rather then retort; And to the thing, we answer,
That the Peoples case is indeed much different from the Ministers, as to Active
Conformity, i. e. They are not to Assent or Consent to all in the Service Book,
nor to subscribe as the Ministers must, in order to their holding Communion,
but passively the people are concerned as far as the Ministers, i. e. They are
to suffer all these things; Their Ministers to be cast out, and all Impositions
which they and their Fathers groaned under, to be enjoined with the greatest
rigor, and not show their dislike of any of them, upon pain of being accounted
Schismatics, according to the 27 Canon. So that the people are as much
wronged, and imposed on in their Capacities, as the Ministers are in theirs; We
grant that the People may hear and see those things done in Divine Service, and
so may Ministers also as private men, which conscientious Ministers ought not
to be active in. As our Savior was present at the Temple Worship, though there
were many Superstitions mixed by the Priests in those days, but what men may do
in some cases, they are not obliged to do in all cases, and people cannot be
obliged to suffer any sinful or doubtful things in the worship they join in,
unless there be some great reason why they may not forsake that worship; Now
the Non-Conformists affirm that the people are obliged in their capacities to
endeavor reformation of things amiss in the Church, and to own that
Reformation they had obtained, and to withstand the unjust intolerable
imposition of the last uniformity, as much as the Ministers are to do; all
these in their places. And therefore as it is no Schism for the Ministers to
preach, so neither is it any for the people to hear. That we may plainly
express the sense of the Non-Conformists in this point, and that the Dr may no
more mistake their Principles, and so labor in vain to convince them. They say
as Harnbeck advises the Cabornist: in reference to the Lutherans. That good
and peaceable men of each party should love each other, and hold as much
Brotherly Communion together as may be, but no more to endeavor any public
Reconciliation or Union, which the Heads and Leaders of the party have so often
frustrated and opposed, till God will give them a more Moderate Spirit, and
some fit reason may incline them to Union. The Question betwixt them and the Dr
plainly is.

1. Whether a multitude of Ministers being turned out of the Church to her
great and apparent damage, without so much as alleging any Crime against them,
but only imposing new things on them, on purpose to ensnare them, whether these
Ministers are bound to lay down their Ministry and live private, and not rather
to assert their own and the Churches Rights?

2. Whether the People thus wrongfully deprived of their Ministers, and imposed
upon also, against their own Judgments and Conscience, in matters of Divine
worship, whether they are bound to submit to the Intruders and Imposers, and
not rather to join with their injured Ministers, in asserting their own
privileges? The Dr's candor is too great to deny, that the reason of
Scripture and the practice of the best antiquity, before the Churches lost
their just liberty, is on the Non-Conformists side in these points.

3. Whether the Non-Conformists both Ministers and People are not greatly
strengthened both in their Nonconformity to the Lyturgy, and also in their
practice of holding Communion, together for self preservation, by what has
followed in an un-interrupted course, ever since the ejection of Ministers,
viz, the horrible and general contempt of Religion, general corruption of
manners, great neglect of preaching to the people, most Dignitaries having many
Parishes in their hands, which they supply by ignorant boys; the great growth
of Popery, with a certain and manifest design of bringing it into the Land
again, if his Majesty who now lets were taken out of the way, the great
corruption of Doctrine as well as manners in our own Clergy, neither of which
are minded by the Rulers of our Church, so as man be conformable; that it is
now in the Church of England, as in that of Rome, men may be of any opinion,
live in any vice, or be of no Religion, so they own the Pope and his Church,
and be no Protestants; so here men may be Arminian, Socinian, Papists,
Atheists, and what they will so they externally conform to the Lyturgy, and be
no Presbyterians, so that it is now manifest, that nothing was intended by the
contrivers of the Act of Uniformity, but to cast out of the Ministry those whom
they knew could not then conform, and for ever to keep out, and entangle the
most understanding and conscientious men, and to let none into the Church, who
should scruple any of her commands or practices. Are such things any motives to
the Non-Conformists after 18 years suffering all the indignities and injuries
that Julian's wit and malice thought fit to lay upon the Christians of his
time, and supposed them more intolerable to them then present death, which
would have been both honorable, and an end of their miseries. I say are these
things motives, that at last they should condemn their former practice, and
without any relaxation quietly take all the Burden on their Shoulders? no,
they are satisfied that whereas the Church of England has given her self a
mortal wound by her Act of Uniformity, and has layn bleeding of it ever since
almost to death, that they ought not to hasten her death, by putting their
hands and adding their helps to it.

5. The Dr. thinks that Ministers are not now so indispensibly bound preach as
the Apostes were, who were immediately sent by God, and Authorized by Miracles,
and therefore they must cease preaching if forbidden by the Magistrate, justly
or unjustly.

Answ. There is the same necessity of the Ministry to preserve, build up, and
continue the Church, by adding new Members through the preaching of the word,
as there was of the Apostles to lay the foundation of the Church, and therefore
there lay's the same necessity upon every Minister to preach to his flock
within his Compass, as did on the Apostles in their Compass. May Civil
Magistrates be resisted, or deposed, by the people upon any pretense, and they
not seek redress, because they are not anointed, and immediately sent by God as
Saul and David, etc. were; if the standing order of Magistracy has its
immutable warrant, and unalterable privileges to enable it, for the the
discharge of that office; surely the standing and ordinary Ministry has as
much warrant and provision for the execution of their office without expecting
Miracles to give them new Authority.

Sermon. p. 36. 6. The Dr. says the Assembly of Divines gave many weighty
Reasons against Toleration, and were for Uniformity as much as the Church of
England, So that, that Church is justified by them from all Tyranny in exacting
Uniformity; and the question is not, whether there shall be a Uiniformity, but
who shall have the ordering of it.

Answ. The present Non-conformists have opposed Toleration of all Sects and
Opinions, as much as the Assembly, but this charge is a great injury both to
the Assembly and to the Nonconformists now living; for the Assembly never
desired Uniformity in the same words of Prayer, and all Divine Offices, or in
Rites and Ceremonies devised by men that might occasion scruple to any, nor do
their reasons tend to any such thing, but only that men should not have liberty
to withdraw from their Parishes upon every pretense, and to constitute new
Congregations. The present Non-conformists desire no Uniformity but in Doctrine
and the substantials of worship, Discipline and Government, leaving the wording
and methoding of worship to particular men's prudence, and the necessities of
their people, and leaving all Congregations to their liberties in Rites and
Ceremonies, not instituted by Christ; supposing that Physicians may as well be
tied to the same rules in administering Physic to all bodies; as Ministers and
people be obliged to the same words, and things, universally for their souls.

[Let the late Act of Uniformity be abolished, the Apocryphal books and
Holidayes be left out of the Lyturgy, and the Psalms read in the new
Translation; let the Cross and Surplice be taken away, and kneeling at the
Sacrament be left indifferent, according to the discretion of Ministers, and
the desires of the people; also let Parents stipulate for their own children,
and some few things in the Prayers be altered, or so explained, that they may
give no offense; let the book of Consecration of Bishops, etc, be restored as
it was in Queen Elizabeth's days, and Ministers be bound only in general words
to a peaceable submission to the Lyturgy and let them subscribe to the 39
Articles only in Doctrines of faith and Sacraments, according to the Statute
Eliz. 13. and this will make much more for Union then any thing the Dr. or his
brethren have yet said.]

Sermon. p. 11, 12. But the Dr. says Phil. 3.16. Commands all to walk by the
same Rule, viz. the Rule of Uniformity formerly given them, when the Apostle
was with them, as they were wont to do in all the Churches.

Be it so, but did the Apostle intend any more then that they should be content
with the same substantials of worship which were for common edification,
wherein all might and ought to agree without contending about the Ceremonies of
the Law, or particular opinions, which some out of weakness might be zealous
for, and others that were more perfect knew were abolished. This seems to be
the plain meaning of the Text; for both the perfect and the imperfect, and
otherwise minded, were all to agree in the practice of this Rule, which
therefore could not be the imposition or limitation of disputable Doctrines, or
questionable Rites and Ceremonies, but he would prove that this Uniformity was
in Rites and Ceremonies from 1 Cor. 7.17. because some things the Apostle
ordained in all Churches; but the Text speaks only of the Co-habitation of
Husbands and wives, when one was an Infidel, ver. 15, 16. Was this a Ceremony?
In 1 Cor. 11.34. The Apostle abolisheth the custom of Love Feasts before the
Lords Supper, because it was abused, and was of no necessity; what then? Ergo,
he ordained Uniformity of Ceremonies. The Apostle adds, the rest will I set in
order when I come, i. e. other disorders among them the Apostle would regulate;
And there is no way to reform abuses in the Church, but by imposing
un-necessary Ceremonies?

He says Page 13. That the Apostles gave Rules concerning Rites and Customs,
wherein there was doubt and scruple.

Answ. But what were they? To impose Rites upon men who scruple the lawfulness
of them? if so, the people might have took their word (who were infallible)
what Rites were lawful, and what not; but no Church Governors have that
Authority now, but on the contrary, the Apostles forbade those who were zealous
for Ceremonies, to impose them upon others, and commanded those who knew their
liberty in such Ceremonies, not to use their liberty to the offense or
disturbance of those who contended for them.

In a word, The Apostles commanded that every man should use his own judgment,
and liberty in things indifferent, privately and peaceably without imposing
upon, or censuring each other; and that all things should be done for edifying,
Romans 14. per totum; and this is directly against the Uniformity of Ceremonies,
or the imposing of any uncommanded Ceremony upon the Church, without apparent
necessity, general consent, and a prospect of edification to arise thereby.

Thus we have exonerated our Consciences of the guilt of Schism, at least
voluntary, and against our knowledge. Let the Dr. seriously look to his
Conscience, for charging us with Schism, or sinful Separation against our own
professed principles, before the Judges of the Land, and the chief Magistrates
of London, without any proof, and at a time when he knows the Papists hope to
devour us and our Religion, by turning the Magistrates sword, and opening the
peoples mouths against the Non-conformists.

PART II.
CAP. I. The Non-Conformists no Friends to General Toleration; An Answer to the
first Argument from the Honor and Authority of our first Reformers.
I Come now to consider what the Dr. has further said in his large defense of
his Sermon, to make good the Charge of Schism, or sinful Separation against the
Non-Conformists. The Dr. proceeds in an Historical way, and therefore is
prolix. I shall according to my first intention (which was to give the Reasons
of the Non-Conformists practice in preaching, (though forbidden by Law) proceed
to examine what the Dr. has further said to invalidate those Reasons; and to
vindicate them from such exceptions as he has made against them, and therefore
I shall only take notice of such things as are matter of Argument, which will
be reduced to a few heads, and pass by all personal matters, as also his long
Preface, and all Reflections on times and persons which are foreign, to the
Argument in hand. The Dispute being about a matter of practice, and of a
public concern, the only end of writing, should be either to find out the
Truth by debateing it calmly, or else if neither side can change the others
judgment, yet to produce such probable Reasons for their Opinion and Practice,
as may satisfy impartial Men, that they act not from rashness, or for sinister
ends, but as becomes Men, that consider conscientiously what they do, and why
they do it. But before I come to his first Argument, I think it of great moment
to take notice of what he charge the Non-Conformists with in general, viz.
their approving an universal Toleration Toleration of all Sects and Opinions
under the Notion of Liberty of Conscience, which he proves by their accepting
Lycenses to Preach according to the Kings Proclamation, 1672. to which I
answer, We are not to take all that is written by men in distress for their
settled Judgment, much less for the Judgment of the whole Party.

The Dr. would think it hard that Bishop Tailors Book for Liberty of
prophesying, and others of that kind, written by Episcopal men under oppression
and restraint, should be charged to be the judgment of the Church of England.
Toleration and Liberty of Conscience was the brat of Socinians and Libertines
in Switzerland, Poland, and afterward fostered by the Dutch-Arminians, and was
ever detested by the Non-Conformists. It is their general sense that they would
rather dye in silence and obscurity then Papists, Quakers, and other dangerous
Sects should have immunity, under pretense of favor to them: But they were
advized to accept of the Licenses granted by that Declaration, because it
straightly forbid all their private Meetings, Commanded to set open their Doors,
and not to presume to Preach without such Licenses first obtained, They
Preached, and did all the same things in private before which now the
Declaration gave them leave to do in public, Would it not have been looked
upon as a rude contempt of the Magistrates favor, and a giving a just cause of
jealousy to the State if they had still kept private Meetings, when they are
commanded to be public, and to receive the Magistrates allowance and
protection: We never pleaded for Liberty of thinking, writing, speaking, or
acting in Religion as every man pleases, under the name of the Liberty of
Conscience; Conscience is bound to the revealed will of God at its only Rule,
and is only to be free where God has left it free; i. e. in things not clearly
revealed, or not commarided by him, either directly, or by just Consequence. We
plead for no Liberty but that wherewith Christ has made us free, that we may
not be again entangled in a yoke of Bondage to those things which Christ has
neither commanded, nor given men leave to command, Gal. 5.1. Nor should it have
been forgotten that the Non-Conformists Friends in the Parliament, were the
chief Instruments of recalling that Declaration, which was no sign that the
whole Party approved of Toleration. But why do we still Preach? The Reasons are
given partly before, and shall be more hereafter. But come we now to the
Arguments, the first is this;

1. 2. The terms of Communion are the same now as they were at the first
Reformation, and if they were no just ground of Separation then, neither are
they now.

Ans. We must Remember the question before us, and the Dr proposed to handle in
his Sermon, and in his Letter to Mr Baxter is barely this, whether the
Nonconformist Ministers ejected by the Act of Uniformity, are bound to sit
down as Laymen in the Parishes they live in, and not to preach or act as
Ministers on pain of incurring the guilt of Schism. This he leaves and runs
into the large Field of Separation from the Communion of the Church, which is
beside the business, for if it were granted that the Non-Conformists were bound
to all acts of Communion with the Parishes, when they preach not themselves, as
the Non-Resident Conformists are in the places where they live, yet it will not
follow from hence, that they must forbear all exercises of their Ministry, and
to be content with the Lay-Communion of the Parishes any more then the
Non-Residents may plead that they cannot reside with their own people, or
perform Ministerial duties to them, because they must hold Communion with them
amongst whom they dwell.

Thus the Dr in all his book has said nothing directly to the question in
hand, but the Terms of Communion he says are the same now as at the first
Reformation, but as to the Ministers, this is apparently otherwise, such
Subscriptions and Declarations being required of them as no History can match,
except those imposed on the Jansenists in France, of which ours seem to be an
immitation. The contrivers of our impositions being then in France, when the
Jansenists were removed from all Ecclesiastical Places by a like artifice as we
afterward were: If he mean the Terms of Communion that concern the people, as
he elsewhere expresses himself, and restrains them to the Terms imposed by
Law, this is nothing to the purpose for the Ministers, though they should
submit to those terms when they act as private men, may nevertheless be bound
not to for sake the exercise of their Ministry. Besides there is a Fallacy in
restraining the Terms to those enjoined by Law; what if neither Ministers nor
people can enjoy the benefit of the Law, but new terms are imposed on them
without Law, as were the subscription to the Service Book, Can. 36. whereby so
many worthy Ministers were turned out in K. James' time, the Reading of the
book for Soorts on the Lords Day, and the Reading of the Prayer against the
Scots, and the order for Preaching but once a Sabbath, and then not to exceed
an hour, for disobeying which more were rejected in the late King's time, and
many such are still continued, viz, the constant Reading of the Communion
Service, though there be no Sacrament, which makes the Prayers more tedious,
and fuller of Repitions then they need to be, and also straitneth the Preacher,
if it do not hinder the Sermon, the placeing the Communion Table and Railing it
like an Altar, and compelling the Communicants to come up by parcels to kneel
before it contrary to Q. Eliz. injunctions: must the people submit still,
because these things are imposed by Law; do not innovations and corruptions
come into the Church by degrees, and by connivance at first; and afterward
when their Authors are strong enough, they are then established by Laws and
Canons: And yet the Argument holds not, the things imposed might be submitted
to at the first Reformation, ergo they must be so still.

The Jewish Ceremonies were tolerated and practiced by the Apostle Paul in the
beginning of the Gospel, and yet when false teachers, and other peevish or
timorous men contended for the observation of them still, when the reason of
it, viz, not offending the Jews was ceased, and they were an hindrance to the
Gospel then the same Apostle would not give place to them, no not for an hour,
though Peter and Barnabas joined with them, Gal. 2.3.4.5. and ver. 11. to the
18. Nor does our practice reflect on our first Reformers, unless they had been
extraordinarily inspired to that work, then indeed to vary from them, or
endeavor to correct them, would be to reproach the Spirit by whom they acted.
But if they made that Reformation only as good and wise men, acting according
to Principles of Piety and Prudence, as far as they could in their
circumstances, it is no disparagement to them, if others vary from them
according to the times and circumstanees they live in. My L. Bacon observes
that in civil matters our Parliament does daily alter our Laws, Bacon 's Essays,
and suit them to the present times and case of the people, yet this is thought
no disparagement to the Wisdom or Justice of their Ancestors in former
Parliaments, but the Church ^^eth almost buried in the Rubbish of time, and
this must not be removed out of Veneration, forsooth, to Antiquity.

The best men not inspired can but do what is best for their own time, we
should therefore inquire not only whether the terms of Communion be the same
now, that they were at the first Reformation, but also whether those terms be
as necessary as Tolerable, and as fit to be submitted to now as they wre then;
Nor did our Reformers expect that their endeavors should be made an
unalterable Standard to all posterity.

The expressed in their Preface to the Common Prayer Book their mind this
purpose, viz. That they had done what they could in reforming the Church and
the Liturgy, according to their light, and as their times would bear, and that
they hoped those that came after would be able to do more, and go further: This
I have heard from diverse Ancient and Credible Persons, who remembered they had
read this passage in the said Preface, though it be now left out: And it is the
more unreasonable to urge the platform of the first Reformation as a Rule not
to be altered, though in disputable and mutable things, because some of these
Reformers, both Ministers and People of that time disliked some things that
were imposed, and because they were yoked with some Papists, who dissembled
their Religion that they might both keep their places, and more effectually
hinder the Reformation, as Bishop Cranmer is said to have complained, How ever
the thing was an unquestionable Truth: Nor is it altogether true, which he
says, that the dislike of our Liturgy or Ceremonies was wholly brought from
abroad by Hooper, Rogers, etc. such as had traveled in Germany and Helvetia,
where Cranmer himself had also been a considerable time; But it sprang up at
home also, together with the first seeds of the Reformation. Almongst Wicklif's
Opinion recited by Mr. Fox, and charged on him by his Adversaries, there by
many pieces of the present Non-Con-formity, relating to Discipline and
Ceremonies, *Church Hist. Cont.
and Dr. Fuller reports that in the latter end of K. Henry 8th. many Articles
were complained of in the Convocation, as being now common among the People as
against Lent, most of the Ceremonies and such like. It is natural for
Christians not only to desire to hear true Doctrine, and to have true Worship,
but to have that Doctrine and worship maintained by such Discipline, and
expressed by such Ceremonies or Circumstances as are allowed by it, and
agreeable to it, and not by exotic things of man's device, and humor, It is
true, then, Conformity and Nonconformity were Twins, conceived and Born
together in the Womb of our Church, and it is as true that Nonconformity put
forth its hand first, though Conformity had the hap first to break, and to be
Midwifed into into the world by Law.

But indeed is it a Reflection on our first Reformers to desire to mend, what
they were not peremptory in, and some of them disliked? And is it no dishonor
to them to change the Doctrine then established, in chief Articles of Faith,
viz. the Pelagian and Arminian points, which have so long reigned amongst us?
And concerning the Divine right of Bishops above Presbyters which they so
expressly disavowed, both in their printed books, and in the Manuscript of
diverse questions decided by them the account whereof we owe to this Learned
man? Irenic p. 2. and last.
All this therefore from the honor of our Reformers is but a flourish.

But now Sect. 3. We have three Reasons given why our Reformers left such
Ceremonies in the Church.

1. He says it was out of Reverence to Antiquity, they being of use in the
Primitive times, long before Popery, and yet three of the chief Men, Peter
Martyr, Martyn Bucer, Paulus Fagius, who were sent from beyond Sea to assist in
the Reformation, promoted no such continuance of these venerable Antiquities in
the Churches abroad, where they had been made use of before to help to reform:
And how Ancient were these Ceremonies? Why? the Surplice he says was used in
Augustine, and Hieroms time, that was 400 years after Christ, and Superstition
came in apace, Images in Churches, and praying for and to the Dead, and such
like; And Ceremonies were so many that Augustine complained of the condition of
the Church in his time in that regard, was worse, then that of the Church under
the Law.

The Sacrament he says was received about Constantines time in a posture of
Adoration.

That was standing Sc. from the time of Easter to Whitsuntide, as all other
public Worship was then performed in remembrance of Christ's Resurrection. But
did they kneel? The Dr. will not say so, nor can he produce any evidence, that
kneeling at the Communion was commonly used, till diverse Hundred years after
Popery had defiled the Western Church. The Cross he says was much Ancienter,
and used with much Superstition even in Tertullian 's time; but the Dr. says
not, it was used in Baptism, nor is there any proof of it, and that was only to
our case. When he pleads that we need not reform beyond the example of the
Primitive times, viz: those soon after the Apostles, and says it gives great
advantage to the Papists, to to reject the Customs of those times upon pretense
that the Mystery of Iniquity was working even in the Apostles days. I desire
to know where we shall stop, and what Church shall we take for our pattern? Do
all, did any, of the Churches for the first 300 years use our Ceremonies in
their public Church Service? or if they did, were not others also used in many
Churches, now generally disallowed by Papists and Protestants. As giving the
Communion to Infants, sending the Eulogies or consecrated Bread to those that
were absent from the Sacrament and the like. Mr. Mead no Nonconformist, has
proved, that Saints and Image Worship in remoter and smaller degrees, began
very early in the Church, amongst which he reckons the most Ancient use of the
Cross in Tertullian's time, with which they use to fortify themselves against
the Devil and all evil Accidents.

There were never more Heresies and Divisions in the Church, Apost. of the
latter times.
then in the Primitive times. Yea, before the Apostles were dead, there have
been no Errors or Corruptions since, but the like were then, and must we not
go beyond or pass by all these times, and appeal only to Scripture as the only
Rule for Constituring and Governing the Church? Did the Judges or Kings of
Judah that reformed their Church before the Captivity, or Zerubbabel and
Nehemiah after it, ever make former times their President? Did they not always
appeal to the Law of Moses? If we must suppose the times next the Apostles had
their Customs, and Ceremonies from the Apostles, because they lived so near
them, This opens a door to all Popish Traditions, and overthrows the perfection
of the Scripture; Or if we suppose the present Church in every Age has not as
much Power of self-Government as the Primitive Church had, or to appoint and
alter their own Customs and Ceremonies, we shall contradict our 20th. Artic.
and bring our selves into unsupportable slavery to all the Cannons and Customs
of all former times; and so the Christians as well as the Jews will need a
Talmud besides their Bible. It is probable our first Reformers, seeing they
must retain some Ceremonies, retained those they thought most Ancient, and
least offensive, and this was the Reason why they were retained, and not laid
aside.

2. The Dr. says, These Ceremonies were retained for fear of the Popish
Bishops, who were some of them Learned Men, least they should reproach the
Reformers with innovation against the Primitive as well as the Popish Church.

Answ. This was indeed the true and chief reason why our Reformations was no
more complete because the Popish Bishops that were joined with the Reformers
hindered them, and the Popish People would not endure a through Reformation: Mr.
John Elliot a worthy Gentleman in the Parliament, Ann. 3. Car. 1. said, That he
had seen in a Diary written with K. Edw. 6th. own hand, Rushw. Colec. part. 1.
page 661.
these words. That the Bishops at that time, some for Ignorance, some for
Sloth, some for Pride and Luxury, and some for Popery, were unfit for
Discipline: To which we must add, that some of the good Bishops, Bishop Ridley
in particular, being but late Converts from Popery, had yet a Zeal for the old
Customs and Ceremonies, those that could be retained without manifest
Superstition. And so much they themselves acknowledge in the Preface to the
Service Book before cited; Now what Obligation is this upon us, not to
endeavor a further Reformation?

3. He says, They had respect to the Lutheran Churches, who retained the same
and more Ceremonies.

Answ. They might consider that seeing they must retain some of the old
Customs, it would be more excusable to retain these, because some other
Protestant Churches did retain them: But that they did it in imitation of those
Churches there is no ground to believe; seeing till now our Church was always
charged to be too much addicted to Calvin, and influenced by him and Beza, both
in K. Edw. and Queen Eliz. time. Nor is there any Reason why the Lutherans
themselves retained so much, many Popish Ceremonies, but because Luther being
almost wholly intent upon reforming the Doctrine of the Church, neglected
matters of Discipline and Ceremonies, which his Followers interpret his
judgment; So hard, is it to make any Progress in any good design, especially in
matters of Religion, beyond the first Efforts, when men's first Affections and
Zeal are cooled, and the World with carnal self does afterward entangle their
minds.

It is strange overlashing when the Dr. says that our first Reformers dyed
Martyrs for our Church. They dyed indeed for the Doctrine and Worship of our
Church, as it is common to all Churches, and grounded on the Word of God, in
opposition to the Idolatrv and Superstitions of Rome, and particularly that
Idol of the Mass. But the disputable things of our Lyturgy as to Government
Rites and Ceremonies, were never in question then; nor did they bear any
Testimony to them. But some of those Martyrs refused Conformity to them
themselves, (as was showed before,) and those who were the chief occasions of
retaining that form of Worship, and those Ceremonies, and to pleas whom, the
better men consented to them, turned Papists again as Gardener and Tunstall by
Name, and were the Persecutors of the rest.

CHAP. II. The Second Argument from the Principles and Practice of the Old
Non-Conformists considered; Their Principles and Practice the same with ours,
so far as their circumstances did bear. The Difference of Circumstances
betwixt them and us.
THE Dr's Second Argument is taken from the Principles and Practice of the Old
Non-Conformists, and largly prosecuted from. 6 unto 17 showing, That they
condemned Separation from the Church of England; did not like of gathering
separate Congregations, wrote earnestly against the Separation of the
Brownists, and when silenced themselves, pleaded for quiet submission, hoping
that others might teach the people better then themselves.

'Ans. An Argument from Authority and Example, especially in a matter of
practice as this is, is of great force, though not to convince, yet to induce
men's mind to further consideration of what they do, especially when it has
been proved by reason before as far as the nature of the thing will bear, but
the Dr. having not given any direct argument either in his Sermon or this Book,
to prove the Preaching of the Non-Conformists Unlawful, which was the thing in
question, and from which I will not wander, the Judgment of former men is of
much less weight when it is brought instead of Scripture and Reason, but we
shall examine the force of it, such as it is to remove the prejudice or Calumny
that may be Created by it, though it be no argument; for what if the former
Non-Conformists thought it unlawful to preach, when silenced by Law, (which
yet by the way they generally were not, but by the new impositions of
Archbishop Whitgift, and the Canons of K. James which were not Law,) is it
therefore certainly so indeed? what if they thought it unlawful for them in
their circumstances, is it therefore unlawful for us in our present case; or
does it follow that they would have thought it so, had they lived under the
same circumstances? The circumstances of every Generation vary things, and make
many actions Lawful or Unlawful, expedient or not expedient, prudent or
imprudent, and of this none but the persons living, and concerned in them are
competent Judges, Spectators can see but the outside of things, Ancestors know
nothing of them; only they whose business and duty it is to consider what they
ought to do in the present case, are able thoroughly to judge what is meet for
them to do or forbear. But the Old Non-Conformists direct all their Zeal
against Separation from the Church of England, as it was practiced by the
Brownists, and what hence can be inferred against the present Non-Conformists
Preaching the Reader must judge. For the further clearing of this matter, I
will briefly consider what were the general and avowed Principles of the old
Non-Conformists in Ecclesiastical Matters, what was their practice, and what is
peculiar in the present case beyond theirs.

1. For their Principles,

1. The Old Non-Conformists generally held the National Constitution of the
Church of England, as it is Collected into one body under the Bishops, as the
general Heads and Spiritual Officers of it to be unlawful, yea Antichristian,
injurious to the several Congregations or Parishes, and contrary to the King's
unquestionable Supremacy. The Dr. Confesses this of those that presented the
Admonition to the Parliament 1570, Part 1 Sect. 7.
viz, That they condemned the Government of Bishops, as Antichristian, and that
they disliked the Ministry of the Church of England as ordained by, and derived
from the Bishops. Now this Admonition was written by Mr. Cartwright, in the
name and by the consent of most Non-conformists then living. Doctor Fuller
says, that the Non-conformists in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, Church
Hist. Cent. 16.
had a kind of Synod met in Coventry, Ann. 588, agreed upon diverse things, as
Canons, some whereof were, That Christ had appointed no Ministers in his Church
but Presbyters and Deacons, that the Bishops pretending themselves to be
neither Presbyters nor Deacons, but Officers distinct from them both, were no
Ministers of Christ, nor to be acknowledged as such in his Church, and that
none ought to receive Ordination from them, because they Ordained not as
Presbyters, but as Bishops, i. e. by a power not derived from Christ. This and
much more he took from Bishop Bancroft. Dr. Ames the supposed Author of the
English Puritanism delivers this, Dang. posit. Book 3. cap. 6.
for the Judgment of the Puritans in those days; They hold that there are not
by any divine institution in the word any ordinary National Provincial or
Diocesan Pastors, Eng. Purit. chap. 3. page 2.
or Ministers under which the Pastors of particular Congregations are to be
subject as Inferior Officers; and that if there were any such, that when the
word of God would have set them down mored istinctly, and precisely then any of
the rest, for the higher place that one Occupies in the Church, of the more
necessity he is to the Church, the more carefully would Christ the head of the
Church have been in pointing him out, and distinguishing him from other, etc.
The same thing Dr. Ames lays down and proves as his own Judgment.

There is a Treatise written in the Name of all the Non-conformists, directed
to King james, Medul. Theol. cap. 32. de Eccl. instit. item 35.
called a Protestation of the King's Supremacy, wherein they say pos. 27. We
hold that these Ecclesiastical persons that make claim to greater power and
authority than this, (i. e. in particular Congregations as in the former
position) especially they that make claim jure Divino of power and Jurisdiction
to meddle with other Churches then that one Congregation of which they are or
ought to be members, do usurp upon the Supremacy of the Civil Magistrate, who
alone has and ought to have (as we hold and maintain) a power over the several
Congregations in his Dominions, and who alone ought by his Authority, not only
to prescribe Common Laws and Canons of Uniformity, and consent in Religion,
and worship of God, unto them all, but also to punish the offenses of the
several Congregations, that they shall commit against the Laws of God, the
Policy of this Realm, and the Ecclesiastical Constitutions Enacted by his
Authority, and pos. 28. We hold that the King ought not to give this Authority
away, or to commit it to any Ecclesiastical person or persons whatsoever, but
ought himself to be as it were Archbishop and general Over-sear of all the
Churches within his Dominions, and ought to employ under him his honorable
Council, his Judges, Lieutenants, etc. and Pos. 32. They crave that the Bishops
may not be their Judges who were their professed enemies, and tell the King
that, So long as it shall please the King and Civil State to maintain in this
Kingdom the State Hierarchy, or Prelacy, we can (in honor to his Majesty and
the State, and in desire of peace) be content without envy to suffer them to
enjoy their State and Dignity, and to live as brethren amongst those Ministers
that shall acknowledge spiritual homage unto their spiritual Lordships, paying
unto them all temporal duties of Tenthes and such like, yea and joining with
them in the service and worship of God, so far as we may do it without our own
particular communicating with them in those humane Traditions and Rites that in
our Consciences we judge to be unlawful. Thus we see it was only for respect to
the State, and for peace sake, that they could give the Bishops any
acknowledgment or reverence, and that though they did acknowledge other
Ministers, for their brethren who did in Conscience ascribe spiritual Authority
to the Bishops, yet they did acknowledge the Bishops as such, neither for
Fathers nor brethren.

Mr. Robert Parker wrote in Latin de Ecclesiastica politia, wherein he proves
Presbyters to be the only Ministers, and answers Mr. Hooker and Bishop
Bilson, where they maintain or excuse Bishops, or a power of imposing what
government the Magistrate pleases upon the Church.

2. They hold Congregations or Churches severally to be the only Gospel
Churches, and each one to have full power and jurisdiction within it self,
without being subject to any Ecclesiastical Officers but their own; but all to
be immediately subject to the Civil Magistrate, and his inspection.

This is the Scope of Mr. Baine's Diocesan Trial, of Dr. Ames in his Medull.
Theol. Cap. 32. Part. 1. And thus they jointly declare, Engl. puritan: Chap. 3.
part. 1.
they hold that the Pastors of Particular Congregations are, or ought to be the
highest Spiritual Officers in the Church, over whom (by any Divine Ordinance,)
there is no Superior Pastor, but only Jesus Christ. And that they are led by
the Spirit of Antichrist that Arrogate or take upon themselves to be Pastors
of Pastors; and to the same purpose position 2. before cited, And Position 3.
They hold that if there were a Supreme, National or Ecclesiastical Minister or
Pastor, that should be the Prince of Many thousand Pastors, that then also
Christ (as he did in the Jewish Church) would have appointed a solemn National
or Provincial Lyturgy or worship, unto which at sometimes of the year, the
whole body of the people should ascend, and that unto the Metropolitan City, as
unto Jerusalem, and that he would (as he did in the Jewish Church) more
precisely and particularly have set down the manner of solemnization thereof
then of his Parochial worship. For as much therefore as they cannot read in the
new Testament of any higher or more solemn worship, then of that which is to be
performed in a particular Congregation, they cannot be persuaded that God has
appointed any higher Ministers of his service and worship under the new
Testament, then the Elect Ministers of Particular Congregations, See Position
4th, more to the same purpose. And Protestation Position 24th, We confine and
bound all Ecclesiastical power within the limits only of one particular
Congregation, holding that the greatest Ecclesiastical power ought not to
stretch beyond the same, and that it is an arrogating of Princely Supremacy,
for any Ecclesiastical person or persons whatsoever, to take upon themselves
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over many Churches, much more over whole Kingdoms
and Provinces of Christians.

3. They held that the Officers of every Church or Congregation, were Pastors,
teachers, and Elders, chosen out of the people, and herein they agreed with all
the Protestant Churches besides the Lutherans; Engl. Purit. chapter 3. p. 13.
They hold that by Gods Ordinance there should be in every Church a Doctor
whose special Office should be to instruct by way of Catechizing the ignorant
of the Congregation (and that particularly) in the main grounds and principles
of Religion, Chap. 4. Position 1. They held That by Gods Ordinance the
Congregation should make choice of other officers as Assistants unto the
Ministers in the spiritual Regiment of the Congregation who are by Office
jointly with the Ministers of the word, to be as Monitors and Overseers of the
Manners and Conversation of all the Congregation, and one of another, that so
every one may be more wary of their ways, and that the Pastors and Doctors
may better attend prayer and doctrine, and by their means, may be made better
acquainted with the state of the people, when other eyes besides their own
shall wake, and watch over them Protestation Position 25. We hold it utterly
unlawful for any one Minister to take upon himself, or accept of a sole
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over so much as one Congregation, and therefore we
hold that some of the sufficientest and most honest and godly men in the
Congregation ought to be chosen by the heads of families to be adjoined in
Commission as assistants to the Minister in the spiritual Regiment of the Souls
of that Congregation of which he is the Pastor.

4. They hold that every Church has power to Elect her own Officers, and to
censure or depose them as they shall deserve, and that this power ought not to
be taken from them, though they grant also that the King or Supreme Magistrate
has Authority to Command, and by Civil Mulcts to compel them to make due
Elections, to amend undue ones, and so to cause them to restore such Officers,
Engl. Purit. chapter 2. page 5.
as may be unjustly rejected by them, etc. They hold that every established
Church ought (as a special Prerogative by which she is endowed by Christ) to
have power and liberty to elect and choose their own spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Officers, and that it is a greater wrong to have any forced upon
them against their wills, then if they should force upon them wives, and upon
women husbands against their will and liking.

And Position 6. They hold that if in this choice any particular Churches shall
err, that none upon earth but the Civil Magistrate has power to control or
correct them for it, and that though it be not lawful for him to take away this
power from them, yet when they or any of them shall apparently abuse the same,
he stands bound by the Law of God, and by virtue of his Office (grounded upon
the same) to punish them severly for it, and to force them under civil mulsts
to make better choice, Protest. pos. 26. We hold that these Ecclesiastical
Officers being so chosen by the Church or congregation are to exercise over the
said congregation only a spiritual jurisdiction and power etc. Then they show
the manner of proceeding in censuring private Members when they offend, and
then add, If any one of the Ecclesiastical Officers themselves shall sin, he
is subject to the censures of the rest, as any other member of the
Congregation, if they shall all sin scandalously either in the execution of
their Office, or in any other ordinary manner, then the Congregation, that
chose themfreely, has as free power to depose them, and to place others in
their room, if the Congregation shall err either in choosing or deposing of
her spiritual Officers, then has the Civil Magistrate alone, power and
authority to punish them for their fault, to compel them to better choice, or
to defend against them those officers that without just causes they shall
depose or deprive, The same Doctrine is desended by Dr. Ames Medul. Theol p. 1.
cap. 35.

5. They hold that insufficient Ministers obtruded upon Churches, were not to
be acknowledged for Ministers, and if their lawful Ministers were without just
cause ejected by any Superior Powers, Engl. purit chapter 2. pos. 8.
they did still retain the Right and Honor of being their Pastors. They hold
that the Congregation having once made choice of their Spiritual Officers unto
whom they commit the Regiment of their Souls, they ought not (without just
cause, and that which is apparently warrantable by the word of God) to
discharge, deprive, or depose them, but ought to live in all Canonical
Obedience and Subjection unto them, agreeable unto the word of God, and if by
permission of the civil Magistrate, they shall by other Ecclesiastical Officers
be suspended, or deprived for any cause in their apprehension, good and
justifiable by the word of God, then they hold it the bounden duty of the
Congregation to be continual Suppliants to God, and humble Suitors unto Civil
Authority for the restoration of them unto their Administrations, which if it
cannot be obtained, yet this much honor they are to give unto them, as to
acknowledge them unto the Death their Spiritual Guides and Governors, though
they be rigorously deprived of their Ministry and Service. And Chap. 3. pos. 9.
They hold that the People of God ought not to acknowledge any such for their
Pastors, as are not able by Preaching, to interpret and apply the word of God
unto them, and therefore that no ignorant, and Sole-reading Priests are to be
reputed the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who sends none into his Ministry and
Service, but such as he adorneth in some Measurewith Spiritual gifts, and they
cannot be persuaded that the faculty of reading in ones Mother Tongue the
Scriptures, etc. which any ordinary Turk, or Infidel has, can be called in any
Congruity of Speech, a Ministerial gift of Christ.

And posit. 12. They hold that it is as great an injury to force a Congregation
or Church to maintain as their Pastor, with Tithes and such like Donations,
that Person that either is not able to instruct them, or that refuses in his
own Person ordinarily to do it, as to force a man to maintain one for his wife,
that either is not a Woman, or that refuses in her own person to do the dutios
of a Wife unto him.

6. They hold that the Holy Scriptures are a perfect Rule of Doctrine Worship,
Discipline and Ceremonies, and that to add new Ceremonies of men's own
invention, was a breach of the second Commandment: With this Mr. Parker begins
his Book of Ecclesiastical polity, that we are to deduce from Scripture all
that concerns the Church of Christ. Thus the Protestation, We deny no Authority
to the King in matters Ecclesiastical, but only that which Christ Jesus the
only head of the Church has directly and precisely appropriated unto himself,
Protest. pos. 22.
and has denied to communicate to any other Creature or Creatures in the
world, for we hold that Christ alone is the Doctor of the Church in matters of
Religion, and that the word of Christ which he has given unto his Church, is
of absolute perfection, containing in it all parts of the true Religion, both
for substance and Ceremony, and a perfect Direction in all Ecclesiastical
matters whatsoever, unto, and from which it is not lawful for any Man or Angel
to add, or detract.

Thus Mr. Bradshaw in his Addition to the 12th. Argument against Ceremonies,
argues, All Inventions and Devises of man grounded only upon the will of man,
and not upon any necessity of Nature or Civility set apart to Gods outward
Worship, are contrary to the second Commandment: These Ceremonies are such.
Ergo, See more in the place.

7. They held Ceremonies enjoined by our Lyturgy unlawful. The Cross in Baptism
was condemned by all, Mr. Parker, and Mr. Bradshaw in particular, wrote against
it. The Surplice was rejected by most. Kneeling at the Lords Supper was
disliked by all, but yet thought Tolerable, and that it might be submitted unto
by some of the most Learned. The Protestours declare themselves thus, We refuse
Obedience only to such Canons as require the performance of such Acts and Rites
of Religion as are rejected and abandoned of all other Reformed Churches as
Superstitious disorders, Protest. pos. 21.
such as are special Mysteries of the Romish Antichristian Idolatry, such as
have been controverted in the Church, ever since the last breaking forth of the
Light of the Gospel, out of the Cloud of Popery in Luthers time; such as all
Protestant writers, and defenders of our Faith beyond the Seas, and most of our
own Contrymen have either in general or particular condemned as vain, idle,
and unprofitable; such as all the faithful and painful Pastors of this Realm,
and in a manner all States and Degrees of the same would be content were
removed, and swept out of the Church, and for which few or none are zealous,
but the Prelates and their Adherents. Mr. Bradshaw wrote Twelve Arguments
against the Ceremonies, with as much vehemence as any have done since. 12 Genesis
Arg. against Cerem.
Arg.1. It Is Will Worship, therefore sinful. Arg. 2. It Is a sinful Compliance
with the Papists in derogation from the honor of the Reformed Churches to use
them.

Arg. 5. It Is Schismatical maintaining differences at home and abroad, when the
Authors acknowledge the things imposed indifferent, and that they might without
sin or inconvenience be let alone.

Arg. 6. That it is Communicating with the Papists in Idolatrous and
Superstitious worship, especially those Papists that live amongst us, and see
how much we symbolize with them.

Arg. 9. Because these Ceremonies are Sacraments of humane institution.

Arg. 10. Because they that use them do thereby acknowledge homage to an
usurped authority in the Church.

Arg. 12. Because they are the occasion of the damnation of great numbers, viz.
the Papists who are hardened by them, and ignorant Protestants who place all
their Religion in them; and because the usual excuse for these and all other
humane impositions (which the Dr. also makes frequent use of) is, that they are
not imposed as things necessary to Salvation, but as matters of Order, Decency
and the like.

Mr. Bradshaw draws his Eleventh Argument from hence, That the Ceremonies are
therefore unlawful, because made necessary to Salvation, which he proves,
because they are imposed with greater Sanctions, looked after with greater
Vigilance, and the neglect of them punished with greater Penalties then many
things necessary to Salvation are, and in all respects they are made equal
with the most necessary things, the greatest rewards being given, and promised
to the obedient, even Heaven it self, and the greatest punishments inflicted
and threatened against the disobedient, Hell it self not left out of the number.
It was said by one, B. of Worcest. Letter against Baxter.
that they do not punish the neglect of Ceremouies so heavily for the weight of
the things themselves, but for the breach of order, and the contempt of the
Church, in such disobedience.

Ans. Thus God himself punishing for the neglect or breach of any of his
Positive Commands, does not punish for the weight or moment of the thing, for
he declares he values not Sacrifices, nor Offerings, but for Disobedience to,
and contempt of his Infinite Majesty, and yet as he has power to impose what
he pleases on his Creatures; so he has that Infinite Wisdom, and Goodness in
his Nature, that inclines him to impose nothing but for good reasons, and the
Creatures good; what power then will the Church arrogate to her self? Besides
by this argument all offenses against the State may be made Capital, because
they contemn the Magistrates Authority, as well as all Offenses in the Church,
are or may be by this Doctrine made punishable with Excommunication, which
depriving men of the ordinary means of Salvation does what in them lies, cast
them to Hell. Nor can it be conceived by impartial men, that any Governors of
the Church should make those things necessary, and constant terms of their
Communion from age to age, which they do in their Conscience judge altogether
indifferent, and of no necessity to Salvation.

8. The Non-Conformists desired that they might be excused from the Lyturgy and
Government of the Church of England, that they might have leave to Govern their
own Churches according to that platform of Discipline that they should draw up,
and present to the King, and that they might not be compelled to Communicate
with other Parishes in things they were not satisfied in, though they could own
them for their Brethren, who practiced those things which they could not;
Protest. pos. 31.
All that we crave of his Majesty and the State is, that by his and there
permission, and under their protection and approbation it may be Lawful for us
to serve and worshiy God in all things according to his revealed will, and the
manner of all other Reformed Protestant Churches that have made separation from
Rome, that we may not be forced against our Consciences to stain and pollute
the simple and sincere Worship of God prescribed in his Word with any humane
Traditions and Rites whatsoever, but that in Divine Worship we may be actors
only of those things that may for matter or manner either in general or special
be concluded out of the word of God, also to this end, that it may be Lawful
for us to exhibit unto them, and unto their Censure, a true and sincere
confession of our Faith, containing the main grounds of our Religion, unto
which all other Doctrines are to be Consonant, as also a form of Divine Worship
and Ecclesiastical Government in like manner warranted by the word, and to be
observed of us all, under any Civil Punishment, that it shall please the said
Majesty and State to inflict, under whose authority alone we desire to exercise
the same, and unto whose punishment alone we desire to be subject, if we shall
offend against any of these Laws and Canons that themselves shall approve in
manner aforesaid, and our desire is not to Worship God in Dark Corners, but in
such public places, and at such convenient times as it shall please them to
assign to the intent that they and their Officers, may be better take notice of
our offenses (if any shall be committed in our Congregations and assemblies,)
that they may punish the same accordingly. And we desire we may be subject to
no other Spiritual Lords but unto Christ, nor unto any other Temporal Lords,
but unto themselves, whom alone in this earth we desire to make our Judges, and
Supreme Governors, and overseers, in all causes Ecclesiastical whatsoever,
renouncing as Antichristian all such Ecclesiastical powers, as arroga^e and
assume unto themselves under any pretense of the Law of God or man, the said
power which we acknowledge only to be due to the Civil Magistrate, And Pos. 32.
-- We crave in all dutiful manner that which the very Law of nature yields unto
us, that for as much as they are most malicious enemies unto us, and do
apparently thirst either after our blood, or shipwreck of our faith and
Consciences, that they may not henceforth be our Judges in these causes, but
that we may both of us stand as parties, at the bar of the Civil Magistrate,
to be tried in those differences that are between us, and that when they shall
Publicly malign, or slander us, or our cause, it may be lawful for us in a
dutiful sober peaceable and modest manner without personal reproach or
disgrace, in as public manner to justify our selves, and then in stead of
that silly mock service to the King of wearing a linen rag upon our backs, or
making a Christless cross upon a babies face, we shall be ready to perform and
yield triple homage, service and tribute unto him, and shall think our lives
and all that we have too vile to spend in the service of him, and the civil
State under him.

Thus much for their principles.

From all which we may fairly infer, 1. That the old Non-Conformists generally
did not only allow of Separation from the Church of England in its National
Constitution, under Archbishops, and their Officers as lawful, but they did
actually practice and maintain such Separation. Forasmuch as they declared the
Hierarchy to be Antichristian, deragatory to Christ's Government over his
Church, contrary to the Constitution and Nature of the Church under the Gospel,
and also thought it inconsistent with the Kings necessary and immediate
Supremacy over all Churches, and upon this account they insisted only upon
their Parish Relations, accounting Parishes the only Churches, and the
Ministers of them the only Pastors.

2. That they did generally live in Non-Communion with the Church of England,
as to the Ceremonies, and many parts of the Lyturgy. This is evident, because
they thought the Ceremonies unlawful, and therefore though they continued in
their Churches, yet none of them would use the Cross in Baptism, few would wear
the Surplice, none would compel the People to kneel at the Communion, and many
gave it without kneeling, yea, many would not read the Common Prayers, others
but some pieces of them, contenting themselves either with Lectures without
charge of a Parish, or else having those under them that could read to do it
for them. All their Care of peace which the Dr. now magnifies after their
Death, but was in their life time as little accounted of, as ours at this day,
they being always charged with breaking the peace of the Church. I say, all
their desire of peace did not oblige them to comply with those things which
they thought unlawful, either in themselves, or at least in their time and
Circumstances.

3. I infer, That when they were rejected for Nonconformity, they still
reckoned themselves the rightful Pastors of their Congregations, and that their
Right or Relation was not taken away, only that they were forcibly kept from
the enjoyment of their right, and the discharge of the Duties of their Relation.

And thus much appears from Mr. Bradshaw's Letter, cited by the Dr. giving the
Reason why they must leave their People, and not Preach to them when deprived,
because this were to run upon the Sword of the Civil Magistrate, who would not
suffer himself to be so despised, as that they whom he commanded to be silent,
should yet publicly preach in contradiction to his Command; there is nothing
of fear of Schism in the case, but a prudent yielding to the times, and of two
evils chosing the less, i. e. to do what good they could privately to their
People and Neighbors, as their own words cited do show, rather then by
Preaching publicly to hazard the bringing an open Persecution upon
themselves, and their people. p. 1. Sec. Sect. 16, 17.
All that the Dr. has quoted, let it be considered, it proves no more then
this, that they did not think it prudence in their Time, and Circumstances, to
Preach publicly when silenced for fear of provoking the Magistrate against
them, and giving occasion to those that used to slander them, especially to
King James as Enemies to the Kings Supremacy; They also modestly added that the
word might be Preached as well, yea, perhaps better by others, then by them;
though their Parishes seldom found it so. All this was but a prudential Reason,
proves no difference betwixt their Principles and Ours.

Let us next consider their practice, The Dr. tells us, Ibid.
That the Old Non-Conformists thought it unlawful for private Persons to
endeavor Reformation of the Church, contrary to the will of the civil
Magistrate, this he thinks condemns the practice of the present
Non-Conformists. But Bishop Bancroft gives another account of this matter,
viz. That it was resolved amongst the Non-Conformists after many years waiting,
Dang. posit book 3. chap. 3. and chap. 8.
and when they saw their admonitions to the Parliament 1570 had no effect, that
then they should endeavor to reform each one in their own places, yet so as by
all means to preserve the peace of the Kingdom, which accordingly they did
pursue in their several Synods, Classical, Provincial and National, from the
year 1572 and forward, having at length composed a Book of Discipline Ann.
1583, which was revised by several Synods, and at length perfected, and
according to it they did order themselves, and frame their Congregations till
all was discovered, and stopped by Arch Bishop Whitgift: let us hear their own
words. Protest. pos. 30.
We hold it utterly unlawful for any Christian Churches whatsoever, by any
armed force or power against the will of the civil Magistracy, and State under
which they live, to erect and set up in public the true Worship and Service of
God, or to beat down or suppress any Superstition or Idolatry that shall be
countenanced or maintained by the same, only every man is to look to himself,
that he communicate not with the evils of the times, enduring what it shall
please the State to inflict, and seeking by all honest and peaceable means all
Reformation of public abuses only at the hands of civil public persons, Vid.
3B. chapter 1. chap. 10.
and all practices contrary to these, we condemn as Seditious and sinful.
Bishop Bancroft makes it the design of his whole 3d. Book, to show that the
English Nonconformist did after the example of the Scots, endeavor
Reformation contrary to, or without the will of the civil Magistrate. By this
it is manifest, that the attempts for Reformation which they condemned, were

(1.) Such as were by force and Arms. Do we defend any such? The Gospel was
planted, and must be propagated by Preaching the Word, and bearing the Cross.

(2.) Attempts for public reformation either throughout the Nation, or in
other Churches besides their own, or to bring their practice and way of worship
into the public view contrary to the will of the Magistrate, especially if he
were a Christian. And this is all that the example of the Primitive Churches
under Heathen Emperors does prove; for they did keep their Assemblies and
Worships in private, and maintain them to the death, against the Laws and will
of those Princes, but they did not ordinarily bring them into public to
affront the Magistrates to their faces, yet when they lived under mild Princes,
and had a kind of tacit connivance they met publicly, as appears by the
question brought to Alexander Severus by the Cooks in Rome: who laid claim to a
public Hall, which the Christians used for their Worship, and the Mild
Emperor assigned it to the Christians saying it was better that any God should
be worshipped there, then that it should be a place devoted to Excess and Riot,
Eusebius. eccl. hist Lib. 1. Cap. 1.2.
and by degrees the Christians had many Beautiful Churches, which Dioclesian
caused to be demolished, and the Christians much bewailed it, yea Mr. Mead
contends that even from Nero's time the Christians had Churches or public
places appointed for their Worship. And Mr. Nich. Fuller maintains the same
opinion in his Miscellanies grounding it on the fore-quoted place of Eusebius.
Tract an 1 Cor. Chapter 11. ver. 22.
They who maintained every Congregation to be a distinct Church, having full
power within themselves, and their Ministers to be complete Pastors must needs
allow that every Congregation must have an intrinsic power of reforming and
regulating themselves, though it should be managed with all reverence and
respect to the Magistrate and public order. But the Non-Conformists judgment
in this will better appear by their practice, under the restraints that were
laid upon them by Laws and Canons, in the beginning of Q. Eliz. about 5 years
Conformity was not pressed, the Liturgy seemed to be put as a bound to
extravagant humors, as many Civil Laws be, but not as a Snare to the
Conscientious. But when it was perceived that the Non-Conformists increased in
number, and power with the people, subscription to the 39 Artic. without any
limitation was urged 1562, and many who had been Sufferers and Exiles in Q.
Mary's Days, refused to subscribe, amongst whom was the pious Mr. Fox, as says
Dr. Fuller, and from this time Mr. Ball dates the Miseries of our Church, Ball
agst. Can.
saying, whilst they walked in peace, God blessed: them with peace, there was
no division, Papists came to our Churches, and were daily converted to the
Truth, but when we came to bite and devour one another, the Papists were
hardened, and forbore our Communion, the progress of the Gospel was greatly
hindered, and perpetual contentions amongst our selves did presently ensue, now
many who did not subscribe were turned out of there places, both in the Church
and in the Universities, and those who for special respect to their persons, as
Mr. Fox and some others were not turned out, yet were looked on with an evil
eye, and accounted Puritans, and from this time says Dr. Fuller, there was a
difference even among the Non-Conformists, Mr. Whittingham and others on the
one side, Chapter Hist. Cent. 15.
held the Government of the Bishops, and the order of the Church of England
utterly unlawful, and in no ways to be submitted to, others were more
moderate, and thought them tolerable, and Reformation in Ceremonies, and some
other things only to be pressed and desired. And if this difference among
Non-Conformists be found at this day, it cannot be fairly said, they have
forsaken the Principles of the First Non-Conformists, seeing it was among them
from the beginning, and that sort of them have increased all along much beyond
the more moderate, through the obstinacy of the Prelates, who in all this space
of 130 years since the Lyturgy was first established, have not amended or
abated any one material thing to gratify the Non-Conformists, excepting that
of late, that the Lessons, Epistles and Gospels should be read in the New
Translation. The Non-Conformists that were turned out made a Separate
Congregation in London, Preached and Administered all Sacraments in a Public
Hall about the year 1567.

Sect. 6. This the Dr. confesses, and names three Ministers as the chief
Authors of it, but says Beza, being advised with, disliked it, why? as
Schismatical? No, but for fear of giving offense to the State, which it was
then hoped might have been prevailed with to moderate things; but did the rest
of the Non-conformists sit down as lay men, and disert their Ministry? No
Bishop Bancroft says, ( Book 3. cap. 1.) that for the first twelve years of
her Majesty's reign, there were many secret meetings of the Non-conformists
that came from beyond the Seas, both in private houses, and also in the fields
and woods, and some of those meetings they called Churches; and Mr. Cartwright
says he, in part defended them, saying that Conventicles was too harsh a term
for them.

The Ministers, both those that kept their places, as well as those that were
ejected, held frequent meetings amongst themselves, all Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
after the Parliament had rejected their admonitions, Bishop Bancroft and Dr.
Fuller says, the first of those meetings that came to their knowledge was at
Walmsworth in Surrey, 1572; and from that time diverse others were held at
Cooks-field in Essex, Mr. Knew-stubs. Parsonage, at London, in
Northamptonshire, yea at length there were three or four small Classes formed
in most Counties in England; there were also a kind of Provincial Synods held
at Oxford, at the time of the Act, and at Cambridge at the Commencement, or at
Sturbridge-fair, and at Coventry, ( An. 1588 Likewise National Synods were by
them agreed on to be held at London, at the time of the sitting of Parliaments;
and accordingly Bishop Bancroft names one or two that was afterward held by
them, Ann. 158^, they first composed a book of Discipline, wherein they laid
down a platform of Church Government in most things like to that in Scotland;
and after that book had been revised in their several meetings, and at length
perfected and subscribed by them, Bishop Bancroft says, they composed a book
of Common Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, and Government of the
Church, which they intended to present to the Parliament, in the 27 year of
Queen Elizabeth, with the form of an Act prefixed for its Establishment, and a
petition to the Queen and Parliament, that it might be made the established
Lyturgy of the Land.

This and much more the Bishop has set down throughout his third book, which
was learnt from the Confessions of Mr. Snape, Mr. Stone, Mr. Johnson, Ministers
of North-hamptonshire, who were imprisoned, and examined by the
High Commission, and from the Papers of others seized in some of their studies.

In Public they held solemn meetings of Neighbor Ministers, once in three
weeks, which they called Prophesyings, wherein some prayed, others preached, or
made Divinity Lectures. And Arch, Bishop Grindal being commanded by the Queen
to disturb them, gave her a fair account of them, and refused to interrupt
them, though he incurred her displeasure for it, as may be seen in his petition
in Dr. Fuller, with all the former passages, ibid.

Moreover in all their Congregations they used the Liturgy according to their
own judgments, and omitted the Ceremonies as they thought fit; kneeling at the
Sacrament was disused, even at the Temple-Church, in the time of Mr. Hooker and
Mr. Traverse, as appears by their Petitions annexed to Hookers Eccles. Polity:
Yea kneeling was not strictly enjoined all Queen Elizabeth's Reign. And Mr.
Chadderton was blamed by the Bishop of London at the Hampton Court Conference,
for that in Emmanuel Coll. Chapel in Cambridge, many did not kneel, what they
did in other parts of Church Government may be guest by this, that Mr.
Cartwright enjoined his own Manservant, being convict of Fornication, a form
of acknowledgment which he gave him in writing, which was charged against him
in the High Commission-Court. Bishop Bancroft tells of a like instance of a man
at North hampton Convict of the same offense, and how he was brought to
submission and acknowledgment in the Congregation, and then absolved by Mr.
Snape. The Bishop also gives account of their proceedings in their Classical
Meetings, in their censures of their Brethren in the Ministry.

When the Canons were made, Ann. 1603, which were to those Non-Conformists, as
the late Act of Uniformity was to us, many were now turned out, and all liable
to be so dealt with, but they that were ejected, still accounted themselves the
Pastors of their Flocks, though they were torn from them, and still visited
them with Letters, and in person, Praying, Catechizing, expounding the
Scriptures to them in private, some were received into Gentlemen's Houses, and
Preached publicly in their Chapels, others found favor under Bishops of
other Diocesse's, and got Livings with them; they joined together in public
and private Fasts, they administered the Sacraments privately, they contracted
and married many, being resorted too from far, for the good and grave Counsel
they use to give at such times, some taught Schools, others bred up young men
in their houses for their Ministry, Mr. Bernard Gilpin in Yorkshire is noted by
Dr. Fuller for this, that he was wont to have twenty young Scholars at a time
in his house; when they were to be ordained themselves, some went into
Scotland, others beyond the Seas, and got Ordination, which was not refused by
those Bishops, and some they Ordained amongst themselves at home; and as the
number of Non-Conformists increased, by the increase of new Impositions, and
more rigorous Prosecutions under the growing Arminian Faction in the Church, in
the latter end of King James, and under Archbishop Lauds Government. So these
practices of theirs increased, and they were bold in them as the necessity was
greater, and that this was their practice, will farther appear by the late Act
of Uniformity, the Oxford Act, and the Act against Conventicles, which do
cautiously in particular provide against all such things for the future, which
the Contrivers of them would never have thought on, had not experience taught
them that those were the private practices of former Non-Conformists, when cast
out of their places.

From all which, (which nothing but Ignorance can contradict it) it appears,
that the old Non-Conformists, when silenc't and ejected by Law or Crnons, when
forbidden by the magistrate and Bishops, did not yet exercise all Ministerial
Acts and Offices, and did not count themselves bound to be content with
lay-Communion; they did them indeed in a way which they thought most proper to
their Time and Circumstances, and not so publicly as we do now; which is to be
ascribed to the difference of time and occasions; which comes next to be
considered.

It must therefore be remembered, (having been spoken more largely before,) that
for a good part of Q. Eliz. Reign, Conformity was not urged with any
strictness, only Subscription to the 39 Artic. and that too, moderate by the
Statute of the 13 Eliz.

The first two Successive Archbishops, Parker and Grindal were mild and
moderate men, who governed the Church about 25 years, and such were most of the
other Bishops, having been Confessors and Fellow Sufferers with the
Non-Conformists in the Marian days: they had also traveled abroad amongst
other Churches, and therefore were not so zealous in matters disputable at
home, of this we have a notable Testimony from Mr. Cranmer, in his Letter to
Mr. Hooker, neither of them to the Non-Conformists. At first the greatest part
of the Learned in the Land, were either eagerly affected, or favourablr
inclined that way, the Books then written, for the most part savoured of the
Disciplinary Style, it sounded every where in Pulpits, and in common Phrase of
men's Speech, the contrary part began to fear they had taken a wrong course,
many which impugned the Discipline, yet so impugned it, not as being the better
form of Government; but as not being so convenient for our state, in regard of
dangerous innovations like to grow thereby, one man stood in the gap to oppose
them, etc. which was Dr. Whitgift, the following Brch-Bishop; here was yet no
occasion for their Preaching in private, while Whitgift was Archbishop. The
last 20 years of the Queen. the Non-Conformists were more straightly dealt with,
the Lyturgy and Subscription more rigorously imposed, their private
associations searched into, yet proceedings then were less then the little
Finger to the loins, compared to those of our days. The Non-Conformists yet
enjoyed their places, at least some places, as Mr. Cartwright who was removed
from being Professor in Cambridge, yet was suffered quietly to Preach in an
Hospital at Warwick till his death.

After the making of the Canons 1603 the Non-conformists were turned out of
places in greater numbers, but yet these Canons did not reach all, the matter
being left to the Bishops hands, some did either conuive at the secret omission
of subscription, or at the doing of it in their own sense, so that many either
kept their old places, or quickly got new ones in other Diocesses. Besides the
Non-conformists were then but few in comparison of the other Ministers, and the
people much fewer, who had not so much Religion as to make any difference
betwixt Ministers, and Preaching, and Discipline, or to distinguish betwixt the
good and bad, nor were there yet any footsteps of men going back again toward
Rome, in Doctrine, Government or Ceremonies; and therefore those
Non-conformists might very well judge it was most advantageous to the Gospel
for them by quiet and private means to serve their people, then by appearing
more publicly to occasion greater contentions; but our case is far different.
Till Whitgifts time there was hope that the acceptable things in the Liturgy
and Church Government might have been mended, their greatest defenders judging
this their best plea, as the forecited Mr. Cranmer in his Letter says, that
the Government of Bishops was not unlawful, and setting up of Elders was not
necesary, or as Mr. Hooker expresses it in his Epistle Dedicatory to the
Archbishop (which also is the drift of his book) that there was no great harm
if things complained of were still continued in the Church, but Whitgift and
his Successor Bancroft, put an end to these hopes by establishing all the
things in question by their Canons, and requiring all the Clergy to subscribe
to the Lyturgy, but still the Doctrine and worship was kept pure, and the
bounds of our first Reformation maintained as sacred, But Archbishop Laud
extended Conformity to his new Arminian Doctrines, to his new Ceremonies, and
to bring all men into such subjection to himself under the name of the Church,
that they must neither speak nor do any thing in Religion but what he allowed
and appointed, and now was hard to keep the ground which was gotten at the
first Reformation. He and his designs were at length defeated, but civil broils
hindered the settlement of the Church.

At length when almost all men weary of confusions longed for peace and union,
the same Laudensian Arminian Faction influenced the State, to establish
Conformity in an higher degree then ever, viz. that all Ministers should not
only practice, but approve by public declaration, all that was enjoined in the
Lyturgy, without any considerable amendment, hereupon there is no favor to be
showed to any, no moderation nor no end, all being established by a Law, nor
were they content to deprive the Non-conformists of their Churches, but a
second Law is added to drive them above five miles from those that were there
people, or any Corporation, where people being more civilized, and having more
leisure, might be more likely to hear then preach; and a third law also, that
they should not exercise any worship of God other then what is prescribed by
the Liturgy in any private house, or in their own family, in the presence of
five other persons, so that the present Non-conformists is this. They are all
turned out as one man, and that for no reason given, only things devised to be
laid on them as snares which the imposers knew they could not submit to. They
were in number about 2000. The People also of the same persuasion with them
very numerous in the 3 Nations, and in Scotland the whole people, there was not
so much as leave to Petition for any moderation, nor is there any bound of time
put to this Rigor, nor may they be suffered privately, and in Corners to Act
as Ministers, and help their People, and in the mean while Popery Arminianism,
Atheism, and profaneness break in like a torrent, now whether there is as much
reason that the present Non-Conformists should keep as private as the former
did, the Reader must judge.

Obj. But the Dr. says the old Non-Conformists earnestly opposed the Brownists.

Answ. And so do many of the present Non-Conformists also the Brownists had two
dangerous Positions or Principles peculiar to themselves.

(1.) That there was no true Church in England, nor indeed in the whole world,
but that all Churches in respect of their Doctrine Worship, Ceremonies,
Constitution and Order, or some of these were Idolatrous, and Antichristian,
and that therefore no man that minded his Salvation ought to continue a member
of them, or to hold Communion with them as Churches, though they might
Communicate with particular Members, or with the Society as a Company of
private men, Praying or otherwise Worshipping God together, provided nothing
was then used or done, which they disliked.

(2.) The Brownists taught that the people had the whole power of Government of
the Church, and that the Ministers, were but the Peoples Deputies in Preaching
the Word, Administering the Sacraments, or exercising of Discipline, and must be
accountable to them. These Principles destructive of all Churches, the
Non-Conformists earnestly opposed, especially the first, sc. separation from
all the Reformed Churches, as Antichristian. For by preventing of this, they
would prevent the other mischiefs; but in maintaining the Churches of England
to be true Churches, did they the Prelaticall, National Church, in respect of
the Established constitution, which themselves had so often called
Antichristian?

It is manifest by their Books, and what is forequoted of their opinions, that
they meant it of the several Parishes or Congregations in England, that they
were true Churches, both in respect of their Constitution, and also in respect
of their Doctrine and Worship; and that there was in them no such intolerable
corruptions, as that all Christians should fly from them; nevertheless when the
Ministers in particular Parishes were more then ordinary defective, and
unprofitable, they allowed and encouraged the people to resort to Neighbor
Parishes for better means of edification; which Mr. Hildersham defends to be
Lawful, Lect. upon John, Page 227.

All this is the sense of the present Non-Conformists; and I do verily believe
there are no more Brownists among the present Non-Conformists Ministers, then
there were amongst them in those days, for some there were then that went
further then the rest in Principles of Separation, and so it is in all times,
and all matters of controversy, and what considerable difference is there
betwixt their allowing people to go to other Parishes or Gentlemen's Chapels,
and our allowing them to go to private Meetings, seeing one takes them off from
their own Pastor and Church as much as the other? The Dr. says they still kept
the same Liturgy, and so they held Communion with the National Church, nay but
many times they did not that; for some, the Old Puritan Preachers used it not
in their Parishes or Chapels, others but little of it, others would Baptize
without the Cross, give the Sacrament without kneeling, Marry without the Ring,
etc. which made people resort to them, who could not have such Liberty at home,
and so they varified from, if not omitted the Liturgy of the Church, but can a
man be a Member of the National Church of England and hold Communion with it,
without being a Member of a particular Parish, and if they be allowed to
continue members of their own Parishes, and not to make a Schism, who did in
cases of necessity, and pro tempore mostly Communicate with Neighbor Parishes,
why may not the same be said now, yea it is said and believed by most of the
Non-Conformists, that the Parishes are true Churches of Christ, and they do not
separate from them, or break off Membership though pro tempere, and for the
present necessity, they do ordinarily Communicate in private Meetings, where
the same Doctrine and Worship is used, only some circumstances and ceremonies
omitted, but no contrary or new ones used in their room, or in opposition to
those in the Parishes, and thus much for the Old Non-Conformists, from whom I
do not conceive those that are now living do considerably differ in judgment or
practice, but only as time and circumstances do direct them, only they that are
dead are out of the way, and so best spoken of, and they that are living,
crossing the humors or interests of their opposites are always ill spoken of.

Obj. 2. The Dr. next objects that we contradict the Principles of the Assembly
of Divines, who did disapprove and gave reasons against the toleration desired
by the Congregational Brethren, as tending to endless Separation.

Answ. The Toleration desired was, that all men should have liberty to join
with what Congregation and Pastor they pleased without respect to Parish or
place of abode, or any other civil distribution or settlement of men amongst
us. Their chief reasons was that Christians being not originally bound to
Nations, places, or any other Civil Distribution, but left free to join with
those Congregations, that they should find most convenient and edifying, and
now Episcopal Government in England being dissolved and no other set up in its
room, the People were again free, and therefore might make what Congregations
or Societies they found most for their own edification, see Dr. Owen of Schism.

This the Assembly thought not reasonable, that things should be unravelled
into their first Principles, and that we should begin to lay the Foundation of
Churches again, seeing our Parishes, at least those that have good Ministers,
have all things necessary to a Church, and it is most convenient for Christians
Living in a Vicinity, and under the same Civil Officers to make the same
Congregation for Worship, nor did they think, the former Relation of Parishes
to be dissolved by the dissolution of the Hierarchy, who were no essential
parts of the Parishes, but general Supervisors, or Visitors over them, of the
same mind are the most part of the Non-Conformists still, and all the
Congregational men went not that way, some allowing all those Parishes that had
good Ministers, and some Christians fit for all acts of Church Communion to be
true Churches. Mr. Cotton adds way of the Churches of New England, that it is
great presumption to say that the Church of England was faulty in its first
Constitution, and therefore to be pulled to pieces, and new-built, seeing all
Histories agree that some of the Apostles, or Apostolical men, were the first
Planters of the Gospel in England, who did certainly constitute the Churches in
a right manner. But where is the Consequence to our purpose, that because the
Assembly, and we as well as they maintain that the Parishes of England are true
Churches, and not to be subverted, therefore when Thousands of their Ministers
are violently thrust out from them without any cause given, (and if they had
been all cast out as it was in Scotland, the Argument is the same) and their
People left either desolate, or like to be betrayed to Ignorance and
Superstition, that it were unlawful for these Ministers to Preach to this
People in Temporary Assemblies, or Congregations, till this storm may happily
blow over. I find no force in the Argument, but each Reader must judge for
himself.

CHAP. III. An Answer to the 3d. Argument from the Nature and Sinfulness of
Separation.
THE Dr. spends the whole second part of his Book in Examining, as he says.

Sect. 1. The Principles of the present Separation, and those are of two
degrees.

(1.) Of some that hold no Communion with the Church of England lawful.

2. Those that hold only occasional Communion with them lawful, but not
constant; and then proceeds to argue against Separation from Churches, whose
Doctrine and Worship are for substance true, and good, and to show many
inconveniences that will arise from such Separation. Now though some of the
Drs. Answerers have diverted to more general Questions about the Nature of
Church Unity, Terms of Communion, and Causes of Separation, and its several
degrees, and so have given him occasion to follow them, yet I judge all this to
be wide of our present Question, in the sense and apprehension of most
Non-Conformists, for we are not disputing about, much less erecting new
Churches. The Question only is, whether it be Schismatical and Unjustifiable
for us to Preach and Exercise all Ministerial Acts to the People in our
Circumstances, still maintaining all the Peace and Communion we can, hoping in
Gods due time this Wound of the Church may be healed. What further. Questions
any particular Men have about the Constitution of Churches, belongs not to the
Cause or Party of the Non-Conformists, whose sense he wrongfully ascribes to
Mr. A, and Mr. B. when they only speak of General Questions about Church
Communion, and not our particular Case in hand. All the Arguments therefore, or
force of this discourse to our present purpose, lies in this,

Obj. Separation from Churches granted to be sound in Doctrine and Worship, is
sinful, and in its effects very evil, but such Separation he would insinuate,
is the Non-Conformists Preaching, therefore sinful.

Answ. In Answer to this we say, (1.) That the Non-Conformists do disclaim, and
are not constrained to own by this their Practice any Principle of Separation.
2. We shall show wherein the great Evil of Separation lies. And, 3. That the
Dr. has provided no better Remedy against it, then those whom he opposes.


1. The Non-Conformists disclaim Separation, for they acknowledge the Parishes
of England to be true Churches, and the Doctrine and Worship established by Law
amongst them to be true and sound; they acknowledge themselves Members of those
Parishes, though wrongfully thrust out, and evilly entreated by them. They did
not Separate themselves, nor withdraw from them, but first the Ministers were
cast out by new devised terms imposed on them, and afterward many of the
People were excommunicated (and more would have been, could the Parish
Ministers have had their wills) for non-communicating in doubtful, if not
sinful things.

They are also ready and desirous to return to a full union with the Parishes
when ever the obstacles shall be removed. And as they own no separation, so
their practice does not constrain them to acknowledge it, They hold Communion
with the Parishes, not only in Faith and Doctrine, but also in acts of worship,
where they think they can lawfully do it, and when they are not employed
elsewhere. But the Dr. thinks if it be lawful for us to communicate
occasionally or sometimes with the Church we are bound to do it always, his
reason is, because if we be members of the Church, and the Church be in such a
condition, that we can sometimes communicate with it, then we must do it upon
all occasions, or else we separate and become members of a new Church; For
Answer, I say, that there are many cases wherein men ought to continue members
of a Church, i. e. not totally to break off, but wait till abuses may be
amended, and breaches healed, and yet it not be their duty to hold constant
communion in all or any acts of public worship; This appears by the instance
of the ten Tribes after Jeroboams Apostasy, they were still members of the
Church of Jerusalem, and might not gather any other Church; there were many
amongst them who held Communion with Judah in Doctrine and Charity, but yet
could not go up to Jerusalem to all or any of the Feasts or Sacrifices, which
were there chief Public Worship. And that they sinned not in forbearing,
appears, because the eminent Prophets Elijah, Elisha, and their Scholars, who
were so numerous that Obadiah alone saved an hundred from Jezabels cruelty, and
they had four Seminaries, or Colleges wherein they were bred up, these I say
lived amongst them, and kept private meetings with them, but neither went
themselves, nor required the people to go up to Jerusalem as things then stood,
Hosea blamed the Priests for laying snares and nets upon Mizpah and Tabor,
Chap. 5.12. to entrap those who out of zeal did go up to Jerusalem, and thereby
caused them to be put to death, but we do not find that this Prophet, or Jonas
or Amos, who were all sent to the ten Tribes, and preached to them, where they
had opportunity, did ever press them to go up to all acts of Public worship at
Jerusalem, because they were Members of that Church.

Again, the people of Judah, who lived nearer to the Temple, and had free
access to it when it was open, those that were upright whether, Priests or
private persons, went not up to it in the time of Idolatrous Kings, when the
Public Worship was corrupted, yet they continued members of the Church; they
frequented the Synagogues or more private meetings at home, Malac. 3.16. and
waited sometimes many years, till Public abuses should be redressed, I know it
will be said the case is not the same, Idolatry was here set up in Public, and
so it is not with us.

I Answer, The question is not about the parrelling the case, but the truth of
this proposition, that where occasional communion is lawful, constant is
necessary, for here we see men continue members of a Church, yea the Priests
and Levites continued officers in it, and the Prophets prophesied in it, and so
held communion occasionally when they could, and in those things they could
lawfully, but they did not communicate in all things, nor at all times, nor
were bound to it. But let us go a little farther after the Captivity, the Jews
being dispersed through all Countries, there continued, and set up their
Synagogues and house of prayer where ever they could have leave. Those Jews
were still members of the Church at Jerusalem, and yet did not, could not (the
far greatest part of them) go up thither, They therefore held communion in
some things, as the expounding the Law and prayer, but not in the Passover or
Sacrifices, which were their Sacraments, and the greatest ties of their
Society, and all this only for their Civil convenience, because they were
seated in other Countries, and by reason of Trade or other occasions were loath
to remove to Jewry; if this will excuse them, why may not other Cases arise
where one part of a people may not think fit to break off from a Church wholly,
and yet not be bound to all acts of Communion or worship with it, and such a
case we have frequently in Ecclesiastical history when the people of some great
City, as Rome, Antioch, Alexandria, etc. differed about choosing a Bishop.

Suppose the better and sounder part chose a fit and worthy Person, and the
bigger and worse part chose a Person unsound in Doctrine, or scandalons in
Life, and him they will have, thrusting out the fiter Person, and his People
also, if they will adhere to him, what should be done in this case. I know it
was usual, neither to Pray, nor hear together, though some of them might happen
to be in the same Prison, and in the same Room, but this without doubt was
Schism on both sides. Should the better yield to the worse, and quit their
Election. So they should betray Religion and their own Souls; should they quite
break off, and forsake the others, resolving never to have more to do with
them; So they should betray the others to utter ruin, and the Church by
degrees to destruction. The good Wheat continually-leaving the Tares, among
whom yet it is very likely, some good Wheat may be scattered, it remains then
that they keep to their Privilege, and adhere to him whom they have chosen,
and yet not dissert them who would cast them out, but communicate with them as
Brethren, especially in such common Duties, as do not contain a plain
acknowledgment of their undue and Schismatical practice, and so wait till
Providence may find means to make up the Breach. That this is our case, shall
be showed in the last Chapter.

The Dr's other reason is grounded from Phil. 3.16. The sum of his arguing from
that Text is this;

Men are to do all things Lawful to maintain the Unity of the Church where
they live, therefore whatsoever is Lawful for them to Communicate in
sometimes, they must do it always.

Answ. Lawful is either simply and absolutely so, or Lawful in those
Circumstannces as the Apostle distinguishes betwixt lawful and expedient, 1
Cor. 6.12. i. e. lawful in it self, or lawful in this or that case. If every
man be bound to do all that is simply and absolutely lawful to preserve the
peace of the Church, then he may be many times bound to yield to turbulent and
irregular persons in unreasonable demands and impositions, but if a man be
bound only to do those things which are lawful in the present Circumstances,
then the Argument is of no force, for it will be said, they that held but
occasional and partial Communion; go as far as they judge lawful, i e.
expedient and fit in their Case and Circumstances, and so they shall not be
bound to constant and full Communion.

2. The great sin and mischief of Separation lies in judging and condemning
others as no Churches, having no Ministry, no Sacraments, and so not being in
the ordinary way of Salvation, not having Christ's presence amongst them.

This indeed deserves all the aggravations which the Dr. cites out of Mr. B.
Sect. 24. and I am persuaded he intended no more, and this was the meaning of
the Old Non Conformists Severe reprehensions of the Brownists, viz. that they
dishonored Christ, reproached his Servants, his gifts and Graces in them, and
slandered the footsteps of his anointed. This indeed tends to the Subversion of
the Church, to expose it to the contempt of the world destroys all charity and
brotherly Communion, and is a great presumption, for who shall dare to judge
when Christ has forsaken a People, who shall profess his Name, and keep up his
Worship for substance according to his word, though they do, or are supposed to
fail in Circumstances, or lesser parts of their Duty. And if the Fathers
mentioned by the Dr. intended any other Separation by their high invectives
against it, as it is probable they did not, (at least those pious, peaceable
men, Cyprian and Augustine) when they said Schism is as bad as Idolatry, etc.
we may say by their leave, that they showed more zeal for themselves and their
own Interest, then for the honor of Christ, and the peace of his Church. Mr.
Hales (tract of Schism) says, Heresy and Schism are the Theological
Scare-Crows, wherewith Men fright Children, and men commonly use against all
that differ from them, when they cannot prove such a Crime against them, and
again he says the Donatists might have been in the right for any thing that
Augustine said against them; and if he had extended it to Cyprian and Cornelius
writings against the Navatians, he might perhaps not have exceeded the Truth.
We do acknowledge all Un-necessary Separation from a Church is a sin, let the
ground be what it will, the error of Conscience in him, who thinks it a duty
will not make it a duty, it does impair Love, it lays the Church open to her
Enemies reproaches, and to endless contentions within her self, but it is not
such a sin as some men labor to make it to maintain their own greatness, as if
it would excuse men for the neglect of their Salvation, or make them amends for
the loss of Heaven, that they have been scrupelously fearful of running into
Schism. Let the Church take care as Mr. Hales advises, that the Terms of her
Communion be no other then the Scripture will justify, and do concern all
Christians; and if any other be added, let them be temporary, and removed when
inconveniences arise greater then the Reasons for imposing them, or equal to
them. Let the Ministers labor in public and private with soft words and good
Reasons to satisfy the People in all their doubts about things relating to the
Church, and if after all this some few (as they will not be many) are so far
dissatisfied, as that they they think they ought to withdraw, let them
withdraw, provided they do not reproach and condemn the Church they depart
from, and let them nevertheless be owned as Brethren. This certainly becomes
the Gospel, and will make more for the peace of the Church, and send more
toward reducing of those that separate, then all corrections and hard words
against Schism.

And thus did the Primitive Christians toward the Novatians, for though some
zealous of their own authority speak sharply against them, yet they were not
troubled in Constantine's time, the Bishops of theirs sat in the Council of
Nice, they had their public Churches, one in Constantinople, when it was the
Imperial Seat, to which the people generally resorted when Macedonius was
Bishop, and when their Church was commanded to be pulled down, and they not to
meet within the City the people assisted in carrying the Materials, and setting
up the Church in the Suburbs, yea, says Socrates, the people would have been
admitted into their Communion if the Novatians had been willing, and we may
observe in History, the Novatians never ceased till the clamours against them
as dangerous and intolerable persons were at end, and little or no notice were
taken of them Indeed could it be proved that any particular Church under the
Gospel, whether National Diocesan or Parochial was of the same constitution
with the Church of the Jews, that all Christians were bound to be Members of
it, or all that live within their Precinct, or at least all that once have been
Members, are indispensably bound to continue so, then it were a damning sin to
separate from them. But when it is Originally, as free for every Christian to
choose his Church, as to choose the place of his abode, and nothing but the
convenience of his own edification in the first place, and next the edification
of the Neighborhood obliges him to join with, and to continue in this or that
particular Church, it can be no sin of so high a nature, though it be
blameworthy for him to withdraw without just reason.

3. Say, that all Separation is as great a sin as our Author would insinuate,
what means does he prescribe to prevent it? why, he says all men are bound to
do, and submit to all things that are lawful, to preserve the peace, and to
prevent the dividing of the Church. True all things that are really Lawful,
but not to all that the imposers say are lawful, if men must judge for
themselves, what is Lawful absolutely and what not, and what is Lawful or not
in their circumstances, will not this open a door for Separation, as much as
any thing his opposites have said, he blames them for allowing people to
separate upon pretense of their Ministers insufficiency or scandal, or
interruption on them againist their wills, for doubtful ceremonies for modes
of Worship, for want of Discipline or right Constitution of the Church, and
says (which is his most plausible arguments,) that some of these, the Papists
might have retorted upon our first Reformers, and all such pretenses would
justify the Ancient Schisms, and make way to endless Separation for the
future. But he wrongs these Authors, which is a common shift, almost to all
that write on this subject, when he intimates that they allow Separation upon
any pretense of such causes. Is there no difference betwixt pretending and
really proving the gross insufficiency, errors or scandals of a Minister, or
gross usurpations over men's Consciences and Liberty? do any prudent men allow
Separation without good cause, full proof, all endeavors of amendment, patient
waiting, and mature advice, and consideration of all circumstances? what then,
is there no preventing endless Separation, but Tyranny over men's Consciences,
that they shall be compelled to approve, and do whatsoever their Rulers please
as the Papists teach? yes, the Dr's final determination is Page 208. A prudent
and due submission in Lawful things is a medium betwixt Tyranny over Men's
Consciences, and endless Separation, what is here more then any Brownist will
grant that understands himself, viz. that as Rulers must not Tyrannize over
Men's Consciences, so the people must not be given to endless Separation, and
that the way to prevent both is, that the Rulers rule with due and prudent
Discipline, and that the people yield prudent and due submission, and that this
Government and submission be exercised only in Lawful things. But still must
not the people in submitting as well as the Governors in Ruling, judge whether
things be Lawful or not? whether submission be due, and how far, and in what
cases it is prudent to yield, or to deny it? if the people must not judge, then
you establish a Tyranny over their Consciences, that they must approve what
ever their Rulers command, or Hobbisme that they must do what ever their Rulers
command, though they believe it to be sinful or inconvenient, if the people
must judge for themselves in the things that concern them, then they must judge
of the insufficiency of their Minister, the Legallity of his call, and the
like? but how then has the Dr. put a stop to Separation more then they? may
not men pretend things required to be unlawful, submission not to be due nor
prudent, and so without end? Their Arguments therefore are but Sophismes, like
those that plead against all certainty of sense or reason, because many men are
certain, i. e. confident when they are mistaken, that a man cannot be sure he
sees, hears or feels, because he has many times thought he did so in his
dream, when it was no such thing, as there is a certain way of proving, that
men are awake and use their senses, so there is as certain a way to prove by
plain Scripture, when Ministers are insufficient, when impositions are
unlawful, when it is necessary to withstand usurpation on the Churches
Privileges, etc. what ever Sophisters will cavil against it, and if men will
pretend cause of Separation when there is none or manifestly insufficient, or
but dubious, they may be convicted, and if they separate, bear their blame: but
whilst men are subject to mistake, to passion and partiallity, which will be
till our Lord come, what shall put a stop to Separation but necessary
moderation in Rulers in imposing? one reverence in the people in submitting,
and meekness toward those, who notwithstanding all care, weakly or peevishly
may dissent in things that are tolerable? This Learned man has not showed us,
nor the experience of Fifteen Hundred Years, the Popish Cruelty could not
prevent Separations, Episcopal Authority could not prevent them. The Donatists
and Novatians had their Bishops, imposing Uniformity in Ceremonies could not,
the First Division in the Christian Church rose about the keeping of
Easter Day, if people offend against the plain Rule of Scripture, or the plain
Rule of good Government and Order, let them be punished according to their
Offenses, but not for things doubtful in Scripture, or burdensome in
Government, if men offend in lesser matters, and cannot be convinced, let them
be born with till inconvenience be seen to arise from such Clemency, and then
it is time enough to retract or retrench it; if this were not daily done in
Nations and Families, no Civil Society could stand, how then shall the contrary
severity establish the Church.

Obj: The Dr. objects, the Reformers taught, that where there is soundness in
Doctrine and Worship people ought not to separate from a Church for lesser
defects, real or apparent, and that they insisted on the corruption of Doctrine
and Worship, as the only cause of their Separation from Rome.

Answ. 1. Doctrine and Worship are indeed the chief things in a Church, for if
God be truly worshipped and his knowledge be truly taught, men's lives will be
bettered, and their Souls saved by it, but then it must not lie dead in the
Confession of Faith, and in the Lyturgy, while men preach false Doctrine, and
bring Superstitions into the public worship, or else neither Preach nor
Worship God in the Congregation at all, or so seldom that the people can be
little profited by them, the Reformers never thought of this mystery.

2. It is not true that they separated from Rome only, for the Corruptions of
Doctrine and Worship, it was for such Corruptions hat they counted her
Antichristian a Rotten and Apostate Church, with whom they might have no Church
Communion, but her usurpation and Tyranny over all other Churches was used also
as an argument for our withdrawing from her, for if the Church of Rome have no
Authority over all, or any other Churches, and if the exercise of such power be
an insufferable oppression, and prejudice to the Churches, then they might
justly upon this account cast off her Yoke, though for this alone they should
not reject Communion with her as a Neighbor Church. Dr. Hammond Dr. Bramhal
and others of late insist upon this as the chief defense of our departure from
Rome, viz. because the Church of England was for the first 600 years
independent on her never Subject to her, but Dr. Reynolds conference with Heart,
and all other of the Reformers who wrote against the Popes Supremacy, made this
one Argument to justify their secession, and so it will be in lesser cases,
even a just ground of departure from constant Communion, though not a ground of
refusing Brotherly and occasional Communion, unless there be corruptions in
Doctrines and Worship allowed also.

3. The first Reformers generally, except Calvin, were too negligent both of
Worship and Discipline, being wholly intent upon reforming the Doctrine of the
Church, gross Idolatry indeed in Worshipping the Mass, Saints and Angels they
did quickly espy, but Images in Churches with other Superstitions, Rites and
Ceremonies they took little notice of, to cause them to be reformed, and hence
the Lutherans to this day retain them, as if they were approved of by Luther
and his Companions: perhaps they waited that the Princes should reform these
things, or it may be they thought if they could have liberty to Preach sound
Doctrine, that would of it self purge out these disorders in worship and
ceremonies, they also might think the people, and especially the Princes would
yet scarce bear strict Discipline, but in time might be brought to it, but they
found they were mistaken, and some of them saw their error while they lived,
Bucer Oelochampadius and others complained as Comconius has cited them in his
Exhortation, that they had not set up Discipline at first, for now the people
had got Knowledge and Notions, and were used to Liberty, they would not bear
the Yoke of Discipline, Bucer with Tears said to some Bohemians when he had
read their Confession and former Discipline, vos soli habetis regnum Christi
interris, none but you have the Kingdom of Christ on Earth. In like manner do
the best Helvetians and Germans complain in every Age of want of Discipline and
Power in their Churches.

Obj. But we must not separate for Ceremonies, and for this the Synod of
Sendomer in Poland is quoted.

Answ. That same Synod also declares that Ceremonies ought not to be imposed,
and when they had recommended kneeling at the Sacrament to their People, to
distinguish them from the Socinians that lived amongst them, they add that they
would not enjoin it, for if they should, then they might be necessitated to use
the Ecclesiastical Censures against those who would not submit, which ought not
to be used for Rites and Ceremonies. Vid. Consens. Eccl. Polon in Corp. Confess.

Ceremonies many times pollute the Worship of Christ, and he forbad Israel all
the Rites and Customs of the Heathen, as well as their Idols and their
Worship, but if the Ceremonies themselves be really inoffensive, yet the
usurpation of them that impose them without Authority, may be a greater offense
then the Ceremonies imposed, and justly to be resisted, and if they will
maintain their Impositions to a division, this breach must be upon them.

Obj. Amyraldus is quoted, who says, Ceremonies are not a ground of Separation
from a Church, unless they be such as import false Doctrine, or false Worship,
or are likely to introduce it.

Answ. And are not these things objected against the Ceremonies of the Church
of England even by the Old Non-Conformists, viz.

That the Surplice is a sign or badge of a Mass Priest, that the Cross was a
Popish Idol, and the use of it Idolothisme, i. e. like the meats offered to
Idols, very offensive and scandalous to the weak; that kneeling at the
Sacrament was a badge of Adoration of it, and was never imposed, nor generally
practiced in the Church, till Transubstantiation was established, and for the
danger of bringing back Popery by these Ceremonies, the Experience of this and
the last Age (since Bishop Laud new modled the Church) is abundant proof I will
only instance in kneeling at the Supper, which turned the Table to an Altar,
set it at the East end of the Church, railed it in, made it Sacred, and to be
bowed to, and that for this Reason, as the Aoch Bishop delivered it in his
Speech in the Star Chamber, because there it is hoc est Corpus meum, this is my
body, whereas in the Pulpit it is but hoc est verbum meum, this is my word. And
then Dr. Heylin writes a Book to prove that there was some kind of Sacrifice of
Christ in the Eucharist which was answered by Dr. Hackwell; and now how far
were these Men from the Mass.

Obj. But this will hinder all Union with Protestants, if we should break for
Ceremonies and Modes of Worship.

Answ. He means the Lutherans, for whom our Arminian Church men have some
kindness, but little for other Protestants, yet this will not follow, for a
Christian may submit to those Rights and Ceremonies in another Church where he
occasionally is, and communicates with them but as Brethren, which he may not
do in his own Church, where he is a constant member, and so is guilty of the
Corruptions, which according to his place he does not oppose, even as every
prudent man complies with the Orders and Customs of places and Families; he
goes in abroad, though he will not suffer the same to be practiced in his own
house, but alas what hope of Union with Protestant Churches, when we teach,
that where there are no Diocesan Bishops, there are no Churches, no Ministry,
no Sacraments, some of his Majesty's Chaplains when they were with him in
Paris, did hold no Communion with the French Churches, as they complained in
public Letters, to say nothing of many at home, that kept their own houses 12
years or more, during the late troubles; going to no Church for want of
Bishops, and the Common Prayer, finally our Act of Uniformity decrees. That no
man shall Preach or Administer the Lords Supper, much less have any
Ecclesiastical Preferment that is not Episcopally Ordained, besides all other
Subscriptions. Now the Communion of Churches lies in admitting of Ministers to
officiate in each others Churches sometimes, as well as in admitting the People
to lay-Communion, as in the famous instance of Victor and Polycarpus at Rome,
celebrating the Sacrament together, Let us unite at home, and then there may be
hope we shall unite with our Neighbors.

CHAP. IV. The grounds of the Non-Conformists present practices.
THE Dr. spends the whole 3d. part of his Book in confuting the Pleas for
Separation from the Church of England, and gathering new Churches, which I
shall leave to those whom it concerns, and shall only say, that all these
disputes do really increase, and not hinder Separation, by laying open the
first Principles of Government to the People, and filling their heads with
Notions and Disputes about things, whereof they are not competent Judges:
Moderation in Governing, and not disputes about Governments does most dispose
the People to Obedience and quiet Submission, and as in Commonwealths, when
People have not the Protection of their Governors, or the Benefit of their
Laws and just Privileges, rigorous proceedings dispose them to defection, and
to study Arguments to defend it from the natural principles of
self-preservation, and the peoples interest in all Government by their
Primitive consent to it, and their successive approbation of it: So, rigorous
Impositions in the Church, without any condescension in Governors, upon just
complaints, will at last make the People weary of forbearing, and search for
all pleas, whereby they may defend themselves in shaking off the Yoke; and then
it will little avail their Rulers, either to their profit, honor or peace of
their Consciences, to cry out upon Rebellion or Schism when they have lost the
people: Our present practice in Preaching, though ejected and forbidden, is not
grounded on, nor need be supported by these, or any other pleas for Separation;
The general sense of the Non-Conformists, both Ministers and People, (leaving
to particular Persons their particular sentiments as the Church of England also
does to many of her Members,) is this:

1. That the Parishes of England generally are true Churches, both as to the
matter of them, the People being Christians, and not to be excluded from
Church Communion; and as to the form of them, their Ministers being true
Ministers, such as for their Doctrine or manners do not deserve to be degraded.

2. That the Doctrine, Worship and Sacraments in these Parishes are for
substance sound and wholesome, though there are some offensive things mixed in
them, and annexed to them.

3. That they are still Members of these Parishes; the people of those where
they live, and the Ministers so far, as not to be obliged to set up distinct
and permanent Churches; nevertheless they think themselves bound to join
together for the Worship of God according to their own Consciences, and public
allowance for some years past; desiring and waiting for an opportunity to
return fully to the Parish-Communion, when ever it shall please their Rulers to
condescend to their reasonable request, in relaxing or removing those things
which are so offensive to them; and in this their practice they judge they do
no more then the Primitive Churches often did, when erroneous, or otherwise
unfit Pastors were obtruded on them, or other differences arose amongst them,
whereupon the Congregations were often divided, as in Rome, Antioch,
Alexandria, and Constantinople, with diverse other places, and then when those
offenses and differences were removed, they returned to full eommunion again;
or as did the Church of Israel, when by, Jeroboams Apostasy they could not go
up to Jerusalem with safety, or other times could not communicate there,
because of Corruptions under some Kings of Judah, who then held private
Assemblies for the present necessity, and when all obstacles were removed,
again went up to Jerusalem, even many of the Ten Tribes in Hezekiah and
Josiah's time, when their own Idolatrous Princes were removed, and they could
do it without danger, though they were still subject to Idolatrous Conquerors,
but such who lived remote, and gave them more Liberty of Religion then their
own Princes did.

We judge our case to be like a case of necessary self defense, where present
necessity is the Guide and Lawgiver, and ordinary Laws and orders which are
proper for times of peace, are in a great measure supersedent. When a Kingdom
is invaded, or divided within it self, all things threaten ruin; it is lawful
for the people to gather into several Bodies, to possess Garrisons, to chose
them Leaders, and for fit men to undertake their conduct, though without,
though contrary to some present commands that may be unduly obtained and given,
yet they shall incur no guilt of Sedition nor Rebellion so long, as they design
nothing but the preservation of themselves, and the whole as far as they can,
and are ready to return to their own places so soon as peace shall give them
leave.

When an Army is in danger to be betrayed by the falsehood or division of the
principal Officers, or when it has lost its Generals in some defeat, it would
not be accounted mutiny for the Soldiers to run together as they can, and with
the help of inferior Officers to preserve themselves from being sold or
destroyed, provided they still retain a resolution of returning to the Body of
the Army, when they may with safety to the whole, and to themselves.

Thus the Non-Conformists lie under such a necessity, they conceive for the
Reasons laid down in the former part, chapter 6, and 7. which it may not be amiss
for a conclusion briefly to sum up.

1. There is now no reason to be pretended for the imposed Conformity: In K.
Edw. days, the Bishops, their Clergy and People made it necessary to retain
what was then retained, now it is not so generally desired. In Queen Elizabeth's
days there was hopes of winning of the Papists by our moderation, now there is
none, but more danger of their incroaching upon us by it.

2. The Dissenters from this Conformity were heretofore but few, now they are a
very considerable part of the Church; I will make no comparison. Formerly the
Ministers were generally censured as Puritans, and were but few, the people
likewise but two or three in a great Town, now they are Multitudes, and those
who are zealous for Conformity, appear fewer then those, who would be glad to
have it reproved, at least in all places that are most civilized.

3. Conformity has occasioned a woeful Division and Scandal in our Church ever
since the Reformation, and therefore ought not after so much Experience of the
evil of it, and also after plain evidence of benefit and advantage to Religion,
by the removal of it for some years, to have been again so rigorously enjoined.

4. The things in Question, though not of the highest nature in themselves, yet
by occasion of the Division they cause at home, and the advantage the Papists
make of it have endangered our whole Religion, and will do, so long as they are
continued. The Nation will not forget the alteration of Doctrine, and of the
Lyturgie, innovations in Worship, and additions of Ceremonies that were brought
in by Bishop Laud, under the pretense of Uniformity, decency, and opposing the
Puritanes, till matters were brought to that pass, that the Papists wanted
nothing to encourage their hopes of swallowing us up, but the prospect of a
Popish Successor to the Crown; and his own Chaplains and dependents were not
ashamed to profess, that there was a design of Reconciliation with Rome; and
whether the present growth of Popery and Confidence that the Papists are
arrived to, had not its Rise from the Act of Uniformity, its turning out so
many Ministers, and making so great a breach amongst our selves, and whether it
be not still fomented chiefly by our division, and under pretense of zeal
against Dissenters, let unprejudiced men judge.

5. A great part of the Nation both Ministers and People have engaged
themselves and their posterity to the long desired Reformation, and that not
without authority, though not with full authority.

6. So great a number of Ministers and Students were cast out by the Act of
Uniformity, that cannot but for one age at least, greatly endanger the Church,
which must needs be supplied with young ignorant and unlearned persons, or be
unprovided, the Universities being not able in many years to furnish out such a
number of tolerable Ministers, as were ejected, and the visible effects do
confirm this.

7. The Terms of Uniformity are most rigorous and intolerable; for not only all
was enjoined, that had been complained of 100 years and upwards, but also
others added, so manifestly contrived to ensnare and offend those that were
concerned, that nothing could be more.

8. There was no hope left either of alteration of this Uniformity, or of
relaxation in the execution of it, it being established by Law, and the Bishops
made the Overseers of the execution. It was also corroborated by two other
subsequent acts, which hindered Ministers from being of any use, yea from living
amongst or near their people. And to this against the Ministers was added, that
none of the same snares were put upon the people, all that bore office, civil
or military, that so there might be no relief for the present, and no hope of
redress for the future.

Now should all this be quietly submitted to, there would be no end of
imposition on the Church, seeing Rulers might when ever they pleased throw out
both their Magistrates and Ministers, and they must all quietly suffer whatever
they will impose on them. We may add, there had been as patient forbearance,
and as peaceable means for redress, during a 100 years, as ever was in any
Church, insomuch as we are now upbraided with it, but nothing was obtained at
last, but adding to their Burdens, and that not without scorn and indignity;
and that the blame may not be cast on our Princes, on whom our adversaries
injuriously, as well as ungratefully, for the most part cast it, it is not to be
forgot, what attempts and endeavors his Majesty made at his entrance on his
Kingdoms, to moderate and accommodate things in the Church, both by his
declarations, and granting a Commission to a fit number on both sides, to
review the Liturgy, and to endeavor a composure; but the Commissioners for the
Church would never vouchsafe a personal conference, and debate with the
Non-Conformists about the things they desired to be amended; and the Answers
they returned in writing were scarce with common Civility; but once in all
their replies, giving them the Title of Brethren, and at last yielding to amend
nothing considerable.

Upon these accounts the Non-Conformists judge it their duty to help the
distressed and oppressed people what they can, whilst they live, praying and
waiting that peace and order may at length be restored to these Churches, and
verily believing that if these impositions be continued, they will unhinge and
divide the people, that scarce any time or means will reduce them to due order,
and then even we may be counted honest men when we are dead, and moderate in
respect of those that come after.

FINIS.

