THE TRIALS Of several Notorious MALEFACTORS: TOGETHER With the other most
Remarkable PROCEEDINGS AT THE Quarter Sessions OF GOALE-DELIVERY, Holden at the
Sessions House in the Old-Bailey, for the City of LONDON and County of
MIDDLESEX; Which began on MONDAY, October 17. 1681. and ended on Wednesday the
Nineteenth of the same instant.
OCtober 17. This day the Sessions began at the Sessions House in the
Old Bailey, holden there for the City of London, County of Middlesex, and
Goale-Delivery of Newgate, where the most remarkable proceedings were these.

After the Court had sat about an hour, there being the two Lord Chief
Justices, my Lord Chief Baron, and seven other Judges present; the Right
Honorable the Earl of Shaftesbury, William Lord Howard, Baron of Escreck, Mr.
John Wilmore, Mr. Edward Whittaker, Mr. John Rouse, Prisoners in the Tower of
London, upon Commitments of High Treason, and of Samuel Wilson Prisoner in the
Gate House, upon the like Commitment, were tendered to the Court, and by the
order of my Lord Chief Justice Pemberton publicly read, etc. all of them
tending to one and the same purport; showing that the aforesaid Petitioners
having been Committed for the heinous Crime of High Treason against his
Majesty, as by the Warrants of their Commitments appears, and have been
continued Prisoners without any manner of prosecution, notwithstanding some of
them having twice Petitioned that Honorable Court to be brought thither by
Habeas Corpus, to be Tried or Bailed, therefore they again humbly besought
their Lordships, that according to the Tenor of the Act, made and provided for
the securing the Liberty of the Subject, they might then be brought by Habeas
Corpus to receive the benefit of the said Act, according to the intent and
meaning thereof. As to the Petitions of the Prisoners in the Tower, my Lord
Chief Justice was pleased to return for answer, That it had been, and was the
Opinion of all the Judges, That the Tower was a Prison not within the
Jurisdiction of that Court, and therefore, as he had formerly told them, so he
did again declare, That it was not in their power to relieve them, but that
they must the first week in the Term apply themselves to the Court of
King's Bench; and if no prosecution was made, they might there receive the
benefit of the Act for securing the Liberty of the Subject. As for the latter,
viz. Mr. Wilson, his Lordship said, They sat only by a Commission of
Goale-delivery; and he not being in the Goal of Newgate, the Court had not to
do with him.

Then the Grand Jury for the City of London appearing, Mr. Jones and Mr. North,
Counsels for the King, made objections against the returning of the Panel:
first, for that one and the same men were returned upon a Precept of Oyer and
Terminer and Goale-delivery; but the Opinion of the Court being, that such
Returns were usual, they prayed that they might be called over before they were
Sworn, for as much as they had been informed, that some of them had been
Returned at the nomination of persons that were not the Sheriffs sworn
Ministers, which was contrary to the Statute of 3 Hen. 8. And farther, that
they had been informed, they were not observers of the Kings Laws, in as much
as they frequented Conventicles, and resort not to their respective
Parish-Churches, and therefore prayed the Panel might be reformed. To which
Objection Mr. Sheriff Pilkinton answered, That he knew them to be all worthy
Gentlemen, and men of unspotted Reputations, and that he had returned them at
the nomination of no person, but upon his own certain knowledge of their being
substantial Citizens. Then at the request of Mr. Solicitor General, they being
demanded whether they resorted to Church, my Lord Mayor was pleased to answer,
That he was well satisfied in several of them that they were good Churchmen; so
that there was only two amongst them that seemed to scruple to give a positive
answer to that demand, viz. Mr. Crisp and Mr. Loggan; whereupon (after a long
debate, and the reading of the Statute of 3 Hen. 8.) twice or thrice over, the
Sheriffs gave their consents to the racing out their Names, and inserting two
others.

John Pack was Tried for stealing a Gelding, valued at five pound, from William
Pack his Master, living near Rochester in the County of Kent; but for as much
as the Horse being brought up to London, and found in Water-lane, where he had
disposed of him, the Felony was laid in London. He being asked what he could say
for himself, only alleged, that his Master lent him the Horse: but having
Robbed him of several things of value at the same time, the Jury found him
guilty of the Felony.

John Fulnum was likewise Tried for the Murdering of Sarah Richardson, on the
twenty seventh of September last, the manner thus: he coming up Sea-coal-lane,
in the Parish of St. Sepulchers, with a Dray, in which he had two Horses, who
upon a sudden starting from the midway, ran the Dray up against the wall,
whenas the party deceased, who was a Girl of about four or five years of age,
thinking to secure herself behind a great stone that stood up at a Masons door,
the wheel drove it down upon her and crushed her to death: but the Witnesses
speaking very favorably on the Prisoners side, how he used his utmost
endeavors to save the Child, and that he expressed abundance of sorrow upon
the sight of that unlucky accident, he was acquitted of the Felony, but the
Court thought fit to bind him to his good Behavior, as likewise the Master of
the Dray, to appear at the Sessions of Peace to be holden at Guild Hall next
Friday, and ordered the Mother of the deceased to prosecute the Mason, for that
he being Indicted, had brought a Certiorari to remove.

Francisco Ferdinando, a Dutchman, was Tried for entering a House in the Parish
of St. Mary Wolnooth, breaking open a Chest, and taking from thence several
parcels of Linen; but the woman of the house coming up before he could convey
himself away, he was apprehended. Upon his Trial he alleged he could not
speak English; whereupon an Interpreter was ordered him, and a Jury of half
Foreigners and half English were Impannelled, who after a full hearing of the
Evidence against him, brought him in guilty of the Felony.

John King and John Winel were Tried for feloniously Murdering of Robert
Reeks, a young man of the Queens Guards, near the May Pole in the Strand; the
manner of the Fact, as it was Sworn to by the Evidence, was as follows. The
deceased and the Prisoners meeting in a Coffee-house, happened into discourse
about diverse affairs; whereupon a contest arising between them, they fell to
quarrelling, but by the persuasions of some persons present, those feuds were
seemingly laid aside, and they departed as good friends; but by the way they
again falling at variance, the Prisoners drew their Swords, upon pretense that
the deceased justled them, and struck the latter with his Cane, which he
perceiving, drew likewise, upon which they pursued him into a Shop, (where he
endeavored to save himself) and there after several Passes run him in under
the Right Pap four Inches, as likewise into the Back, of which wounds he
instantly dyed. The Surgeon that searched the Wounds, declaring upon Oath,
that the Wounds were given by two several Swords: and they after the Murder
committed betaking themselves to flight, the Jury found them both guilty of
wilful Murder.

John Rouse being removed by Habeas Corpus from the Tower of London, to the
County-Goale of Newgate, a Bill of Indictment for High Treason was prefered
against him, the substance of which was, That he on the Eighteenth of March
last, and at sundry other times, had spoke diverse Treasonable Words, tending to
the destruction of his Majesty, and the Subversion of the Government. The
Evidence that swore to the Bill, were Bryan Haynes, John Wyat, Edward
Turbervile, Edward Ives, John Macknamarra, Bernard Denis, Thomas Corkine,
Elizabeth Haynes, and John Smith; many of which Deposed, That Rouse should say,
That although the Sessions of Parliament at that time to be holden at Oxford
would be but short, yet the several Prorogations and Dissolutions would avail
nothing; and that they the people of England had yet another way to effect
their designs; which was by force of Arms to compel his Majesty to condescend
to their requests; with many other Treasonable Words, which we think not fit
here to insert. After all the Witnesses had been publicly sworn in Court, the
Grand Jury withdrew: but the Court not allowing them to examine the Witnesses
in private, they returned, and after a long debate of the Privileges and usual
Customs of Grand-Juries, they consented to hear the Witnesses over again in
open Court, and to ask them such Questions as they should think convenient.
Whereupon, the Witnesses were called one by one, and after a long and tedious
Examination, the Jurors withdrew to debate the Evidence; and having held a
private consultation for the space of three hours, they came into Court, and
answering every man to his Name, returned the Bill IGNORAMVS; upon which, being
demanded whether they did not believe the Witnesses, or that they thought the
words expressed in the Indictment, and others that had been sworn to, were not
Treasonable; the Court declaring, That if they scrupled the latter, they would
resolve their doubts; but their answer was, That they were satisfied in their
CONSCIENCES of what they had done; and farther added, That they could not
believe what the Witnesses had Sworn.

Thomas Baly was Tried upon an Indictment of High Treason, for Clipping and
Filing the current Coin of this Kingdom, viz. Forty Elizabeth shillings, Forty
of King James's shillings, and Forty of King Charles the First his half-Crowns.
The Evidence against him swore, That when they apprehended him, they found
Clipping shears and other Implements about him; and that he had at several
times put Moneys to Goldsmiths in Lumbard-street, the which he called in at
short warnings, receiving broad Money for his Clipped, having put out in other
men's names about six hundred pounds, but for which he allowed them two
shillings in the pound; but he pleading that the Clipping Instruments were
delivered to him by one Hix, and that he was only trusted with the Money, the
which for fear of an Attachment, he was obliged to put out in strange names, he
was brought in Not guilty.

Elizabeth Warner was Tried for Robbing Thomas Fopling of St. Paul's Shadwell,
on the Twenty fourth of September last, of Twenty five shillings in Money, to
which she pleaded Not guilty; but having confessed it before the Justice of
Peace, and her Confession testified against her in Court, she was found guilty,
and received Sentance.

George Paget was Tried for stealing a Silver Cup in St. Clements Danes, of
which being found guilty, was ordered to be Whipped.

James Beech, and William Pomfret, had an Indictment preferred against them for
stealing a Tankard, valued at five pounds, from Thomas Price, living in the
Parish of St. Clements Danes; the circumstances of which, as they appeared upon
Evidence, were, That the Prisoners coming into the Prosecutors house to drink,
stayed the drinking of five Tankards, and then calling for another, the Maid of
the House brought it them, but they alleged, she took away the Tankard, and
returned it not again; so that a contest arising, the Prosecutor charged them
with a Constable, and carried them before a Magistrate, who bound them over;
but it appearing by the Prisoners Witnesses, that Price offered to compound
with them, and to take half Money, and their Bonds for the residue; and they
appearing by the testimonies of their Neighbors, to be honest laborious and
industrious men, were acquitted by the Jury.

The Grand Jury for London presented several noted Recusants, living in the
City and Liberties thereof, and received the Commendations of the Court for so
doing; declaring, that it had been a great defect in former Juries, who had
been altogether slack in returning them, which was the occasion, that within
this great City, few or none had been Convicted since the beginning of the
Plot; to which Mr. Sheriff Pilkinton answered, That their Lordships needed not
doubt the diligence of this Jury in finding Bills against Recusants, in order
to their being Convicted.

The Countess of Portland, and several others that had been formerly Indicted
of Recusancy, and had joined Issue thereupon, being called, and not appearing,
were put upon the Jury of Life and Death for the County of Middlesex, who
Convicted them according to the Statute last made and provided.

Margaret Haines, a woman about seventy years of age, was Indicted for having
two Husbands; her Plea was, That her former Husband had been absent eighteen
years, and that the latter having spent all she had, Indicted her to take away
her life, thereby to make way for another; so that there being no prosecution,
the Court took pity on her, and directed the Jury to Acquit her.

Mary Marshal was tried for stealing a Curral, with a Silver Chain, valued at
twenty Shillings; which being proved against her, she was Convicted of the
Felony; but not being above twelve years of age, though an old Offender, having
been in Newgate before, for the like Robberies, she received Sentence with the
rest; but notwithstanding, was reprieved after Judgment, for Transportation.

Margery Marsh, who had been formerly Condemned for Clipping, and Arrabella
Pickering, were Tried for Misprision of Treason, for putting away false Coin,
knowing of which, they were both Convicted.

There were at this Sessions seven persons Burnt in the hand, six Condemned to
die, three men and three women, viz. John King, John Winel, John Pack, Ruth
Carter, Mary Marshal, and Elizabeth Warner. Four to be Whiped, and one to be
Transported.

LONDON: Printed for Langley Curtiss. 1681.


