A LETTER To the True Protestant Doctor, The Reverend Titus Oats, Dean of
Salamanca, and Bishop of Weavers-Hall, at his Apartment in Southwark, from
Timothy Trimmer his Friend.
IN LONDON.
Doctor,
I Cannot but Compassionate the present Sufferings, under whose weight you are
now Pressed; and the whole World is not Ignorant how great an Advocate I have
been, and still am, in your Behalf; not only in my Daily and public
Controversies with that malicious Discoverer of your Intreagues and Veracities,
Old Nobs, but also in the private Intelligences and Secret Correspondencies,
held and managed with the only True and Protestant Preservers of their
Country, the Falsely styled Fanatical Party.

But alas, my endeavors have been in Vain, I have been towing against Wind and
Tide to bring our bottom to its designed Harbor; but the Storm is so great,
our Tackle is Broke, we are got a Drift, and our Vessel is now Split. To lay
the cause hereof at your Door, would but add Affliction to the Misereble: yet
in Truth I must say you have not managed the Tallant your great Master gave
you, to that advantage as you might have done: whence in a great measure it is
that this Damage is come upon us: for had People really, as in Davs of yore,
believed your Plot, and every Moment expected the Spainish Pilgrims at their
Back-sides, the black Bills and Mustard-balls at their Throats and Habitations,
they would not have had the leisure to have looked about what was designing by
the Faithful and true Lovers of their Country at Home. We might have Effected
our Purposes on the two Brothers at White Hall, and made the same a further
Confirmation of the Popish Plot: we might have taken off the Tory Bishops, Tory
Guards, Tory Mayors and Sheriffs, and all the Tory Friends of Monarchy, and set
up a True Reformed Church and State amongst our selves. But alas these Days are
over, the Eyes of People are now Open, and scarce a Boy in the Street, but can
give one Instance or another of your Confounded Veracities: insomuch that your
old Friends very hardly part with their wonted Contributions; and my Trouble is
five times more at present in Collecting them than ever, and many of them are
behind: insomuch that I believe could they be Possessed or secured by the other
Party, that you should not Swear them into the Fanatical, as you Swore them out
of the Popish Plot: you might even turn Papist again for them, and Damn your
own Soul to get Chops of Mutton at St. Omers; for between you and I, it is
Interest binds the Party, and were not there something of this kind in the
matter, you might reduce your Family, and live without the use of Menservants.

Let me therefore advise you to signify your Will and Pleasure to them
forthwith; that unless they pay down their Subscriptions, you will open your
Swearing Mouth, take the Bible into your Swearing Hand, and let fly such a So
help me God against them that shall bring the thoughts of Ketch and Devil into
the Soberest Noddle amongst them. This is your only way: For give me leave to
whisper in your Ear, there is scarce a considerable Man amongst them, but is
afraid every time he sees the Staff of Authority go by his Door, that some
Evidencing Brother has told Tales of him: and if they fear them, what would
they do by you that are so great a Master in the Art, and know so much of their
Intreagues, who can raise a Mountain from a Molehill: and make nothing seem so
much in the true methods of Evidence. In short, their Fear preserves them your
Subjects; and while you hold their Noses to your Girdle, they may smell a
Knave, but know not how to be rid of him. It is an Age of Policy, and since
Honesty thrives not, that Conscience is very Barren, that can plant no other
Herb of Profit there. Yours and Mine are neither of them such, but thanks to
our Stars, if we cannot travel the plain Rode, the Hedges and Ditches in our
way shall never retard us. Pray Commend me to your fellow Sufferers, to whom I
hear you are made Chaplain in Ordinary. It is a great Blessing you are amongst
them, and much for their general Profit, if they know how to improve it. I hope
our Brother B -- ll spends his time there for the advantage of his Country, in
proving his great Systeem, that Monarchy is Destructive to Trade: wherein I
doubt not but he is seconded by his Ingenious Companions, the rest of the
Brethren. In your next, let me have account whether Sir T. P. is not pined a
way for the want of Mother Creswells Provisions for the Carnal part of him. It
is very Hot Weather, and the Rebellions of the Flesh are many and often, which
tho such as are at Large have a supply for; yet I know not how it fares with
you: as to your self indeed you have a double Advantage over your Neighbors,
for Man and Woman both Administer to your Occasions. But of this no more, till
I see you, least it should come to a Discovery of the Worlds Eye; and who knows
what advantage may be made thereof amongst the Wicked, who consider not the
Spiritual License which is taken by the Brethren, in relation to these Matters;
whilst the same is used for the inward Comfort and Refreshment of the
Righteous, and in a True-Protestant Privacy, w^^ch must be always regarded, and
wherein I doubt not of your Caution. I Conclude with my Wishes for your
Enlargement, in order to the public Benefit, and the reception of your just
Demerits, who am

Your constant Abbettor, Friend and Servant Timothy Trimmer.
From Whigland, near our late great Patroons House, August the 1 st. 1684.
LONDON, Printed by George Croon, at the Blue-Ball, over against Baynard's
Castle, in Thames Street, 1684.


