The Lords day Vinaicated: OR The First day of the WEEK THE Christian Sabbath.
In Answer to Mr. Bampfields Plea for the Seventh day, in his Enquiry, Whether
Jesus Christ be Jehovah, and gave the Moral Law? And whether the Fourth Command
be Repealed or Altered? BY G. T. a Well-wisher to Truth and Concord.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just, but his Neighbor
comes and searches him.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Clement, at the White Swan in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

TO THE READER.
Though there be many Books already written on this Subject, the following
Preface will justify the Seasonableness of this Modest and Judicious Reply to
Mr. B. especially among serious Professors in the West of England. But it
cannot be unfit upon other Considerations, that such a Discourse be now
Published, when the Doctrinal Truth, in the Controversy of a Weekly Sabbath,
is opposed by so many, and the Practical Sanctification of it neglected by so
many more.

It has been generally observed, that the Power of Godliness has Flourished or
Abated in every Age, and in every part of Christendom; as the strict and
conscientious Observation of a Weekly-Day of Holy Rest did obtain, or not: And
particularly in our own Country, no outward Means can be assigned, that has
more availed to help the Preservation of Pure, Reformed, Christianity among us.

On which account, it concerns all Christians to enquire what is our Warrant
for the Observation of One day in Seven? and likewise whether the Seventh, or
the First day of the Week, (which according to a true Account, may also be
called the Seventh) ought to be observed as the Christian Sabbath.

What is said on this Argument in the following Reply to Mr. B. discovers so
much the Candor and Moderation of the Author, as will recommend it to every
Impartial Reader. His Distance from London, and nothing else occasions, or
needs this Epistle; as will doubtless be thought, even by such as have some
different Conceptions from him, in some lesser Matters of this Controversy.

That it may advance the Honor of Christ, and help to satisfy the Minds of
some Wavering, and less Established Christians, and promote the real Interest
of Practical Godliness; (upon which the Doctrine of the Weekly Sabbath will have
a great Influence,) as it will answer the Authors Design, so our Desires and
Prayers,

John How. John Shower.

The PREFACE.
IT may afford cause of Wonder to considering and serious Persons what should
be the Inducements of the Author of the Enquiry whether the Lord Jesus etc. to
Print and divulge it at such a time, and under such circumstances, as we are
brought into: And though he has proposed no Preface to his Book, to plead for
it is Emission; yet I think there has scarce been a Piece sent into the World,
these many Years, that more required and needed it. For,

1. He well knows that the whole Christian World is engaged against him herein,
and that they have Sciptural grounds, and the practice of the most ancient
Churches, the Doctrine and Testimonies of the must Orthodox and Learned Fathers,
derived immediately from the Apostles, with an uninterrupted Succession through
several Centuries; and their own Education, Custom and Practice, received down
from many Generations, with their own blessed Experiences of the Light of Gods
countenance; the operations of his Spirit, the activity and growth of their own
Graces on that blessed Day, etc. for their consecrating of the first day of the
Week to Divine Service and their Religious and Devout appropriating it to, and
employing it in those Duties, which immediately concern the Glory of God, and
the Spiritual and Eternal Weal of their own Souls: Which things are not easily
overcome and laid aside; with as great and Rooted Prejudices against his
opinion, of the Seventh-day Sabbath; as that it is Judaical, Fanciful, and
Singular, such at least as has had but very few Favorers and Abetters either
in the ancient Churches, (and these branded for Heresy) or else in the modern,
some three or four starting up of late years among our selves, daring by
Writing and Printing to endeavor the Introduction of this Novelty into the
belief and practice of Universal Church. All which, and other Prejudices
against this Opinion cannot slightly be eradicated out of the minds of Men; and
therefore he could hardly imagine any great success to this undertaking, unless
he could have produced undeniable demonstrations to our Reason, or irrefragable
Testimonies of Scripture to our Faith: Which I hope we shall see he has been
far enough from.

2. He should also have considered, and concluded, that these Arguments which
have been produced heretofore by those of his persuasion, are not likely now to
convince and convert the whole Christian World to his thoughts and practice:
Seeing they have been so often, and by so many worthy, Learned, Orthodox, and
Pious Divines, answered, and in the judgment of Wise and gracious Persons,
fully confuted, and satisfactorily baffled, to the deeper Rooting and more firm
Establishment of the Churches of Christ in their constant Observance of the
Lords day. Wherefore, if he would have effected any thing by this attempt, he
should have offered some new Inventions of his own, that have never yet
encountered with any opposition: But in all his Book (to the best of my
Remembrance) I have not met with any one place of Scripture, nor argument drawn
therefrom, nor Improvement thereof, for his own Sentiments: Nor yet any Text of
Gods word, or Topic against ours, no, nor any one solution of our
Authoritative or Rational proofs, for the confirmation of our Contrary Belief
and Practice to his, which has not been already produced by others, and as
largely and strenuously managed as by himself; and that too in the same manner.
It Is no great Prudence in a Combatant to make use of the same Weapons, Modes,
and Arts, against his Antagonists which have been frequently Baffled, Defeated,
Broken and retorted into his own Bowels. Wherefore, it is strange to me, if any
Victory over any considerate studious Person, could be hoped for by such a
casting of the Gantlet.

3. But suppose he could have expected to have proselited some to his Opinion
(as who has not, though the Doctrine be never so absurd, Heterodox and Impious,)
yet sure it could not be thought a sufficient means to prevail upon all the
Churches; no, nor upon the universality of the National Church, of that
Collection of so many millions of counterminded Christians and Protestants,
whereof he is. He could not certainly presume, that all the Authority of these
Nations, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, would follow his Dictates, or receive
new Light from his Torch, and acknowledge themselves to have been in gross
Error, and in a sinful Practice ever since, and always before the Reformation,
since they Professed Faith in the Lord Christ: And that they should alter all
their Acts and Statutes, all their Canons and Articles, in this particular. And
herein acknowledge him to be the infallible Apostle, or at least the only happy
Doctor, of this great part of the Christian World, no nor of the greatest, or
any considerable part thereof; but only of a few, here and there of unsettled
Scruplous, Superstitious minds. No person could have a Rational and probable
Prospect of a greater Return from such an Adventure, or Crop from such a
sowing: And so wisely have judged, that all his expectations would never quit
his cost, nor be worth his Risk. Especially considering that,

4. He should deeply have weighed the sad and sinful Consequences and
scandalous Effects that his appearance in Print has a direct tendency to
produce. (Though I trust such a tendency will be obstructed, and frustrated, by
the good Spirit of God, and by the Wise and settled Principles of our people.)
The Natural Tendencies are such as these,

1. An encouragement to the Profaners and deniers of the Lord's Day in their
Principles and Practices. They who have no Inclination to separate any Day as
Holy, to the Holy God, in a performance of Holy Duties, will take advantages
from hence, to decry the strict observance of the Lord's Day, and to fortify
themselves in their Idleness, Recreations, Worldliness, and sinfulness thereon;
and withal slight and deride the Seventh-day Sabbath, as Judaical, Fanatical,
and Singular, and so being taken off from the First-day-Sabbath, they will
acknowledge none; but give that, and all the following days of the Week to their
Interests, and to their Lusts; to Earth and to Hell: And we have heard that
this Book has already produced this fearful effect in our City.

2. An Offense and Stumbling Block to sincere and affectionate Saints; who have
their Hearts established in Grace, and their Heads in the grand Fundamentals of
Faith and Practice; but are not acquainted with disputations about such remote
things as these; and therefore having very tender Consciences and dreading to
offend God, and to approach unto any moral evil, hearing of such a piece as
this, from such an Author, (so known to some of them) will be apt to be
startled, and excessively troubled with Fear, lest they have hitherto lived in
Sin, and provoked God all their days, by a Holy resting upon the Lords day, and
Working upon Saturday; and so all their Services of God upon the one, in the
works of their General, and the services of themselves, their Families, and the
humane Society (of which they are Members) upon the other, in the works of
their particular Callings; have been provocations, and evils to be Repented of,
(for we know what Aggravations scrupulous Consciences, and a tempting Devil,
are apt to make of smallest things) and to live in perpetual fears and doubts,
in their continuance in attendance upon Gods Ordinances on those days, whereon
they are only to be had (in the most solemn manner, and all of them at least)
in the professing Church of God: And so they will be deprived of much of that
Spiritual Comfort, and saving profit thereby, which they formely received in,
and by them: And still would, had not such an unhappy Scandal been laid in
their way: Which is no small Offense and Sin against Christ. And this also we
know to be another product thereof, such Christians not daring to neglect the
observance and Ordinances of the Lord's Day because of their former Persuasion,
Practice, and Experience, and yet doing it with doubts and fears, lest they
should Sin thereby, because of this Piece.

2. A perverting and withdrawing of the more simple and unstable into this
Opinion, which we doubt not to assert, and question not to evidence, to be ill
grounded and false; and so will prove a scandal indeed, even to lead into and
to build up in Sin, and an unwarrantable Practice: And thus to Offend weak ones
in Christ is a very great Evil, 1 Cor. 8.11, 12. But suppose the Authors notion
be Orthodox, and the contrary Heterodox; yet another pernicious Tendencie of it
is,

4. By a Proselyting of some Persons, or some Ministers, so many as may make
Assemblies and Congregations, he will be the Author of a needless Schism and
Separation, and of inevitable Feuds, Rancors and mutual Reproaches and
Condemnations: The Observers of the Lords day will decry and exclaim against
the others, as Jews, and proud Schismatics; and the keepers of the Seventh day
will censure and condemn the other, as willful breakers of Gods express
Command, and profane compliers with the will and Traditions of Men. And he that
has not the Gift of Prophecy, may easily foretell what sinful and dismal
fruits will grow upon such a Root of Bitterness. Men should be cautious how
they disturb the peace of the Church, and rent our Saviors seamless Garment.

5. He should seriously have pondered the Days and Times we are fallen into; the
sad and deplorable Divisions of the Church of God among us, and the dangerous
and fearful Prejudices, Rancours, and Enmities begotten and fomented thereby;
with the uncharitable and inexcusable Effects they have produced already in
Tongue, Pen and Hand, as the general Division between Conformists and
Non-Conformists: and the diverse Opinions, Parties, and Separated Societies of
the Latter. (Though blessed be God, the most considerable and Orthodox of them,
the Independents and Presbyterians, have coalesced in their Subscriptions to
Articles of Agreement) and how unseasonable and inconvenient it is therefore to
broach new Opinions among them, and to increase their Divisions and
Animosities; and so also give an Advantange to their observers to increase
their prejudices, and augment their Accusations against them, and their
Insultings over them, as fickle, inconstant, and heady, not knowing where to
fix, nor what to hold and Practice, now that they have forsaken an universal
and uninterrupted Conformity unto them. Such a stout Nonconformist to the
Church of England, ought to have used all caution, not to have given the least
occasion of weakening or vilifying his own Party.

6 Lastly, All these things laid together in the Balance of a sound Judgment,
would have informed him, that no such thing as he has hereby attempted, should
have been undertaken, unless it had been about the most weighty and necessary
Truths of our Religion; such as do necessarily concern the Glory of God and the
Salvation of Souls, or very near bordering thereupon. Which I hope he does not
believe the Controversy to be; seeing it is not not about the Substance of Duty
or the very heart of a Command, but only about the least Circumstance (if I may
so term it) of it. Not about what Proportion of time God shall have Consecrated
to his service; For that is agreed to be the Seventh; But only what day, of two
of them must be that day of the Week? And therefore he that observes the
First Day, gives and devotes to God the Seventh part of his time, as well and
as much as he that does the Seventh-day.

Wherefore though the Authors Integrity and Intent may not be questioned, yet
certainly his Prudence in this Work, and the Work under such Circumstances, are
no way plausible: And he should have applied that of the Apostle, Romans 14.21,
22. to have detered him therefrom.

Wherefore seeing this Piece is so dangerous, and may do, and already has done,
so much hurt, its very Expedient, if not morally Necessary, to endeavor a
prevention of its evil Consequences; and there especially where the Author is
resident, and it may most infect; and it may well be deemed a Duty of some one
of the Dressers of that part of the Vineyard of the Lord Christ, where this
Weed or Thorn is sprung up, to endeavor it is eradication, before it spreads
any farther, or wounds any deeper.

That Province therefore which I (most unable for, and Naturally altogether
averse from, Polemical Disputes) shall undertake, and with the best skill and
faithfulness, that God shall afford, perform, shall only be, with all possible
Brevity and Perspicuity, to weaken all the Arguments, the Author manages for
his Notion; and to confirm and Ratify all these which he endeavors to weaken,
and evacuate, for the ancient, general, Scriptural Doctrine of the
Lords-day-Sabbath, or Sacred Rest; and herein to follow his own method; Giving
some transient Glances upon things that may occur, some what Excentrical or
Alien from the Great design of this Book: Which I shall study to do with all
Candor, and due Deference to the Gentility, Gravity, and (I hope) real Piety,
of the Author.

THE CONTENTS.
Sect. I. SOme general Observations premised, whether the World were made by
Christ, as Jesus Christ God-man? page 4 Sect. II. Of Christ's being Jehovah,
and in what sense the Law was given by him? p. 8 Sect. III. Whether after the
Creation the Lord rested on the Seventh-day, and so Sanctified and Instituted
it, and did himself observe it; as that even Adam in a State of Innocence was
bound by it, and all Mankind, without distinction, before the Fall? p. 12 Sect.
IV. Whether the Ten Commandments were given by Christ to Jews and Gentiles? p.
21 Sect. V. Whether Christ in the Flesh did confirm all the Ten Commandments,
and every tittle of the Fourth? And whether Christ and his Apostles did enjoin,
or did not rather speak against the Observation of the Seventh-day Sabbath? p.
24 Sect. VI. Of the Word Seventh in the Fourth Commandment; the Sabbath not
recommended by Christ to his Disciples. Of Commenius's desire of Reformation,
etc. p. 30 Sect. VII. Of the Ceremonial Law, and what is Moral and Positive;
what is truly Moral, that the Saturday Seventh-day Sabbath is not; more may be
pleaded for Circumcision. p. 35 Sect. VIII. Whether Christ in his own Person
Observed the Seventh-Week-day-Sabbath and no other, and what may be gathered
from it? The Arguments for the Seventh-day Sabbath equally hold for all the
Jewish Ceremonies. Of the Pre-Antiquity of that Day and the falsity of that
Argument. p. 41 Sect. IX. Whether Christ Rested on the Seventh-day Sabbath,
while he lay in the Grave? And what may be Argued from it? p. 44 Sect. X. Upon
what day of the Week, Christ ascended into Heaven, whether the Seventh-day or
Saturday? p. 48 Sect. XI. Whether after the Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ, the Seventh-day Sabbath was observed by the Apostles and First
Christians? How long the Apostles met the Jews in their Synagogues on the
Seventh-day, and for what Reason? p. 51 Sect. XII. The Argument from Christ's
Resurrection, for the First Day of the Week to be the Christian Sabbath
Vindicated. Circumcision not more abolisht than the Seventh-day Sabbath: That
abolisht, the First succeeds on the Account of Our Lord's Resurrection, since
that Time, with equal or stronger Reason than the former continued till he Rose
from the dead. p. 57 Sect. XIII. Other Arguments for the First-day-Sabbath
Vindicated from the Objections of Mr. B. Of a Sabbath Days Journey. After three
Days, may be understood on the third Day he rose again. John 8.56. Psalm
118.22. Psalm 2.7. Acts 20.7. cleared and Vindicated. Of the beginning of the
Christian Sabbath. p. 61. Sect. XIV. More Texts cleared, Rev. 1.9, 10. of being
in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, Math. 12.8. Mark 2.27. Jesus Christ Lord of the
Sabbath. Of the Lord Supper. Christ's Resurrection commemorated on the First Day
of the Week, by Institution. p. 79 Sect. XV. Gal. 4.9, 10. Explained. What days
excluded from binding Christians. Col. 2.16. What Sabbaths meant as Shadows, to
vanish when Christ came. Math. 24.20, no Argument for the Seventh-day Sabbath.
p. 92 Sect. XVI. Of the Morality of the Fourth Command: The difference between
Moral and Positive: Between Naturally or Absolutely Moral, and positively or
secondarily Moral: What the Fourth Commandment requires as Moral and Perpetual.
p. 101 Sect. XVII. When to begin the Christian Sabbath, and of the fit Time for
Public Worship on that day. p. 116 Sect. XVIII. The Argument of Tradition
considered. p. 118 Sect. XIX. How far the Decalogue is in Force, as to us
Gentiles. p. 125 Sect. XX. The Tradition of the Lords-day's Rest, or First Day
of the Week from the Apostles time to the end of the Fourth Century. Of Easter
and its Observation. The change from the Seventh to the First Day not
introduced by the Bishop of Rome. p. 127 Sect. XXI. The Conclusion of the
whole, with a Summary of what has been Proved for the Observation of the
First Day of the Week, as the Christian Sabbath. p. 130
A REPLY TO Mr. Bampfield's PLEA FOR THE Seventh-day Sabbath.
THE very Title of the Book is justly liable to Exception, as that which does
not fairly state the Question; the second Enquiry being [whether the fourth
Command be repealed or altered] for he very well knows, that these against whom
he Disputes, even those who acknowledge the Morality of a Sabbath Day, do
neither pretend to the Repealing of the Command, nor yet to the Alteration of
it as such; for they strenuously assert the Ratification of the preceptive part
of it, though they allow a practical Mutation of a single Clause therein; which
was at its first Injunction, added as a Motive for the observance of the
Seventh Weekly-day: And therefore he should rather have stated the Enquiry
after such a manner as this, Whether every Clause in the Fourth Commandment be
Moral, or whether every Clause of it, be absolutely Immutable, or so imposed
from the beginning, as to be so. It Is not Ingenuous nor Candid, so to propose
the Controversy, as though the Dissenters from him, were either Repealers, or
Alterers of the Fourth Command. Moreover, the Annexion of this Query to the
former, and the Subservience of the former to this, (For it is very evident,
that that weighty fundamental Enquiry, is made to serve this Hypothesis, by his
Connection thereof, Page 5. thereto) as though the Immutability of every Tittle
to this Command, was founded upon the Deity of our Lord Christ, his creating
the World, and giving the Moral Law; and the Denial of the one, were vertually
and consequentially the Denial of the other; and so those that are for the
observance of the Lords day, (for so I take leave now to call it) are really
and consequentially Ebionites, and Socinians; and so worse then Arians: Which
is either to tax them all as gross Heretics, or at least ignorant and
inconsiderate Persons, that do either not know, or not heed the direful and
damning Consequences of their own Doctrine. But I hope we shall see, that either
the first Query is but little concerned in the second; or that those who are
contrary to his Sentiments in this, are thoroughly Orthodox in that. To which,
as it is proposed, with a good and plain distinction, may be replied both
negatively and positively; that the Lord Jesus Christ made the World, is
Jehovah, etc. and that the Lord Jesus Christ was not Jehovah, made not the
World, etc. and that altogether according to the Scriptures; and so the very
stress of his Argument enervated, and this Foundation of this Structure,
supposed to be eternal and immutable, proved to be Sandy, Temporary and Human;
which we shall endeavor to evince in its proper place.

I shall purposely wave any Reflections upon his Four first Pages, (though
Remarks might be made thereon) because I suppose if there be any thing which he
judges of moment in this Case, they are to be found in the following Discourse;
to which they are but an Introduction: Only shall hint my Belief of his not
having seen Mr. Warren of Colchester's Book against Tillam; seeing he does not
mention him, Page 4. among the Writers he there quotes for the
First-day-Sabbath. A most worthy Author who has so fully and convincingly
confuted his Adversary, that I am prone to believe, had Mr. B. perused, and
duly studied him, he would not have troubled the World or the Church, with his
Book; and were that Book commonly to be gotten, or a new Edition thereof to be
Printed, there could need no other Reply to this; much less should I have put
Pen to Paper, being so far Inferior to him: However, a Pygmy upon a Giants
Back, may see a little farther with his own Eyes.

SECT. I.
HE states the first Question, Page 5. Whether the World were made by Jesus
Christ? and that too, as affording help to his Sabbatarian Notion; but rightly
apprehended, it conduces nothing at all thereto: For Evidence whereof, we say
that it may be orthodoxly denied and asserted, that Jesus Christ did not make
the World, for the World was 4000 Years before ever Jesus Christ was: For these
two Names J. C. do necessarily imply, or include his Human Nature with his
Divine: For his Divine Nature formally and abstractly considered, cannot be
Christ, that is, not Anointed; not fitted nor qualifyed by any other, for any
Offices, Employments or Designs: It belongs to his Human Nature alone. Neither
could his Godhead so considered, be our Jesus; for the Godhead can neither
obey the Law, nor bear the Curse; both which were to be done by our Jesus: And
these appertain only to his Humanity, though his Divinity gives the Merit of
our Salvation to his active and passive Obedience; so that actually and
formally, Jesus Christ could not be till his Incarnation: Though his Merits
extended to all the Generations of Relievers from Adam, according to that, Rev.
13.8. For though an actual Existence be necessary in Physical Causes, before
they can be Causes and produce their Effects, yet it is not so in Moral; but
their Effects may be before the actual Existence of the Cause; as Persons may
be redeemed and let loose from Prison, upon the foresight of a Ransom, or a
Payment to be made, Months or Years after. And so God out of an Infallible
Foresight of our Saviors paying the Debts, and laying down the Ransom of the
Elect in the fullness of time, and giving to himself a full meritorious Price, (
even the Blood of God, Act. 20.28.) for all their spiritual and eternal
Mercies, delivered, blessed and saved all the Saints and Believers, before our
Lords being actually a meritorious Savior, with an Eye and Regard thereto; and
so he was not actually Jesus, neither could he be, till he had actually done
and suffered all these things for which they were Redeemed and Saved: And
therefore here, as Jesus Christ could not make the World, though as God, we
acknowledge he did.

In the Old Testament Christ is Prophesied of, as to come, Dan. 9.25, 26. How
could he then create the World? And when he is born of the Virgin Mary, he is
then pronounced by the Angel to be Christ, Luke 2.11. as being then the
Accomplishment of Daniel's and other such Prophesies, that went before of his
future Messias-ship. And upon his Incarnation, he had the Name of Jesus, given
him by God, Math. 1.21. How then could he as Christ Jesus, create the World? I
desire that this might be duly considered by the Reader, because it is of great
weight to overthrow the chief Prop of his Sabbatarian Structure; and to prove
them to be but of ill tempered Mortar: For in this and the two following
Queries, he builds upon a fallacious Composition, as though whatever God is, or
did, that Jesus Christ must be, and do; and so he must create the World because
God did so. Just as if we should suppose the Platonic Existence of Souls,
Thousands of Years Solitary, without Bodies, and impute what ever those Souls
Did, Thought, Resolved, etc. in that Condition, to those Men of whom they came
in time to be an essential part; and say this Man so thought, and so resolved,
this would be a very improper Speech; for the Man was not, till the Soul came
to be essentially conjoined to the Body: And therefore in Propriety, 'twas the
Soul, and not the Man that was the Author of these Cogitations and Resolutions;
for they were Thousands of Years before the Man was. So the Godhead of Jesus
Christ made the World, but the Godhead was throughout a beginning less
Eternity, before Jesus Christ; and therefore he could not be the Creator of the
World. It Is somewhat strange to me, that Mr. B. did not see this gross Fallacy.
All Scriptures therefore which he brings to prove this Assertion, must be thus
understood, as for Example, Col. 1. v. 12, 13, 14. with v. 16. which Scripture
confutes his Suggestion, and confirms our Assertion: For surely he cannot say
that the Creator, as, and when Creator, had Blood: But Christ as such, had
Blood; and therefore Christ was not Creator, but his Godhead. So must also,
John 1.1, 3. where the Creator is called (...); which we translate the Word; it
might as well have been translated the Wisdom which was eternally with God, in
God, and is God; and so must be the Creator. But it is very observable, that St.
John does not call him Jesus Christ, till v. 17. when he had before spoken of
his Incarnation, v. 14.

Just such another is Heb. 1. where it is said, that God made the Worlds,
(taking them for the created Worlds, visible and invisible; though other
excellent Divines interpret them otherwise) by his Son, even his Coeternal and
Co-essential Son: But it is not here said, that he made them by Jesus Christ,
but Christ, the Son of God, spoke to us in the last days; he did it in and by
his Humanity, but so he created not the Creatures.

In the last Proof, Ephesians. 3.9. It Is indeed expressly said, That God created all
things by Jesus Christ; which if meant of the old and whole Creation, must be
meant as above; and it is as much as if he had said, God the Father created all
things by God the Son; which Son is now Jesus Christ. Wherefore we conclude our
Reply to this Query, by asserting that the Godhead of the Lord Christ, created
the World; but that Christ consisting of that Godhead, and the Humanity
hypostatically united to it, did not so.

SECT. II.
HE asserts Page 9. that Proposition which no Christian ever denied or
questioned; and whoever does so, deserves not the Name Christian, viz. That the
Lord Jesus Christ is Jehovah: Which he proves at large, home to Page 22. which
in these days might have been very seasonable and commendable too, had it not
been made a progressive Step toward the supremely intended Doctrine of the
necessary Obligation of the Seventh-day Sabbath. But yet I must say, that our
Lord Christ's Deity, or Jehovah-ship, has been more fully proved, and more
methodically, and from more Topics, and all these demonstrated and confirmed
from Scripture, than here it is; and that by many Orthodox Divines. We
acknowledging his Thesis to be good and orthodox; we hope he will acknowledge
this to be so likewise, viz. That Jehovah was not always Christ: Christ is, and
must be everlastingly Jehovah. But Jehovah was throughout a past Eternity,
before there was ever any other Being, and in the beginning of time, before
there was a sinful Being: And therefore necessarily before Christ Jesus had a
Being. For Christ Jesus in an orthodox Notion, and according to Scriptural
Revelations, does pre-suppose a created, and a fallen sinful Being. And so this
orthodox Proposition, will but contribute very little to that other, which we
deem heterodox. I shall make no Reflections at all upon what he has written in
all these Papers, save only upon that Medium which he uses Page 12, and 13.
which is Christ's giving the Law; (for that is his Expression) where again we
urge, according to our former Interpretation, that Christ properly apprehended,
did not give the Law before his Incarnation, not being Christ before it: He
gave it not to Man before the Fall. When the whole absolute and primary Moral
Law, was implanted by God on his Mind, to know all the Duties he ought to
perform toward his God, according to his Excellencies and Attributes revealed
unto him, according to his Works and his Obligations laid upon him, and all his
Duties toward all his Fellow Creatures: In his Will, by a perfect and full
Compliance with, and active and exact Conformity to all these moral Dictates of
his Understanding, in all the Inferior Affections, Appetites, Inclinations,
Motions, Senses, Organs and Members of the Body; by a ready and complete
Subjection to the holy Will, and a most harmonious Obedience thereto. Which the
Apostle calls Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.
Neither did Christ Jesus give the Law just upon the Fall, as I suppose the
Moral Law must be supposed to be given to Adam; seeing that by the Fall, he had
greatly defaced and blotted the former clear and perfect Edition of it, in his
Heart and Soul. Neither did he give it in the Third Edition, when 'twas brought
and delivered by the Hand of Moses, from the Finger and Mouth of God, to the
Israelites: For all these were long before Jesus Christ came into, and so was
in, the World: And St. John himself tells us, John 1.17. The Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. So that the Law was given long
before Jesus Christ came, and preached, and purchased the Grace and Truth of
the Gospel. But all this is made use of by this Author to insinuate, that even
Christ Jesus, in the Flesh, was the Author of all the Ten Commands, as they are
verbatim recorded in Moses's Books, or were written upon the Tables of Stone;
and so particularly of that very Clause in the Fourth Command; which is given
as a reason of the Sanctification of the Seventh day to be the Sabbath, home to
his own Resurrection.

But this we shall prove in the Sequel to be a very great Mistake: The only
Proof that he brings for this, which has not been sufficiently answered
already, or may not be so, by what has been formerly said and proved, is John
14.15. If ye love me keep my Commands: And such other like Passages. Here I
would feign enquire, in what Sense he understands the Commands to be Christ's
Commands: Either as he is Jehovah; and so before his Incarnation: If so, then
the Ceremonial and Judicial Commands were his as well, and as much, as the
Moral; for he gave the one as well as the other. And so by this arguing, and
from this Topic, we are bound to keep the one as well as the other: If we
would evince to our own Consciences, or others Observations, that we sincerely
love Christ. If he understands them to be his, after his Incarnation, as
taught, commanded and confirmed by his own blessed Mouth and Doctrine: So we
confess that all the Moral Law was his, and that he taught it in the discharge
of his Prophetical Office in the Flesh. But then we affirm, and doubt not to
prove, that in all his Doctrine, Discourses and Commands, there is not one word
that teaches or enjoins the Seventh-day Sabbath, but much to the contrary: Or
if there be only a perfect silence in this particular, without any thing spoken
or done by Christ contrary to it, whilst he particularly enjoins and presses
all those other Precepts, which are acknowledged by all to be Moral: I suppose
this very Exclusion of it, out of all his Discourses, carries more weight in
it, to cashire it from being any one of the Commands of Christ Jesus, than all
his former Endeavors to prove Christ to be the Maker of the World, to be
Jehovah, and here to be the Giver of the Law, have of moment to prove the
Morality, and so the necessary observance of the Seventh-day. I have been here
a little the more large, because I find the Author, Page 24. referring unto his
having proved the Law to be given by Christ, as to that which highly conduces
to his grand Design; but being duly weighed, we see that it is of little or no
use at all thereto.

SECT. III.
WE have a third Interrogation proposed, Page 22. Whether after the Creation
the Lord rested on the Seventh day: And, Whether the Seventh-day Sabbath was
sanctified and so instituted by him, and was observed by him who made the
World? To the first Clause whereof we have sufficiently answered, That it was
not the Lord Christ that created the World and rested, but it was indeed
Jehovah; and though Christ be Jehovah, and the Maker of all things as such; yet
the same Lord Christ is also the Son of Man, and made by Jehovah, as such; And
therefore as Christ, as God-man, he neither created the World, nor rested from
that Creation. Though in the Body of the Question, the Efficient of the
Creation be only styled Lord, by which may be equally understood the Son of
God, before and after the Incarnation, yet in the Margin he interprets this by
the word Christ; and therefore we have given a proper, a direct and sufficient
answer to that part thereof: And here it will be worth our observing, that in a
proper and strict Sense, Jehovah, the Creator of the World, cannot be said to
rest; because it is impossible that he should either admit of any Weariness, or
Pain in himself; yea, or of any the least new motion in himself; God being an
Infinite, Perfect, Immutable, Act and Life, cannot possibly admit of any such
thing; and all the Changes that he makes, either substantially of nothing into
Being; or Alteration of the Qualities and Conditions of Being, etc. without
himself, are and must be without the least Mutation, and Alteration within
himself: And this the very Light of Nature, and Metaphysics, will teach us, as
well as the light of Scripture and Theology; as Mal. 3.6. Jam. 1.17. So that
though God may properly be said to conclude, or end his work of Creation, yet
cannot he properly be said to rest from it, or after it; because this, in its
formal Notion, implies Motion, Activity and exerting of Power and Ability, with
a Weariness thereby, which the Deity is infinitely free from: Which I desire
may be heeded, because I perceive the Author would fain have every Clause in
the Fourth Command to be Moral, and of necessary and perpetual Observance; and
especially this of Gods resting on the Seventh day. Now that which is Moral, as
to Motive and Obligation to the Humane Nature, is that which the light of
Nature, right Reason, or (to go higher) the perfectly irradiated Mind of our
first Parents, would have of its self discerned and closed with, as a Motive
and Engagement to Piety or Charity, or any Duty: Which I think Gods resting on
the Seventh day may well be asserted not to be, because,

1. Reason or the illuminated Mind of Man, could never suppose God to take
after his work, any real Rest or Refreshment in himself, which he had not
before. And Secondly, God's working in the maintaining of the Creation in its
Being, Order and Operation, is altogether as great, and as much, as it was in
the Production of it; and therefore the Schoolmen say, That Preservation is a
continual Act of Creation, because the same Word and Power is exerted in the
one as in the other. Yea, if we respect the Work it self, or the Term of it
without God; we may well say that the Preservation of the World is a greater
work than the Creation of it: Though as to the Act it self in God, all is the
same, (being the Act of the same infinite Power, Wisdom and Godhead) because of
the contrary Qualities of the Creatures mutually tending to each others
Destruction; but especially because of the Malice of Devils, and the sinful
wretched Depravity of Fallen Man; which without an infinite Wisdom and Power
exerted to the contrary, would soon bring all to Ruin, at least it would do so
by the Humane Nature, for which all other things of this World were made and
are continued: And therefore this Motive to a Seventh-day Sabbath, cannot be
in, and of it self Moral. And this our Savior clearly shows, John 5.17. My
Father works hitherto, and I work: Which he gives by way of Reply to those,
who in the former Context, taxed and condemned him for a Breach of the Sabbath.
Grounding it seems (tacitly at least) their Accusation, from that Passage in
the Fourth Command of God's resting on that day, as though it had been of a
Moral and Perpetual Obligation: And therefore our Savior here tells them, It
was not so; for both he and his Father did work on the Seventh day, as well as
on any other day of the week; from which it is clear this Clause in the Command,
is not Moral, but Positive.

As to the Second Part of the Question, whether the Seventh-day Sabbath was
Sanctified, and so Instituted by him; and was observed by him who made the
World. We answer, 'twas Sanctified, and Instituted by the Lord, as Jehovah, but
not as Jesus Christ: And then that 'twas observed by Jesus Christ Incarnated,
but not as Jehovah; because the Observation of it, seems to import some dutiful
Obligation upon its Observer, which cannot be supposed with respect to the
Godhead, but may be so with respect to the Lord Christ, as Mediator in his
Human Nature. But then this Observance makes no more for the keeping the
Seventh-day Sabbath, than for the Observance of Pentecost, the Passover, the
Feast of Tabernacles, and other Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, under which our
Lord Christ was, and which he observed in the days of his Flesh; the Mosaical
and the Ceremonial Administration being in force all the while he lived, and
expired with his Death, and were buried in his Grave, as to their Virtue and
Obligation: And so we assert the Seventh-day Sabbath did also; which I hope we
may evince in the progress of this Discourse.

By what has been said, we have a sufficient Reply to his Three Proofs which
follow his Querly, for it is Affirmative, and how they may be orthodoxly
admitted, or else as Heterodox rejected. And here we may take notice that all
the former Particulars which the Author makes use of, as Foundations to build
his beloved Notion upon, do as equally militate and plead for the Observance of
all the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, as for the Seventh-day Sabbath; for the
Creator of the World enjoined them, as well as this. The great Jehovah imposed
them, as well as this. The Lawgiver gave those Laws, as well as this. And our
Lord Instituted and Sanctified those, as well as this, as he was God; and
observed those, as well as this, as Christ Jesus, as God-man. It Is as Prejudice
sufficient against all those (supposed) Achillean Arguments, that if they prove
what they are pleaded for, We must all turn Jews.

But before I leave this Query, I must reflect upon one Paragraph or two, under
it, Page 23. wherein we have him laying down all his former great Postulata's,
that the Lord Christ made the World, rested on the Seventh day, observed,
blessed and sanctified it: By which Repetition, we may see how much he depends
upon these, for the carrying off his Design: But withal, we have formerly seen
how little, yea, how not at all, they conduce thereto. But to these, he
superadds another grand Postulatum, as though 'twere a Particular, which either
he had undeniably demonstrated before, or were granted by his Adversaries:
Which is, that the Lord instituted this Seventh-day Sabbath for, and imposed it
upon Adam, and in him, to all Mankind without distinction; and that before the
Sin and Fall of Adam. And hence concludes that it is a Moral Law incumbent upon
Adam, and all his Posterity; which is a Conclusion, either from rotten
Premises, or from such as will never logically infer the Conclusion: Which we
shall show as briefly as we can; and what is spoken here, may lessen some of
our Work hereafter. 1. Hereby is employed that this Command of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, was given to Man in the State of Innocence; which he can
never prove. For though the Institution thereof, be inserted in the beginning
of the 2. of Genesis yet it is clear, the Scripture does not always keep a
Chronical Order: We must not expect in our Bible, a constant Prius and
Posterius; (as they say) but the sacred History, admits of many hysterons
proterons; of many Misplacings with respect to the order of time; relating
those thigns before, which were done after; and Vice Versa: And it is most clear
that it is so in this very place. For here the Sabbath is recorded before the
Plantation of Paradise, v. 8. which was not spoken of before; yet was Paradise
part of the Works of the Creation, and consequently created before the Seventh
day, though spoken of afterward; which proves that the order of the relation of
the Sabbath, is no infallible proof that it was instituted before the Fall, but
might be after it; though antecedently mentioned. And Mr. Warren brings many
probable Arguments to prove that Adam fell before the Sabbath Day; and
consequently before the giving or declaring of that Precept; because therein
God's resting on the Seventh-day, is proposed as an Example and Motive to his
keeping of it; which could not be done before the Seventh-day came: And so the
Command must be given after the Fall. Which Arguments of his, ought to have
been fairly debated, their Moment considered, and a due Answer and Solution
given to them, before this had been so peremptorily asserted. But,

2ly. This seems to imply, that whatever Injunction God gave to Adam before the
Fall, was of things that are purely Moral, or so in themselves; or else it can
never regularly be drawn from this Medium, that therefore the
Seventh-day Sabbath was so. But this we know was not so, for God prohibited him
to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; which was purely positive,
and a Duty only resulting from the Will of the Legislator. Again, if we should
take it for granted, that the Institution and Injunction of the Seventh-day,
was antecedent to the Fall, yet this would rather prove the Negative, than the
Affirmative of its pure Morality. For whatever was purely Moral, and a Duty of
its self, resulting from the Nature, Qualifications and Obligations of the
rational Creature, Adam in the perfect Knowledge of that Nature, must know and
discern, in and of himself; and consequently would have known the Seventh-day
to be so: And if he knew it, there needed no Institution thereof, by God at
all. Besides, it is very observable, that from the Creation of our first
Parents, till their Fall, we do not read of one Moral Duty enjoined them,
either of the First or Second Table; (unless this be supposed to be so) and
what reason can be given for it, but this, that it needed not; because they
were all fully and distinctly implanted in Man's Soul. If therefore the
Seventh-day Sabbath, had been so Moral, 'twould not have needed a singular
Institution; much less such Arguments to enforce its Observance upon perfectly
wise, and holy Adam. From whence, in my Apprehension, a good Argument may be
drawn against its Morality.

3. It implies, that all the Commands that were given to Adam in Innocence, are
authoritatively incumbent upon all his Posterity. The contrary whereto, is
clear in the prohibition of the Tree in the midst of the Garden; for that
ceased both to himself and all his Posterity upon his Fall: By all which, we
see the weak reasonings of this Author.

In the following Paragraph, he tells us that all those things were recorded
for the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ; where as none of them do at all concern
Jesus Christ: For all those things in the foregoing Paragraph by his own
Doctrine, and according to his own Sentiments, were effected and agitated before
the Fall of Man: In which time there could not be so much as any need or use of
a Jesus, or a Christ. Nor was there so much as the least Hint of him given, by
either Prophecy or Promise; much less was he himself in being: And
consequently none of these things could conduce to his glory; for there can
nothing appertain to that which is not. And thus these supposed unmovable
Foundations of this Tenent, are found not to be so much as Sandy: For they are
found to be nothing at all, as he would have them refer to our Lord Christ. We
acknowledge therefore that all these Particulars which he named, are for the
Glory of Jehovah; and that the Observance of the Seventh-day Sabbath, home to
the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ from the Dead, was to his Praise as
Creator and Legislator. But withal, we hope to prove that the Change of it, and
dedicating another day of the Week to our Lord Jesus Christ, the same Jehovah,
and spotless Son of the Virgin, does highly conduce to his Honor, as Lord and
Glorious Redeemer; as Conqueror of Hell and Death; as Accomplisher of that
Great and Glorious Work of our merited Salvation. (A Work unconceivably more
glorious in it self, and insinitely more advantageous to us, and really
laborious and grievous to himself) and as he entered into his real Rest on that
day, even the first day, out of the Depths of his Humilitation. Here in the
next Paragraph he quotes, Mat. 12.8. The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath,
with that Gloss or Interpretation which he puts upon it, which I doubt not, is
very false, and has been already proved to be so: But because he refers it to
another Place, we shall attend him there, and then endeavor to give its true
meaning. About the Fourhth Question, Page 23. I shall not contend, for I verily
believe the ancient Patriarchs, did Observe and Sanctify the Seventh-day.

SECT. IV.
THE fifth Question: Whether the Ten Commands were given by Christ to Jews and
Gentiles? Page 24. He thinks he has proved the Legislation of Christ from the
Beginning: But how this is to be understood, and wherein he has taken false
Measures, has been before shown. Whether he gave them to Jews and Gentiles,
that is, to all Mankind, he takes this for granted also, Which we also assert,
even that all the Moral Law was given to the Humane Nature, and so to all
Mankind in Adam: But withal, that the Seventh-day Sabbath was no part of the
Moral Law; no nor yet a seventh part of time to be Consecrated and Sanctified
to Divine Worship. (I mean not Primarily and in it self Moral) which I should
endeavor here to prove; if I did not foresee a more convenient Opportunity for
it hereafter. Only let us here consider what he himself here grants, viz. That
the Moral Law was written upon Man's Heart; that it did consist in Knowledge,
Righteousness and Holiness; wherefore the Seventh-day Sabbath is no part of it;
because it was not written upon Man's Heart at first. 1. Because God revealed
it to Man after his Creation; which needed not, if it had been in him before.
2. Because there are obscure Remains of the Moral Law, in the Humane and
Rational Creature, with respect to all the other Commands (as might be easily
manifested by an Induction) but none as to the Seventh-day Sabbath. It is true,
as to the Moral Substance of the Law, that is found in Mankind, even a
Separation of time, and proper Seasons for the Worship of God; but this is not:
Nay, it is so rare, that not one among Ten thousand does dream of it, or scarce
one in an Age does so much as fancy it. 3. Because by his own Orthodox
Assertion in this very place, the Moral Law is reingraven, that is, more fully,
clearly and distinctly, and in its Spiritual Sense and Latitude upon the Hearts
of those that are revived by the Spirit of God, which is the Image of God,
reinstamped upon the Regenerate and Converted; as St. Paul says Col. 3.10.
Ephesians. 4.24. Now it is as clear as the Sun, that the Generality of the Called,
enlightened and sanctified, have not the Law of the Seventh-day Sabbath written
in their Hearts: Nay, they have an Aversion from it. Of all truly Religious
ones, that ever I knew, Mr. B -- is the Solitary Person of this Persuasion;
whence it must necessarily follow, that it is no part of the Moral Law, or of
that Image of God which was instamped upon Man plainly and fully at first; and
remains imperfectly and obscurely in all Men; and is restored to the Saints in
their Regeneration, and is increased in them in their progressive
Sanctification: Whence it is also clear, that this Command, thus stated, was
not given by Christ to Jews and Gentiles in the Creation: And his proof for it
is very weak and invalid; which is taken from those express Commands given by
God to the Jews, of causing them that were either their Substance, (Slaves
bought with their own Money) or Proselytes, Strangers by Nation, but yet joining
themselves to them, and dwelling among them; and so were of their Body; who
were bound, as he himself there acknowledges and proves, to be Circumcised, to
observe the Passover, etc. And now what Tendency has this to prove, that the
Seventh-day Sabbath was given to Jews and Gentiles? When this proves only, that
those Gentiles were bound to keep it, who were within the Gates, and of their
Body Politic: But has no reference to, nor does at all concern other Gentiles;
some of which might never hear of the Name of Israel; or of any of their Laws
and Sabbaths. It pities me to see such weak and invalid Arguments; which if
they have any force, it is to Judaize all the Christian World.

As to the second part of the Question, whether the weekly Seventh-day Sabbath
were observed ever after, during the Old Church: We acknowledge it was so still
among the Jewish Nation; and he needed not to have produced any proofs for it:
But withal we say, never among any other Nations, nor any Footstep of it,
which is a sure Proof against its proper Morality. As to that Observation, Page
28. That the Seventh Day, throughout the Old and New Testament, was called the
Sabbath day. It was fit it should be so all along till our Savior's
Resurrection; because it was the Sabbath day till then: And afterward, if it be
so called, it was in compliance with the Jews, who still held it so to
continue, or to use the Expression which was in most common use, whereby the
day might be known they spoke of; (as we do of Sunday, Monday, etc. only to
declare what day of the Week we mean) or else to declare the Abolition thereof:
And (if we remember it) we may make some use of that Assertion, that the
Seventh day and Sabbath are Synonimous in the Language of the Old and New
Testament.

SECT. V.
THis Question he endeavors to prove Assirmatively, Page 29. That Christ did
in the Flesh, confirm the Ten Commands, without any Exception of the Fourth
Commandment, or any part or tittle thereof. Which if we should fully grant,
without the least Exception, it would make nothing for his Cause, nor against
ours; for as long as Christ was in the World, so long we all agree, that the
Seventh day of the Week was the enjoyed Sabbath; and therefore ought to be
observed; and so might have been commanded by Christ to be kept: And so we know
he ratified the Ceremonial Law, by commanding the cleansed Lepers to go and
show themselves to the Priest, and offer the Gift which Moses commanded for
their cleansing, Matt. 8.4. And so also the Judicial Law, by injoyning them to
pay Tithe of all, even of Mint, Annis and Cummin, Matt. 23.23. (which I think
few or none do hold to be purely Moral) and so the Brother's taking of his
Childless Brother's Wife, he seems to confirm by a Tacit Approbation to the
Sadducees, objecting that to him, to baffle and puzzle him about the
Resurrection, Matt. 22.23, 30. Yet nevertheless those Laws were not permanent,
but expired; the Ceremonial with himself, and the Judicial with the Judicial
State and Polity. Withal we add, that our Savior did for ever confirm the
Moral Law, which is contained in the Ten Commandments: And so the Fourth, as
far as Moral; and in all that it commands as such: But withal we say, that
some Passages of the Fourth Command are neither Moral, nor yet commanded
therein as such; or of the Substance thereof: Whereof the mentioning of the
last, the Seventh Day of the Week, to be the Sacred Rest; is one: (which here
is but nakedly asserted, but we defer the Proof) and such as was to expire at
his Resurrection. Wherefore we say that that Passage, Matt. 5.17. Till Heaven
and Earth pass away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass away, must
refer only to the Moral Law, Quatenus Moral; and as it refers to, and obliges
all Nations; which several Passages belonging to the Ten Commands do not;
whereof this is one about the Seventh day; and I think th is may be cleared by
this Argument: That which neither our Savior himself, nor any of his Apostles,
did command or enjoin to be followed by his, or their, Disciples and Followers,
cannot be Moral: But neither he nor they did ever enjoin the
Seventh-day Sabbath, therefore it is not Moral. Our Savior in none of his
Discourses (that I remember) did ever expressly or particularly command the
Observance of the Sabbath Day; but spoke and did things which seem to declare
the Abolition of the Seventh day; neither do any of his Apostles, in any of
their Writings, impose it upon, or command the Observance of it, from either
Jews or Gentiles, to whom they write; and consequently we may conclude, that
they never preached it (for we truly hold, that the Sum and Substance of all
their Sermons is in their Books.) Yea, their Writings have several weighty
Passages against the Seventh-day Sabbath. Now our Savior in his Commission
which he gave his Apostles, after his Resurrection, just as he was ascending up
to Heaven, expressly commands them to teach all Nations to observe all things
whatsoever he commands them, Matt. 28.19, 20. Wherefore seeing they commanded
not the Nations to observe the Seventh-day Sabbath, Christ never taught them
that Doctrine, nor enjoined them to do it; and therefore this cannot be one of
those Jots or Tittles of the Law, which in this Authors Sense, was not to pass
from the Law; but only what was Moral in it. We acknowledge that the Lord
Christ also confirmed the Moral Law, by commanding the Lawyer to love the Lord
God, etc. But withal, that whoever gives to God the seventh part of his time,
though it be not the Seventh day of the week; does therein love God as to the
Declaration, as to the Fruit and Effect of his Love, as much as if he did the
Seventh day; because it is as fully the Substance of that Command.

The same answer will serve to Mark 12.28, 31. ( Page 30.) with this Addition,
That the change of the Seventh-day Sabbath into that of the first day, is no
more laying aside of the Morality of the Fourth Command; than the change of
Circumcision, the Passover, and other Ceremonial Ordinances of the Old
Testament into Baptism, the Lords Supper, and other Evangelical Administrations
under the New. These being as really included in, and commanded by, the second
Command at that time, as the Seventh-day Sabbath is in and by the Fourth. And
therefore as the change of those Rites and Modes of Worship by our Lord Christ
and his Apostles, was not the laying aside of the second Command, but rather a
perfect Obedience thereto, and practical Confirmation thereof; so the change of
the weekly-day-Sabbath was no Infringement, but rather an Establishment of the
Fourth Commandment.

In the same Page he Insinuates, that we take away those words [The Seventh day
is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God] which yet we neither do in Letter, nor
Sense, for we leave the words in the Command, and obey them in their purport
and meaning: For they do not so much enjoin the Seventh day in order, as in
number, not so much the last day of the week, as one day of the week, to be
observed and sanctified by us (as I suppose we may have an opportunity to
prove.)

Page 31. He shows from Scripture that one great Article of the New Covenant,
is Gods writing his Law upon the Hearts of his People, which he, with us,
expressly acknowledges to be the Moral Law: How then can the Seventh-day Sabbath
(as such) be part of that Law, which is not written upon the Hearts of
Thousands, to one of Gods People. I judge this to be a clear Demonstration
against the Morality thereof.

He could never have shown, that the Seventh-day Sabbath was a part of the Law
of Nature in Adam,) though the substance of the Ten Commands was it) and
therefore it was instituted by God as before.

Page 32. He shows us (for so I have a Belief he intends) that he had a mind to
prove, that Set Forms of Prayers, or other parts of Worship under a Form,
though never so Excellent, though in express words of Scripture; are the Pesel
or Graven Image, that is forbidden in the second Command, which is a Notion, I
am sure, alien from the Resentments of the most Grave, Prudent, Learned and
Experienced Christians of former and Modern Ages, and very few of them have
thought so uncharitably and rigorously of them, as to brand them with the
grossest Idolatry; though many judge them fit to be lain aside by them, to whom
God has given a good and competent Gift; but yet much rather to be u sed, and
that comfortably and profitably too, where such a Gift may be denied. And I
think by this Rule, that everly Man that joins with another in Prayer is guilty
of Idolatry against the second Command; for he makes the words of the Minister,
or private Christian, to be the Set Form of his Prayer: And why a Prayer
written as a Form, should be more an Idol than a Prayer spoken as a Form, I do
not yet understand.

In the same Paragraph he also hints, that the Lords Prayer ought only to be
used in secret and alone; not in public, no, nor in private, with any others;
because of those Expressions in Matt. 6.6, 9. When thou prayest, enter into thy
Closet and shut thy Door and Pray, etc. Whereas the Form of that Prayer in the
plural Number, the very matter of that Prayer, being the universal Concern of
the Universal Church, and of every Congregation and Society of Christians, as
well as of every private Christian; and our Savior commanding his Disciples to
use it without any such Limitation: Of a secret Personal Retirement, Luke 11.2.
are sufficient proofs, that it may be as well used Socially as Solitarily; with
others as lawfully and conveniently as by ones self.

In the following Paragraph he seems to be of the Opinion, that it would be
better to have Men's or Ministers own Inventions in singing of Psalms, than the
Divine Inspirations of David and other Authors in Scripture. And when I can
believe, that theirs can be better than those in Scripture; or can be convinced
that there is neither Psalm nor Hymn in the Bible that can fit a present
Condition, either for Prayer, or Praises, or Gratitude, etc. I will think so:
but as to the former of these two, I hope I shall never believe; and as to the
latter, I think it is not likely to fall out in my days. These things ought as
curiously to be replied, as the Author has started these Notions; and when he
sees fit to endeavor a more large Explication and Vindication of them, then we
may also see what may be discoursed agianst them. And I heartily wish, he had
but hinted this of his Seventh day; and so saved all this labor in answering
of it; for it is just another such Opinion as the former, and deserved only to
be mentioned: Indeed not to be mentioned at all, at least not in Print, not in
public: But of this in the Preface.

SECT. VI.
IN the next Paragraph he tells us, he has much to do to recover the word
[Seventh] of the Fourth Commandment: Whereas none, but the Deniers of the
Morality of the Seventh, would wrest it from him; for we all grant it to him,
and acknowledge it to be of the very substance of the Command; that a Seventh
day should be set apart for an Holy Consecrated Day to Divine Worship; only we
say, that the Seventh day is so, as the seventh part of the Week; as one day of
the seven, and not the seventh in order; or the last day of the Week: This we
say is not expressly commanded therein, and might be altered for another day of
the Seven, upon very good and authentic Reasons and Grounds; as it is from it
to the first.

In this same Page he returns to our Saviors Confirmation of the Decalogue,
from Mat. 5.17, 19. Luke 16.17. and then asks why those places confirm all the
10 Commands, and not the Seventh-day Sabbath; and tells us that he can assign
no other reason for it, but the marvelous Corruption of our Nature, which
inclines us to be Gods, etc. when yet he knows, that they that are for the
change of the Seventh, into the First-day-Sabbath, have given him many Reasons
and good scriptural Grounds and Arguments, which do amount (in their Esteems)
to a divine Authority for that Change; (though they do not produce an express
Command for it; (as that which he seems to require in this Paragraph yet, what
amounts thereto) but it seems all these are not Reasons to him; are not so much
as Shows of Reasons: But the only Reason is Man's Corruption, Pride and
Rebellion. Whereas he cannot but know, that many of those, who in Doctrine and
Practice, admit of this Change, are as free from these Vices, and have as much
mortifyed them, as himself; and are as Eminent for Holiness, and Humility and
Obedience to God, as any Sabbatarian can pretend to be: And their Earnestness
for the First day, does not spring from the Looseness of others thereon, nor
mainly and chiefly from their Education and Custom: But because they know it is
not Moral, (as other Parts and Appendix's of the Ten Commandments are not) and
therefore not confirmed by Christ in those Expressions; with many other good
and solid Grounds.

And here I shall ask him by way of requital, if the Seventh-day Sabbath were
really and primarily Moral, and by Christ confirmed, as well as all the other
Commands, which are undeniably so. Whence comes it to pass, that in all his
Sermons and Discourses that he made to the Jews about the Moral Law, he did not
so much as ever mention the Sabbath to his Hearer; either by way of
Recommendation of it to them, or commending of them for their Zeal for it, and
tthe strict Observance of it; nor yet commanding of its Observance, or teaching
them how they should Keep and Sanctify it according to its first Institution?
seeing it is clear, that he in his Discourse, does particularize every other
Duty of the Moral Law; and Exhorts, and Requires Obedience thereto. In all his
most copious and glorious Sermon upon the Mount, where he Explains, Enlarges
upon, and Injoyns the other Moral Duties, we have not a Word about their
Sabbath; and when ever he enumerates Particulars of the Moral Law of the
Decalogue, he never mentions among them, the Sabbath; nor when so many
particular and express Occasions were given him by the Pharisees, and captions
Jews; (in their condemning him and his Disciples, as Profaners of the Sabbath,
etc.) to expound the Duty of the Sabbath, and to show them wherein the due
religious and acceptable Observance of the Seventh-day Sabbath consisted; There
is not the least Word appertaining hereunto, uttered by him; only a Vindication
of his own, and his Disciples Practices, from a Profanation thereof. If I may
judge at the Reasons, I think they may be such as these.

1 Because he knew that it was not of the same nature with the others, not
Moral as they, nor necessary to be kept to Salvation as they. 2. Because he saw
the Jews too superstitiously and zealously affected toward their
Seventh-day Sabbath already. 3. Because neither they nor we, neither Jews nor
Gentiles, should have any thing from his Mouth that might have the least color
of confirming that Sabbath Day. 4. Because he designed its speedy Absolution as
the Seventh day, and its Conversion into the First day. 5. Because as Place,
Priesthood, Mode, outward Ceremonies of Divine Worship, which were before his
coming into the Flesh; were to be altered by his Authority, as King of the
Church, so was Time also; the day on which those were chiefly and most slemnly
observed, into another day, wherein his own Institutions were to be chiefly and
generally practiced by his Church: And for these and such like Reasons, he did
not only particularly recommend and enjoin, but did also speak and do (as has
been formerly hinted, and may be futurely evinced) such words and things, as
had a doctrinal and practical Tendency toward its Expiration.

Page 33. He imputes the Observation of the First day, but to a good Intention;
which has been the cause of all manner of gross Superstitious Errors, Bloody
Wars, etc. As though this general Opinion and Practice of the Universal Church
all along, since the days of our Lord Christ, had no other Foundation, but in
the deluded Brain of silly Zealots, and not the least Footing for it in the
Word of God. An unworthy Suggestion, and a most invidious Comparison; and such
as very ill becomes a Man of his professed Candor and Reading.

It Is strange that a Man should fancy that Commenius, when he exhorts to a
Reformation of the Government, Doctrine, Worship and Practice of the Church;
according to the Word of God, and the Pattern in the Mount, should mean as one,
if not the chiest of those Particulars, the removal of the First-day-Sabbath,
and the reversion of the seventh day in lieu thereof: When he knows that all
the Divines and Doctors that are orthodox, and his Adversaries in this Opinion,
prescribe the same rule for the Reformation, and call upon those in Authority
to subserviate all their own Laws Ecclesiastial and Civil, to an Observance of
the Laws of God and of Christ: And Commenius himself, in his Practice and in
his own Church, was an Observer and Sanctifier of the First-day-Sabbath, (as he
here acknowledges) so a Disowner and Rejector of the Seventh day: And
therefore questionless did not esteem the Seventh-day Sabbath to be any part of
that rule, according to which he would have all Churches regulated. But here we
see what a strong fancy can do; it can transfigure into its self those things
that are quite dissonant, if not directly contrary thereto.

SECT. VII.
HE gives us his Opinion Page 34. of abrogating the Ceremonial Laws: But why
does he not bring us an Express Command for their Abrogation, as he requires us
to do, for not the Abrogation, but only the Mutation of the Sabbath, from one
Day of the Week to another? For I assert, and can prove it, that some part of
the Ceremonial Law was more confirmed by the Mouth of Christ, than his
Seventh-day Sabbath. I take leave to call it his, because though 'twas Gods day
before the Resurrection of Christ, yet now it is not so; but Men will be
favorably to themselves and their own Opinions, while they are rigorous
toward others, and their more Orthodox and Scriptural Resentments.

In the same Page he gives us a Caution of not incurring the Threats of
infringing the Laws of Christ, even the least of them; and by way of a
charitable Requital, we warn him to be cautious lest he build again that which
Christ has destroyed, and repair the rased Synagogue.

Here we have also his Notion of what is Moral, telling us that many call the
Ten Commandments the Moral Law: I think all slid Divines do call them so; but
none that I know, do say that every Clause and Word in them, or belonging to
them, (by this last Expression, I mean part of the Preface to them) is Moral;
and particularly not the Seventh-day Sabbath, or that Clause appertaining
thereto in the Fourth Commandment; no, nor yet the Seventh Part of Time therein
expressly commanded, and perpetually too, (that is not primarily nor absolutely,
and of its self so.) As to his Notion of what is Moral, I cannot call it either
a Definition, or a Description of the thing; but only an Interpretation of the
Word Moral, viz. pertaining to Manners. We usually in such Discourses, put
Moral, in opposition to what is positive; whether it be Ceremonial, or
Judicial: But this is such a Notion, as includes all Laws whatever, even Human
as well as Divine, and of Divine, all of them of what sort or kind soever; for
they all apertain to Manners: Yea, to Thoughts, Words and Actions; yea, and are
included in the Love of God, because whoever loves God truly, will, and must
yield Obedience to all his Laws of what sort soever; whether Moral or Positive.
But such a lax Interpretation of the Moral Law, served to the Design of the
Seventh Day, because it includes it will all other positive Laws; but had he
given us a true Notion of what is Moral in its self, or in its own Nature, it
would necessarily have been exclued: As may be evinced by some Properties of
what is truly Moral.

1. The Moral Law is inward, and was consecrated with the rational Creature;
and does need no external Revelation, or Divine Institution; especially in the
State of human Integrity before the Fall; but such was not the Seventh day: For
'twas Instituted by God, after Man's Creation. 2. The Moral Law yet remains in
some Footsteps and Degrees thereof, in the Human Nature, and so in the
generality of Mankind, the Heathens themselves not excepted; (as might be
easily proved by their Laws and Writings) but the Notion of the Seventh day, is
Universally excluded; and the Generality of Mankind totally destitute thereof.
If it be here objected, That the Heathen did separate a Seventh-day to their
Religious Service: To this may be applied, That 'twas but some of them, and but
for some time; not Universally and Perpetually. That they did it by Tradition
from the Jews, or by Satan's Institution and Injunction, who in his cursed
Pride, affects to have his Votaries serve him, as the Acknowledgers of Jehovah
do him. 3. All Moral Laws are clearly and distinctly engraven upon the Minds
and Hearts of those that are enlightened and sanctified by the Spirit of God:
But not a Tittle or punctum of his Seventh-day is seen in the Generality of
them. 4. Man was made for Moral Duty, that is, to Glorify and Honor God in all
Acts of Internal and External Piety; to profit and comfort his Neighbor by all
Acts of Charity; to possess his own Vessel in Sanctification and Honor. And by
so doing, he lives up to the end for which he was made: But now Man was not
made for the Sabbath and for its Observance, but the Sabbath was made for Man,
and for his Good, Mark 2.27. 5. Moral Duties are such, as a Man cannot change
them, or neglect them, or do any thing beside them, without dishonouring and
sinning against God. But now it is certain, That as to the Nature of the thing
its self, (separated form a positive Institution) that a Man may as fully
Glorify and Honor God, and as completely serve him, by appropriating and
employing another day of the Week to, and in his Workship and Service, as the
Seventh; provided he do dedicate another day in Seven, to that Service, the
Worship is the same; and the proportion of time the same: and so God as much
and as long served, as upon the last day of the Week. Let him denominate any
other Propriety of what is Moral; and I will undertake to evince, That it
belongs not to his Seventh-day Sabbath. To what purpose then to urge and insist
so much, and so long, upon the Moral Law, when the Seventh-day Sabbath, is no
part at all of the Morality thereof?

Those Passages before mentioned, That Christ came not to destroy, but to
fulfill the Law; that the Breaker of the least of Gods Commands, shall be least
in the Kingdom of God, etc. And these Page 35. He that will enter into Life,
must keep the Commandments: It is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass away,
than one tittle of the Law, to fail; do not only concern the Moral Law (though
if they did, we have sufficiently shown that the Sabbath is not concerned in
them) but also the Positive; even the Ceremonial Law. For while they were in
Force, as they all were throughout the days of our Savior's Animal Life;
(which I so call, to distinguish it from the Glorious Life of his Humanity upon
Earth after his Resurrection.) They that would enter into Life (at least of the
Jews and their Proselytes, to whom only they were Laws and Obligatory) were
bound to keep them. And if they did wilfully and perseveringly disobey them,
they would as certainly be Damned, as if they had lived in a Contradiction to
any of the Moral Laws: Because such a Refusal to observe and keep the
Ceremonial Laws, is directly and ultimately a Disobedience to the Moral; and
that too, to the very Soul and Foundation of all the Commandments: Even the
First Command, by being a Renunciation of Gods Authority in refusing a
Conformity to his revealed Will. Again it was a direct and immediate Sin
against the Second Command; by being a refusal to worship him according to his
own instituted Worship: So Christ came not to destroy the Ceremonial Law, but
to fulfill it. Which he did by being the End and Consummation thereof; by being
the Substance of those Figures, and the Body of those Shadows, and no Law is
destroyed which continues in its Force as long as the Legislator intended, and
produces all those Ends for which he designed it. Now the Ceremonial was
intended by God to be no longer a Law, than till our Lords Death, or
Resurrection, or Mission of the Holy Ghost; and it was designed only to typisie
the Lord Christ, and to lead Believers to him, as to the End and Substance
thereof; which our Lord, being he was so far from destroying it, that he
perfectly fulfilled it, though he abrogated its future legal Authority: And so
not one tittle of the Ceremonial Law did fail, for all had its Accomplishment
on Christ, no more than a tittle of the Moral Law cannot: So that we have
granted him his desire, in showing him what Law Christ meant in such Passages,
even the Ceremonial as well as the Moral; for they were the Object of the
Superstitious Jews greatest Zeal, and they persecuted him and his Disciples, as
the Overthrowers of the Ceremonial Laws; and therefore Christ tells them, He
came not to destroy, but to fulfill them, etc.

By all that has been already said, is fully shown, the Impertinency of those
Quotations ( Page 35. 38.) where our Savior makes use of an confirms the Moral
Law: For there is not one word of his Sabbath in them all. In our Savior's
Carriage and Language he vindicates the Sanctity of the Temple, John 2.13, 17.
so he does Circumcision, and Authorizes its Administrations upon the Sabbath
day, and derives it from a more August Antiquity than Moses, John 7.22, 23. If
our Author had any such Expression from our Savior's Mouth concerning the
Sabbath; how would he have triumphed therein, and have fetched its everlasting
Establishment therefrom? But there is not one such Syllable concerning it.
These have a greater show for their Authority from our Savior's Discourses
than the Seventh-day Sabbath; yet I doubt not but he looks on them as no longer
in Force, and of no Obligation in these latter and Evangelical days.

Page 37. He produces the Church of England Articles, the Presbyterian
Confession, the Independants Declaration of Faith, for the Ratification of the
Moral Law; who yet are all for the Exclusion of the last day of the Week from
being the Christian Sabbath; and thereby declare their Rejection of it from
being any part thereof: And thus all the Authority, both Divine and Humane,
that he produces, makes nothing at all for him, but very much rather against
him: With which this question is concluded.

SECT. VIII.
HE proposes the Question, Page 38. Whether Christ in his own Person did not
observe the Seventh Week-day-Sabbath, and no other during his Life. To which we
answer affirmatively with him, that he did so, that he was bound to do it, that
it was part of his Righteousness which he was to fulfill; for he was born under
the Authority and Obligation of the Old Testament Administrations; even of the
Ceremonial ones, and therefore was Circumcised the eighth day; went up to
Jereusalem with his Mother in his Childhood to keep the Annual Feasts; and in
his Manhood was a Constant, Conscientious and obedient Attender upon, and
observer of the Passover; as we read in the History of his Life, after his
Baptism, and manifesting himself to the World, home to his Death, or just
before his Sufferings; and so doubtless did by all the other Ceremonial Laws,
according to Gods Injunction of them, and was an Observer of all other positive
Divine Laws; and so consequently must he be of this; for neither all the
former, nor this particular, were to be abrogated and lain aside, as to their
Authority, till he himself was lain aside and buried in the Grave. Without
doubt he also dutifully kept and practiced all the Judicial Laws; being born a
Member of their State, as well as of their Church, as far as their Roman Lords
would permit; for the Authority of these Laws lasted as long as the Judicial
Polity; and with it declined and perfectly expired. Will this Pleader for the
Seventh day, contend for the Authority of all those Ceremonial and Judicial
Laws home to our days, because our Blessed Lord observed and kept them? He must
do so, if this Argument be of any weight. And it has been the Fate of all his
Arguments hitherto, to militate as much for all the Ceremonies (except that of
the Sabbaths being given in Innnocency) of the Jews, as for the Seventh day.
Enough for their own Confutation.

Just another such Medium is cunningly insinuated, Page 39. to prove the
Goodness of the Observation of this Sabbath, viz. Its Antiquity, having been
the Sabbath of the Church for four thousand Years; which will introduce
Sacrifices into the Worship of God, a Bloody Offering up of Beasts, for they
are as ancient within a day or two (as it is probable) for God taught Adam to
offer up such Sacrifices as the Types of the Seed of the Woman who was to have
his Heel bruised by the Serpent, his Humane Nature murdered by the Devil and
his Agents; but then sacrificed and offered up to God, as the Expiratory Victim
for the sins of Fallen Man: And it is probable that those Skins which God made
Coats of for Adam, might be of such sacrificed Beasts: And Adam taught his Sons
to Sacrifice to God: And we read Genesis 4.4. That Abel brought to God the
Firstlings of his Flock, and the Fat thereof. Will he therefore plead that
their venerable Antiquity must still give them a place in the Evangelical
Dispensation, now that that Grand and All-sufficient Sacrifice, the substance
of those Shadows, is offered up? I trow not: So neither can the Antiquity of
the former Sabbath, till our Savior's days, and through his days, be any
Argument for its Admission and Authority now; seeing by our Saviors coming, we
have the new Heaven and the new Earth, which the Prophets foretold, Isa. 65.17.
and 66.22. and a more glorious and blessed Work accomplished, than that of the
Creation; which does much more deserve a Sanctification and Separation of that
day, whereon its Compleater rested from all his former Labors, and a new
external Administration was introduced; and a new day and consecrated time
suitably also instituted.

SECT. IX.
IT is demanded Page 40. Whether Christ did rest the Seventh-day Sabbath when
he was in the Grave. And it is affirmatively resolved, that his Soul rested in
Heaven, and his Body rested in the Grave that day. All as a Proof that our Lord
Christ himself, did in his state of Death, confirm that Seventh-day Sabbath, as
well as by his Practice and Doctrine in Life; and so recommended it to the
Observance of all the future Churches: Which Notion, if it could be proved,
would do more for the Seventh-day Sabbath, than all the Arguments he has yet
brought. If he could rationally demonstrate, that the blessed Redeemer did rest
on the Seventh day from all his Humiliation and Sufferings; he would then
defeat the great ground on which all the Churches, since our Lords coming and
consummating the work of Redemption, have built upon for the Change of the
Seventh day, into the First-day-Sabbath. For they say, they do it, because on
the first day our Lord Jesus God-man, rested from that more Wonderful,
Glorious, Gracious, Profitable and Ravishing Work, than that of the Creation
and more laborious and difficult work to himself; being really and dreadfully
so to his Humane Nature. But indeed this Notion is a very strange and an
uncouth one; because the Rest of the Mediator in this Sense, cannot be thought
to be any other than a happy and Complacential Reflection upon the work of our
Redemption, merited by all his Active and Passive Obedience; which could not be
until he had waded through all the Degrees of his Abasement, and begun his
Exaltation, and so in his Blessed and Glorious Estate, delighting himself in
his Conquest of the Devil, the World, Death and the Grave; and his having
perfectly satisfied Justice, and purchased Grace and Glory for Lost Sinners;
which could not be till the Resurrection of his Body. Can the State of Death
with any probability be thought the Mediator's Rest? Or his lying in the Grave,
be deemed the end of all his Abasements, when Death was the worst thing his
Enemies could bring upon him in their Rage and Fury; when they triumphed over
him in the Grave; and concluded that now they had completely vanquished him,
and proved him to be a Grand Deceiver, Matt. 27.62, 64. when it was that which
was especially required as the utmost of his Sufferings for the Expiation of
our Sins; being that which was denounced, at first against Sin, Genesis 2.17. and
as the consummate Punishment thereof, and is the proper Wages of Sin, Romans
6.23. and therefore so to be undergone and lain under by the Sinners Surety;
standing in his stead, and bearing his Punishment, and being made that Curse
for him, Gal. 3.13. which was the lowest Descent of his Humiliation, which
saddened the Hearts of his Disciples, and filled them with fear, whose hopes
almost expired at his Death, and were buried in his Grave; in which Estate if
he had abode, the Devil and his Enemies would have gotten a complete Victory
over him, and we could never have been justified nor saved.

Moreover our Savior's Body and Soul rested as much upon the Cross after his
Death, as they did in the Grave after his Burial; And so the Muchammedists have
as fair a Plea for their Sixth-day-Sabbath, because on that day the Dead Body
of our Savior felt no pain on the Tree, and his Soul enjoyed all Bliss in
Heaven. And so in this sense rested on their day of Worship.

How unreasonable and unscriptural to call this the Rest of our Redeemer!
Besides it was impossible that as Redeemer he should rest in the State of
Death, and in the Grave; for the Redeemer must be God-man; his Deity could not
declaratively rest, till it had raised its own Humanity out of the Grave, and
rent in sunder the Bonds of Death: And his Humanity could not really do so;
because it was not, during that Condition; for we know that Death is the
Separation of the Soul from the Body: Now the Soul separated from the Body, is
a Spirit and not a Man; the Body separated from the Soul, is a Corpse not a Man;
both Soul and Body separated are not Man; but essentially conjoined they make
the Man. Wherefore though both Body and Soul in their mutual Separation were
united to the Deity; and so he was always God, and had the essential parts of
Man; yet being divided, he was not Man; for by Death they being dissolved, his
Humanity was destroyed, and continued so, as long as Death had power over him.
So that it is against all Reason and common Sense, to assert that the Mediator,
who must be God-man, rested in the Grave; seeing in this true sense he could
not be Man there. No, no, This was no part of his Rest, but his Resurrection
from the Grave; the re-uniting of his Body and Soul, was the first entrance
into it: For as the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, Jehovah, is not said to rest,
till he had fully completed his six days work of Creation; and then with
infinite Complacency viewed all he had completed on the Seventh: So Jesus
Christ, God-man, cannot be said to rest from the Work of our Redemption, till
he had fully completed and ended all his Humiliation; till he had conquered
all his and our Enemies; which could not possibly be while he lay in the Grave
on the Seventh day; but it was when he rose from thence on the First; when
indeed he had a glorious and Blessed satisfaction in himself, when he reflected
upon all he had done, and all the Sufferings he waded through, and all the
Humiliation he was sunk into, and had happily and triumphingly concluded, with
all those inestimable Blessings that should accrue to the Church, and that
infinite Glory that would redound to God thereby: And therefore as God's
Resting on the Seventh day from his work of Creation, was proposed as the
Example and Motive to the Old Church before Christ's coming, for the keeping
the Seventh for their Sabbath: So likewise our Savior's Resting from his work
of our Redemption on the First day of the Week, may worthily be, and we say
really is, proposed as a Motive and Example to the Churches, since his coming,
for their consecrating of that day for their Weekly Sabbath. I am sorry that
such Passages of the Author, should occasion so much Tediousness to the Reader,
and enforce such Enlargedness from the Writer. As to that place, Mat. 24.20.
which he tells us he will improve hereafter to his own Advantage, we shall
attend his Motions, and meet him there.

To his Query Page 41. we grant that the Jewish Believers, did keep the
Seventh-day Sabbath, while our Saviors Body was in the Grave; and that they
ought to do so, because as yet, the First day by our Lords Resurrection, was
not Consecrated to be observed as the day of the Redeemers Rest. And withal,
that they were obliged during this time, to observe the unleavened Bread-Feast;
and (supposing it to be the Eighth day from their Birth, to Circumcise their
Children) yet I hope this is no Plea for the everlasting Permanency of these:
So neither can it be for that of the Seventh-day Sabbath.

SECT. X.
WE have his Conjecture Page 43. about the Weekday of our Lord's Ascension;
which he would fain suppose to be on the Seventh: But if we may believe St.
Luke, Act. 1.3. that he tarried on Earth Forty Days, and so was visible to his
Disciples all that time, and conversed with them as often as he saw fit, and
about what was most necessary and profitable for their Knowledge; and then
ascended into Heaven: If we look on this as an Historical Account of his Abode
on Earth after his Resurrection, (as it lays a fairer Foundation for it, than
all Human Conjectures can be) then if we reckon from the First day of the Week,
to the Fortieth day, and both the First and Last inclusively, then the day of
his Ascension, was upon the Fifth day of the Week; which is our Thursday, (as
the Church of England observes it) If we exclude either the First or Last day
only, 'twill be upon the Sixth day of the Week, our Friday, (if I mistake not;)
but if we exclude both the First and Last Days, (I mean the day of his
Resurrection, and the day of his Ascension) from the number of Forty days, then
'twill fall out upon the Seventh day of the Week our Saturday; which he
conjectures to be the day of the Week of our Saviors Ascension: But here we
must consider that we have two to one against him in this Conjecture: And
according to his Conjecture, and the usual Phrase of Scripture, our Savior
would have continued Forty Two days upon Earth: For the Scripture in the number
of Days, does usually include both the First and Last day. As in calling the
last day of the Week the Seventh, it takes into the Number, both it, and the
First day of the Week; for there are but Seven in all: And so when it says
that our Savior rose the Third day from the Dead, it includes the First and
Last days of the Three; and therefore having the scriptural usual Phrase on our
side, and the Tradition of the Churches, we have very good Ground to conclude,
that he ascended upon Thursday; and he has no Ground but his own Conjecture,
for his Opinion of his Ascension upon Saturday. But every little Surmise is
made use of, to exalt the Seventh above all the days of the Week; and
especially above the Lords day in this Controversy. As to that Fancy of our
Saviors coming to Judgment on the Seventh day, I leave it as a Pure Fancy.

Here also he takes it for granted, that our Savior after his Resurrection,
appeared to his Disciples upon the Seventh day, (or at least he supposes it may
well be granted) because they were then assembled, etc. But he knows they met
together on other days, and particularly upon the First day, on which our Lord
appeared unto them. And that Assembly in the First of the Acts, if 'twere on
the Ascension day, was according to Scripture numbering of days, upon our
Thursday. But seeing he would make use of (if we would grant) our Lords
appearing to his Disciples once on the Seventh day, what an Advantage may we
justly take for the First day, from our Savior's appearing so often unto them
on the same? so that there is no other day of the Week named, whereon our
Savior manifested himself unto them after the Resurrection, but this First
day: It Is not said that he appeared unto them on the Second or Third, nor at
all on the Seventh; and it is very probable, that all the Appearances of our
Savior, (which were not a few) were on the First day: Except only that on his
Ascension day. It Is worth our serious Observance, that as our Savior would not
grace the Seventh day, with one particular express word of his Mouth about it,
during his Lifetime, so he would not honor it with one Appearance of his
Human Nature to his Disciples, throughout all the Forty days after his
Resurrection: Which to me, seems plainly to signify, that he would have a
perpetual Silence thereof, in his future Churches; and that he had buried it in
his Grave, and would have it lie dormant there for ever.

SECT. XI.
HAving done with this Conjecture, we proceed to the Author's Question in the
same Page, Whether the Seventh-day Sabbath was observed after the Resurrection
and Ascension of Christ: Whereof he thinks he demonstrates the Affirmative: But
is far enough from it by those Instances which he brings from the Apostles, and
especially and mostly from St. Paul; yea, only from him. For though we take it
for granted, that many of the newly Proselyted Jews to the Doctrine and Faith of
the Lord Jesus, (the ordinary and common sort of them) did continue to observe
the Seventh-day Sabbath, out of an Erroneous Conscience toward God, and a
Persuasion of the perpetual Obligation of the Fourth Command, as to this
Seventh day, as they did also Circumcision, the Passover, and other Mosaical
Rites, and Consecrated Times (for all which, St. Paul in his Epistles to the
Galatians and Colossians, does clearly and severely reprove them.) Yet we say
that the Apostles themselves never did so, much less St. Paul, the great Doctor
of the Gentiles, and the great Vindicator of their Freedom from the Rites and
Days of the Old Testament-Administration: For they were otherwise, and better
taught by their Lord, and instructed by the Holy Ghost; for they went indeed,
(I mean Paul and his Companions) into the Synagogues on the Sabbath Day, I mean
here the Seventh-day; though it deserves not now that Name. But 'twas not in
any Observance of that day, as more Holy than another; as 'twas not in any
Observance or Deference to the Synagogue, as a more Holy Place than another,
that he went into it. But 'twas because that then and there, the Jews were
assembled in great Numbers, because that was the time, and that the place of
their Solemn and Numerous Associations for their Divine Worship: And he could
not find so fit an Opportunity any other day, nor so convenient a Room in any
other place to Converse with them, to Preach the Gospel to them, to prove the
Lord Jesus to be Gods promised, and their expected Messiah; to Convince them
hereof, and to Exhort them to Believe on him, and Embrace him as such, which
his Zeal for Christ's Glory, and his Love to their Souls, strongly constrained
him to. And this we assert, was the only cause of his so often, and so unusal
going into their Synagogue on the Seventh day, without any Difference as to
Time and Place; as if it were more holy than any other. We know how ardently he
longed after the Conversion and Salvation of his own Countrymen and Kinsfolk,
according to the Flesh; how fervently he panted after our Lord Christ's being
acknowledged by them; as that which would be their greatest Good, and his
greatest Glory in the World: For so his Enemies would become his Friends; his
Basphemers of him, as the worst of Deceivers, would be turned to be his
Praisers, Adorers and Relyers on him; as the Son of God, the King of Israel,
and Savior of the World: And therefore this constrained him to apply himself
to them in every Place, and at every Time, where he might discourse with most
of them, and with greatest Freedom and Advantage. And if the Jews had convened
on other Days, in other Places, in as great Crowds; he could doubtless then and
there, have applied himself unto them: And had they accustomed their Assemblies
at any other time, or in any other place, he would have made it his Custom and
usual Manner, to have associated with them. The Reason that the Holy Ghost
gives us of Paul's going into the Jews Synagogues on the Seventh day, and
making it his usual Custom, is no where said, as I remember, that he might
Worship with them; much less, that he might observe the day with them; but only
that he might Preach the Gospel to them, and prove the Lord Christ to be their
Messiah: Wherefore seeing the Holy Ghost tells us every where, that this was
his great Design, and this his great Work in their Synagogue: Therefore it
hence follows, That if he could not have had such Advantages for this Work
among them, he would never then nor there, have accompanied with them: So far
was he from any Respect, either to Time or Place, in this his Custom, that he
only made use of them, in a Subserviency to his farther Design: And therefore
it is very remarkable, and worthy our most diligent Observance, that when the
Apostle Paul, had sound the Jews given up so far to their cursed Blindness and
Prejudice against the Lord Christ, that all his Pains he took with them, all
the Affections he showed he had for them, all the undeniable Demonstrations
from Scripture he produced before them, could prevail nothing with them, but
rather they contradicted and blasphemed. He forsook them and their Society, and
turned to the Gentiles, Act. 13.45, 46. and doubtless, went into their
Synagogues no more on the Seventh day. In other Places he did go into the Jews
Synagogues after this, on the Seventh day, as long as he had any hope of
succeeding in his Preaching the Lord Christ to them; but when he saw that they
were generally hardened, and took Advantage to speak Evil of the Lord Christ,
and his Doctrine before others, (the Gentiles) he turned away quite from them,
and forsook their Synagogue; and made the School of a Heathenish Philosopher,
one Tyrannus, the common Meeting Place of his Auditors, Act. 19.8, 9. and so
questionless, altered the Time and Day, as well as the Place of his Preaching,
and the Meeting of his Auditors: For after this, throughout all the remaining
Book of the Acts, throughout the remaining part of this Chapter, and all the
other Nine, you find not the least Mention of Paul's Preaching or Praying, or
Associating with any others upon the Seventh day; neither could this Author
produce, because he could not find any such Passage after this Eighth Verse of
this Nineteenth Chapter: Wherefore that Word of Mr. B. Page 45. Line 15.
Continually, might well be omitted; for he did not continually go into the Jews
Synogogue, on the Seventh day, but ceased from it, when his great Design
thereof was frustrated; and never is said more to do it, after this time: No,
not at Rome, where he lived Two whole Years in a hired House of his own, and
might have appointed what day he would for the Collection of his Disciples and
Hearers. Is he ever said to have called them together on the Seventh day? which
I assert to be a clear Proof that he never did it before out of any Regard to
that day, as more holy than other: And therefore this Discourse of Two or Three
Pages, and the particular Remarks which he makes upon this Practice of St.
Paul, in some few of the Chapters of the Acts, and the great Advantages he
thinks he has for the Seventh day from them, are dwindled and vanished into
nothing. If he would have gotten any thing for his Cause, from this Practice of
St. Paul, he should have shown these, or such like Particulars.

1. That St. Paul called his Auditors together upon that day; which he cannot
do, for the Jews assembled themselves thereon. 2. That he associated himself
with the Gentiles, and made their Religious Assemblies upon that day; but this
he never reads. 3. That he did this perseveringly, even when he turned from the
Jews; but this he can never show, and therefore all this show is but a show.
Besides, we know St. Paul preached wherever and whenever he found a
convenient Auditory, in the School of Tyrannus, Acts 19.9. in the Marketplace,
Acts 17.17. on Mars-hill, v. 22. at the High Priests Bar, and before Festus and
Agrippa; and as he made no distinction of places, so none of days, as to the
preaching of the Gospel (though as to the Churches solemn stated Worship he
did, though not the Seventh day) and so these days and times have as much to
plead for their Sanctity from the Apostles preaching on them, as the Seventh
has. But I suppose I have said enough of this, to satisfy any unprejudiced
considering Person.

Page 46. To his Question we grant, that the Holy Scriptures do call no other
day of the Week a Sabbath but the Seventh (though Dr. Lightfoot shows, that one
day of the Year is called a Sabbath day, whenever it falls out upon any other
day of the Week, viz. Pentecost) and do not begrudge him all the Advantage he
can take from hence. Thus (I hope) by Gods Assistance and Guidance, I have ran
through all this Author's Arguments for his Sabbatarian Opinion, and if I
deceive not my self, have proved them to be very weak and ineffectual, as to
the Edifying and Establishment of it: And now I must proceed to try his Skill
in plucking down, and to see if he be more Dextrous and Successful in defeating
our Arguments against the Seventh day, and for the Sanctification of the First
day (which from henceforth I will take liberty to call the Lords day) which he
judges to be most weak and empty, even the Conjectural Mistakes of the meaning
of some Passages in Scripture; let us see whether he can prove them to be such.

SECT. XII.
THe first Objection against the Seventh day, and Argument for the Lords day,
is Page 47. from the Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ upon that day, etc.
Against which he has nothing directly and particularly, but only hints the
Differences of Opinions about the changing of the day; but all (save one) do
agree, that it is changed, and reason would judge, that their universal
concurrent Suffrages, should weigh more for its Mutation, than their
Differences about the Circumstances thereof, should against the Change of it.
He answers, there is no express Alteration of the Seventh into the
First-day-Sabbath: And he expresses his meaning to be, not by any express
Precept; but we say there are other ways of Abrogating and Establishing things
in Scripture, than by express Prohibitions, or positive Injunctions; even by
genuine Consequences from Doctrins, from Examples of those that are proposed to
our Imitation, etc. And that the Sanctification of the Seventh day is as much
abrogated in the Gospel, and the Lords day established in its stead, as any of
the Ceremonies of the Old Administration are. And I think we may challenge him
to produce any one express Command for the Abolishing of any one of the Jewish
Ceremonies, or of all of them conjunctly; which because we cannot find,
consequently we must still look upon them to be in force, and keep them alive
in the Christian Churches, and these days of Reformation. I do verily believe,
if my Judgment were swayed with such Arguments against the Lords day, and for
the Seventh, they would lead me back to all the Jewish Religious Worship,
because they were all as really commanded by the Second Command (even all
instituted Worship) as the Seventh day is by the Fourth, both which are in
themselves positive, though referred to, and virtually contained in the Moral
Commands; yet he acknowledges the Abolition of these without an express
Command, and why not of this? Let him bring his Arguments from Scripture for
the Abrogation of any of them, and I do verily believe we shall be able to use
the very same for the Exclusion of the Seventh day. I know not any one
particular Rite of the Old Testament, more particularly spoken of in the New
Testament by the Apostle toward its Exclusion from the Christian Church, than
Circumcision; yet there is no express Command against it that I know of: And I
assert, that let him bring what Argument he can from these Epistles against it,
I will produce the same against the Seventh-day Sabbath, and so they must
either stand or fall upon the same Ground, and so must the other Ceremonies
that are not so much as mentioned in the Books of the New Testament. Again,
here he recurs to the Danger and Presumption of Indulging to Conjectures and
Humane Fancies in the things of God, without any warrant from Scripture, or
against the Commands thereof, under a pretense of honoring God and Christ
thereby, and unworthily applies all this to the Assertors of the Lord's Day. But
to this we have answered already, and doubt not but to be as Innocent in this
Respect as himself; and this is the sum of all his answer to this Argument for
the First-day-Sabbath. But we must not so leave it, but speak what (I hope) God
will direct to the Vindication of it: And here we must know, that this Argument
is not the solitary Proof that we bring for the Lords-day's Holy Observation;
for then it might seem to carry no great weight with it. But,

First, We undertake to prove an Abolition of the Seventh day from the Word,
and then propose the First day, as bidding fairest of all the other Weekdays
for it; because we acknowledge one day of the Seven to be the substance of the
Fourth Commandment, and to be positively and secondarily Moral in it; and that
therefore there lies still an Obligation upon all the Churches unto the end of
the World, to keep one day in seven Holy unto the Lord (at least all who may
have the Commands entirely conveyed to them, and duly taught them, for there
may be a case of Exemption in this particular, as we may see in the progress)
and we say the Seventh day being cashiered, the first day ought to be its
successor; and that because of the glorious Privileges of this day above all
others of the Week; whereof this of our Lords Resurrection from the Dead is
chief, because this was the day of God the Redeemer's entering into his Rest.
And our Argument for the Lords day is both a Pari and a Majori; from Equality
and Eminence; Equality with, and Eminency to, the Rest of God the Creator upon
the Seventh day; for as the Creators having finished the Sixth days work and
rested the Seventh, was made a positive Motive for the Observance of that day
for a religious Rest, during all the time that Jehovah rested from no other
more eminent work of his: So we say in like manner, the Rest of God the
Redeemer from that his greater work of Redemption on the first day, may be as
good a Motive for the Consecrating thereof to a religious Rest; for here we
suppose the Seventh day excluded: Yea we argue a fortiori, and say it may much
more upon this account challenges its Holy Observation. Because,

1. The Rest of Jehovah after the works of the Creation, was no proper Rest (as
has been proved) but now his Rest after the work of Redemption, was a real and
proper one, from the Labors, Sufferings and Humiliation of his humane Nature.
2. The Work of Creation cost God but six words of his Mouth; but the work of
Redemption cost him his Incarnation, and in his Manhood, his mean and
contemptible Birth, his poor, obscure, laborious Life, for thirty Years
together in his reputed Fathers House, and probably at his Trade too; and after
that his itinerant, wearisom, tempted, reproached, persecuted and sad Life, for
3 or 4 Years before his Sufferings, and his complete, voluntary and sinless
Obedience to his Fathers Will, all his days; and his fearful Sufferings, and
most dreadful, shameful, painful, lingering and accursed Death. 3. By the work
of Creation God brought all things out of nothing, and so could not possibly
meet with any opposition thereto; but in the work of our Redemption he waded
through and overcame all Opposition, all the Temptations of Men and Devils; all
the Rage and Malice, the Revilings, horrible Reproaches, false Accusations,
unjust Condemnations of Men; all the Rage, Fury and Cruelty, of Earth and Hell,
of Men and Devils: Yea, all the Wrath and Vengeance of his Father (which was
infinitely worse than all the former) and at last Death and the Grave. 4. By
the Creation God brought our Nature out of nothing; but by Redemption, from
Satan, from Sin, from Death, from Hell, from the Wrath of God, and from the
Grave. 5. By the Creation God made us perfectly Holy and Happy; planted
Paradise for us; gave us an Immortality, and Abilities, and Inclinations, and
infinite Obligations, so to remain for ever; but not the effectual Grace (for
we speedily fell) and an animal Life (for we were to eat and drink and sleep in
Innocence, to recruit the Decays of Nature) but by Redemption God brings us
again into a perfect and more glorious State of Holiness and Happiness, conveys
us into the third Heaven, gives us an eternal Security there, and makes us like
the Angels for ever and ever; and doubtless our Condition in the third Heaven,
where Redemption conveys and lodges us, will be as far more Noble, Glorious,
Blessed and Happy, than our Condition in Paradise, where Creation made and
stated us, as that is in Situation above this. 6. God glorified his Power,
Wisdom and Goodness in the work of Creation; but much more all these in the
work of Redemption (as might easily be displayed to the Reader) and withal,
his Pity, his Grace, his Justice, his Holiness, his Truth, his Jealousy for
his own Glory; more of Gods Glory shining forth in one Line of the Redeemers
Face, than in all the Creation both visible and invisible. Wherefore seeing
this work of Redemption does so unconceivably surpass that of Creation, both as
to Excellency, as wrought out by God; and as to its Vtility to us, as wrought
out for us; we say (with Reverence and without Offense) that the first day has
more to show upon this account for its Holy Separation from, and Exaltation
above, the rest of the Weekdays, than ever the Seventh had, or can pretend
unto: And we say withal, that it is very Congruous, that God the Redeemer
should have one day of the Week consecrated to his Rest for 2000 Years in the
latter days of the World; as well as God the Creator have a day throughout 4000
Years consecrated to his Rest: Especially seeing that the Honor and Glory of
the Redeemer herein, is the Glory and Honor of God the Creator, for both are
the same Jehovah; whereas the Glory of the Creator herein, is not the Glory of
the Redeemer; for the Redeemer was not when the Creation was produced, neither
should ever have been, had the Creation stood in that Estate wherein God
created it, and rested in his works: So that it is clear from hence, that it is
not a Pretense to honor the Lord Christ, that is pleaded for the first day;
but it is really an Honor, a great Honor to the Redeemer, that it should be
dedicated to a holy Commemoration of his Rest. That the First-day-Sabbath has
the same Argument and Motive in this particular that the Seventh has, even
God's Resting from his work; and herein a stronger, as far as the Glory and
Profit of Redemption, excels that of Creation. I have been somewhat long here,
and the Subject is very Glorious, Delightful and Profitable; and the Argument,
with others, weighty and convincing, and ought not to be slightly passed over,
how little soever is said against it; the Author seeming to fancy he could blow
it out of door with a puff.

SECT. XIII.
HE proposes Page 49. our Argument from our Savior's appearing to his
Disciples on the first day of the Week, for its being the day of Christian and
solemn Worship from John 20. to 26. To which he answers, all this amounts not
to an Institution, but with other Arguments, it bids fairly for it, and shows
the Honor our Savior put upon this day beyond all others. As to his other,
it is replied, that it is probable, that first day spoken of in v. 19. here, may
be the same with that spoken of Luke 24.13, etc. and it is probable it is not so,
for our Lord appeared to his Disciples on several Lord-days. But fairly to
grant what he cannot get: Suppose it were so, could the two Disciples,
traveling to Emaus, and our Savior's coming to them, walking and conversing
with them, any way disparage this day, or weaken this Argument? Not at all. For
1. These Disciples were yet Unbelievers of Christ's Resurrection, and so could
have no thoughts of keeping a First-day-Sabbath to the Commemoration thereof.
2. Their Journey to Emaus might be but a Sabbath Days Journey; It might be for
religious Ends, and we know many among us do go and ride, or have gone or rid,
several Miles to hear Sermons and receive Sacraments; and yet not be adjudged
as Profaners of the Lords day: And our Lord, by several Discourses of his
about, and Actions of his upon, the Sabbath, might well take them off from too
scrupulous and nice Observation of the Lords day. 3. The Journey seems not to
be so great, nor the distance between Emaus and Jerusalem so many Miles, as
Geographers relate: And therefore Beza says (as Mr. Warren informs me) that
they were mistaken: And there seems a great probability thereof, because it is
said, Luke 24.33. That they rose up the same hour, and went to Jerusalem; and
came to the Congregation of the Eleven, and the other Disciples, before ever
they were dismissed: And therefore it is very improbable that it should be seven
Miles and a half from that City, and much more probable that it was but a
Sabbath Days Journey. 4. Our Savior being risen and entered into his Glory (at
least the first degree thereof) was now no longer subject to Sabbath
Observance, neither could he be a Profaner thereof, whatever he did thereon:
And beside, having a glorified Body, he might be with them in an instant upon
the way, and so in a very small particle of time return to Jerusalem; and all
his Discourse to them was most proper for the Holy Sabbath; opening to them the
Scriptures, reproving them for their Unbelief, and making their Hearts to burn
within them: So that our Savior's Discourses and walking with them, do rather
serve to confirm the First-days-Sabbath; and their going to Emaus no way to
infringe it.

As to that which is produced, Page 50. from John 20.26. he replies, that they
might not be gathered together for religious Worship: For what else then? For
fear of the Jews. A very probable Conjecture indeed! For if it had been only
for fear, it had been safer to have been divided, and every one have hid and
concealed himself in some Friends House, or unsuspected and safe place or
other. But to be all assembled together in a suspected House (for the Text
plainly hints, that was either in a Disciples House, or some other usual
meeting place) would be rather to expose themselves; and to do this without any
design of religious Worship, would argue them very indiscreet: But now 'twas
their duty to meet together to worship God, though with hazard; and this they
did, and shut the doors upon them, that they might not be disturbed by the
Jews. His denial of this second Appearing to be on the Lords day, is taken from
a Criticism about a Greek Preposition, which we translate after: Now all that
know any thing of that Language, know that their Prepositions are very
Polysemous, and admit of diverse Interpretations, or include many of ours; and
that two joined to one Case of the following Noun, as this Meta does; for it
might be rendered before the Accusative, in, within, as well as after; and it
might have been so translated here, but they would render it by after; well
knowing that even so rendered, it would no way alter the Sense of the Holy
Ghost; but according to Scripture Phrase, still intend the first day of the
week following, according to the Expression in Mark 8.31. After three days the
Son of Man shall rise again: Three days after he was killed he should rise
again; for so the Text says expressly, where the meaning must needs be upon the
third day; and the English Translation of Queen Elizabeth render this place,
within three days he shall rise again And thought it well rendered according to
the purport of Meta; which the Critics tell us is usually written and spoken
by the Grecians in the meaning of in or upon: Other Translation render Meta by
an Adverb, and not by a Preposition; as afterward in three days; and so in
John, afterward in eight days; in which eight days are comprised the first
Lords day and the second, as completing the number; and so this second meeting
of Christ, and his Disciples, was on the first day, as his Circumcision was on
the eighth day, which the Scripture expresses by another such like Phrase as
this, When eight days were accomplished for the Circumcision of the Child, Luke
2.21. As for his Evasion of that passage in Mark, by telling us the same
Expositors think, that Mark reckons the time from his first being betrayed and
apprehended. This no way helps him, for suppose he do so, yet his after must
signify upon, or on the third day, for it is clear that he was betrayed in the
Evening late of the sixth day; for St. John tells us, chap. 18.3. that they
came with Lanthorns and Torches to take him; and it is very probable, that that
young Man who followed him with only a Linen Cloth upon his Body, as he was
immediately upon his Apprehension led to the High Priests Palace, Mark 14.51.
was one startled out of his Sleep and Bed by the rude Violence of the
Soldiers, haling him through the Streets: Therefore this must be the former
part of the sixth day; in the latter part whereof he was Crucified, and laid in
the Grave, in which he continued throughout the seventh, and out of which he
rose very early in the Morning of the first day: And so it could not be after,
as he would fain have it, but upon the third day: And therefore without any
danger of shaking the third days Resurrection, our Expositors, according to the
use of Scripture, do thus interpret this Passage, and this Preposition: (See
another express place for this, where, after three days, is said to be upon the
third day, 2 Chronicles. 3.5, 12.) And because it was our Savior's use to appear to
them upon that day, even the first day: It Is strange that he should herein go
against all the Critics of that Language, and against all the Sense of all the
Expositors that I can see, to serve his own Hypothesis. It Is without doubt,
that it was not upon the Seventh day that our Lord did now appear to his
Disciples; unless we will understand it thus, after four or five days, after
the eighth day he appeared to them: And thus he slily evades this other
Argument for the Lords days Observance, even his Appearance to his Disciples,
when gathered together for religious Worship, which as I have showed formerly,
was not once only, but several times after his Resurrection: And it is the only
day of the Week which is named by all the four Evangelists, upon which our
Savior appeared to them, and graciously discoursed with them; no other day so
much as mentioned, nor the Seventh so much as hinted, to be the day of his
Personal Manifestation of himself unto them; which is another high Honor and
Prerogative our Lord, and the King of the Church, has bestowed upon this first
day of the Week, and seems to be a practical and exemplary laying aside of the
Seventh day from being the weekly Sabbath Day, and substituting the first day
to be that day consecrated to the public and solemn Worship of God; and an
Assurance that he will be in the midst of his People assembling themselves upon
this his day; and will come and Bless them; which has been, and is, according
to the Experiences of his People in their religious Devotions and public
Congregations, for there have they met, and do they still meet him, in those
his Galleries: Then he brings them into his Wine-Cellar, and his Banner over
them is Love: Then he gives them the ravishing Kisses of his Mouth: Then they
behold his Beauty in his Sanctuary, apprehend his Glory, Experience his
gracious Power in and upon their Souls: Then they are abundantly satisfied with
the Fatness of his House, and drink delicious Draughts of the Rivers of
Spiritual Pleasures that flow therein: Then they experience that that first day
of the Week in Gods House, is inconceivably better to them, than all the days
of the Week any where else, or about any other Employment whatever. Wherefore
we have just cause to hope, that our People will not, and persuade them that
they do not, neglect the Sanctification of the first day of the week, and their
Assembling themselves together on that Holy day. Seeing herein they follow the
Examples of the Apostles themselves, and the other Christians in their days;
and experience the Gracious Spiritual Presence of our Lord in the midst of them
(as they did both his Carnal and Spiritual Presence then) and turn aside after
the novel and singular Opinion of this Author, being also poorly grounded, as
we have seen.

He proceeds Page 51. against that which some bring from John 8.56. Abraham saw
my day, etc. as the day of Christ's Resurrection; and so the First day of the
Week: He says some would have it meant of his Birthday, for the Observance of
Christmas; others all the days of his Flesh; and the things which he did speak
and suffered, and our Redemption thereby, which I think to be a true Notion:
But then to be sure he must foresee his Resurrection, and so a day thereof; and
this was the great Cause of his Joy and Gladness: Because without this, there
could be no cause of Gladness in all the rest. For his Birth, Life and Death,
could have brought no Glory to him, if he had still layen in the Grave; nor
Good, nor Profit to us, if he had not rose out of it; but he would have been
conquered by his Enemies, and we forever undone. But now his Resurrection is
for his own greatest Glory, his Enemies Confusion, and our Comfort and Triumph:
This was properly our Lords day. He calls the day and time of his Sufferings,
Luke 22.53. the hour of his Enemies, and the power of Darkness: Because then
they insulted over him, and he was delivered into their Hands. But the time of
his Resurrection was his own day; because he therein Triumphed over all his
Enemies, and had perfectly vanquished them; and therefore this day must chiefly
be intended by Abraham; because 'twas the chief day of his, and all Believers
Joy and Gladness: Though Mr. B. does not so much as once mention it in all
those Particulars he reckons up, under this Head.

Moreover, Page 52.53. he mentions those Texts, Psalm. 118.22, 24. and Heb. 4.1,
11. where the day the Psalmist speaks of, which God has made, some do
interpret of the Resurrection-day; and that therefore upon that day of the
Week, Christians or the Churches, should go into the Houses of Worship; and
there praise the Lord, and adore him: And Psalm. 2.7. where the day of God's
begetting his Son, is interpreted the day of Resurrection: And there is very
good reason, nay, there is Divine Authority for it; for it is applied and
appropiated to that very day, Act. 13.33. So that the Text in the Hebrews,
which speaks of a Sabbath, besides the Seventh day from the Creation; and that
Sabbath or Rest, which Jehovah brought Israel into, in the Land of Canaan;
(which was to succeed, and as it were, to antiquate, and exclude the others) is
by good and excellent Authors, understood of the Lords day; the Sabbath of the
First day. Who bring many excellent Arguments, for this their Interpretation
and Opinion: Which Mr. B. should have Produced, Answered and Invalidated; and
not put them off only by a bare Denial, or Calling them Shifts and Wind-laces:
As though his only Rejection of these Passages, were enough to Counterballance
all the Arguments, and rational and scriptural Discourses, which many good
Scholars, Divines and Holy Men do draw from them, and give us upon them: And
therefore seeing he says nothing to Confute what they have said, and I desire
to study Brevity, I shall speak nothing more here, but only refer the Reader to
these Orthodox Authors themselves; and Particularly to Mr. Warren, in whom he
shall find very good Improvement of these Passages for the Lords day.

Page 54. He mentions Act. 20.7. as an Objection against the Authority of the
Seventh day, and for that of the First; and well he may: For it is an eminent
one, and such an one as he will find very difficult to answer; but yet we must
expect the utmost of his Efforts to do it: I shall track his Endeavors. 1. He
says we guess that he First day of the Week, was that day we call Sunday; as
though this were but a bare Guess: (as a Blind Man shoots the Mark, or catches
the Hare; as the other Three Guesses, he says we make in the very next
Paragraph.) But yet it is such a Guess as he will not controvert; and we think
it is because he cannot gainsay it: But yet this great Condescension to us,
must be with a Grant from us to him, that St. Paul was a Keeper of the Seventh
day, and an Observer of it as a Sabbath; and so for his granting us what he
cannot deny, we must grant him what he can never prove; Yea, what we have
denied and still do, viz. that Paul was a Keeper of the Old Sabbath Day. We
grant indeed (as before) that he Preached on that day usually to the Jews in
their Synagogues, because he could have no other such convenient Time and Place
for it: But that he kept that Sabbath, we utterly deny. For then he would have
done it among the Gentiles, as well as among the Jews; which yet we never read
he did: Or if he says he did, let him prove it; which we are sure from
Scripture, he can never do: Nor after the former Chapter, that ever he did go
so much as to the Jewish Synagogue (for this is all the Proof of his keeping
it) upon the Seventh day. But here we find that the Disciples came together uon
the First day, and Paul came to them, and associated with them in Religious
Duties: And why is the First day now named, and the Seventh never after, as the
Solemn, Dedicated Day to their Worship; but because it was never so from that
time? But yet this is not all the Condition upon which he will be so
exceedingly kind to us, as to grant the First day of the Week, to be Sunday or
our Lords day; but it must be bought with another Information, even on what
part of the Sunday 'twas that this Assembly was, and St. Paul's associating in
them; which he takes for granted, (and I am sure does but guess that his
Opponents do) that 'twas in the Evening after the Seventh day: Which he takes
for the beginning of the First day, and so Paul Preached till the Midnight; and
brake Bread, and discoursed only till the Light of the First day; but performed
no Religious Duty upon the Morning of that day at all; but as soon as ever the
first Daylight began to dawn, he betook himself to what was Profane, and
Traveled. Which I think is a begging of the Question; and in a scriptural
Sense, is to say, that he performed no Religious Duties at all thereon; for
'twas the Light that God called day, and the dakness he called night, Genesis 1.5
and so to contradict the express words of the Text. Besides, I would fain know
of him which is the chiefest part of a natural Day, either the dark part of it,
which we with Scripture call Night, or the light part of it, which with it we
call Day: If the light part (as I think an unprejudiced Mind will grant) why
should he suppose that all the Religious Duties of that Day, should be done in
the Dark thereof; and not in the Light?

Again, we think that the Lords day did not begin at Even, but rather in the
Morning, when our Lord rose out of the Grave; that being the great occasion of
its Sanctification to sacred Duties, and its being employed therein by those
Disciples and Paul. And for this we have express Scripture, (I mean for the
First day of the Weeks beginning in the Morning) as Mat. 28.1. in the end of
the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the First day of the Week; where the
Scripture determines the Sabbath to end with the Darkness of the Night, before
the First Day Morning; and the Lords day to begin at the dawning of the Morning
of the First day: So far is it from Truth, that the Evening and Night before
the Morning of it, were part of that day; (at least in this Scripture Phrase)
and hence we say that Paul began to Preach to them in the light part of that
Day, as the beginning thereof; and continued with them till the following
Midnight. Yea, throughout that Night, and so the next Morning being the Second
day, on Monday took his Journey, as a proper day for it: And now we have another
of our Guesses, which is, that the breaking of bread here spoken of, was the
Lords Supper; and we would fain know what other breaking of Bread should be
meant. Can it be imagined that all the Disciples should come together to Feast
it with Paul, and that too in the Night-season, as he would fain have it? They
had Houses of their own to Eat and Drink in, and they would doubtless rather
choose to receive the Consecrated Bread from the Apostle, that day being the
last he was to tarry with them; having as it is probable, no other Apostle, or
Evangelist, or Pastor with them at that time; than to eat common Bread, which
they could do when they pleased in his Absence: And the Sacrament is more
suitable to the Society of Disciples as such, to the Preaching of the Word of
God by the Apostle, than the feeding their Bodies. Wherefore we say, that
seeing it is clearly here implied, that the Disciples gathered themselves
together uon this day, as upon the usual time, and the Apostle ministerially
served them then; it is very probable, (and more than a bare Guess) that this
day was the usual day; and so to be the future day of their Solemn and
Religious Devotions, Dedicated thereunto. As to what follows in the other
Paragraph about Preaching and Reasoning, we may with good reason pass it over,
seeing we can see in it but little to the present Case.

Next by way of Concession, he tells us that though this were a Religious
Assembly, and the breaking of Bread was the Lords Supper, yet then all this is
but once. But this is such an once, as leaves the Seventh day for ever out of
mention from being the day of Association: Such an once, as clearly seems to
imply the Custom of the Disciples, to be their Convention on the First day:
Such an once, as the Holy Ghost is pleased here, so particularly to mention,
after he had showed us before, that 'twas the usual day of the Disciples
Religious Association, and our Saviors personal Presence with them, and his
gracious Discourse to them: Such an once, indeed now, (as no Meeting can be but
once at a time) as with the former, makes more than once; and such an once, as
with what has been said, and what may be said, will be of force enough not to
repeal a Law, or the Fourth Command, but only to alter a Circumstance and
Motive therein; the whole Substance thereof continuing in its full Vigor and
Authority. Once he says, occasioned by Paul's being to depart to Morrow. Which
very Circumstance, seems to me to be of some Moment against the Seventh, or for
the First day. For we may well suppose, that St. Paul had determined some days
before the very day of his Departure; and therefore seeing he intended the
Second day of the Week to be it, he might with much more Convenience have Met
and Preached, and Administered the Lords Supper to the Disciples on the Seventh
day: If that had been now the Consecrated day of the Week, and so have had more
Time and Leisure with them for his Work, and not have so straightened himself, or
incommoded them throughout a whole Night: But becaust the Lords day was the
sacred day of the Week to be observed and kept, therefore he would defer it
till then; though to his own and their greater Inconvenience. Here we have a
Conjecture somewhat strange, viz. that the Apostle kept the Seventh day at
Troas. What, was it alone by himself, and without any other with him? as a
private Person, and not as an Apostle? and then would keep the First day of the
Week as an Apostle, and with the Assembly of Believers? Doubtless St. Paul was
no such Dissembler on one hand, nor Supersticious Bigot on the other; to
observe Two Sabbaths in the Week, one by himself, and another with the Church;
when God commands but one only. But he seems to do all he can to turn the First
day into the Seventh, and to persuade us that the Assembly of the Disciples,
was begun on the last day of the Week; and continued some time of the First:
Whereas the Text expressly tells us, they came together on the First day, and so
continued together the First day, till its Conclusion in the Second days
Morning. Here he takes no notice at all, or to no purpose, that the Holy Ghost
tells us expressly, that Paul abode Seven days at Troas; of which one must
necessarily be the last day, the Seventh day in order of the Week: And yet
never tells us that the Disciples met on that day, or Paul with them; but only
on the First day. And why should this be (if for any reason) but to show us
that the Lords day was the day of their Religious Conventions; and the Seventh
day antiquated and no more to be mentioned, and observed among Christians as
such a day? What follows has been (if I mistake not) satisfactorily answered
already.

It Is well he recedes from and stands not much upon the Greek word (...) to be
interpeted one, for he knows that in both the Sacred Languages, the Numerical
word is frequently used for the Ordinal; and if we should render this word here
one, it would make the Language of the Scripture very Impertinent and
Uncertain: It would be Impertinent and Superfluous, because if it were upon any
day, it must be upon one day of the Week, for there is no day that is not one
of the Week; and what need the Holy Ghost to tell us that was, which we are
sure could not but be. And it would be uncertain and dubious, for according to
this meaning we could never know what day of the Week this religious
Congregation met, whether on the first, or second, or third, or fourth, etc.
and the Expression seems to hint, that the Holy Ghost would acquaint us with
the particular day thereof. But such an uncertain Translation would greatly
befriend this Author, for then he might more confidently suppose it to be the
Seventh day. Seeing that now when the Spirit clearly asserts it was upon the
First day, he does persuade himself, and would persuade us, that it was upon
the Seventh. What follows after, being Conjectures and Consequences drawn from
his former weak Premises, I shall say nothing more to them.

SECT. XIV.
HE next proposes, Page 58. the Objection against his Sabbath, and Argument for
our Lords day, which is in 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. which is taken (as we say) from the
Collections for the Poor made in the public Congregations on the first day of
the Week, and does what he can to enervate it: Let us see how successfully.

1. He tells us he knows not what the order to the Church of Galatia was: But
St. Paul tells him plainly, that in this particular it was to collect Money for
the Poor on the Lord's Day. 2. That he does not find written, that this order to
that Church should oblige all others. The like may be said of all the other
Orders and Directions given in Scripture, to all particular Churches therein
mentioned and written to: For it is not there said, that they are intended for
all other Churches to the end of the World: Yet I hope he looks upon the
Doctrins taught them, the Ordinance and Discipline established amongst them, to
be Obligatory upon the Churches now. And we may well suppose, the Apostles
being inspired by the Holy Ghost in these Matters, in all their Constitutions
of their prime Primitive Churches, to lay the Platform for all succeeding ones;
except there may be some particular Circumstance which may necessitate or allow
a Deviation therefrom; which in this matter of Collection cannot well be
pretended. 3. That it was a general order for a charitable Seposition, but no
order to observe the first day: True indeed, but it does imply the Observance
of that day, else why should it be enjoined on that day more than on another,
but because thereon public Assemblies met? 4. It Is an Order, he tells us, for
a profane Employment, as to cast up their Accounts on that day, and to tell
their Money they have got, and to reckon up how much their Stock is increased;
for he here supposes a Man must on this day look over all his Stock, cast up
all his Charges, etc. But certainly this is a pretty far fetched Invention, for
they are commanded only to lay up by them on the Lord's Day, what God had
graciously enabled them to give to the Poor, by his Success on their Labors,
and his providential Blessing on them, as to Earthly things; which they might
very well enquire into the day before, even the Seventh; and having then
discovered how God had succeeded them, the next day, even the Lord's Day, to
separate that charitable Portion from the rest, and carry it unto the public
Assembly, and so cast it into the Poors Box. And I think it is clear, that the
Text necessarily implies a former Inquisition into their Stock, before this
Seposition; but where it implies it must be done on that day, no Man can see.
Wherefore we say, that a former Examination being had of these Matters, this
day that consecrated part was taken, carried to the Congregation, and put into
the common Stock; that so the Apostle, when he came amongst them, might not be
forced to go from House to House to gather, but find it all ready in the
public Ecclesiastical Treasure. I am sure he can bring no Demonstration from
the Text for his, or against my Interpretation: But then I have the Testimony
of the most ancient Fathers, that on the first day they publicly assembled;
and then they made Collection for the Poor in these Assemblies. Moreover, If
the Apostle here enjoined such a profane or worldly Task as he supposes; why
does he enjoin them to do it on the First days, seeing it might have been done
as well n every day of the Week, and better on the Sixth day? If the Seventh
were then their Sabbath, that so they might know, at the end of the common
days, what they might well and gratefully spare of that weeks Gains, and so lay
it up against the ensuing Sabbath for the Poors Stock. Whence we see that this
supposed Solution to this Argument, has no ground at all from the Text, and to
be sure from no other Topic: And therefore conclude, that the General
Collections, and so Associations of the Galatian Church, being on the First
day; And the Appostle commanding the Church of Corinth to make the same
Collections on that day in Imitation of them, or as they did; is, with the
former, a very good Evidence, that that day was the instituted day for Worship,
and so consequently the Seventh excluded.

Page 60. That Proof for the First-day-Sabbath in Rev. 1.9, 10. where that day
which St. John calls the Lord's Day, we say was that day of the week, which we
will by no means grant; but tells us what the Opinions of some singular Persons
were concerning it; that it was Annual, not a weekly day; either the day of
Christ's Birth, or of his Resurrection; either Christmas Day or Easter: Others
say it is a great providential day to vindicate his Kingly Authority; and
others, the last day of his coming; but how this day, whereon St. John was in
the Spirit, should be a future day, can hardly be conjectured; but every thing
must be hinted, that may seem to serve to an Undermining of the First day of
the week from being the day of this glorious Vision. But at length it is
granted, that some take this Lord's Day to be a weekly day: But then again these
some are crumbled into a Sub-division, and some of them assert it to be the
First day, and some the Seventh day thereof; and this is written, as though the
Assertors of the First day were as small a some, as those of the former annual
Opinion, of a future day to John's Vision, and of the last day of the Week:
Whereas I dare to say, put them all together, they will not amount to the
hundredth part of those solid and learned Authors, which understand it of the
First day of the week; but withal these some for the Seventh day, as
inconsiderable for number as they are, in comparison of the other, yet they are
far better founded, and proceed upon more certain and undeniable Grounds than
the First-day-Men do; for they proceed upon Scripture, but these have only
Tradition, if they have that for their Opinion. Now the Tradition which is
pleaded for the First day to be the Lord's Day, is constant, uninterrupted, and
universal, from the days of the Apostles: The Generality of Christians
acknowledging the Dominical day to be the First day, whatever Opinion they had
of the Sabbath; till of late Years, some Sabbatarians have thought fit to
question it, and virtually (if not expressly) to deny it. Which is such a
Tradition, as upon which their very Scriptural Proofs are grounded; for it is
from Tradition that they know the meaning of the very words of the Scripture.
Whether the Original Languages carry the Sense they are interpreted in; and
whether we have the genuine and proper Significations of the Originals, can be
known by nothing but Humane Tradition; for either it must be had from
Translations, or Lexicons, or oral Traditions: Wherefore if the Sabbatarians
will renounce here such a Tradition as is pleaded; they must withal renounce
their own Scriptural Authority, which course will make wild work in the Church.

He very well denies it to be Christmas Day, or any annual one; but the great
Query is, What day of the Week this was; and here in the entrance of his
Discourse, he endeavors to invalidate the universal Tradition of the Churches
for 1600 Years, by an Induction of other unlawful Traditions; as that of
Polygamy among the Patriarchs; of whom the Scripture mentions but a few
particulars; and what is that to the Universality of Christians? And which was
condemned by our Savior as alien from the first Institution of Marriage: And
how does this resemble the First days being the Lord's Day, which was never
blamed by him? The like he mentions in the Omission of the Feast of Booths; and
the Custom of the Profanation of the Seventh-days-Sabbath before the Captivity:
But these were against express Injunctions and Commands, still in force and
obliging; which we deny the Seventh-day Sabbath to be; and avouch, and may yet
more prove its Abolition, as of other positive and ceremonial Commands, without
any express or literal Prohibition of them in Scripture. What therefore he
says, in the following Paragraph, would be very cogent and undeniable; If he
could prove the Seventh day of the week to be still enjoined by the Fourth
Command, which he has not yet done by his positive Proofs for his own Opinion,
(as we have seen) nor by his Negative, in denying of ours, (as has been in some
measure seen already, and may be more hereafter.) At length he comes to give us
his own Judgment concerning this Lord's Day, what day of the Week it was; and if
he had not told us, we should have presumed that it determined for the
Seventh-day, (which in all things till the end of the World must have the
Pre-eminence according to his thoughts) but withal it is grounded upon
Scripture, which we will heartily and fairly weigh and examine. 1. That the
Lord Christ instituted the Seventh-day Sabbath just after the Creation, he
means too before the Fall, quoting Genesis 1. begin. which we utterly deny,
because Jesus Christ then was not, nor could be, (we speak of his Existence,
not Gods Foresight and Decree) for then Man was Guiltless and Sinless, and so
needed no Jesus, nor could have had one: But in all these Old Testament Proofs
he runs upon that former Fallacy of Ill Composition; taking for granted that
whatever Jehovah did, the Lord Jesus Christ did. Jehovah, the Godhead of our
Savior, did create and institute the Seventh-day Sabbath, but not Christ
himself; which necessarily includes both the Godhead and the Manhood: And
therefore the Premises being false, the Conclusion cannot be true; nor the
consequential Discourse thereupon of any Moment. His second and third Arguments
laboring under the same Mistake, admit of the same Answer: Besides, we know
that the positive and ceremonial Precepts of Jehovah before his Incarnation,
were to be abolished by himself after his Incarnation, that is, by our Lord
Jesus; and others more Easy, Clear and Effectual, introduced in their room,
(whereof we assert the Seventh-day Sabbath to be, which he can never prove to
be Moral, and so was to be excluded with them) and a new Time, as well as new
Rites, instituted by the King of the Church.

His next Argument to prove his Assertion, is from those Passages, wherein it is
said, The Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath Day, Matt. 12.8. Mark 2.28.
Luke 6.5. A Proof which we make use of to prove our Doctrine of the
First-day-Sabbath, and he thinks makes clearly and strongly for his. Though
there may be some ground for the Opinion of ordinary Men, being meant by the
Son of Man in these Texts; because it is the Appellation which the Holy Ghost
usually gives them, calling them Sons of Men; and when he speaks to Ezekiel
particularly, his usual Expression is Son of Man: And St. Mark relating the
same History, of the Disciples gathering Ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day; and
the Pharisees being scandalized thereat, and complaining to our Lord Christ
that they did that which was not Lawful; as the occasion of this saying of our
Lord Jesus (which the other Evangelists relate also, and no other occasion of
it is recorded in them, neither do we find that he used it at any other time)
seems to carry it in this Sense; for he says Mark 2.27, 28. that Christ said
unto these Censurers, The Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the
Sabbath: And then immediately adds this Sentence with an Illative, Therefore
the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath. I suppose no Man will deny but that
the first Verse is meant of ordinary (I mean) mere, Men; for it is brought by
our Lord Christ as a Vindication of his Disciples action, who were mere Men;
and not of any one of his own, who was God as well as Man. Withal I believe
that we cannot find in all the Scripture, that appellative Man, thus abstractly
and absolutely used, without any distinction or Limitation, antecedent or
consequent to it; understood of any but of mere Men, which being granted the
Illative therefore, seems to carry the next Sentence for the same Subject, and
to declare that Man, common Man, is Lord of the Sabbath; not an authoritative
Lord to dispose of it as he pleases, and do on it as he lists; but so far a
Lord, as to be the end of the Sabbath; for whose Profit and Comfort it was
ordained. As a Son may be said to be Lord of that House that is built for him;
and in which he dwells and uses for his Convenience and Delight; though his
Father obliges him not to sell or alienate it; and the Laws of the Land not to
burn it.

Though therefore this Interpretation of the Son of Man be no way Heterodox,
nor any way strained, from this Text; neither do we by this Interpretation,
give a mere Man a Lordship over the Moral Law, as he supposes, (for his taking
for granted, that the Last-day-Sabbath is Moral; I look upon as his Fundamental
Error; and the great cause of his Mistaken Confidence in all this Discourse:)
We say that in no respect Man is Lord over any of the Moral Law; not in this
that we speak of; for Man was made for the Moral Law, that is, to perform all
the Duties thereof; but now Man is Lord over the Sabbath (as our Lord avouches)
in this respect, viz. That the Sabbath was made for him, and therefore cannot
be Moral, (as before,) But yet I say let it be granted, that it is spoken
precisely of our Lord Christ: Likewise we grant that the Sabbath spoken of in
these Texts was the Seventh-day Sabbath, and that our Lord Christ as the Son of
Man, that is, such a Son of Man as is also the Son of God; is Lord of the
Sabbath; (we should have observed before to evacuate all his Proofs drawn from
the Old Testament, to prove the Seventh day of the Week to be the Lord's day
here spoken of; that he, who is here called the Lord of the Sabbath, is said to
be the Son of Man, which he was not then.) Wherefore being such an one, it
cannot be denied but that he is an Absolute Lord of the Sabbath, without
Limitation; and so has power to alter and change the day (which is no way
Moral, I mean not the Seventh day at all) and so to make that to be lawful on
the Seventh day, which before was not; even all sorts of honest Employments of
our particular Callings, as well as charitable Actions; for when the day ceases
to be Holy, and another advanced to that Honor by his Authority; then being a
common day, common works are proper for it, which may seem to be the proper
Intention of this Expression to the Jews; for when they blamed him as a
Tolerator of the Profanation of the Sabbath by his Disciples, he takes a double
Medium to refute their Slander; the one as a Doctor and Prophet of the Church;
and so he teaches them, that that charitable Action of theirs toward their own
Nature, was no Breach, but an allowed work of that day; and proves it by a
Scriptural President; and so vindicates his Disciples Action from Sin:
Wherefore supposing (as this Author does) that our Savior had no other design
but to vindicate his Disciples, this had been abundantly enough, and he needed
not to recur to his own Anthority over that day; which he does, and so uses
another Medium; as a Lord and King of the Church, and so of all the
Institutions, and particularly of the Seventh-day Sabbath, (for which they were
as Zealous as the Author, as necessary and permanent) and says he himself, is
Lord of the Sabbath; and so had Authority to abrogate that day, or establish it
as he pleased; which seems to imply this much: You are ever and anon carping at
my Disciples, and especially at me, as though their, and mine, Actions, were
Profanations of the Sabbath: But I would have you to know, that I have a
Sovereignty over it, and can dispose of it as I please; and make things that
are not Lawful on the Seventh to be Legitimate: Which we look upon as a hint of
its Abrogation shortly after.

Especially considering what Christ did, or caused to be done on that day in
another place, viz. John 5.8. where having cured the impotent Man at the Pool
of Bethesda, he commands him to rise, to take up his Bed, and walk: Now we know
that bearing of Burdens on the Sabbath day, is expressly forbid, Jer. 17.21, 22,
24, 27. and there are Promises made unto them, that would obey that Command,
and bear no Burdens; and Threats denounced against them that should contradict
it; serving to consirm the Defense of bearing Burdens on that day. Accordingly
Nebemiah was strict in its Observance, Neh. 13.19. and the Jews themselves were
very nice in this particular, and very severe in their Punishment of such
Bearers, by Whipping and by Death, (as that great Hebraick Critic Dr.
Lightfoot informs us.) Yet here our Lord expressly commands the Healed Person to
take up his Bed and walk, that is, to carry it either to his own House, or to
some other convenient place; for so he did in obedience to this Command, v. 10.
Whereat the Jews were very highly offended, and condemned it as an unlawful
Act, and sought to persecute and kill Christ for enjoining of it, v. 16. Now we
would enquire, to what end our Lord Christ did enjoin this Person to carry such
a Burden on the Sabbath? If it be said, it was to try his Faith and Obedience,
or clearly to evince the Perfection of his miraculous Cure, or both of these:
It Is replied, that these things could be as well done without the carriage of
his Bed: He might have gone every where, and proclaimed his Cure, and his
Restorer; he might have done it by leaping, dancing and praising God; as the
Cripple in Acts 3. Wherefore it is probably apprehended by learned Men, that it
was a practical Proof of his being Supreme Lord of the Sabbath, and of his
Authority to change the old day into another of his own appointment, and this
was a real blow begun to be given to it.

Besides all that was said against these his Arguments for the Seventh day, to
be the Lords day meant in the Revelation: It Is observable that the Greek word
(...) is used but once more in the New Testament; and that is, 1 Cor. 11.20.
where the Sacrament of our Saviors Body and Blood is called the Lords Supper;
in which it is clear, it signifies both his Authoritative Institution thereof,
and that his own Death is signified thereby: The Lord is both the Institutor
thereof, and his Death the thing commemorated thereby: And therefore Reason,
and comparing Scripture with Scripture, would require that it should be so
understood here also; even as a day of his own Institution, as the Son of Man:
For so he appeared to John to be in the Vision. And so St. John calls him, Rev.
1.13. and so a day for his own Commemoration, even of his Resurrection, viz.
the First day of the Week; which none deny to be that day. And 'twas on that
day whereon the Author of the Revelations, saw the Lord Jesus walking in the
midst of the Golden Candlesticks, with the Seven Stars in his Right Hand; that
is, with his Orthodox and Zealous Ministers, receiving their Light and Heat
from him, the Sun of Righteousness; And then diffusing it abroad in the
Churches, or in the midst of the Congregations; which we know the Orthodox
Fathers, throughout all Ages of the Church, have principally done upon the
First day of the Week, the day of the Resurrection: And so the future Practice
of the Church, proves the Lords day to be the First day of the Week. Again, St.
John calls this the Lords day, after his Resurrection; and our Savior tells
him Verse 18. I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I live forevermore:
Implying, that as after his Incarnation, Obedience, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, Session on the Right Hand of God, and Mission of the Holy Ghost; all
the former carnal and ceremonial Administrations vanished, and a new
Government, new external Modes of Worship, were introduced, which were properly
the Lords and bear the Stamp of his Authority, as Mediator, as God-Man, over
the Church and all her Ordinances: So this was also the Day of his own
Institution, after his Humiliation and Exaltation, for the Celebration of his
new Institutions; the other being excluded with the former Appendixes thereto.
What follows under this Head, being what has been spoken to before, and is
frequently inculcated (as of great Moment for him) as the Moral Law, as the now
changing of the Sabbath; mere Pretenses of the other party, etc. as being but a
little better than the begging the Question, and taking that for granted, which
we utterly deny: These I tacitly pass by, and leave the Judicious Reader to
judge, if after all has been said, it be not far more probable that the Lords
day, spoken of in the Revelations, is the First day of the Week; (as all
Scholars and Churches almost, have hitherto believed) than the Seventh day
thereof, which a very few, scarce deserving the Title of Number, have pitched
upon, as a Prop to their tottering Seventh-day Sabbath.

SECT. XV.
THere are other Texts which he produces, Page 69.70. as Romans 14.5, 6. Gal.
4.9, 10, 11. Col. 2.16, 17. from whence we hold and contend the Seventh day, to
be everlastingly excluded from the Christian future Sabbath; the chief being
the Two latter of these. We say in Gal. by Days are meant the Jewish Seventh
day; because the Apostle mentions their Months, that is, their Observance of
the New Mood Festivals; Times: Which some apply to Easter, Pentecost, Feast of
Tabernacles, etc. and Years; which some think is meant of the yearly Feast of
Atonement and Expiation. Or it may be understood of the year of Jubilee, (if
not the Great Jubilee every Fiftieth year, yet the less of every Seventh year;)
which St. Paul probably observed them very Superstitious in: But whatever the
Difference may be in the particular Applications of these Terms, yet they
generally hold, the more rare or seldom Jewish Festivals to be meant; and by
Days then, what other Festival of the Jews can be understood, but the Seventh
day? If he do not mean their Weekly Sabbath by Days, it cannot well be
conceived what it should be: We doubt not but by the latter Three Expressions,
Months, Times and Years, are meant Jewish Festivals: And why Days should not
signify the same, cannot well be imagined. Besides, we find that these
Galatians were greatly infected with the false Leven of Judaical Doctors, who
taught them to observe Circumcision, etc. as is seen clearly by the Epistle,
and seems to be the chief occasion of Writing it; to turn them from, and
sortify them against, such false Doctrins, and dangerous Observances. And
therefore hence we conclude St. Paul condemns the Galatian Church, for keeping
the Seventh-day Sabbath, as well as other Judaical Rites and Festivals; and
tells them he is afraid he had bestowed his labor in vain upon them.

In that Text to the Colossians, we have the Observance of Sabbaths expressly
spken of; and thereby St. Paul discarded from their Observance, as Shadows,
which were to vanish when Christ the Body was come: By which we contend, is
meant the Weekly-Sabbath; because that in the Scripture, is Chiefly, Mostly, if
not Solitarily the Acceptance thereof: And we have heard him again and again,
asserting that it is the Intent of this Word every where. And I believe so,
whenever it stands absolutely, as here without some Annexion or other to alter
its Signification. And what Reason can be given why here it should not so be
understood? that only here, and no place else in the Bible, it should not be
taken for the Weekly-Seventh-day? Moreover, here the Apostle seems plainly to
intend their Annual, Monthly, and Weekly Festivals; their Annual, by Holy days;
their Monthly, by New Moons; and so their Weekly, by Sabbaths: And there was no
Weekly Festival, but the Seventh-day Sabbath. Or if by Holydays we apprehend
the Generality of Jewish Festivals, because they were all Holydays as long as
their First Institution lasted; yet then he condescends to some Particulars of
them, as the Monthly and Weekly, which then must necessarily include the
Sabbath; because that was a Jewish Holyday. Yet again, If we should grant, that
under the last word Sabbaths, any other Festivals may be included or meant: Yet
certainly the Weekly-Sabbath cannot be excluded, being the most famous
Analogate comprehended under it; and therefore in such an Expression, cannot be
excepted; though sometimes the most famous Analogate be only meant, and
excludes all others; yet never is it it self not intended in such Propositions.
Withal, as we said before of the Galatian Church, so we do of the Colossian;
'twas infected by false Teachers, that would make a Mixture of the Jewis, and
Christian Religion, and would have Moses's Rites to be kept with Christ's
Ordinances: And they know well enough, that by Sabbaths was meant the Seventh
day; seeing it is always so accepted. Whence we may well conclude, that here is
an express exiling the Seventh-day Sabbath out of the Church of Church.
Heretofore we were called upon to show one Text in which the
Seventh-day Sabbath was abrogated, and now we bring an express literal one; yet
it will not do, but many Objections are brought in against it: Which we shall
successively consider and traverse.

1. Some think it must be understood of Ceremonial Sabbaths only; because else
'twould reach the First-day-Sabbath, as well as the Seventh. But there is no
fear of that, for the First day is never called Sabbath in the Scripture; and
therefore cannot be meant; and we say the Seventh-day Sabbath, was both
positive and ceremonial, for he himself allows it to signify the eternal Rest
above. 2. He Objects that one place names no Sabbath, but only Days; the other
indeed names Sabbaths, (which he would have interpreted Weeks, for which I can
see no Reason; but much against it; and therefore shall say nothing till he
produce his Reasons for it.) And all the weight of this Argument is but a silly
Conjecture of the meaning of the word Sabbaths: But we have seen before, that
this is not a silly Conjecture, but grounded upon the very usual Acceptance of
the Word, upon the Connection of the adjoined things, upon the State of the
Churches unto whom he writ; and upon the design of his Epistles to them. But I
am sure what follows, is not so much as a Conjecture, but a very great
Oversight; for he tells us, that he finds the word (Sabbaths) in the Plural
Number, no where in the New Testament ascribed to the Seventh day. It was then
because he would not be at the pains to sind it; for it is in all these places,
Mat. 12.5, 10, 12. Mark 3.4. Luke 4.31. and 6.2, 9. In all these places he will
find it so; and in the Original Greek, the word is Sabbaths, without a Verbal
Superaddition of days; which he himself must be enforced to acknowledge, spoke
of this day.

3. The Seventh day he faith was never in Question in any of these Epistles,
and if there be no such Question about altering it, how can such a Sense be
imposed, etc. Just so I may say the New Mood Observation, and the Annual
Festivals, are no where questioned in these Epistles; (nor any where else that
I remember, expressly to be lain aside) How therefore can such a Meaning be put
upon Years and Months, as to include the Judaical? seeing Sabbaths are as plain
and clear for the Seventh days, as any of the former, for what they are
understood here. We have still the Thred-beaten Plea of the Moral Law
introduced and improved; when I assert, that neither he nor all the World can
ever prove the Seventh-day Sabbath to be part of the Moral Law, Quatenus Moral.
His Fourth Answer plainly confounds Sabbaths with Years and New Mons; which
the Apostle clearly distinguishes, and of all the rest I may truly say, they
are but mere ungrounded Conjectures, to baffle an express Text of Scripture:
But here he has a very strange Fancy, That by Days may be meant the First day;
because the Heathen worshipped the Sun on that day: And so then every day;
because the Heathen worshipped distinct Idols every day: And so we should have
no Consecrated day at all, neither First nor Seventh, nor any other. All the
rest that follows here, are but (as he expresses) his own Thoughts, and as well
grounded, as that Thought of his, That the First day was not observed by
Christians: When yet we have found them several times associated on that day;
and Christ appearing several times in the midst of them; and at Troas Assembled
on that day; and St. Paul Preaching and Administering the Lords Supper to them,
and therein to Harmonize with the Church of Galatia; (which I suppose proved
against Objections) neither of which can be said concerning the Seventh day:
Only there were Assemblies of the Jews on that day; and St. Paul took the
Advantage on these days to Preach to them. But what is this to Christ's
Disciples and Followers? We may therefore (according to his own Rule, That
which appears not, is not at all) conclude, that the Seventh day was never
observed by the Disciples and Followers of Christ, after his Resurrection, as a
day consecrated to Public Worship; because we never read in the Scripture,
that they did so meet. Whereas the contrary is seen by the First day. So I
dismiss this Thought, and the others as no more likely.

5. He farther says that it is uncertain, and therefore as such, I over look
it. 6. He says from Paul's constant keeping the Seventh-day Sabbath, that he
cannot be supposed to condemn his own constant Practice: But how he did this,
we have already seen; and therefore shall not stop here. 7. That St. Paul
commends the Whole Moral Law, as Just, Holy and Good; and therefore can never
be thought to condemn it here. Here we have anew theatrized the Moral Law,
which we acknowledge the Apostle does strenuously urge, and never opposed any
one Tittle thereof. But yet he here decries the Seventh-day Sabbath, as very
consistent with, and agreeing to all his Zeal for the Moral Law; because that
was never of the Substance of it: Neither is it either Holy or Just, or Good:
(I mean not in, and of it self; as all that is truly and naturally Moral is;
but by Gods commanding it: We acknowledge it to be positively Moral.)

8. The last Answer, is from Math. 24.20. Pray you that your Flight be not in
the Winter, nor on the Sabbath Day. Upon which place he lays so great a Stress,
as to suppose it a sufficient Proof for the Observation of the Seventh day, as
our bounden Duty. For here he takes for granted, that this Sabbath here spoken
of, is the Seventh day; that the Flight here spoken of, is that (at nearest) of
the Destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, about Forty Years after Christ:
And therefore our Savior knowing what a great Trouble of Spirit 'twould be to
gracious and devout Souls, to be forced to flee for their Lives on that day,
whereon they should have been Glorifying their God, and Refreshing their own
Souls in Religious Duties, and Holy Communion with the Father and the Son; He
exhorts them to Pray against such an Evil, thereby implying (as he would have
it) the Continuance of that Sabbath; and his own Confirmation thereof till
then, and so forever. Wherein (I think) I have (I am sure I intended to have)
given all the strength of what he has written from hence, and not concealed or
lessened any whit of it. Unto which I proceed to answer that,

1. Some understand this to be a proverbial kind of Speech, to express the
Difficulty and Irksomness of a thing; that 'twill be as tedious as a Journey in
a Cold, Snowy, Dirty Winter; or as a Flight to a superstitious Jew upon a
Sabbath Day. 2. Others apprehend it to be spoken to the Disciples in this
Sense, Pray that your Flight may not be on the Seventh-day Sabbath; Because
thereby you will greatly offend the superstitious Jews, who will deem you as
Profaners of that day hereby, and so will be so far from Pitying and Relieving
you, that they will hate and michief you all they can: As we know the Jews were
great Enemies to them, because they were so to their Ceremonial Worship (as
they deemed them) and to their Sabbaths too; and hence were so far from
sheltring them from, that they betrayed them to, and delivered them up into the
Hands of Heathenish Persecutors. 3. It may well be interpreted specifically of
a Sabbath, and not numerically of the Seventh day only: And so it is as if our
Lord had said, pray that on what ever day your Solemn Rest for Religious
Worship, and Divine Service shall be; that on that day your Flight may not be;
for 'twill then be very grievous, and more intolerable, than on any day of the
Week: And so includes, yea, primarily intends the First day, the Dominical day.
But 4. To be as fair as we can with him, and to grant all that he does desire,
we will suppose that our Savior did mean by his words, what they, it is most
probable, did understand by them, even the Seventh day, to be that Sabbath on
which they were to deprecate their Flight: Yet this will be also far enough
from so clear a Proof for him as he imagines. For we know it is usual in the
Holy Writers, to speak of Evangelical days, and of the Worship of God in them,
under Legal Metaphors; to wit, by Sacrifices, by erecting of Altars, by coming
up to the Temple, etc. as all that know the Style of the Prophets, cannot but
be acquainted with; because these were then the Services which that People
performed, and they knew no other; and probably would not have endured the
mentioning of any other. So here, our Savior speaks indeed literally of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, because the Jews and his Disciples (who were Jews) knew
yet of no other, neither were prepared to hear of the future substituting of
another day in its place. Yet this does no more confirm the Seventh day to be
the future Sabbath, than those other Scriptural Sayings, do the Ceremonial
Rites to be the Evangelical Worship; or the external Modes of serving God in
the times of Reformation, and when the Body and Substance of these Signs and
Figures were exhibited.

Besides, we say our Savior did very well foresee that many of his Disciples
(as we know the Churches of Galatia, and Colosse; and those of Jerusalem, with
James did) would many years after his Decease, dote upon the judaical
Ceremonies, and would reverence them out of Conscience to God, their Author and
Imposer; And so also on the judaical day. And therefore our Lord
fore-apprehending this, bids them to deprecate their Flight on such a day,
which their own Conceits and false Apphrehensions of things, would make more
grievous and burdensome to themselves; not his Injunctions, or the real
Obligation of the day. And there is nothing more common than this way of
speaking according to Men's Apprehension of things, without any the least
Approbation of that Apprehension. So we find our Savior speaking in his
Discourses of the Jews Circumcision, very commendably and honorably; yet I
hope this did not confirm it for the future. But here it may be objected, But
he did not Prophecy of its future Observance, or require any thing of them,
upon a Supposition of its Continuance afterward; and therefore this is nothing
to the purpose. But we know he could not but foresee that they would observe
it, and keep it up in the Churches after his Departure from them and its
Abrogation; and so these Speeches of his would then be upon Record, and
probably made a Plea for its Use: (especially seeing he never did, as I
remember, speak any thing against it, or expressly of its future Extrusion out
of the Churches) Which Speeches of his cannot Authorize their future Practice
Neither can our Saviors foresight of their superstitions and mistaken
Observance of the Seventh day, and his Command for their Ease-sake upon that
Prevision, authorize the Continuance thereof. Therefore seeing there are so
many Solutions given to this Plea, against the Apostles meaning of the Seventh
day; when he condemns them for their Observance of Days and Sabbaths; (whereof
some one may be deemed sufficient; but much more all together:) It cannot by
any impartial, judicious Person, be thought of any Prevalency to evade an
express Prohibition of the Apostle, of the Observance of that day; which we
contend his Prohibition of Sabbaths to be; the Seventh being the most famous of
all Sabbaths: Being that which is mostly, if not only intended by that
Expression in Scripture, and in that very word, whereby the Holy Ghost in the
New Testament, intends and means the Seventh-day Sabbath.

SECT. XVI.
HE begins Page 75. to betake himself to the Command it self, and would from
thence collect an absolute Necessity of the perpetual Observance of the last
day of the Week; asserting the Morality of the whole Command, and endeavoring
from some Passages and Letters of that Law, to ratify his own Opinion herein.
Therefore I shall take leave with as much Brevity and Plainness as I can, to
give my weak Thoughts about it; and leave it to the Learned and Judicious to
determine. Here we must premise a Distinction or two: 1. Between Moral and
Positive; between that which is Good, Just and Holy in it self; which emerges
from the right Constitution of the rational Creature, and so would be a Duty,
if 'twere never externally enjoined by God; And that which has no such innate
Goodness, neither would have been performed as a Duty by Man, were it not
imposed by a superadded Precept. 2. Between that which is Purely, Naturally and
Absolutely Moral in it self, and that which is Secondarily, Respectively and
Positively Moral: The former is that spoken of above; the latter is that which,
though the rational Creature could not of it self have judged a Duty, yet when
it is once imposed by Command, and so revealed to be the Legislator's Pleasure,
there is discerned in the thing it self, a very great Equity, Goodness and
Suitableness to Gods Glory, or the Creatures Good, or both: As in the case of
Tithes, or the Tenth of every Man's Estate to be devoted to Pious Uses, for the
Maintenance of the Worship of God, and of those that are by him called thereto,
and employed therein: Though the Light of Nature could not primarily, and from
it self, have discovered and devoted this very precise proportion to the
immediate Service of God as absolutely necessary; Yet when God does once
require it, it must needs close with it, as very reasonable and just, that God,
who gives all, and whose all is, should have the Tenth part devoted and
separated to his own Service: So that the Goodness of this, does not only arise
from the Will of the Legislator, but also from the Nature of what is required,
when it is once discerned to be the Legislator's Pleasure. So that it is neither
purely positive, nor yet primarily Moral, discovered only by the Promulgation
of the Legislator; and then embraced at, and acknowledged to be most just and
good by the Creature, from whom it is required: Whereas, what is purely
positive, has nothing just or good in it self; nor discernable after its
Imposition. 3. In the Fourth Command we must distinguish between; 1. The Duty
commanded; 2. the Explication of the Duty; and 3. the Arguments and Motives
thereto. And so, without any more nice Distinctions we proceed by God's
Assistance to our Apprehensions about this Matter.

1. The Duty Commanded, or the Substance of the Fourth Command, which is in the
first Words of that Command, Remember the Sabbath Day, (or the Day of the
Sabbath,) to keep it holy, (or to sanctify it:) Where we acknowledge the Rest,
or the holy Rest, to be primarily and absolutely Moral, which this right
Judgment of the rational Creature dictates, directs to, as that which it ows to
its Creator, Preserver, and Benefactor; even a set and solemn Time separated
and devoted to the immediate Service, Praises and Adoration of God; who,
because of his own Infinite and Incomparable Excellencies, deserves all their
Praises and Adoration; and because of their own innumerable and inestimable
Benefits received from him, merits all their Love and Observance: Which
Employment, the rational Creature would acknowledge to be the most noble and
excellent, the most happy and blessed that it can be employed in, being the
Employing of the most noble Faculties of the Soul, in their most excellent
Acts, about the most raised and glorious Object: This, I say, the true Light of
Nature would direct unto; and so is purely moral: But whether it would have
directed to a Separation of a whole entire Day thereto, I cannot resolve:
Though this also may be most probable; being a Time so limited, measured and
distinguished, by the antecedent and subsequent Darkness; or by the Presence,
Light and Motion of the Sun in the Hemisphere. But here, I believe, we may take
for granted, that the rational Creature in its Rectitude, would have actually
consecrated to so divine Worship, and employed in divine Worship, all that Time
that could have been duly and conveniently spared from the Refreshment of the
Body, and those due Preparations, which must be made for his decaying outward
Man; so that Adam would have subserviated, (had he stood in his Innocence) all
his tilling of the Garden, all his eating, drinking and sleeping; all the
Recruits of his Body, to the solemn Manner, as that which was the End of his
being; the due of his God from him, and the highest and most blessed Employment
of himself. This, I say, would have been, had he beenleft to the Dictates of
his own Knowledge, which was given him of God, of himself, and of his
Engagements to the Author of his being, and well-being; and not been prescribed
by a Precept from his Lord and Sovereign. But however, this all must
acknowledge, that a Time of Rest, (For that is the english of Sabbath) to be set
apart and sanctified to the immediate Service of the most high and munisicent
God, is purely moral: And it may be also thought, that an entire Day may bid
fairly for it. And this, I say, is the Substance of this Precept, and really
moral.

But here, before I proceed, I must obviate a little Criticism, which the
Author here seems to lay a great Stress upon; and that is about (he) in the
Original, which he would fain have to be very emphatical, and to signify,
That, by way of Eminency here in this Verse, the beginning of the Command, the
Words are Remember the Day of Rest. (Eth Jom Hasshabbath.) I would enquire of
him, whether this rendering of these Words, be not as proper, as any he can
render it by: Whether the Day of Rest, be not so proper, as the Day of a Rest,
or the Day of that Rest. For every one that has but peeped into the Hebrew
Bible, very well knows that that Letter, serves many times, if not most times,
only for a Letter and Ornament of writing, without any Signification whatever:
And, whether I render it by an English Particle or no, he cannot blame me; if I
will, he has no Reason to quarrel me, if I render it A or The; nor I, much, to
quarrel him, though he chooses to translate it That. For neither A, nor The, nor
That, are found in the Original; but are only English Particles: And, I would
fain know what Emphasis the same Hebrew Particle has before [ Shamajim, Aretz,
and I am] Heaven, Earth and Sea; and whether the Translation either without a
Particle, or with that which carries no Emphasis, be not far better than the
Translation with an Emphatical one: As for Example, the Lord made Heaven and
Earth and Sea, or the Lord made the Heaven, the Earth and the Sea, are not
better than, the Lord made that Heaven, that Earth and that Sea; for if we take
this Particle That, Emphatically, it seems to signify, that there are more
Heavens (for we suppose the visible Heaven or inferior one, is here meant) and
Earths and Seas, than One; and that it is Emphatically and Eminently meant of
those in the in Command, beyond the others; whereas there is no other Heaven,
Earth, or Sea, but what is meant in the Command; and therefore would be very
impertinently rendered by an Emphatical That. From whence I would ask this
Gentleman; what reason there is why before Sabbath, and Shebigni, should be
more Emphatical, than before those other Words in the same Command: Sure that
Opinion wants solid and deep Foundations, that must be upheld by such
superficial and weak ones. Thus much for the first part of the Command, the
Substance and unquestionably moral Part thereof.

2. We have the Explication of that Part of the Command in its following Words.
Six Days shall thou labor and do all thy Work; and the Day, the Seventh, a
Sabbath to the Lord thy God; ( is or shall be, or both) a Sabbath to the Lord,
that is dedicted to the Worship and Service of Him. Thou shall do no Work; thou
nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, etc. Where we have one Day in Seven, or of
Seven, declared and signified to be that Day of Rest, or Holy Sabbath, which
was commnded in the Beginning. And here our Authors contend, and worthily, that
this Seventh Day in this Peace, is not an Ordinal Seventh Day, that is, the
next Day after the former Six Days: But rather a Proportional (If I may so
express it) Day, or a distributed part of the Seven; that is, that of Seven
days God will have one entire day to be sanctified to him and his Service,
without specifying what day of the Seven it should be. And I am sure he has no
reason nor ground from the Command hitherto, to except against this
understanding of the Seventh day. In this Explication of the Command we have
two things.

1. The Portion of Time, or the Part of the days that God will have sanctified
to an Holy Rest; the Seventh. 2. How he will have the Rest observed: By an
Abstinence of all sorts of Persons from earthly and worldly Employments,
(except such as do not interfere with its due Sanctification) that they may be
wholly in Body and Soul busied in his Service; as is clearly enjoined in that
word in the Substance of the Command, (to Sanctify it.) As to this Seventh
part of time so sanctified and separated to Divine Service, this is not
Primarily and Purely Moral; though we acknowledge it to be Secondarily and
Positively so: Not such a measure of Time as the Wisdom of Man in Innocence
would have precisely separated to Divine Worship; and not one day more, nor one
day less, of all the Weekdays. I think I have shown before, that the light of
Nature would have separated and dedicated all to the solemn Service of God; all
the time that it could spare from the due Recruits of Nature; Which I doubt not
but in an Estate of Innocence, would have been a greater Measure and part of
Time than the Seventh: For now we find by Experience, that even after the Fall,
since that the Earth is cursed for our Sins, and requires a great deal more
Labor and Time to be lain out upon it, for the Production of our necessary
Sustinence, than before the Fall: Now that our weak, crasie and distempered
Bodies call for a great deal more Care and Time for their Sustentation, their
Recruits and Reparation, than when they had a perfect Temperature, were
completely Healthy, Strong and Immortal, in Innocence; and many other Civil,
Domestic Affairs take up, and must have, a great deal of our time, which would
have exacted none of it in Innocencency: And yet we experience (I say) that six
in seven allotted us for these things, are sufficient enough; and we can very
well spare a Seventh day for the solemn Service of God, without any Detriment
to our Bodies, or our civil Concerns: Yea, and have many other Seasons and good
Opportunities given us to serve God in: And doubtless had God seen fit to have
required the sixth part of our time; it would have been so also. Wherefore I
conclude, that the seventh part of the Week, or one day of the Seven, is not
primarily Moral; because the light of Nature could not have precisely dictated
it to us: Which methinks I could demonstrate by this Supposition; Suppose a
Person that is against the Morality of the Sabbath, that judges no day of the
week more Holy than another, should by Providence be thrown among Mahonietans
or Heathens, and preaching the Gospel to them, should be Instrumental to
convert any of them to the Christian Faith: I assert, that in such a case (and
he would certainly be horribly uncharitable that should judge the contrary) if
they did keep all the rest of the Moral Precepts with a sound Faith in Christ
they would infallibly be saved, though they never separated one day of the week
entirely to Gods Worship and Service: But now if they did allowedly live in any
Breaches of the other Commands; (yea supposing some of them should never have
been expressly taught them by their Converter) as if they did not acknowledge
the only true God in their Souls; if they did worship Idols; if they did Swear
Falsely or Vainly; if they were Rebellious and Undutiful to Parents and
Magistrates; if they lived in Hatred, and were Cruel; if in Wantonness, and
were Lascivious; in Theft, and Couzenage; or were Oppressing, in Lying,
Slandering, and False Witnessing; or in an inward Love and Delight in any of
these Sins, they should certainly Perish: And why? But because all the other
Commands are primarily Moral; and this of the seventh part of time is not so:
Yea in, keeping the other Commands, they keep the Morality of this also;
Commands, they must separate time to the performance of that Divine Service,
which is the prime Morality of the fourth Precept. Thus I think it is clear,
that the Sanctification of one Seventh day of the week, is not absolutely and
primarily Moral; but yet it may also be concluded, to be secondarily and
positively so; that is, that upon the Revelation of the Will of the Legislator
and his Injunction, the rational Creature closes with it, as that which is
Holy, Just and Good; as that which is infinitely reasonable; for what can be
more so, than that is seventh part of time should be devoted to his Service,
whose all our time is; especially when it is also for the Creature's chief good.

3. We have the Reasons to inculcate its Observation: 1. The Legislator's own
Example, because he was six days in creating the World, and ceased from those
works on the Seventh day, rested on the Seventh day: and it is hence only, in
all this Command, that they can have any show or ground to plead for the last
day, or the Seventh day of the week, to be the Sabbath or Rest that God did
command; which is no way cogent, because it may be meant a Seventh day, by way
of part or portion, and not the Seventh day of order nor in number of the week.
And it may be thus understood, Because I was six dyas in making the World, and
then rested; so shall you be six days busy in your common lawful Employments;
and then a Seventh you shall consecrate to me and my Worship. So that in this
Sense it does not enjoin the last day, the Seventh day of the week in order,
but a Seventh day in proportion of time: For which we have this to lead, That
seeing Gods Example is made the great Fundamental Argument of the
Seven-day-Rest, it should hence follow, that if Adam had exactly followed the
Pattern, then the Sixth day of the week would bid fairest for the day of Rest
of all the Seven, because then Adam must have worked six days before his Holy
Rest, as God did; and then being created, as we may suppose, about the latter
end of the sixth day of the Creation, he must have wrought the day following
(which is the Seventh) and so the five other days following, and rested upon
the Sixth day as his first Sabbath; for that would have been the day after his
six days Labor or Work: For it is clear, that the Seventh day after the
beginning of the Creation, (though it were so with respect to Gods Works; yet)
'twas the very next day after Adam was; and could not but be within a very few
hours (if hours) after his Creation; seeing it begun in the Evening: And so
Adam and Eve were so far from an exact Imitation of God in the Observance of
the first Sabbath, that in his particular they were contrary thereto; for God
wrought six days first, and then rested the Seventh; but Adam rested his first
day, and then wrought the six days following: God's Rest was in the Conclusion
of his Work; and Man's Rest was in the beginning of his Work, in his first
seven days; which I think somewhat enervates this solitary Plea they have here
for the last Week-day-Sabbath. But yet we will Suppose that in this Clause, God
did there enjoin the last day of the Creation-week to be the Sabbath; but then
we say this is purely Positive, and no way Moral at all, neither Primarily nor
Secondarily; for it is were so, the Morality thereof must arise from the Reason
that is given for it, viz. Gods Example; even because he made his work of
Creation in six days, and rested on the Seventh: But this is no way cogent, or
(rather) Moral, not such a thing as the light of Nature would engaged us to:
For 1. God is not to be imitated by us in all that he does; neither could the
rational Creature conclude upon Gods Revelation of his having ended his work on
the Seventh day, that therefore he must work six, and rest the Seventh, without
an express Injunction; which therefore God gave here. 2. If we could suppose,
that such a Collection of imitating God, could have been apprehended by Man,
without Relevation; then the Sixth day of the week, would by him be pitched
upon for his own Sabbath of Rest; because the Sixth day of the following week
would have been his Seventh day after his Six days working, as before. 3. Gods
making of the World, in six days, was a pure Revelation; for Man could never
have known it of himself; no not in the Estate of his pure Knowledge: Because,
for ought he could know, God might have made the World simultaneously, all at
once, or by one word speaking; for he knew he might so have done, if he had
pleased; he could not know that God did gradually, or progressively make the
Creatures; much less that he took up six days for it, neither more nor less:
Indeed the Order, and Method, the Time and Duration of the work of Creation,
must be by Revelation to Man, seeing he was created the last of all the
Creatures: So that in this respect it is not Moral; neither could it ever be the
Dictate of Man's Mind. 4. God cannot properly Rest, because he cannot be said
properly to Labor: Rest properly is a Refreshment after Weariness, Isa. 40.28.
The everlasting God, the Creator of the Ends of the Earth, faints not,
neither is weary. Consequently neither rests; for he does all he does with an
infinite Facility, and perfect Immobility; and takes no more pains in creating
the World, than in creating a Fly; that is, none at all. And besides, as
before, God works still in his works of Preservation and Providence, which are
altogether as Great and Glorious, and some of them more Great Glorious, than
were the works of Creation: So that in this respect this Argument is not Moral;
not such a Motive as could have been found out by the Mind of Man. Lastly, If
this were such a cogent Reason in it self, or a Moral Motive for the
Sanctification of the Seventh day, in the Repetition of the Fourth Command, why
is it not so much as mentioned? For Deuteronomy. 5.13-15. there is not a word
concerning it; but whereas in the other Commands all the Motives that were
used, and adjoined to them in their first Edition, are here again repeated; yet
this is quite and clean left out in this second Edition of the Fourth Command;
and in lieu thereof, their mighty and wonderful Deliverance out of the Land of
Egypt is inserted, that 'twas therefore because he saved them, that he
commanded them to keep the Sabbath Day. What this should signify I cannot well
see, unless God would hereby teach us, that the Salvation of his Church is a
far more great and glorious work in it self, and far more beneficial and happy
to us, than that of the Creation, (for the Deliverance of Israel out of Egypt
by the hand of Moses, was a Type of the Deliverance of the universal Church
from the Devil, from Sin, from Hell, from the Curse, from Death and the Grave;
by our Lord Jesus Christ) and that when this shall be completed (as we know
'twas at our Savour's Resurrection, it being the Conclusion of his Estate of
Humiliation by which he purchased our Salvation, and an entrance into his
Glorification, where he would procure it, apply, and effect it) then the Reason
annexed to the Fourth Command from the ceasing the Works of Creation, should
(in a sense) be lain by; and that of the Redemption of the Church be
substituted in its place: And so consequently as the Seventh-day Sabbath was
observed in Commemoration of the works of Creation, until a more admirable work
of God should be accomplished; so the first day ever after should be the Holy
Rest; when that Supreme of all the works of God, our Redemption, should be
rested from on that day. I do verily believe Gods neglecting the works of
Creation, and substituting that of the Churches Redemption, as the gread
Foundation and Reason of keeping the Holy Rest, here in Deuteronomy. declares this
unto us.

But I refer it to wiser Heads: Only from what has been here spoken, I will
conclude, that this part is purely Positive; both the Seventh Week-day-Sabbath,
and this Motive upon which it is grounded, God's working six days and resting
the Seventh, which is a Motive to us to observe it, as well as it seems a
Reason in God to require it. Wherefore here I would fain demand of this
Gentleman, why he should be so exceedingly Zealous for the Perpetuity of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, when it is both a Ceremonial and Positive Precept:
Ceremonial, as it signifies Gods own Rest from his Works past; and as it
signifies our future Rest in Heaven from all our Labors in this present Life:
And purely Positive, seeing all the former Ceremonial and Positive Precepts
concerning Worship, are abolished by the coming of Christ: Why should this then
solitarily be excluded, and stand in its Strength and Vigor, when all its
other Companions are thrown to the Ground and vanish? I know no reason, but
because this was written by the singer of God upon stone. But this alters not
the nature of the Command it self; neither can it from hence plead a greater
Privilege; for all the former had God for their Author as well as this, and
God's Mouth is as Authoritative as his Finger: Wherefore we may well conclude,
that seeing there is no reason can be given, why the Seventh-day Sabbath should
not recede and give place, as well as all other Ceremonial and Positive
Precepts to our Lord Christ at his coming, and his new, and more glorious
Administrations; that it is, and ought to be, excluded with them, and give
place to a more glorious day, in Commemoration of a more glorious work, and
Gods resting from it: Even the first day, our Lords glorious triumphing day.

The other two reasons of this Fourth Command follow, which are Gods Blessing
the Sabbath day, and Hallowing it. Where it is worthy our Observance (though
this Author deems it a Triffe) that it is the Sabbath day, not the Seventh day
of the Week, that is here blessed and hallowed: As if God would hint, that the
Sabbath, upon what day soever (of his own Appointment) should be Blessed; even
the first as well as the Seventh day of the Week, when in the latter days his
Sons glorious Rest should Authorize that day; and as it should alter all other
Ceremonial and positive Ordinances of his own Appointment, so also this
Ceremonial and Positive day, into that other, which with all the other
Ordinances and Institutions of the Blessed Redeemer, should last to the end of
the World. From which Discourse concerning the Nature of the Fourth Command,
all that follows in his third or fourth Pages after, is sufficiently answered,
and so his next answer to another Objection against his Opinion, P. 82.

SECT. XVII.
THUS by God's Help, and (I hope) his Guidance, I have considered all his
Arguments that he urges for his Sabbatarian Opinion; and have shown their
Invalidity and Weakness: And all the Solutions that he brings to disannul all
our Proofs for the Dominical Tenet; and suppose that I have vindicated ours
from all his Attempts, and shown how they remain solid and substantial. Other
things which follow, being but Appendixes to this Discourse, and not of so
great Moment, I shall but touch upon them. As Page 83. about the Beginning of
the Sabbath. He would have it to begin at Even; and we willingly grant him,
that the Seventh-day Sabbath did so; for it began when God had ended his Works
of Creation, which was the Evening before the Sunrising of the Seventh Day.
But, I judge that now the best Time to begin our Lord's Day with, is in the
Morning; because, 1. 'Twas on that Time of the Day, early in the Morning, about
Break of day, that our Lord Jesus rested from his Work of Redemption:
Wherefore, if the foregoing Evening of the Old Testament-Sabbath, was its most
convenient Beginning; because then God ended his Work of Creation, and rested
then: So he Morning-Light of the First Day, is the most convenient Time for its
Beginning; because then God rested from his much more Glorious, and really (in
his Humanity) Laborious Work of our Redemption. 2. Because the Holy Scripture
expressly begins it thus, placing the Conclusion of the Seventh Day at the
beginning of the Morning of the First Day, Mat. 28.1. In the End of the Sabbath
as it began to dawn toward the First Day of the Week; and consequently then
that Day began. 3. Because it is the most convenient Time; because most
observable, less liable to Prophanations, upon the account of Mistakes; and so
to turbulent Spirits, less obnoxious, etc. but this is not so substantial a
Dispute. Let every Person give up and consecrate the whole Lord's Day to the
Service of God; I mean, the whole Artificial Day; or rather the whole lightsome
Part thereof; and then let him begin either at Even or Morning; I doubt not,
but if it be conscientiously done in the Name of Christ, God will accept him.
But, there he must not scandalize others by doing Common or Mechanic Works
upon the following Evening of that Day; which the Generality of Christians,
among whom he lives, account as Sacred.

He seems Page 84. to imply, that there should be Morning and Evening religious
Service every Day in public: But there is scarcely any preaching Minister can
have so much Leisure, beside his own personal and domestical Devotions: And
beside our People will not attend it every day; and then the proper public
Duty of the Sabbath, to be but once, and begin about Noon. I, for my Part,
believe the Times of public Worship on the Lord's Day are most conveniently
ordered already: Twice, once in the Morning about Nine; and so in the Evening
about Two. An Interval being for the Refreshment of the outward Man, and
Recruits of the Spirit, for a more vigorous and enlarged serving of God in the
Evening: Beside, we know in the Country, it is convenient to keep some Persons
at home; or one Person, when Houses are solitary and liable to Injury, by those
who should know them totally destitute of an Inhabitant; and in Country and
City, Families that have Children, which must be kept at home, either through
Weakness, or such as would disturb the Congregation by their Presence, must
have some one or other to take care of them: Now in such Cases, one Servant or
Person, may be at home in the Morning, and another in the Evening; and so all
partake of the public Worship every Lord's Day; which could not so
conveniently be done by one single assembling the Congregation: But however to
meddle herein, would be very impertinent, and would rather savor of a restless
Fancy (to say no worse) than of a peaceable and prudent Spirit.

The other Pages home to the 90th. I overlook; because in them I find, either
such things as do not belong to the Sabbath, nor to this Controversy at all: Or
if they do, they are such as are written already, (at least the Substance) and
answered.

SECT. XVIII.
HE produces, Page, 90. the Argument of Tradition from the Apostles in the
universal Church these 1600 Years, for the Observance of the Lord's Day.
Whereto his Answer is, that no Tradition can add to, take from, lay aside, or
alter any Word of Christ, or Duty of Man. But, yet such a perpetualand
epidemical Tradition may serve for a good subservient Proof for that which is
founded upon, and deduced from Scripture; as the case is here; for we have
proved by many Arguments from Scripture, the Abolition of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, and the ratification of the Lord's Day.

He answers to such a general and lasting Tradition for the Sanctification of
the Lord's Day: That he has already proved that the Seventh Day is the
Lord's Day spoken of, Rev. 1.10. But I think, I have disproved that Proof.

Page 91: He himself recurs to Tradition, and undertakes to prove that
throughout several Centuries there have been Churches, who assembled themselves
themselves for religious Worship on the Seventh Day. And, so this is set as a
Bar against, and a Counterplea to that Prime, Primitive and universal Tradition
for the Lord's Day: To which, I answer in general: 1. That a few Exceptions
against a general Rule, do rather confirm than weaken it. 2. Every Antiquity or
Tradition will not, cannot, serve to prove either Practice or Doctrine to be
commendable or orthodox, nor derogate from what is so. For, the Denial of the
Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ is as ancient as the Apostles Days; in which
Corinthus was such an Heretic; and the Ebionites, Photinians and Arains have
handed down that damning Doctrine to our Socinians. 3. Scarce any Church, since
the Apostles Days, have been without out their Flaws, in Doctrine or Worship or
both; and we doubt not, but this has been one of them, if it can be proved to
be practiced. 4. In many Churches, where they did observe the Seventh-day, as a
Day of public Assemblies; yet in them the Lord's Day was also kept and
observed; and that too, as the chief Day: For on the Lord's Day all, in
general, were engaged to wait upon God's public Worship, not so on Saturdays.
On the Lord's Day all the Ordinances of the Gospel were administered, not so on
Saturdays: And so still the Lord's Day had the Pre-eminence even in those very
Churches: Which general Answers may be enough to stop the Mouths of all his
ancient Witnesses: Yet, I will take a little Pains, and employ a little Time,
to inquire into the Particulars; for I think they neither deserve nor require
much of either. As to his first Instance, if all the following be such, I am
sure they are stark naught; yea, they are not at all. For, he asserts, that in
the Apostles times the Seventh Day was observed as the public Day of divine
Worship: Here he must meau by Christins, or else he trifles: But he can never
find in all the Scripture, that in the Apostles Days there was ever one Society
of Christians gathered on the Seventh Day: Indeed, St. Paul did go on that Day
into the Assemblies of the Jews, to preach the Gospel to many of them, which he
could not conveniently do on any other Day: But never did he invite any to keep
that Day, never did he assemble afterward on that Day; when he was separated
from their Synagogues finding them imperswasible and obstinate. But, now we can
produce several Christian-Assemblies on the First day, the Lords day, after our
Saviors Resurrection, in which our Lord appeared to them: And 'twas then their
Custom to Assemble, and bring their Public Alms to the Public Treasure;
wherefore I cannot but marvel at this bold Assertion.

The Basis of traditionary Structue, being so visibily sunk and come to naught,
makes me suspect that the erected Stories thereof, will tumble and fall: So
that it is clear, we have the Apostle Examples, the Churches Use in their days,
and their Commands against the Seventh day, and for the Lords day, as a
sufficient Demurr to all his future Tradition: Into which I now descend, and
must say that I have searched the Magdeburgenses for his Quotations, but cannot
find them where he quotes them; and therefore believe that the Author used
either another Edition, or another that is various either in the Bulk, or in
the Pages. I found in them the Eliberine Council, but there he Twenty Third
Canon has nothing of a Fast upon a Sabbath day. As to the other Authors, I
have them not, and know not where to get them, that I might peruse them;
neither is it needful; for the matter of these Quotations, makes very little
for his Cause: For whoever considers them, will find, 1. That very many, if not
most of them, declare the Establishment and Separation of the Dominical day for
Divine Service. 2. That another great part of them, prove the Observation or
keeping both of the Dominical day, and the Sabbath, in very many of the
Churches. 3. These tell us that the Sabbath was kept as a Fast, by the most (if
not by all) of the Churches that kept it; and the Lord's Day as a Festival,
which all our Ecclesiastical Writers acknowledge as before: And so evince that
it was not kept with so equal Authority as the Lords day. (So does Dr. Young at
large) which also shows that they never observed it as the ancient Sabbath; or
'twas enjoined in the Fourth Command: But upon a new Account, or for a new
Reason; even because our Lord Christ lay dead in the Grave on that day;
Therefore they would Fast and Humble themselves, because their Lord and Savior
was on that day in his lowest Humiliation: (So far were they from this
Gentleman's Opinion, that his State of Death was his Rest after his Work of
Redemption) and they would observe the First day with Praises and Holy
Rejoycings, as the Christian Festival; because 'twas the Lords day of Triumph
over his Enemies, even of his Resurrection. These include the greatest part, by
far, of his Historical Examples, and a very few are left which do not expressly
acknowledge these things: And they that do not express them, may well be
thought to include them. I mean, though some of these Quotations do not
verbally tell us that when they kept this Sabbath, they also kept the Lords
day, yet it may well be presumed they did so; seeing 'twas the common Practice
of such Churches, to observe both of them in the foresaid manner. Such an one,
for Example, is that of Socrates Scholasticus, who tells us (for I have
examined him, and find he does verbatim tell us) in a manner all the Churches
in the World do Celebrate, and Receive the Holy Mysteries, every Sabbath day
after other: Yet the People inhabiting Alexandria and Rome, of an old
Tradition, do not use it. Yet doubtless, they also observed the Lord's Day,
seeing 'twas that which Constantine, had before by Edict enjoined the Churches
to do. And he says in the very next Page, and in the same Chapter of this
Quotation, that at Caesarea in Cappadocia, and at Cyprus, the Priests and
Bishops do Preach and Expound Holy Scripture at Evening-Prayer, on the
Saturdays and Sundays by Candlelight; and therefore we may well presume that
the other Churches did, which before he spoke of: These being some of these
all. As for his Historical Account, when the Lord's day was brought into
Scotland, viz. An. 1208. It may be very well answered, that the initiating, or
bringing in of the Dominical day, does not refer to the day it self, but only
to the Authority that introduced it; even that in that Year it began to be
Established by the Authority of a Council; which before it had not been: Or if
it refer to the day it self, it may not simply be understood, as if that day
were never taken notice of at all in Scotland, as a Sanctified day: (For who ca
believe this? seeing 'twas all along observed by the rest of the Churches, as
his own Quotations acknowledge.) But respectively, as now 'twas by Authority
enjoined to be strictly kept and sanctified, and to be solitarily separated to
Divine Service: Whereas before, they were Loose and Profane in their Carriages
upon it. All which is most probable, and very well concurrs with the truth of
the History. And therefore this History does not, nor that of Englands late due
Observance of the Lords day; or their keeping Markets on that day, etc. till
the same Century, or any other evacuate the Series of an Universal and Constant
Tradition for the Lord's day: For even in these Nations, the Lords day might be
then acknowledged to be the day of Divine Worship; though not so strictly and
duly kept; as we know in this very last Century among our Selves, Plays,
Interludes, all manner of Sports, selling of things in our very Streets, have
been permitted and practiced. Yet still the Lords day acknowledged in the
Church to be the day of Divine Worship. And it cannot well be supposed that
those Christian Churches, (as England and Scotland) who observed the Seventh
day, because on it our Savior lay in the Grave (not because 'twas commanded in
the Fourth Precept, nor because 'twas the Creator's Rest after his Work) should
altogether neglect and disregard the First day, seeing 'twas the day of his
Conquest, and the Entrance into his Glorious Exaltation. This I thought
convenient to say to those Historical Collections of his, and must leave a more
particular and exact Answer of them to those who have better Helps, and more
Leisure to examine them.

He gives us Page 102. Thomas Aquinas's Opinion concerning the Fourth Command,
(whom I suppose to be the same Thomas before quoted for the same) that some
part of it is Moral, and some Ceremonial, etc. Which Opinion of his, how
heterodox soever the Author deems it, I doubt not, but it is very Orthodox, and
the Truth of God clearly evinced by the Light of Nature: And that no Person
shall ever be Condemned for not observing a Seventh day of the Week, (much less
for not observing the Last day of the Week) entirely to God's Worship and
Service, without the Revelation of the Fourth Command to him; no more than he
shall be Condemned for not believing in the Lord Jesus, without the Revelation
of the Gospel.

SECT. XIX.
BUt enough of this before, which invites me to reflect upon one Particular
which I intended to have replied to, in its proper place: But I know not how
'twas then neglected, which is Page 79. An Answer to another Objection against
the Morality of the Seventh-day Sabbath, viz. That the Decalogue in not at all
in force to the Gentiles: Which Objection methinks, should not be so crudely
produced, nor in such an unlimited and unqualified manner; for I dare to
assert, That that One, whoever he was, that this Author intends, does hold that
the Decalogue in one respect does, and in another does not oblige the Gentiles.
That it does oblige them as to the Morality and Substance of every one of the
Ten Commands, (the Fourth not excepted) That it does not oblige them, as those
Ten words were Engraven on Tables of Stone, as they were delivered to the
Israelites upon the Mount, in such a dreadful and formidable manner, as Moses
was the Receiver of them from God's Hand, and their Conveyer to the People:
Which to be his Sense, his very Production of the Preface for his Argument,
sufficiently proves. Which (we doubt not) is a most Orthodox Opinion; and not
only the Judgment of One, but of almost (if not altogether) all our learned and
solid Divines. For, how can that oblige the Getiles, which they never heard,
nor were in a Possibility to know? As Millions of them never were; and Millions
more may never be: Who never heard of a Deliverance from Egypt, nor of a Moses,
nor of a burning Mountain, nor of horrible Thundrings and Lightnings, nor of
such a Deliverance of that Law? And the Gentiles, who have, by Gods gracious
and blessed Providence, these things brought to their Cognizance, are not
obliged to them, as given by Moses, but as given by God; not to them, as
delivered out of the Land of Egypt, and out of the House of Bondage, which was
peculiar only to the Israelites and those that came out with them; not to them,
as having a share and Possession in the Land of Canaan, (the Motive to the
Fifth Command,) for that was only peculiar to the Israelites: So then the
Decalogue does not oblige all Mankind, as 'twas given to the Israelites, and
as urged upon them with their singular and peculiar Obligations, but as 'twas
engraven upon the Humane Nature in our first Creation, as the moral Perfection
of the rational Creature, so it obliges all the Gentiles, as well as the Jews.
His Argument of the Deliverance of the then whole visible Church, is a Mistake;
for there were some of the visible Church, who were not among them, as Jethro,
Moses's Father-in-Law; and we believe more with him, seeing he was a great Man,
or a Priest of Midian, Exodus 3.1. whose Faith in, and Worship of the True God
are clearly seen, Exodus 18.8, 12. Wherefore this Deliverance of the Jews, could
not so effect them or appertain to them: But, suppose that these Motives could
have a typical and remote Influence, and lay some kind of moral Obligations
upon the Heathens that may have the Tidings thereof sent among them, it cannot
be well imagined how it could ever affect, or be a Motive to those Nations that
never had the least Notice thereof; and consequently, the Decalogue, thus given
by Moses, is not in force toward the Gentiles as such; for so 'twould equally
oblige them all.

SECT. XX.
AND thus I have passed through all his Book that concerns the Sabbath; and
have done what God has enabled me to show the Weakness and Non-Conclusion of
all his Arguments, having endeavored to look into the Depth, and find out the
Strength of every one of them: And on the other hand, to confirm and establish
ours against all his Endeavors to undermine and bassle them. And, might here
have concluded; but shall not 'till I have shown him the Tradition of the
Lords-days-Rest down along from the Apostles Time, home to the Conclusion of
the Fourth Century; which is the purest Antiquity, and enough for our purpose,
being found in the most ancient orthodox Fathers, and spoken of as the Practice
of the Church of God in their Days, whom I shall but name, and set down the
Time of their flourishing in the Church, referring the Reader to Dr. Young, and
Mr. Warren, to find out their Quotations thus.

Ignatius Co-temporary with the Apostles.

Justin Martyr in the Year 160.

Dionisius Bp. of Corinth near the same time.

Tertullian Anno. 200. Origin 226. Cyprian Martyr An. 250. Athanasius An. 326.
Hilary 355. Ambrose 374. Hierome 385. Chrysostom 398. Augustine in their Time.
Eusebius (says my Author) testifies, 'twas observed all the World over. And
Bp. Andrews (as I have read him) in his Speech against Thrask a Sabbatarian, in
the Star Chamber, avows it on his Credit, that there is not any Ecclesiastical
Writer, in whom it is not found. Viz. The sacred Observance of the Lord's Day,
that is, the First Day of the Week. Which Testimonies of so many excellent
Doctors (yea, says Bp. Andrews of all eminent Doctors) of so many great and
flourishing Churches, carry much more Weight with them, than all his
Collections can pretend to do against them.

As touching Easter and it is Observance, that is no Part of this Controversy;
therefore I shall only say, that I am no Zelot for it is Observance, and am
persuaded it has less Grounds for it is Celebration than any other of those
Festivals which are appropriated to our Lord, and in Commemoration of his
Birth, of his Manifestation, of his Ascension, of his Mission of the Holy
Ghost, because the Lord's Day is a constant Memorial of that Resurrection,
being that Day of the Week whereon he rested from all the Work of his
Redemption: wherefore, seeing there is a weekly religious and solemn
Commemoration thereof, there must needs be the less Cause for an Annual. As for
the other Festivals which are appropriated to mere Men, and dedicated to their
Remembrance and Praise; as I have nothing to say for them, so I think it
neither prudent nor seasonable to say any thing against them. But, let him that
keeps a Day, keep it to the Lord, and he that keeps not a Day, unto the
Lord let him not keep it: And let both maintain the Unity of the Spirit, in the
Bond of Peace.

Here I hoped to have annexed my Epilogue, but some Passages in the Discourse
of Easter, do require a little Animadversion. As when,

He tells us, Page 134. (which he had done several Times before) that the
Change of the Seventh Day to the First, was introduced by the Bp. of Rome, and
so imposed by him upon the other Churches, which he thinks evidenced by his
former Collection. But, 1. We have seen it observed before there was a Bp. of
Rome, and he received it from the Assemblies of the Disciples and Christians
just upon our Savior's Resurrection, and in the Apostles Days. 2. We have seen
it observed by very great Churches in the Purity of the Roman Faith, and the
Moderation of the Roman Ecclesiastical Government, when either the Roman Bishop
did not pretend to any Authority over them; or if he did, they rightly and
stoutly resisted and refused it: And therefore 'twas rather an universal
Reception of all the Churches conjunctly, as from the Apostles and scriptural
Authority; than any Imposition of Rome upon them.

He has a strange Notion, Page 130. (as it appears to me) which is, that first
Rome endeavored to introduce the Observation of the Passover upon the
Lord's Day; and so the weekly Holy Rest upon that day; which to my Apprehension,
implies that Rome her self observed the Passover; Lord's Day, before she did the
weekly. Whereas it is clear, that Rome observed the first day of the week,
because 'twas the Dominical day, the day of our Lord's Resurrection; whereas
the proper Paschal-day was two or three days before the Lords day: And
therefore in Honor to that day, did the Bishop of Rome require Easter to be
kept; and not ordained Easter First Day, as a Shooe-horn to bring in the weekly
first day after. Moreover in those Churches wherein they dissented from Rome,
as to the day of Easter, they concurred with her in the weekly Lord's Day: So
that the Lord's Day was weekly observed by them, before Easter was kept upon
that day; and therefore the yearly first day could not be an usherer in of that
weekday which was before it.

SECT. XXI.
AS the Conclusion and Result of all this Discourse, I think, I have shown,
that the Lord Christ did not make the World; that Jehovah was not Christ before
the World; that he never instituted the Seventh day, nor rested on it, till his
Incarnation; nor being Christ really till then; that he gave not the Commands
on Mount Sinai: Neither were they there given to the Gentiles, but to the Jews
only, and those mixed People that came out of Egypt: That the Ten Commands were
confirmed by our Lord Christ in his Sermons and Discourses; but the
Seventh-day Sabbath never so much as mentioned by him in them all; as that
which was no part at all of the Moral Law; but purely positive, both in it
self, and in its Grounds and Motive upon which it is founded, and imposed upon
its Observers in the Old Testament; and therefore was liable to be changed with
the other positive and ceremonial Precepts of the Law of God; that our Lord
Christ indeed observed it in his own Person in the Flesh, because he was made
under the antecedent Law of all the Ceremonies and Mosaical Administration, and
observed them all as well as the Sabbath; but yet he then spoke, and did such
things as declared its approach to Dissolution and its Non-Morality; that he
rested no more in the Grave on the Seventh day, than he did on the Cross on the
Sixth, when he hung dead thereon; but the day of his Rest from the work of
Redemption, was the first day of the week; which day he supreamly honored
above all the days of the week, by his Resurrection thereon from the Dead; by
his several Appearances thereon to his Disciples after his Death; by his most
gracious Discourses thereon unto them (which he never did, nor made, on the
Seventh day after his Resarrection) and by the Mission of the Holy Ghost upon
his Disciples thereon: Upon which account St. John calls it the Lords day, and
by all the Churches ever since, that Lords day has been taken to be the first
day of the Week: That the Apostles and Believers kept the Lords day, or the
first day of the week as their religious Rest; and met together on that day as
the day of their public Assemblies, and we never read of any Assemblies on the
Seventh day, save those of the Jews (our Lords Enemies) in their Synagogues, to
whom Paul went to preach the Gospel then and there; but when he experienced
their desperate Obstinacy; left that time, and those Synagogues, and we never
read that ever on that day he joined with any religious Society; after that at
Troas he preached and administered the Sacrament to the Believers on the first
day, the Lords day; and that the Holy Ghost does call the first day of the week
the Lords day, being the day of the Redeemer's Rest from a far more glorious,
laborious, gracious and beneficial, Work, than that of the Creation: And that
there is an express Prohibition of the Seventh-day Sabbath in St. Paul's
Epistles; and consequently, seeing the positive Morality of one day in Seven in
the Fourth Command, is of perpetual Obligation to the Churches; therefore the
first day must be that day, and the Sabbath was excluded, that the Lords day
might succeed, and that the Promises made to the Rest of one day in Seven in
the Command, are made to, and entailed upon the first day of those Seven now,
as they were upon the last of them, before its Expiration; and that a due
Observation thereof, shall have a gracious Acceptance with, a bountiful
Remuneration from our God and our Savior, according to all the Blessed
Experiences of the strict and conscientious Observers thereof. That there is a
more express and peremptory Abolition of this Sabbath in the Scriptures of that
Apostle, than there is, or can be found in them for the Cessation of many other
particular, positive and ceremonial Institutions; which yet Christians in
general (and this Gentleman in particular) disregard as dissolved and vanished:
And I profess, if I could see but half so much in the Second Command, to prove
a Form of Prayer to be the Pesel there forbidden, or at least included therein,
I should utterly deny all Forms as Idolatrous (which now I dare not do; but in
some cases hold them not only lawful, but necessary and Praiseworthy) or but
half so much in any Line or Sentence of the New Testament against the use of
the Lords Prayer in the public Congregation; I would never so use it more, but
to my due power would endeavor its Banishment thence: If, I say, but half so
much as I find expressed for the Seventh days Deposal; well may we wonder that
in such things a Man sees what scarce no Man else ever did, in the word of God,
and yet in this, that he should not see what almost every Man else can plainly
discover.

Wherefore I question not, but all our Divines and Ministers of Congregations,
are sufficiently satisfied, that they serve God duly, as to the Circumstance of
time on Lords days; and may, and do, in Faith, associate on the Lords day, as
the only Sacred day of the Week, with all other Christians in the Apostles days
since our Saviors Resurrection, home to this very Generation: And I cannot but
hope that this piece, how specious soever it be, and with what confidence
soever recommended; however backed with the Pretenses of Divine Authority, of
Jehovah's Will, etc. with pathetical Inculcations of those in multitudes of its
Pages, for the Observance of the Seventh day will find but very few, if any,
Proselites among our common Professors; and, I am confident, none among our
Wise, Stade, experienced Christians; or if any be in danger of Infection, I
pray to God that this Reply, intended for this end, may be an Antidote to
secure them. Lastly, it will be good Advice to this Gentleman, who has caused
the Expense of so much time in this Controversy, to bethink himself how his
Opinion leads us to Judaize; and this work of his tends only to divide the
Church, to stumble the Weak, to employ and please the Silly, Fantastical and
Giddy in matters of Religion, to encourage the Profaners of the first day, or
rather of the Lords day, to scandalize and grieve all, and therefore to cease
from farther Attempts of this kind. And all I desire is, that the Reader would
impartially compare what he has written for his Seventh day against the Lords
day; and what I have written for the Lords day, against his Seventh day; and
beg Wisdom and Understanding from God to have a due Insight into, and draw a
right Conclusion from both.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Samuel Clement at the Swan in S. Paul's Church- Yard.
GOD's Revenge against Murder and Adultery, expressed in Thirty several
Tragical Histories: Wherein are lively delineated the Various Stratagems,
subtle Practices and deluding Oratory used by our Modern Gallants, in order to
the seducing young Ladies to their unlawful Pleasures. To which are annexed the
Triumphs of Friendship and Chastity, in some Heroical Examples and Delightful
Histories. The whole illnstrated with about fifty Elegant Epistles, relating to
Love and Gallantry. By Thomas Wright. M. A. of S. Peter's College in Cambridge.

A Complete History of the Late Revolution, from the first Rise of it to this
present Time; in Three Parts.

The English Grammar, setting forth the Grounds of the English Tongue; and
particularly its Genius in making Compounds and Derivatives, with many other
Useful and curious Observations: Wherein are also explained the usual
Abbreviations, the several hands used in Writing, and Characters in Printing,
the Variety of Styles, the Art of true Pointing, and the Way to understand
Books: With a Prefatory Discourse about the Original and Excellency of the
English Tongue; and at the end an Alphabetick Collection of the Monosyllables,
being a Treatise of Orthography for Writers, and of Rhymes for Poets. A
Necessary Work in general for all sorts of Persons desirous to understand the
Ground and Genius of the English, and very proper to prepare Young Men for the
Latin Tongue. By Guy Miege, Gent.

Cerevisiarii Comes: Or, the New and True Art of Brewing, Illustrated by
various Examples in making Beer, Ale and other Liquors, so that they may be
most Durable, Brisk and Fragrant; and how they may be so ordered, as to yield
the greatest Quantity of Spirits in Distillation. To which is added, the right
way to refine and bottle Beer and Cider; and a Cure for those that are Sick and
Ropy, so as to return them to their internal Sanity; as also the true Method of
manuring Lands and the Art of making Salt Water fresh. All proved by
Demonstration and Sound Philosophy, to be more agreeable to Man's Body than
otherwise, and so not only sit for English Constitutions, but also for
Transportation. Published for the fake of Variety, and therefore recommend to
all that esteem demonstrated Truths before Notional Theory. By W. Y. worth,
Medicin-Professor.


