A SERMON, Preached in the Cathedral Church OF NORWICH: Before the Mayor and
Aldermen.

Upon the Second of December 1697.

Being the day of Public Thanksgiving, etc.

By Charles Trimnell A. M. Prebendary of Norwich, Rector of Brington in
Northamptonshire, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Sunderland.

LONDON, Printed for J. Weld, at the Crown between the two Temple-Gates in
Fleetstreet. 1697.

To the Right Worshipful Lawrence Goodwin, Esquire Mayor of the City of Norwich.
SIR,
THo I was unwilling to increase the number of Sermons that have been Printed
of late, to the prejudice of those excellent Discourses, which had they been
fewer, would perhaps have been of more value and use; yet I could not easily
deny the Request, which you with several of your Brethren, and others were
pleased to make me of publishing this: When I saw it proceeded from your
concurrent opinion, that it was likely to answer in some measure those Public
and Peaceable ends for which it was made. I pray God it may, and if it does so
at all, I shall be so far from being concerned, that you put me upon it, that I
shall be glad you engaged me.

However, Sir, I cannot repent the gatifying you in particular, in what I am
sure was a well intentioned desire; and came from the same good Principle that
has ever made you a constant and serious Attender upon the Worship of God; and
added an honor to that Office you so well Adorn in other respects.

That it would please God to continue his mercies to you, and give you with all
good men the satisfaction of seeing Religion and Virtue flourish under this
Blessing of Peace, for which we have rendered our Thanks; is the hearty Prayer
of

SIR, Your very much obliged and very affectionate Friend and faithful Servant,
C. Trimnell.

PSALM 116.1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my
supplications.

Because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as
long as I live.


THese words express the grateful resentment which David had of the
loving kindness of God, shown to him, in his signal deliverance, and they also
contain his resolution upon it, to place his whole future dependence on him, as
the only return he could make, for those mercies which he does in this Psalm so
fully acknowledge: Nor is he in any thing a Man after God's own Heart more
clear than in this; as it is not possible for us to conceive or imagine, that
he can be pleasing to God who has no sense of his mercies, or thinks to approve
himself by any other return. But when the blessings of Heaven fall so, as to
sink into our Hearts, and we are made soft by them, as by the drops of Rain,
God will delight to shower them on us; when his Goodness enters into our Souls,
and takes such hold of our Affections, that our spirits cleave steadfastly to
him, then will he also rejoice in the gladness of his People, and accept of the
thanks of his Inheritance.

That those blessings of his which we this day Commemorate, may have this
effect upon us; and that our Thanksgivings may prove of this force and virtue
with him; I shall proceed to consider.

1. The reasons we have to love God for his having inclined his ear unto us,
and heard our Petitions.

2. The Obligation we are under, in return, to call upon him as long as we live.

1. The Reasons we have to love God, etc. or as we read in the Liturgy, to be
well pleased, that the Lord has heard the voice of our Prayer, as no more is
proposed to be understood by Love in this place, than barely that joyous
affection, with which we are unavoidably carried, upon the sense of any
Felicity, toward him we esteem as the Author, before we consider what sort of
Gratitude he may expect at our hands: And then looking on God as having heard
our Petitions, we can no more help loving him for it, than we can being pleased
with what he has given; which before we weigh its Importance and Use, must
needs be a delight, as effectually answering those earnest Prayers we have put
up these several Years.

For if the desire accomplished is sweet to the Soul, Prove. 13.19.
as the Wise man assures us, and the Sense of the meanest finds to be true;
bringing that to perfection at last which has been so long expected, and under
so much suspense, cannot choose but afford a proportionate joy: when our Hearts
are discharged of that sickness which always attends the delay of our Hopes,
and our Minds are delivered from that oppression, which our fears brought in
abundance upon us; they will of themselves grow erect, and break out in the
praises of God.

And this admiration of his wonderful goodness will rise higher still, as we go
on to reflect on the Blessings themselves: An advantageous Conclusion of Peace
crowned with the safe return of the King.

If we look upon Peace but in its general view, there are so many things
agreeable in it, that he must have lost the Taste of all that Human Nature does
relish, who can find in his heart, to make any doubt, whether it be a Blessing
or no: A Blessing beyond all question it is, so far as the perfectest state of
this World can pretend to be so; for we have no other notion of Civil, any more
than we have of Natural Health, but such a condition in which the course of
things goes quietly on; when no violent obstruction forbids the due use of what
we receive, but every thing we take, or enjoy, has leave to promote the most
suitable end.

Nor does it alter the state of the case, that Afflictions are frequent
occasions of Good, and the calmest condition often a Snare; this arising from
our corruptions, and not so much from the nature of things. It is to mankind's
disadvantage, that men often say we are by nature the Subjects of War, and they
who say this ha'nt so much as a thought, that it would not be better for us to
be always in Peace, if those Lusts that are in us would let it be so. For as
many Wars as there have been raised in the World, no Man ever yet desired they
should last as a general good, but only hoped to work by them some desperate
Cure: And, taken alone, that must be an Evil which our Nature abhors, and which
makes a part of the threatenings of God; as that must be accounted a happy
Estate, which Men have ever pressed to enjoy, and which is proposed as the
greatest reward of our Obedience here, by him who delights to be called the
Prince, and King, and God of Peace; and is described as scattering those that
take pleasure in War.

And well do they deserve to be scattered, who have burst the Bonds of
Tenderness so far, as to make sport of that furious Employment, which draws
such a Chain of Miseries after it, and can hardly ever with any comfort be
looked back upon, but when it ends in such a Peace as we have attained: A Peace
that makes ample amends for what we have endured, by the advantage it brings to
our Civil and Sacred Concerns.

For this War is not ended, as Wars too often are, in our slavish subjection to
some vile and imperious Sword, but that Royal Hand which has led on our Arms,
and prevailed to our laying them down with Safety and Honor, has been
stretched out to maintain our Religion and Laws, and by the help of God, has
defended them both.

Our Possessions now may be called our own, a Wall of Defense is placed round
about them, and we may safely take our Pastime therein: The sound of Alarms is
no more in our Ears, nor is our sleep broken by visions of fear, but our Days
are all quiet; and our Nights are secure. No restraints Iy upon us, but what
the wisdom of Laws directs us to choose, and our very Liberty it self does
require; so that all the fair ways of thriving are open, and we are free to do
all the good that we would.

Had we felt more of the smart of this, so many years War, we should not have
needed any representations of other Men's making, to give us a value of this
blessing of Peace: And I trust, we shall not esteem it the less, for God's
having been pleased to bring it home to us, before he had suffered the War to
fall, with all its force and terror, upon us. Not but that the Fire has been
often so near us; and the apprehensions we have frequently had when things went
against us, must be still so fresh in our minds; that we cannot choose but from
our own observation, form great Ideas of that Mercy, for which we are called to
offer our Thanks

And these will still be enlarged, as we our selves advance to consider the
aspect it has in our sacred concerns.

By this our Religion is preserved to us incorrupt and entire, and we are not
only maintained, but encouraged in keeping up its public profession: Be it
never so true what has often been said, that no Man's Religion can be rifled
from him, that being a Treasure locked up there, where no outward malice can
come; yet considering the weakness of Men, the arts of the World, and the wiles
of the Devil; how apt we are to grow sick of our Faith, when troubles attend
it, and how forward the great Deceiver appears to suggest doubts in Belief,
when it is hard to profess; we must needs acknowledge it a singular mark of Gods
tender compassion, that he keeps off temptations from coming upon us, and
suffers us not to be brought into such fiery Trials as these.

It cannot but make us think the better even of the Truth it self, to see it
protected; and that Religion must invite our Obedience, which so visibly has
the succor of Heaven: The Duties of it are matter of easier practice, the
freer we are from the cares of this World, and the more removed we come to be,
from that Fear which has Torment, in so much the better condition we are to
receive the gentle impressions of Love.

An entire dependence on God, and a joyful taking of all that he sends, are
pretty difficult Lessons, when things frown upon us, and we see nothing but
Troubles about us: But when he is pleased to turn again and refresh us, new
vigor arises, and rejoicing in him becomes a natural work. While our Thoughts
are oppressed with the temporal dangers we find on every hand, they have hardly
leisure or spirit to look to what passes within: Some, it is to be hoped, are
brought to reflect on the state of their Souls, from the hazard they find their
Bodies are in; but the care of most, it is to be feared, is limited there, and
the better part must have patience to stay till the worse is secure.

At best, the service we pay in the midst of distress, especially when it
begins not till then, is very imperfect, and falls abundantly short of the
Obedience we give, when we have strength to resist: And it is quite another
Oblation we make of our selves, when we like our Condition, over that we put
up, when we wish for a change: We may possibly be accepted in this through the
mercy of God; but we are cheerful givers in that, and such as he loves: when we
offer him all that we take pleasure in, it is to be sure, a greater sign of our
Affection and Zeal, than just flying to him at a time that we know not whether
to go; and we our selves have less comfort in this, than the other, where we
are scarce able to keep up our hopes of being received, while there we move
with all the fullest assurance of Love.

There are many virtues no doubt to be shown in the most wretched Estate, and
many occasions of Piety given us by those, that wish ill to our Souls: but a
larger field of Obedience to be sure is opened, by making us room enough to go
at our ease; and our outward Prosperity is a great invitation as well as a
means, to complete our felicity in every respect.

Promoting the knowledge of God, reforming the manners of Men, and extending of
Charity with all the train of Religious Works, are things of great worth in
themselves, and esteem in the World: and we account it none of the lightest
mischiefs of War, that it is a mighty hindrance to these. How much then must it
add to the advantage of Peace? That by it we are put in a state of pursuing
these glorious ends; That we have leisure to look to our selves with such
greater exactness, as withal to regard the welfare of others, who cannot be
forgotten but at our expense.

For it is when we want inclination or time to look to that which most nearly
concerns us; that we neglect those who have a right to be part of our care, and
will be remembered when we think of our selves; God having most wisely disposed
our several interests in so mutually depending a manner, that for our own
sakes, we must be kind to our Brethren; and therefore we cannot but think those
Circumstances exceedingly happy, that put us into so fair a Capacity of
following up our common Concern.

And we are in the better posture for this, through the extent of that Peace, in
which so many others partake the Comfort with us: which is not only a great
addition to the general joy, but every ones particular Triumph is thereby
advanced; as that good fortune which affords us no more than a just
satisfaction, while we think of it with calmness at home, is apt to transport
us when we get abroad, and come to see what effect it has upon the face of the
World. So natural is it for Joy as well as for Grief to swell up to a pitch
from the number of those that make up the Train.

And there is great reason it should do so here, where not only Religion, and
good nature persuade us to be well pleased that others are happy; but our own
opportunities of doing good, and receiving advantage are thereby enlarged;
while all the kind Offices of Neighbors and Friends are freely exchanged in
this part of the World.

We have also the more reason to hope the continuance of this mutual Access,
for it is being so wide; which cannot but make the prospect more pleasing to
all, and all the more careful for that to prevent the cutting off any thing
from it, and hardly can there be any one found so little concerned what the
rest shall think of him, as not to avoid with the utmost caution, that soul
mark which must light upon him who first disturbs the the common Repose.

Which Consideration as it greatly enhances our Joy on this happy occasion, in
respect of what we might otherwise fear from Abroad; so it further Augments it,
by the hopes it affords of putting an end to our civil dissensions at Home: For
though some may have been hitherto held by the mistaken Bonds of former
Engagements against the plain sense and meaning of Laws, and the nature of
Things, yet now perhaps they may find themselves free, and in a state to accept
an Accomplished Deliverance. They might possibly be in a well meant suspense,
while things were in dispute, and seemed to depend upon the Issues of War: but
when that last Recourse has determined against them, and all the World besides
confirm the decision; it is to be hoped that they also will be fully concluded.
It cannot sure but give them a lower conceit of their private Opinion, to find
it disclaimed by the rest of mankind, who have less concern that it should be
an error; and prevent their being so fond of Disquiet, as still to resolve
upon continuing uneasy when the World is at Rest.

This we will hope both for them and our selves, and with so much the more
expectation of having our wish; as it has pleased God to Crown this Blessing of
Peace, with the return of the King.

Had his Sacred Person been permitted to fall by the black Malice of Implacable
Men, or taken from us by any other, all-most as sad, tho less violent Death;
after all, that his Wisdom and Courage with the Blessing of Heaven, had
accomplished for us; that Glorious Day had been overcast at its very first
opening upon us in the dismallest manner; and what would have followed that
Terrible Night, no Mortal can tell: The loss of him who is not only of that
importance to us, but to so many about us, at such a critical time, might well
have unravelled all things again, and put our Afairs in a dreadful disorder:
And such a Confusion had been too thick a Cloud for us to see through, what would
be in the End.

But God has had pity upon us, and by bringing back his Majesty to us, seems
inclined to establish the wonderful things he has wrought for our good, and to
make that Hand which has hitherto prospered with so universal an Honor in War,
a further means of procuring to us, all the remaining Glories of Peace. And
this we may have the fuller hopes he will do, if in the next place we proceed
to consider.

2. The obligations we are under in return, to call upon God as long as we
live. This calling on God implies our entire dependence upon him; and our care
to order our behavior so as may give our Hearts a Confidence in him. And what
is there in either of these, that we must not acknowledge his due in a singular
manner, for what he has done? What temptation can we possibly have so much as
to think of withdrawing our affiance in him, who has been so far from forsaking
us, that he has been exceedingly favorable to us, beyond what we could even
allow our selves to expect at his hands? Had Afflictons and Wars been our
Portion still, our Trust ought to have stood, where our Help ever did in the
name of the Lord: But it would be now altogether as senseless, as it would be
an ungrateful offense, to place it any where else. He who has safely conveyed
us through so many Dangers, and brought us at last to the end of our temporal
Hopes, has not only a right to our Trust, but such a one as it would be madness
in us to dispute.

On the other hand it would be a presumption to rely upon God, without care to
make our Conversation such as might give us an humble assurance in all our
appearings before him. To keep on in ways of our own, when he has done so much
to invite us to order our goings, in his, is such a contempt of his mercy, as
would soon provoke him to turn it away: To divert his Goodness so far from
being a means to lead us to Repentance, as to make it a new occasion of
sinning; would be such a despite to his Spirit and Power, as must justly make
us dread the return of his Judgments, with so much the fiercer Anger upon us.

To prevent this, and to secure our Peace, we must resolve upon paying an
unfeigned Obedience to God, who has been so gracious to us; Psalm. 105.43, 45.
who has brought forth his people with Joy, and his chosen with gladness, that
they might keep his statutes and observe his Laws. And to uphold us in these as
well as to continue our happiness to us; we must according to the most obvions
sense of the words call upon him as long as we live. Duly considering that
while we are here, there will always be danger of our departing from God, and
of his leaving us, when we do, to the fruit of our ways: both which we must
pray to avoid, and for some reasons peculiar to Peace.

For though, as it has been already observed, many great opportunities of
promoting Virtue are thereby allowed us; yet it must be confessed, that there
are too some Temptations in it, so apt we are to forget God, when we see no
particular need of his help, and let our vain Inclinations take their
extravagant course, when there is no visible stop in the way; and the apter
still shall we be to do this, as our late visitation has had the less Influence
on us: insomuch, that observing how little we are amended by that, we ought to
be the more apprehensive of a tendency in us, to pervert and abuse our better
success: And that should make us fear its Decay.

How highly then must it always import us to pray to God in the first place
that we may be Obedient, and wisely employ the Blessings we have; to lay the
better ground for our asking their future continuance? And that these Prayers
may be heard, we must be earnest and diligent in them; whether we offer them up
in the Public Assemblies, or in the less suspected Zeal of a private Devotion:
Both which ways of Address should always afford each other their mutual Help;
that our secret Retirements may have the more warmth, by what we bring from the
Concurrence of others; and our solemn meetings be quickened with greater
Attention from our Practice at Home.

We are now more than ever obliged to be frequent and serious in these, as well
that we may show our Esteem of such Opportunities, as provide for their being
the longer enjoyed: since it cannot be thought we account them a Blessing, if
we care not to use them, or be hoped they will last, if we do not pray that
they may be preserved.

For though there is a Concurrence of several things to give us good hopes of an
Enduring Peace; yet we cannot but know the state of this World, how uncertain
it is; and the designs of those who have been most Disappointed, how unwearied
they are. We ought therefore with the more carefulness to watch unto Prayer
that our condition may be the less subject to change, and beseech God that we
may never be added to that Church which has debased Religion and corrupted the
World.

The better to guard against such a Bondage as this, we must pray for a union
of all our strength and endeavors at home; that they who have long since
divided from our Holy Communion, may upon looking nearer into what we profess,
see through the thinness of those pretenses upon which they withdraw, and not be
frighted from calmly considering the state of the Case by any want of Temper in
us.

To this let us add our Requests: that they who shall remain to dissent from
this Days Thanksgiving, may come at last in this sense too, to see the things
that make for their Peace; and be brought on their way by such usage from us,
as may show the desire we have to share our Happiness with them.

For both these ends, we must earnestly pray that the King may live long, and
prosper among us, not only in gratitude to him, but for the sake of all that we
owe to his Care; as we cannot hope to be settled and flourish in Peace, under
any hand so well as that, which procured it for us, which steadily guided the
Helm of this tottering state, dashed on each side with contrary Waves, and has
brought it at last to the Haven where it would be.

A great deal remains to be done for repairing the hurt it got in the storm,
and should not he who secured it then, live to make up the Breaches of that, it
would hardly bear the launching again? considering of how many different parts
the Vessel is made, it cannot but want the Cement of so strong and piercing a
spirit to hold them together, and secure the Effects of all that have an
Adventure in her.

This, if he lives, (who has made the most distant Interests abroad work
together for Peace) we may hope he will do, to consummate our Happiness, and
fully complete the Satisfaction he takes in perfecting that: And though a far
greater reward will come at the end of all his Labor and Care than the
brightest Scene of this World can afford; yet it cannot but be an agreeable
earnest of that Glory which shall be revealed, to see the fruit of his Toils
and Conflicts here, in the Virtue and Greatness of those Kingdoms for which he
has been so often exposed.

For his sake therefore, as well as our own, let us jointly endeavor to make
this just and grateful Return, and help him to finish that excellent work he
has so far advanced, that it must be our fault, if it ever miscarries: he has
now by the favor of God, put it into our hands to do good to our selves; and
it is our true Wisdom not to let the occasion slip* as it certainly will, if we
do not improve it; and not only vanish it self, but leave our Condition worse
than it was.

To avoid this Relapse, let us here ^n the presence of God reckon our selves to
be saved from the hand of our Enemies, that we may serve him without fear, in
Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of our life, and if our
Deliverance has this effect, our welfare is safe in our Virtues and Blessings
daily receiving a mutual increase, and the Better we are, the Happier still
shall we certainly be.

Let it then be our Care to give the mercies we are met to acknowledge, this
interest in us; that our present Rejoicing may leave an abiding Comfort upon
us, and every moment make us fitter for all that we want: That the King may
have the pleasure we owe him of ruling a People with ease, he has been at so
much pains to preserve; and that from both God alone may have always the
Praise. To whom be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor and Glory, Dominion and
Power, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

