White Hall, January 21st, 1687/8.

This may be Printed, SVNDERLAND, P.

THE SPEECH OF Charles Trinder, Esquire; RECORDER OF GLOUCESTER, AT HIS Entrance
upon that Office, JANVARY the 8th, 1687/8.

LONDON: Printed and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
1687/8.

THE SPEECH OF Charles Trinder, Esquire;
Gentlemen,
IT has pleased His Sacred Majesty to send His Royal Mandate hither; in
obedience to which, I have had the Honor to be Elected, Admitted, and Sworn
Recorder of this City.

Gentlemen, I am very sensible of those many Defects, which may seem to others
as well as to my self, to render me unqualified for so weighty an Office. But I
shall not here loose time, either in extenuating or excusing the same. None
here are ignorant of those many invincible Obstacles, as to all sorts of
Learning and Knowledge, which have been laid in the way, to Persons of my
Character and Religion: To mention no more then the very Oaths which we could
not take, and for the not taking of which, (till of late) there was no
Dispensation to be had: These, I say, alone, were a too sufficient cause of
discouragement, and hindrance, from any close pursuit of Study, or
Conversation, in such Knowledge, and Practice, as are requisite to an
accomplished Lawyer.

But our Comfort is, that in the present state of Affairs, not so much
profoundness of Skill, as sincerity of Heart, not the great Understanding, but
the good Will, are the most indispensable Necessaries for His Majesty's
Service; not only in this, but in most other Stations and Employments.

And for these, I may without vanity challenge them to my self; and I hope,
being no Stranger to most of you here present, you will easily believe and
acknowledge the same; and that, if on the one side, you regard His Majesty's
Affairs, and on the other side the circumstances of my Life and Profession, it
would have been, perhaps, difficult to have found any One in this County, more
entirely at His Majesty's Service then my self.

And let this suffice to justify His Majesty's Choice, and (notwithstanding my
own avowed Defectiveness and Incapacity in other respects) my submission to it.

Mean while, I am not to be put in mind, that even these beloved Oualities,
which I seem to glory in, of Zeal and Fidelity in His Majesty's Service, and
which I plead as an Atonement for my other Unworthinesses, that even these
alone, I say, are enough to blast me in the Opinion of some men, who will never
hope for any good, from One so disposed and declared. The distractions and
differences of Opinions, have caused such disaffections of Heart, that Men's
Fancies are filled with Fears and Jealousies, against the most innocent and
laudable Purposes and Protestations of this nature, even before they are
reduced into Act.

Hence it comes to pass, that a Man can no sooner make profession of his Duty
and Zeal to His Majesty's Service, but some discontented and ill-affected
Worldling, who knows little, and loves less (besides what concerns his own
self-interest) represents him to himself and others, as one of the Court-Party,
no Friend to his Country, One ready to sacrifice his own, and all other Men's
Liberties and Properties, to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of the Prince.

Neither does this happen in matters which relate to the Service of the King
only, or upon Temporal accounts alone; but also, in all Endeavors and good
Desires for the welfare of our Fellow Subjects too; and that in things which
are Spiritual, and concern the Conscience only.

Hence it comes to pass, that a man cannot compassionate the heavy Sufferings
of his innocent Neighbors, for matters of mere Religion, but he is presently
maligned by some Bigot or other, as an Enemy and Underminer of the Church of
England, as I my self was in this very place, for this only cause, in the late
heats at the Quarter Sessions for this County, publicly traduced and branded,
as One that did more mischief then any other Man in the County.

But let such Worldlings and Bigots give me leave to tell them, That they know
not what Spirit they are of.

The first of them seem to trace back the Practices of those Times, in which it
was neither sufficient, nor safe, for a man to declare for the King, but he
must be for the King and Parliament too: till at last, he must upon his peril,
disclaim both King and Parliament. Whereas in reality, Loyalty to the King, and
Justice to the People, are in their very Essence so united together, that they
are incapable of separation.

The second sort seem to have forgotten, or even deserted, the so-much boasted
Principle of their own Church, which they use to say, is not of a Persecuting
Genius or Spirit; unless, peradventure they mean by a Distinction, that it is
so in its Articles, but not in its Members.

But, Gentlemen, that we may spare both these sorts of Spirits, and calm them
too, I will say no more of either, but only this, That I am sent hither to
serve a Prince, who makes it His business to content both; who to all His
Subjects, however affected, is a Mirror of Justice and Clemency. And as I
cannot serve, so neither can I please Him better, then by using my best
endeavors (as by God's Grace I ever shall in whatever comes before me) that
the effects of these two God-like Attributes in Him, may be equally distributed
to all, without regard to Fear or Favor.

But because I told you in the beginning of this Discourse, that the cause of
all these Jealousies and Disaffections, was that great distraction in Opinion
and Judgment, wherewith this Age has been divided and perplexed, while each one
endeavors to maintain and promote his own; sometimes one prevailing, and
sometimes another, and all equally laboring, if not for Power, at least for
Ease and Security. Give me leave to entertain you a little with the cause of
those Distractions in Opinions, which are the cause of these Disaffections. I
hope the Remarks which I shall make, will prove no mis-expence of time, either
to you or me.

This great and famous Kingdom of England, being many Ages past, (as again now
at present) highly blessed with Kings, enriched with a most sublime Wisdom, as
well as other Princely Virtues: The Government of it was many hundred years
since, founded on such Rocks of Prudence and Justice, as might in all humane
prospect have secured it unshaken to the Worlds end.

It is that of Monarchy, which has for its pattern the Great Monarch of Heaven,
and of all created Beings. A Monarchy by Descent, which secures us from all
those dismal Factions and Wars, which commonly attends the Election of Kings,
to the great weakening, and oft-times final destruction of the Government and
People. A Monarchy, wherein the King has all the Power, the Nobility all the
Honor, and the People all the Security, which the Hearts of men truly
Rational, can wish or aspire to.

How often, and with what great Solemnity, has the great Charter of the
Subjects Liberty and Property received Confirmation from the glorious Ancestors
of our present Reigning Monarch? What Spot of Ground is there through the whole
circumference of the Earth, where the Subject lives so free, so plentiful, and
so secure from any sort of Oppression, as in this our truly fortunate Island?
What man so low, as (not offending the Laws) to need fear his most potent
Neighbor? Again, What Nobleman so Great as to dare either by force or
treachery, to attempt either upon the Royal Authority or Public Peace? Lastly,
What Throne so fixed and unmovable as Ours? Since the Royal Prerogatives are
so inalienable from the Crown, that even the most solemn Acts of our Kings
(when found inconsistent with their personal safety and Government, and the
good and safety of their Subjects) are of no manner of force, to restrain the
exercise of their Regal Power? This appears by the King's Declaration in the
15th of Edward 3d, Printed with the Statutes, and by many other instances which
might be produced.

After such Foundations laid, after such regular and well-polish'd Architecture
in the whole Frame of this our happy Government; when, moreover, our Kings have
at their Call the most August Senate in the World, whose Duty it is to
strengthen the Hands of the Sovereign, by their Counsels, and the Kingdom's
Treasure, as Emergencies arise. How comes it to pass, that we have seen and
felt effects not only far short, but even contrary to such glorious Causes? to
pass by our ceasing now for a long time to advance our Nations Glory, by
Acquisitions abroad, (though we have not wanted Princes of great Abilities and
Inclinations that way). How comes it to pass, that we have with much difficulty
conserved our own from Foreign Encroachments. Nay, lastly, how has it come to
pass, that we have suffered such fatal Convulsions at home, among our selves,
by which the whole Frame of our Government has been shaken in pieces, nothing
to be seen but Horror and Confusion, nothing to be expected, but utter Ruin
and Destruction?

To answer these important Queries, tho private Malice Pride, Lust and Avarice
be the immediate incentives of all who are Authors or Fomenters of all Civil
Dissension; yet manifest it is, that this so great decay from the Ancient
vigor of our Government, and the many Difficulties in which it is of late so
deeply involved, have arisen principally, if not purely, from the Cause of
Religion.

'Twas a memorable saying that of my late Lord Chancellor Clarendon, to the
two Houses of Parliament, soon after his late Majesty's happy Restoration: It
is, said he, a mournful subject, and that which has cost the King many a Sigh,
many a sad Hour, to consider, that that very thing, which was appointed by God
as a Cement of Affection, betwixt Strangers and Enemies, Religion, should now
become the fiercest Incentive to Strife between the dearest Friends and nearest
Relations.

This Consideration carries me back to examine, from what time, and from what
cause, this unhappy effect of Religion had its first rise: For were it indeed
to be found in the Root or Essence of Christianity it self, I should conceive
the Reception of such a Religion into the World, and its so long continuance
amidst so many Nations, to be a greater Miracle, than any that was ever wrought
for its Birth or Propagation. But I take the fact to be far otherwise:

For upon the first Planting of Christianity, the Apostles (inspired with the
Holy Ghost) all taught one and the same Truths; which their Disciples held
themselves obliged to believe, and for ever keep inviolate and entire, as
proceeding all from one and the same eternal Verity: and when afterward any
difference arose concerning what was so taught, or what not: The general
practice of Christians was, to submit to the determination of their Pastors,
either Single, or in a Provincial, National or General Council, as the exigency
of the matter required, and the circumstances of the time and place allowed.
Which left no room for pertinacy in Dissension, at least, not any possibility
of disturbing the public Peace.

And by this means Christianity remained in this Kingdom unshaken, from its
first entry, until about the 24th year of K. Henry the 8th, when that unhappy
Prince, not finding from his long and chargeable Addresses to Rome, a passage
to the Enjoyment of a second Wife (the first then living) breaks that Power he
was not able to bend, and levels whatever opposes to his unbridled Appetite:
and maugre Magna Charta, (which in the first place grants, that the Church of
England be free, and all her Rights and Liberties inviolable,) the Treasures
and Revenues of the Church, nay, its very Foundations and Lands are no longer
spared, than that King's Profusions needed not fresh Supplies.

To this end, by an Act in the 26 of his Reign, the King is declared Head of
the Church of England, in Spirituals, and that under the Penalty of High
Treason to deny it. But this Sounding Monstrous Novel, many of the most eminent
for Learning and Piety, who could not believe what they had never before heard,
nor pretend to believe, what really they did not, lost their Lives and
Fortunes, and that with all the outward marks of Infamy.

The Fence being thus broken down, whereby Unity had been thus long preserved,
no wonder if way was soon made for multiplying of Opinions: For People being
once persuaded, they had been taught one untruth, and that in a point of so
great importance, as the Headship of the Church in Spirituals; how could they
forbear to doubt, whether they were not imposed upon, and taught Untruths in
many others also, since both the one and the other depended on the same
Authority? And to what other Oracle could they then possibly resort for the
solution of their Doubts, but either to the mere Letter of the Scriptures, on
all hands admitted to be God's Word, or else every man to his own
Interpretation for himself? Since, if the Church it self had been so foully
deceived therein, and therefore forsaken by them, certainly no other could
pretend Authority to deliver the true Sense, so as to oblige others to the
belief of it.

But the King himself having looked upon that Power as intolerable, which had
been ever before Superior to him in Spirituals, could now less brook any
control or contradiction from His own Subjects, over whose Souls and
Consciences He assumed a more absolute Dominion, than ever any Pope had done
before, or any King of England over their Bodies or Estates.

By this absolute Spiritual Power, he thought to put a stop to that great
difference of Opinions which multiplied every day: and backing the said
Spiritual Power with Authority of Parliaments, which he had always at his beck,
and ready for his turn, he began first to think of some means of Reducing
Dissenters by Acts of Uniformity; and then to make Tests, much like to our
Modern ones, as to the meekness of their Style, tho a little point blank as to
their matter: For in the 31st of his Reign, it is Enacted, That

If any hold, that in the Sacrament of the Altar, there is not present the
Natural Body and Blood of our Savior, born of the Blessed Virgin; or that any
substance of Bread and Wine romans after Consecration, he shall be Burnt, and
otherwise forfeit, as in case of High Treason.

If any hold Communion under both Kinds necessary, or that Priests or Religious
may Marry, or oppose private Masses, or deny Auricular Confession; or if a
Priest or Religious Person Marry, they shall suffer Death, and forfeit as in
the case of Felony.

And by these Antiprotestant-Tests, very many (well-meaning persons no doubt)
were violently hurried out of their Lives and Fortunes, with as much (I would
say with as little) Reason and Justice, as they have been of late: For setting
aside on which part the Truth of those points did lie; men being left to their
own private Interpretation of Scripture, exempted from all Authority of the
Church, how could they ever bring themselves to believe what they could not
find in their own Sense of Scripture-Words? or why should they be forced to
become Hypocrites, and pretend to believe what they did not?

Again, by a Statute of 32 of Hen. 8. it was Enacted, that all Decrees and
Ordinances which (according to God's Word) should be ordained in matters of
Faith and Religion, by the Bishops and others thereto appointed by the King's
Letters Pattents, should be obeyed and believed by all the King's Subjects.

The King, in whom then rested the final result of all Controversies in
Religion, would no doubt ever Judge all his own Decrees to be according to
God's Word. So here was an Implicit Faith to be yielded not only to what the
King then had, but to whatever more he should hereafter decree. A Burden sure
too heavy for any man, that had any sense of any Religion at all.

In the 24 and 25 of the same King, it was Enacted, That all English Bibles of
Tyndal 's Translation, and other English Books of Faith, Religion or Scripture,
contrary to the Doctrine set forth, since 1540. or to be set forth by the King,
should be Abolished. None should deride or despise such Doctrine: none shall
retain Books for Maintenance of Anabaptism, or other Books suppressed, or to be
suppressed by the King's Proclamation. The Bible shall not be read in English by
the common People. Nothing shall be taught contrary to the King's Injunctions.

By a Statute of the 37 of the same King, it is declared, That the King has
full Authority to Correct all Heresies and Errors, and to exercise all other
manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and that the Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Ecclesiastical Persons, have no manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
[And if so, then they derive no more from Christ, than what is common to the
meanest Mechanic.]

By a Statute of the 35 of the same King, Power is given him to name sixteen
Spiritual and sixteen Temporal Persons, whom he pleased, to establish all such
Ecclesiastical Laws, as he and they thought fit.

So Volatile and Floating was Religion in those days; and yet every change,
under great Penalties to be obeyed.

And thus did this poor unfortunate Prince weary out himself in difficulties
most insuperable, to constrain by cruel Laws the Belief of his own tottering
Doctrines, after he had driven his Subjects from all reliance on those
Established by the Church.

But such doings against Nature and Reason, can have no longer duration, than
either Violence does compel, or Interest bribe Obedience: and therefore,
notwithstanding all those costly Baits of Church Lands, with which he had drawn
the Nobility and Commons to a Compliance; notwithstanding those many hideous
Executions, with which he had terrified Dissenters, during his life; lastly,
notwithstanding the careful choice and rigorous charge given to those to whose
Government he committed, by Testament, the Minority of his Successor; he is no
sooner laid in his Grave, but all he had done is overthrown and buried with
him: All, I say, except the Supremacy, that is, the Source and Fountain of all
the Miseries which had already befallen the one Party, and a Power of making as
much Havoc upon the Souls, Bodies, and Fortunes of the other, when time should
serve.

And accordingly by an Act of the 2 and 3 of Edward 6th, [reciting, That the
King (who was then a Child) had appointed certain Bishops and Learned Men to
make an Uniform Order of Common Prayer and Sacraments, which, says the Statute,
by the aid of the Holy Ghost, they had done: Tho very incoherent with any thing
done by Henry 8. who no less pretended to the aid of the same Holy Ghost] you
have a new Anticatholie Test Enacted, That if any refuse, or use any other, or
speak contemptibly of this, (the Makers, it seems, were very apprehensive of
being laughed at for their pains) they should suffer the Deprivations,
Forfeitures, and Imprisonments in that Act appointed. And this was further
enforced by a Statute of the 5 and 6 of Edw. 6. which obliges all to come to
Church on all Sundays and Holidays.

And by an Act of the 3 and 4 of Edward 6. Cap. 11. The King had power to name
thirty two persons, to compile such Ecclesiastical Laws, as he and they thought
fit: And Cap. 12. To name twelve to settle the Form of Making and Consecrating
Bishops and Ministers.

The inferences from all these Acts, are so natural, obvious and easy, that I
shall leave every man to his own Remarks on them.

But this again held not long; for by an Act of the 1st of Queen Mary, all that
was done before, concerning Religion, was again Repealed: and the Sanguinary
Severities of this Queen's Reign were no less ineffectual and deplorable, than
those of her Father and Brother. They were indeed designed to restore that
Spiritual Church Authority, which, when submitted to, can alone prevent or heal
all Dissensions about Religion: but they had a quite contrary effect, and left
those whom they pretended to reduce, in a far greater degree of horror and
aversion from all Peace and Reconciliation, than they were before.

To her succeeded Queen Elizabeth in the Throne, as she did her Brother in the
Supremacy: For, as he, a Child, so now she, a Woman, (forbidden by God's Laws,
so much as to speak in the Church) ascends the Chair, and declares her self
Supreme Governor of the Church of England. And by an Act of the 1st of her
Reign, Power is given to her and her Successors, to Reform, Correct, and Amend
all Errors, Heresies, Schisms, and Offenses.

After this time, such an Inundation of Penal and Sanguinary Laws, to compel
the Worship of this Idol so set up, as would require more than this whole day
to enumerate.

But I am the more willing to instance in some of them, because it was she that
began to employ her Two-edged Supremacy, against all sorts of Dissenters, as
well Protestant as Catholic: and from her too exemplary zeal for Uniformity,
have sprung all those Penal Laws, by which either her self or Successors, have
endeavored to maintain the Church of England, by depressing all others.

Twelve Pence a Sunday is a mere Trifle in the eye of a thoughtless rich man,
who perhaps is in no danger of paying it: But how supportable to a poor
Labourer, perhaps lame too, or blind, old, or sick, and with a Family to
maintain? and at last, for his dissent alone, excluded from the relief even of
a morsel of Bread from the Parish.

The Twenty Pound a Month is no great matter from men of large Estates: But how
impossible to be paid by him that has less? and yet Body, Lands, and Goods,
must all go to make it out.

The two Thirds of a Dissenter's Lands, must indeed needs pinch close even upon
the greatest; for men of Estates are Educated to suitable Expenses, and are
generally under as great difficulties, to keep within their bounds, as those of
smaller Fortunes: How then can they subsist after two Thirds are lopt off?

But all this, tho tending to the ruin and famishing, not only of the
Offender, but of his innocent Wife, Children and Posterity; yet you may say, it
breaks no bones, nor extends to life: But the end is not yet.

No man doubts but that a Roman Catholic is a Christian, and also a Member of
the True Church; (tho he as also every one is) Erroneous in the opinion of
every man that differs from him: Yet by a Statute of 13 Eliz. If any man shall
reconcile another, or be reconciled himself to the Church of Rome, both
Reconciler and Reconciled, shall be punished as Traitors; and that without any
regard, whether the person Reconciled were before Pagan, Turk, Jew, or Atheist.

No Man denies, that a Priest of the Roman Church is rightly Ordained, for the
Exercise of Spiritual Functions: Yet if any such, being a Subject of this
Kingdom, do but set his foot on English Ground, his Native Country, without
other Offense, he shall suffer as a Traitor, 27 Eliz. chap. 2.

It is known, that the Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion cannot be
without the help of Priests, yet if any Entertain, or but Relieve any such, he
shall be punished with Death, as a Felon, 27 Eliz. chap. 2.

Many about us have felt the smart of the Laws against Conventicles. But by the
Statute of 35 of Q. Eliz. we find, that if any absenting from Church, a Month,
shall afterward resort to a Conventicle, he shall be committed to Prison; and,
if he Conform not within three Months, he shall abjure the Realm, or suffer as
a Felon, without Benefit of Clergy.

These, one would think, were somewhat severe, and that any tolerable degree of
Truth thus guarded, might be of sufficient force to resist the Batteries of all
Opposers.

And yet in so dreadful a manner has this unhappy Land been ever since haunted
with Panick and Imaginary Fears, that notwithstanding all this, and whatever
more the Wit and Art of Man have been able to do or invent, for the securing of
their Church, they have been always calling for more, as often as there is a
Sessions of Parliament.

Out of which Fear have at last sprung up their Two Darling Acts; The first of
the 25th of the late King, Entitled, An Act to prevent the Danger arising from
Popish Recusants. And thereby, All that shall not take the Sacraments, Swear,
and Declare, (as is therein required) are Excluded His Majesty's Service. The
other in the 30th of the late King, Entitled, An Act for the more effectual
Preservation of the King's Person and Government. And this Excludes from
Parliament All, and from the King's presence, Many, that shall not Swear and
Declare, as is therein required.

As these are Acts of Parliament, they ought to be Treated with Respect, and
Understood in such a Sense as may Consist with Loyalty, and the Being of
Government; that is, that That Great and Wise Body had no other intent, then
what the Title and Preamble of those Acts seem to import, viz. The King's
Security from the Danger of Admitting into his Service, Council, or Presence,
by Surprise, or Inadvertency, such as they then conceived not likely to be
faithful to him. Yet not meaning to thrust from him, any of whose Truth and
Abilities he himself should be assured, and as occasion required, should call,
and by his Royal Dispensation enable to serve him.

But in the Sense, to which These Acts have been since Commonly, I may say
Andaciously Wrested, that is, so to Tie up the King's hands, that he shall by
no Means, nor on any Extremity be capable of receiving Aid, Succor, and
Service from so many Thousands of his Subjects, (how Faithful or Able soever)
as shall believe it either not lawful to Swear at all, or not to Do, Swear and
Declare, as is required; or, whatever their Judgments be, shall neglect to do
it, when required: This were to raise up the Acts into a Mortal War against
themselves, and to pervert The more effectual Means of the King's Preservation
and Government, Pretended, into a more Real and Certain Ruin and Destruction of
Both, Intended: And surely, it were but a sorry Compliment to so many Great
Men, as were concerned in the Passing of these Acts, to tell them at this time,
that this was indeed their very Meaning.

We all know, Gentlemen, that by the Act of the 25th of Edw. 3. To Compass or
Imagine the Death of the King is High Treason. But this Compassing is not
restrained to the narrow Compass of Designing ^^^sent Execution, by Poison,
Dagger, Screwed Guns, and Chewed Silver Bullets only. No, our Laws interpret
this Compassing to a far more extended sense.

Sir Edw. Cook (though then no friend to the Prerogative) tells us, that he that
declares by Overt act, to Depose the King, does enough to prove, he Compasses
the King's Death. And so it is, to Imprison, or Take the King into his Power.
For there is but a small distance between Deposing or Imprisoning the King, and
his Death. So that whosoever Compasses the one, virtually and obliquely, tho
not directly, Compasses the other also.

In the Case of the R. Reverend Father, Dr. Plunket, Lord Archbishop of Armagh,
and Primate of Ireland, who fell one of the Victims to the late celebrated
Plot: An Intention to raise Rebellion, was by my late Lord Chief Justice
Pemberton declared Treason, because Rebellion does include an Intention of the
King's Death.

So, in the late Lord Russel's Case, an Intention of Seizing the King's Guards
was adjudged Treason, because Depriving the King of his Defense, does imply a
Compassing of his Death.

So to detain the King's Fortresses or Ships of War, is a Compassing the King's
Death, because so considerable a part of that strength, which is to defend his
Life, is withheld from him.

And I my self have heard our present King, most admirably and rightly observe,
that that Monstrous Treason and Rebellion here in England against his late
Glorious Father, began not in 42, as is vulgarly supposed, but long before, by
the Trains and Lines prepared for it.

These are a few of the many Instances I could give on this Subject. I pray
you, then, what Interpretation can be made of such Endeavors for Excluding and
Wresting from his Majesty's Service and Presence, and from his Counsel in
Parliament, so vast a Number of his Subjects, (more valuable than Forts or
Ships) of whose Fidelity and Capacity to serve him, he has the utmost
assurance. Looks not this somewhat like taking him into their Power, who thus
Thrust others from him? And who knows, but in time to come, the Number thus
excluded, may be ten times greater than now it is? And who knows also, but many
of those, who make no scruple of the Tests, may yet pretend it, or whether they
pretend it or no, may yet forbear them, of set purpose, to defert his Service;
till between such as cannot, and such as will not take them, under pretense of
Conformity to Law, we shall have at last, a King left without one Subject, to
Counsel, Obey, or Come near him.

Under this Contemplation, of what now really is, and what hereafter may
farther happen, with what face can any but pretend to Loyalty, and not to be
open Enemies to their King, their Country, and the Public Peace, when at the
same time, they cling and hug themselves up in so Pernicious or perhaps
Treasonous Interpretation of these Two Acts. And what Horror and Indignation
against them, must it needs create in every man, that has but the least spark
of Loyalty left in his breast.

Gentlemen, My business is not here to declare what I take to be true or false
in Matters of Religion, nor to advance the one, nor depress the other. What I
speak of, is only in reference to the Public Peace, which, as much as in me
lies, is my Duty to promote.

To this end it is, that I have given you here, for the Subject, a very short
(though for our time too large a) Scheme of many of the great Mutations in
Religion here in England, of late times, by Public Authority, and of some few
of the many sharp Laws, from time to time invented, by each prevailing Party,
to force the submission of others.

The multitude of Men and even of whole Families, not only that have suffered,
but have been driven into Foreign Lands, or ruined and swallowed up by those
Devouring Laws, are even beyond account or any Man's power to number up. Where,
by the way, it must be observed, that the very suffering is a clear proof of
the sincerity and well-meaning, though it cannot be always of the truth of the
sufferer.

And after all this Havoc, where every little Knave receives encouragement, to
insult over and make a prey of his more worthy Neighbor, at length up comes
this Brace of Tests, Midwiv'd into Acts, by the aid of persons, then famed
indeed for Patriots, but soon after Notorious in the ensuing Conspiracy,
succeeded as their Natural Issue, by a Plot that is the Disgrace of our Nation,
or rather, The Plot and later Tests, Twinchildren of the first, succeeded also
by Votes for Excluding his present Majesty from his Inheritance, by an Horrible
Conspiracy, against the Lives of our present and late King; and by the Great
and Dangerous Rebellion of England; and now at last, to the World's wonder, and
their own shame, most closely, and that in the worst sense, adhered unto, by
such Vain Boasters of Loyalty, as would allow no share of it to any part of the
World but themselves; tho by this very adherence their own share of it becomes
far too little for any prudent Prince to rely on.

But at length, God Almighty in his Mercy has given us a King, whose Heart he
has inspired with Wisdom, to discern the Imprudence as well as Injustice of all
these Severe Laws, with mildness to admit a general Abolition of them all; though
from many of them great Riches have been, and might still be, drawn to the
Crown, and with Fortitude to prosecute with an undaunted Courage, as well as
indefatigable Labor, so glorious a Work, though strongly encountered therein, by
Two sorts of men; Both, I confess, too numerous, and in their own Opinions very
mighty, and as many more, as either of these are able to impose upon, or
deceive.

The one, such as being unacquainted with the use of Reasoning, or not liking
the labor of it, imagine, Religion can be no longer kept up, than it is,
Gig-like, lasht into motion; and yet themselves much too tender to bear the
least touch. And yet again, through want of Thought, expose themselves to the
utmost peril, not foreseeing, that they cannot be sure to be always uppermost;
and when not so, the Penalties they prepare or retain for others, fall directly
on their own heads.

The other sort, such whose manner of life seems to indicate little other sense
of Religion, than a fear lest their vicious Customs should fall under some
restraint by the Practice of it.

Right Religion consists not in Violence, Noise or Tumult: God was not in the
Whirlwind, nor in the Earthquake, nor in the Fire, when he spoke to Elias, but
in the still small Voice. Religion rather consists in Meekness, long Suffering,
and doing as we would have others do to us.

We have our Savior's word, That a Kingdom divided cannot stand. Now, there
are but two ways imaginable, whereby such a Division among Christians, can
possibly be avoided, as must else necessarily terminate in the utter overthrow
of Christianity it self; which is Christ's own Kingdom, and which every
Christian must needs abhor to think of.

One is by the general Submission of particular Christians to one common
Authority; which, how much soever to be wished for, cannot now be supposed
practicable; and therefore no more need be said of that. The other is, by
bearing with one another differences in Religion, and in letting every man
enjoy his own, without offending, or being offended at his Neighbor.

This later His Majesty has graciously chosen: He has not only already granted
a general Indulgence, (which yet can last but during Pleasure) but he is also
ready totally to dissolve our Bonds, and set us so free, that even his own or
Successor's hands shall not be able to hurt us, for matters of Religion: And
this by a Magna Charta, as solemn and sacred, as that by which we enjoy our
Lives and Estates.

What then remains on our parts? Must we always imitate the hardened Jews in
murmuring against our most Benign Rulers, against God himself, and nauseate the
Quails and Manna he sends us? Must we always (Slave-like) hug the Chains which
tie up both King and People, not only from restoring the Kingdom's Glory
abroad, but even from its necessary Defense at home? Or ought we not rather,
with united Hearts, first offer up our Thanks and Praises to God, in whose
Hands are the Hearts of Kings, for having put it into the King's heart to do
such good things for his People: Next, to present our unanimous Thanks, in an
Humble Address, to His Majesty; and then, with as united hands, and with all
the power we have, to serve and assist Him: Which, at this time, we can no ways
better do, than by employing our utmost endeavors to Find and Elect for
Parliament, when called, such Members, as we may be sure, or reasonably hope,
will readily and cheerfully join with His Majesty in this so Pious, Prudent,
Charitable, and kind Determination, joined with our hearty Prayers for the good
success of it.

It remains now, Gentlemen of the Jury, that I Address my self particularly to
you, and that I give you in charge, what Offenses you are to make enquiry of
for this present Sessions: But I am sensible that I have already trespassed
sufficiently upon the Patience of the Court; and tho the importance of my
Subject be really so great and considerable, both for the Service of His
Majesty, and for the Welfare of us all, that it does very well justify the
length of my Discourse, yet that I may not render it tedious without necessity,
I shall wave at present all enumeration of such particular matters, as make the
usual and ordinary subject of a Charge: You your selves, Gentlemen, are not
unacquainted of what nature they are: and Indictments and Presentiments will be
brought in to you, for all such more urgent matters, as shall need and require
a more special Consideration and Redress.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4. l. 19. read need to fear. p. 8. l. 21. after Jurisdiction, 1. but by
from and under His Majesty.


