INSTRUCTIONS FOR A Young Nobleman: OR, THE IDEA OF A Person of Honor.

Done out of French.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and S. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1683.

To my Lord Ruthyn, Eldest Son to the Right Honorable the Earl of Kent.
My Lord,
HOw differing soever have been the Sentiments of Mankind in points of Decency
and good Manners, every Nation has entertained and established certain Maxims,
as the Standards of a Wise and Prudent Conduct, and as things conducing nay
necessary to render the Commerce of life as well agreeable as advantageous. But
what People have been most happy in the choice of such General Rules, is not
very easy to determine; and should We allow the advantage to those who in each
Age have laid most Claim to Politeness, yet perhaps we may remain in some
Perplexity through the number of the Candidates. Amongst the Foreign Modern
Pretenders, the French seem to have the most General Vogue, which was the most
prevalent Motive toward my putting these Instructions into English, being the
Essays of one of that Nation, and thought worthy of being dedicated to their
King. But I know not whether they be considerable enough to atone for the
presumption in making them an offering to your Lordship, but must be forced to
have recourse to your Native Goodness for my Pardon. My Ambition to have your
Lordships Name in the Head of them, was, that the Idea of a Person of so much
Honor, would be the means of recommending them unto the Good Opinion of the
World, and of making way for their reception, by setting before them the Model
of what they only Copy. And indeed, though Greatness of Spirit, Capacity in
Affairs, Solidity of Knowledge and of Judgment with Courage and Loyalty, in
defense of our King and our Country, seem to be the Birthright of your Family;
Yet the Modesty, Prudence, Penetration and Affability, which already appear in
all your Actions, show you endued with no less Charming Qualities than those
which have acquired to your Family the Popular Glories you Inherit. Thus I can
hardly forbear Taxing my self as a Criminal to a High Degree, for aspiring to
Consecrate so small an Oblation to a Person so every way Conspicuous: But the
early Testimonies your Lordship has given of your Generosity and Disposition to
Countenance all Mankind in things that tend toward the promoting the Empire of
Virtue, made me Flatter my self that your Lordship would not deny me your
Protection in this Occasion. And brought me to give way to the inclination I
had to Honor your Merits: And though an Homage of this Nature may in no wise
be capable to proclaim your Virtues, yet I could no longer hold from falling in
with the General acclamations, nor forbear showing the Zeal and Ambition I have
to be accounted,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Humble and Most Devoted Servant, F. S.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR A Young Nobleman.
THE Love and Fear of God, is the first thing a Person of Quality ought to take
into Consideration; for this the Laws of Christianity not only lay upon him, as
an indispensable Obligation; but it is also certain, God will not bless his
Designs and Endeavors, if he abandon and have not recourse to him in all the
actions of his Life. Thus his respect for Holy and Religious matters must be
such, as may be proof against all Temptations. He must be inseparably wedded to
Religion, and shun, as Pests, such Libertines as dare oppose these Maxims.

After God, nothing ought to be so dear to him in this Life, as his Honor; he
must be mindful that the loss thereof is irreparable; that the World is Judge
in the Case; that the World pardons nothing, much less in Persons of great
Rank, than in those whose Birth or ill Fortune have placed in a lower Sphere,
as well by reason Envy does naturally fasten upon things the highest exalted,
as because the greater Quality a Person is of, the more Merit he ought to have;
and a Man of Birth and Fortune, without Esteem, is more worthy of Compassion
than of Envy.

I know very well, Reputation is subject to the Caprices of Fortune, as well as
the rest of things, and that it sometimes happens, prejudice is done to
Deserts; but this cannot last, for sooner or later Merit does make it self
Conspicuous, and it is impossible Fiction or Lying should subsist; for which
reason we ought to examine our selves often, call our Hearts and Actions to a
rigorous account, and when after a Scrutiny of this nature, we are satisfied
with our Thoughts and Conduct, we may march on boldly, and promise our selves
one day, the esteem of all mankind.

To attain to so great a blessing, our Nobleman must have an inexhaustible
stock of Goodness and Justice, without which he can neither be Generous,
Acknowledging, nor Faithful, which are the essential Qualities of a Gallant
man; for when I said he was to be careful of his Repute, I did not pretend to
confine it to one Quality alone. Valor is not sufficient to make a Man of
Honor; he must have Probity, be faithful to his Friend, true to his Word, seek
to oblige all Mankind, pity the unfortunate, especially those who do not
deserve so hard a Fate; and take delight in easing and comforting them, when an
occasion is offered for so doing; in a word, he must have an upright Heart.
Happy is he who has such an one as to be sensible of the Pleasure there is in
doing good to others! Whose Heart is faulty, sins in the principal, and carries
along with him the original of all Vices.

Vanity must above all things be avoided: It is one of the greatest weaknesses
the Soul of a Gentleman can be capable of, and it is commonly the Wrack of
Noble Persons in their Youth. When they see themselves attended by a numerous
splendid Retinue, they disown and look with Contempt upon all former
acquaintance. Instead of considering this as a trouble, which the Circumstances
of their Condition does oblige them to comply with, they make it a piece of
Grandeur, and seem to have set there the confines of their Merit. True Glory is
very opposite to this Conduct, and it is not by such means as these that
Persons of Honor distinguish themselves in the World.

Not but that a Noble man is to keep his Rank, of which he must be even
jealous, and support its advantages with the highest Rigor and Haughtiness,
against those who shall be so bold as to dispute 'em with him. But when people
contest nothing with him, pay him what they owe him, and do not boast and erect
themselves up to him, it is becoming and genteel to stoop sometimes down to
them. He must gain, if possible, the love of all People; and it is not without
reason that our Forefathers have said, That good Wine makes good Vinegar, that
there are no small Friends, nor small Enemies. Thus let his Nature and Carriage
be tempered with Sweetness and Courtisie, since that is the way to win the
Affections of those he Converses with, and to acquire the Esteem of all the
World.

He must be careful to avoid ill Companies, for as the frequenting of such is
pernicious, because People are insensibly led away by ill Examples, so it is
certain that the World will judge of him, according to the Maxim of the
Spanish Proverb, Dime con quien bives y te dire quien eres, Tell me whom thou
Converses with, I will tell thee who thou art. Thus he is only to engage with
such Persons as whose Reputation may answer for his own, let him give betimes
good impressions of his dispositions and behavior, and remember that on the
first Paces we make at our entrance into the World, does commonly depend the
good or ill Opinion that People have of us all the rest of our Life.

But as in the Current of the World, there may happen to be ill Persons amongst
those of his Condition, with whom he cannot dispense himself from having some
Commerce; yet let it be no further than what Civility and Necessity do exact
from him. Rid himself of them he must, both handsomely and with speed, and be
very Cautious how he contracts Friendship with men of that temper. We live in a
time that prudent Persons are loved and esteemed, and if we make Reflections,
we shall see that the King, whose Sentiments ought to serve for a Rule to all
the World, did never honor any others with his Favor than Persons of his
Character.

But when I advise him to be prudent and discrect, I do not mean that sort of
Wisdom which degenerates into pettishness. Wisdom and civil Pleasures are not
incompatible. It would be even dangerous for a man, when he is so young, to
affect seeming overwise, and it is the way of the Sir Formals, and the Sir
Foplings, which are two Characters he must carefully shun. True Wisdom does
not consist in a certain outside, which savours more of the Pedant than the
Gentleman; he may in some certain occasions allow himself to say such things as
are indeed but weak and trivial, but never to commit a silly action.

Let him have a noble boldness, let it imprint in his looks a certain honest
Confidence which we ought to have in our selves, when we know our hearts to be
true and upright. Let him stick to that, be cautious that this be not tinged
with Presumption, nor with contempt of those who approach him. Pride is capable
of spoiling the best things: Mankind has so general a hatred for the Proud,
that it sometimes proceeds to the doing them injustice in their best Qualities.
The Boasting Bullies may serve for a proof of what I say: Many of them do not
want Courage, nevertheless People take delight in doubting of their Valor; it
is the like with Wit and other Qualities. Let him be wary how he falls into
this fault, since it is capable of producing very ill effects.

Let him hate all vices in general, principally Lying and Drunkenness: the
first can only have entrance in a sordid mind; and as people commonly Lie only
for excuse, we may conclude, that a man who is subject to lying is subject to
commit Faults. For Drunkenness, as of all Vices there is none less in the mode
than it, and that the Ladies whose Commerce so much contributes to the
polishing a Gentleman, cannot bear with it, so it produces the worst effects
imaginable. It disturbs the Reason, and when a man falls into the Company of
People in the same Condition, it is a hard matter to come off without such
inconveniences, as we sometimes repent of all the rest of our Lives. A Drunkard
becomes a sloven, slupid, incapable of secrecy; a Quality of all Qualities the
most necessary in War, and at Court, to a man who aspires to high things; for
what likelihood is there that great Employments should be consided in a Person,
who is always upon the point of losing his Reason: The Marsha^ de Rantzaw, who
was otherwise a Great man, had the cruel displeasure by not being Master of
himself in his Drink, to fail in his interprise upon Ostend, the Conquest
whereof would have been so much to his Glory and Renown.

Neglect he must not, any of those exterior Qualities, that may serve to
render him pleasant and grateful; for though he may be a man of Honor without
having them; it is nevertheless true that those who possess them have great
advantages over others. I place in this File, a genteel behavior, and a
certain graceful air, which we may call the I know not what of good mien,
Dancing, Singing, sports of Exercise, and the Instruments suitable to a Person
of Quality; now as for other Exercises, as Riding and Fencing, they are of an
absolute necessity, since they serve to preserve both Life and Honor.

Above all, he must Cultivate his Wit. It is much finer to please by it, than
by any other talent and thing. But when I give him this advice, I do not desire
he should confine himself all the day long to his Closet, and plunge himself
into the profound Sciences: Every one must know and act in his own Province,
that is not his. I mean by Polite Learning, that which consists in the
knowledge of History, Mathematics, Geography, Chronology, Languages, Heraldry,
Genealogy, and the Beauties of Poetry. Yet I do not pretend he should be
ignorant of the other Sciences, to the point of being obliged to keep silence,
when any of them are the Topic of the Company. A man of the World ought to be
Universal, and though he know not things to the bottom, yet he ought to know so
much of them, as to be able to speak his Opinion without clashing with good
Sense, and listen with delight to those who speak upon any Subject whatsoever.

Let all he says be natural and easy: Let him not go beyond his Character, but
remember that the best of all Books, is not to be compared with the knowledge
of the World. This is what he ought to study most, for that purpose he must
address himself to what is greatest, both for understanding and quality in both
Sexes, and not despond for meeting with difficulties, which discourage those
who begin to enter into the World. There are none but persons of ordinary
merit, with whom it is so easy to make acquaintance. Others are something more
shy and reserved; but it is much better he constrain himself for some time with
these, than to receive the advances which might be made by those others.

Railery is also a great help to please in the World, but the practice thereof
is difficult and dangerous. It must be sinely drawn, nice, and rejoice the
Company, and not gaul and wound the person who is railied. It is a very
slippery step, in case the Railery be sharp and bitter; or that it attacks
people by their weak sides, it degenerates into Offense. True it is, that there
are such as are innocent: Nevertheless, as Railery is a Combat of Wit, wherein
the Heart ought to take no further share, than what concerns Joy, how innocent
soever it may be: He who Railies ought to stop, when he perceives it disturbs
the Person who is railied: For as naturally People do not love to be overcome,
it happens when the mind does not furnish wherewith to answer, that Spite
succeeds to the Confusion they have of being obliged to yield; and insensible
they make a serious business of a thing, which in the beginning was only a
trivial matter. All well considered, it is so difficult a matter to Raily well,
and so many measures are to be kept in such an occasion, that there is no great
hurt in abstaining from it altogether. With how much greater reason judge of
what we ought to think of Detraction, which is the most common and most
dangerous of all Vices.

Drolling is also another way of Railying, whereof there are two sorts: The
first consists in a certain turn that is given to things, which both surprises
and rejoices at the same time; this, provided it be without Affectation, is
commendable and entertaining: the other is not the like. As it commonly turns
upon dull Equivocations, and upon a kind of punning and playing with words,
which can only bring Contempt upon their Authors, it is unworthy of a Person of
Quality. In case he finds his Wit inclined that way, he is only to make use of
that as can please People of a good Taste. It Is dangerous to divert the
Public, and to take it rightly, when a man is of a certain Quality, the
personage of a Droll, how well soever he may perform it, is a personage he
ought seldom to act.

Whatsoever I may have said against Railery, it is nevertheless necessary to
understand it thoroughly and aright. Railery has been in all Ages; and a man
would pass for a Clown, if he did not bear with it in certain Ren-counters; the
principal is not to confound it with offense. It is one of the circumstances of
our Life; wherein we stand most in need of our Judgment. The incertainties in
this Case are troublesome. It is from them that arise those Scruples of honor,
which are most commonly the cause of the quarrels we see happen in the World;
for it is very rare that People have a positive reason to be offended; though
the number of the Fiery and Passionate be great, we find few who are so to that
degree as to give us those cruel Affronts, wherein we have only to consult our
Hearts.

To avoid these niceties, he must, as I have already said, know how to
distinguish the things which do, from those which do not oblige us to have
Resentment; now for ought I know, there is as much hurt in being unseasonably
pettish and angry, as in not being so when there is occasion. When Railery is
innocent, a Man must be a Brute to complain thereof; when it is too sharp, the
Party Railied ought to let the Person who Railies know, by an air somewhat
serious, that it does not please him; and after that, he must be void of
Reason, if he does not change his style.

As for things which are positively offensive, it is not the like. According to
the Maxims of the World, which yet I do not advise him to prefer, before those
of the Gospel, they cannot be repulsed with too much vigor; but there are many
which are thought to be of this nature, which are not so; and it is principally
in those sort of occasions, that we ought to know the Reasons which deserve our
proceeding to such like extremities. Blows, the Lie, reproaches of Treachery,
Baseness and Cowardice are of this number; as for these, I have nothing to say
to him. I presuppose that a man who has received any of these affronts, is not
Master of his Resentment; and I have reason to believe, that since God has the
goodness to pardon the first Motions, those who exercise the Laws will not be
more Rigorous.

The Conduct he is to hold for the avoiding such like misfortunes, is to live
very seriously, and not have any Commerce, if possible, with such Persons, as
lie under the imputation of being quarrelsome; for how large a share soever he
may have of Wisdom, he can never have enough to live peaceably with Fools and
Madmen; and though he should abound in Prudence, nothing seems to me more
troublesome, than to be obliged to constrain our selves for Persons who do not
deserve the pains. I know very well there are unlucky moments, wherein
notwithstanding all the precaution that can be taken, a misfortune cannot be
avoided, but they must also grant that this is rare, and that of twenty
quarrels which happen, two thirds of them might have been avoided, if Prudence
had been used.

Amongst other things, my Nobleman must distrust indiscreet Zealots. There are
Persons who cannot endure that the least thing should be said of their Friends,
and who take fire upon the least jest that is made upon them. I own this
departs from a good Principle: But People do not think, that in making a
quarrel upon their Friends account, they bring him in too, and that the best
service we can render our Friends, is not to engage them. He may repartee for
them without doubt, when the occasion is worth the trouble; but this ought to
be after such a manner as affords them Protection, without pinching him who has
started them in discourse.

This Maxim is principally necessary, in regard of Ladies. Their Honor is so
nice a point, that the best Service we can do them, is never to bring them into
play. Herein it is good that there be neither Tenant nor Assaillant, this
Combat, be the issue what it will, would turn to their disadvantage. We are no
longer in the time of the ancient Chevalry, wherein people judged favorably of
things. The age we live in is somewhat less Charitable, and the world will
hardly forbear believing, but that a man who draws his Sword in the quarrel of
a Woman, was obliged thereto by some acknowledgment. The Defender in such an
occasion, would be more to be feared, than the Offender; and I believe a Lady
who loves her Reputation, would have much more reason to complain of the former.

Persons who speak much, are commonly subject tothese sorts of indiscretions,
and we may say that they are not fit for the Court. It is very difficult to
speak so much without discovering more than we ought, and without saying many
idle and impertinent things; but though they should say nothing that is blame
worthy, for ought I know, a little less prolixity would produce a better
esfect; the best things have their excess; voices and the Lute are attended
with many Charms, nevertheless to hear alwys singing and thrumming, one would
grow weary at length. Judge then what a penance it is to be with a Person who
speaks much, and who for one good thing, says a thousand that are slat and
tiresome.

Conversation is not of the nature of Harangues and Speeches. Every one ought
to listen and speak in his turn. It ought neither to be too eloquent and
florid, nor too starched and studied; it must be managed by hazard; every one
must paint himself in his discourse; in a word, it must be natural.

It ought likewise, as much as possible, to turn upon indifferent matters,
especially amongst Courtiers, who are commonly the Spies of one another. I own
it is troublesome to constrain ones self with so much rigor, and that thereby
we deprive our selves of one of the greatest Comforts of Life. Happy is he who
can find a Friend, who is another himself, and more happy he who can find him
amongst his own Kindred: He may boast of having found an inestimable treasure;
but when do people meet with those Friends, and those Relations, with whom it
is safe to speak on all things with an open Heart? It is not sufficient that
they love you, they must also be capable of Secrecy, which is a Talent God has
not bestowed upon all Mankind.

My Person of Honor must nevertheless endeavor to gain such a Friend as may
be faithful; for so exact a reservedness is a heavy burden: The best precaution
that can be taken in so nice a matter, is to allow a great deal to the general
approbation. We ought to believe that the Eyes of the Public are not so
subject to be mistaken as our own, and that we live in a time, as does not so
flatter People, as to give them such Qualities as they are not possessed of.
Let a man have never so much Wit, yet it is a hard task to be without a Friend.
Our own interests do blind us in some Rencounters, and men of the greatest
Sense and Parts, do stand in need of Council. Half of the Faults that are
committed, proceed from the want thereof, and who takes all his Resolutions in
his own Head, is in danger of being mistaken.

History, for want of a Friend, is a considerable help and advantage. It is a
source from whence excellent Counsels may be drawn; it instructs us at the
expense of the dead, without fearing their betraying us, or revealing our
secrets. As there is nothing to be feared nor hoped for from them, they do not
flatter us, they cite our Faults without disguise. It is a spacious Theater
where a vast number of Transactions are to be seen, by which we may regulate
our Conduct. Neither does the Books of Morality, nor the Sentiments of
Philosophers instruct us after so beneficial a manner; but if the reading
thereof is necessary for all people, it is principally so for such Persons who
stand fair by their Rank, or their Services one day to command Armies; there is
nothing which so much illustrates the Wit, and forms and ripens the Judgment
more: it has given views to the greatest men; it enters into Councils of War;
and it is difficult to be a good General, unless a man possess it to perfection.

It is of no less use in Embassies: It teaches the Ranks and Presidences of
Crowns, shows the advancement of Families, the Erection of Dutchies, of
Parliaments, and great Offices, acquaints us with the Manners, the Religions,
the Customs, and interests of Princes; inspires noble Sentiments, has its place
in Conversations; and though it should only serve to satisfy the curiosity of
those who read it, it would well deserve not to be neglected.

Let not a Nobleman be too impatient to show his Wit, in what kind soever it
may be; the disappointments in that case are dangerous; and it commonly
happens, that those who would go on so fast, instead of advancing, lose Ground.
He must acquire a free and easy pronunciation; the terms he makes use of
should be proper and significative, neither too lofty, nor too mean: Let there
be a noble simplicity in his Discourses: let good Sense always preside therein:
It is for it to hold the Rudder, and without it he can neither have that
exactnses nor rightness of Wit, which are so necessary for our good behavior
in Life.

I know not what to say to him upon Love. It is a passion which may produce
both good and ill effects, the property of Love being to transform the Object
which Loves into the Object beloved; this depends on the deserts, or the bad
qualities of the Person he fixes upon: Be it as it will, we must never allow
this Passion to make us neglect our Duty, nor to get the Mastery of our Honor.
History teaches us how fatal it proved to Mark Anthony, by having suffered it
to lead him away with too much blindness, when he abandoned his Fortune and his
Honor to follow Cleopatra. Nevertheless, it is the part of a Gentleman to
respect and honor Ladies, whose Commerce is both pleasant and useful. A
reprimand from a beautiful person, whom we have a desire to please, is often
more effectual than all the Counsels in the World, and I know such men as are
indebted to the fair Sex, for the best part of their Breeding and Merit.

Let him endeavor betimes to become of a supple humor: Those who abound in
their own sense, and decide with a tone of Authority, how much reason soever
they may have on their side, do hardly ever prevail with any Body to be of
their Sentiments. Not but that we ought to maintain our Opinion, when we think
it just, but it must be with a certain temperament, which may render him who
disputes against us, ready to yield without Spite and Reluctance. If the
Reasons he alleges make us sensible we are in the wrong, let us not
obstinately persevere in a bad Cause. Be the first to Condemn our selves, by
that means we may come out of that Labyrinth with Honor, and set such a value
upon our selves, as few people are capable of.

A Person of Honor is never to commit any Faults, if they are possibly to be
prevented; but if he is so unhappy as to commit any, let him endeavor, at
least, to make the best of them. Let them oblige him to take precautions
against himself, by fortifying the weak places of his Breast. It seldom
happens that Faults are committed out of Ignorance; Reason always Condemns what
is not well. But it often happens, that not being so strong as the passion
which opposes it, it has not the power to curb the Will. For this Reason we
must almost ever be upon our Guard, against the weak places. It is with the
Heart of a Man, as with Towns of War, there are some places that are so strong
that they defend themselves: A Liberal man has no need of being upon his Guard
against Covetousness, a Sober man against Intemperance, a Cold man against
Choler, a Stout man against Fear, and so on with the rest, there needs no more,
than to suffer our selves to be guided by our own Constitution. But it is not
so with those places which Nature has not taken care to defend; there it is
that a Wise man ought to give Testimonies of the force of his mind, that if in
case he cannot attain to the Correcting of his ill Inclinations, he may
nevertheless act in such manner, that they may be only known to himself. I know
that this is a difficult matter; but after all it is not impossible, when we
are watchful upon our Conduct.

One of the things which most contributes to this design, is to have a
propensity to judge well of all the World, and not to be a Critic: This
Character is odious; People examine us so strictly, that they pry into our
Imperfections, and though we had none, yet such a man would be accused of many.
Not that I disapprove of Criticism, it serves to inform us at other Peoples
Costs; but I would only have it pass within the circle of our own Breasts,
otherwise the Consequences thereof are dangerous. When we have Friends, we are
very much to blame not to have Reason; but a Man will gain but few, by turning
a public Censurer. We should see all, make good use of our Observations, and
say nothing.

We must be also careful how we let our selves be surprised by Envy. We should
take delight in commending what deserves Commendation: Nothing shows more the
meaness of a Heart, than repining at the Praises that are bestowed upon others.
It is a sign of Malignity and Weakness, which can only depart from an ill
bottom. There is a superiority in praising; because, as Plutarch says: He who
gives is presumed richer than he who receives; and moreover we ought always to
render Justice to Merit, though it were in the Person of our Enemies.

We must have an aim in all we undertake: None but shallow Wits, and Hearts
void of Ambition, live without design; but what advantage soever a man may reap
thereby, he is never to practice nor attain it, but by such means as are
generous and noble. He must root it strongly in his mind, that the greatest of
all Blessings is, to have nothing to reproach ones self with, and that we
purchase things too dear, when they cost us a Repentance, which is almost ever
attended by a great Contempt of ones Self. Though we may use never so much care
to hide our bad places from us, yet there are few days but that they offer
themselves to our view in all their deformity; and there is no Breast so
Corrupted, but has still some tincture of good, which in spite of it, inclines
it to hate Vice.

A Nobleman must be often mindful that he is sprung from an Illustrious Family,
which has produced Great Men, and that it would be a shame for him not to
imitate such Patterns, and is to take the most considerable of his Ancestors
for a Model. Let him inform himself carefully of the actions which rendered him
Conspicuous in the World, and of the means he made use of to attain to the
Reputation he acquired. Inform himself too he must of his failings, that so he
may avoid them; and if possible, let there not a Day pass without making some
Reflection upon himself.

Advice touching the Court.
AFter his having acquired Esteem, it is but reasonable to think of the
advancement of his Fortune. Generous Persons cannot have too much Riches,
because they always make a good use of them, and instead of loving them for
their own sake, they only consider them as means that may serve to show their
Merit. For this Reason we ought to apply our selves to the Court, since it is
there that Favors are distributed; but we must look upon it as a stormy Sea,
full of Banks and Rocks, whereon it is easy to be Shipwrackt, unless our
Conduct be dexterously managed.

The first thing we ought to apply our selves to, is to know perfectly the
different Interests of the Court we enter in; for though all Courts are alike;
tho this has much resemblance to those which preceded it; and that there be
certain general Maxims which have always been, and which will always be; it is
nevertheless certain, that whosoever keeps to these general Maxims, will not much
promote his Fortune. It is not sufficient to be Secret, Circumspect, Regular,
Assiduous, Complaisant, and Flattering: Those Qualities, though essential, may
not be of any use, if Judgment does not fit them to occasions. The importance
is to know how to nick and make use of an Opportunity. For that purpose my
Gentleman must above all things study the mind of his Master; unless he know it
thoroughly, it will be a difficult matter to prevent committing mistakes, which
by occasioning us pettish answers, do raise in us disgust, and vexations, which
often contribute to the loss of our Fortune.

Not that after all the precaution that can be used for the begging of Boons
and Favors, he can be assured of obtaining them; there may be Rivals and
Candidates who deserve them; and in that case we may see that preference
depends upon the Stars; but at least by demanding in that manner, if he is
refused, it is with gentleness, and the Repulse he meets with, sets him fair
for the first Favor that is offered.

Spite and Impatience are things the most injurious in the World at Court; for
as they do not only take away a certain air of Joy, Cheerfulness, and Freedom,
which renders us agreeable, they also abandon the Heart to motions which are so
much the more dangerous, as they almost ever give some blemish to respect.

I know very well the Court does not always seem just in the distribution of
its Favors, whether that it be sometimes obliged to defer Rewards, or that it
has peculiar views beyond our knowledge, or that people are born under so
unlucky a Star, as is not to be overcome by Perseverance and Merit; but though
it should be capable of committing injustices (which we ought not to believe)
when we consider that it is to no purpose to fret and fume against a Master,
and that this only serves to incur his hatred: We find the best Course is to
lay aside our aims till another season, and to suffer with respect what indeed
we cannot hinder.

The Life of a Courtier ought to be a continual study of subtlety of Spirit. No
false steps are made at Court, but what are taken notice of. As interest reigns
there more than all things, we ought to be persuaded that those who steer the
same Course with us, are as many spies upon our Conduct, who fail not to take
advantage of our failings. We must be Eternally upon our Guard, not only
against those who surround us, but likewise against our selves; be of a plying
and slexible temper, and always propose to our selves an aim that may lead us
to something as may augment our Fortune, or our Glory.

For the bringing this design to pass, my Gallant man must, according to the
different employs he is called to, do his Duty with extreme industry, and
application, that his Master, or those in whom he reposes the choice of
Persons, may find in him a subject worthy of their favor; for let the Prince
and his Ministers have never so much inclination for him; he cannot pretend to
their favor, unless he give them a Lawful pretense to prefer him before an
infinite number of Persons, who have right to lay claim thereto.

Neither must a Courtier, be he who he will, trust in his own merit, and in his
Services, to the Degree of believing they cannot be without Him. We live in a
time wherein there is no want of Subjects capable of supplying vacant places;
and how rich soever the Court is, for ought I know, we may say, that it has
less favors to bestow, than there are persons who deserve them.

Let him Cultivate the Protection of Ministers of State, and have a care of
being infected with the distemper of certain restless Spirits, who are ever
condemning their Conduct. This is openly to blame the choice which their
Sovereign has made of their Persons, and by an inexcusable retort, wound the
Respect we are obliged to pay our Prince. Private persons are so far remote
from Affairs, that be their suggestions never so great, all their Discourse
upon such matters must be with great incertainty. Affairs make Men, and upon
this principle we ought to conclude, that though those Persons who have been
called to the Ministry, had but little capacity at their first entrance into
that Province, they will have rendered themselves able therein by experience.

It is a Maxim established in all times, that we must never Cabal against the
Ministers. As it is their Office to pry into particulars, and that it is almost
of an indispensable necessity, that things of the most importance are referred
to their Judgment; they have a thousand means to do us an injury if they do not
love us. Wherefore he must endeavor to engage them in his Interests; yet
without debasing himself to servile Compliances; these are of those things
which are not exacted from persons of certain Quality. It is sufficient that he
Honors their Merits, and the dignity of their Employments, pays them his
Respects, and Courts with application and vigilance the occasions of showing
them how sensible he is of the favors he has obtained by their means.

A Courtier must also be extraordinary careful to avoid pretending to the same
things with his Master: Jealousy is a venom easily Contracted. Those who are
born to be above others, cannot endure to be equalled in Qualities they value
themselves upon; and jealousy with them, is so near a Neighbor to aversion,
that the one succeeds the other in a moment.

There is more Wit than People imagine, in concealing ones mind. It is good to
be Sagacious, for that it gives a man prospects which he may take advantage of,
and that by seeing all, he is upon no occasion a Cully: but must see without
seeming to have seen. We do not naturally love those who pry against our Wills
into our secrets. When we once pass for Cunning, we are no longer so. We are
looked upon as Spies; are dreaded, shunned, and so many precautions are used
against our Discoveries, that all our Arts and Cunning become useless and
abortive.

He must also be cautious how hefalls out with Ladies, and never be a Party in
any Slander, or Detraction that is cast upon the fair Sex; they are dangerous
Enemies: but though he stand never so well in their Favor, let him not rely
upon it in any manner: Most Women are inconstant, and and there are few of them
in whom we may confide a Secret. If for the interest of his Fortune, he is
obliged to pay particular Respects to one of them: Let his Head govern his
Heart; there are few occasions wherein he will stand more in need of a prudent
Conduct.

There is no less need of prudence in the well managing of his Estate. The
common Expenses at Court are great, and many unforeseen, so as if he gives any
loose to Passions and Extravagancies, he will be obliged, for want of Stock, to
retire with loss, and to renounce those hopes which might have proved
effectual, had he been in a Condition to have waited.

For this Reason, a man who has Ambition, and a great Rank to support, ought to
be extremely careful of his Conduct; for since the Multitude of Persons, which
the Court is obliged to recompense; does delay Favors, and that through the
Corruption of the Age, Merit without Fortune, is a Merit without Luster. An
honest man has a great deal of interest to preserve to himself the means of
showing himself in the World, and of putting himself in a Condition to wait
from time the rewards he hopes for.

Economy is no dazzling Quality, but there are few more solid: It holds an
honest Medium between Covetousness and Prodigalities; and though it only spares
for to spend, it is nevertheless good Husbandry. It is a mistake to believe
that Avarice is the support of Families: Most ruined People are of a stingy
humor, and in case we came but to particulars, we should see that never any
person was ruined by Liberality.

The reason whereof is easy to find, seeing all that bears the Character of
Virtue, has Order and Conduct, and that Vice which is insparable from
Dissolution, does produce Effects conformable to its Nature: The stingy cannot
without extreme violence part with their Money; they love rather it should cost
them a hundred Guineys in a year, than give fifty to day: Economy is with them
an useless knowledge; they pass insensibly from Hardness to Injustice, from
injustice to an universal denial, and from all these things to the public
aversion.

We ought equally to avoid Prodigality, though the Principle thereof be not so
shameful, the Consequences thereof are no less dangerous. There is folly and
madness in giving more than we ought: He who gives must distribute his Favors
with Order and Discretion, and consider what he gives as a Sacrifice he makes
to his Ambition and his Honor. I do not for all this pretend he should
diminish either his Train or his Table, I mean he should charge upon himself
the maintenance of his Liberalities, by depriving himself of superfluous
things, or of those which are not absolutely necessary: Is it not better to
play at small Game, than not to play at all, or if he will, let him retrench
himself of some other thing, and employ the Money it would cost, in doing
actions of generosity, which may acquire him Friends and Servants, who often
contribute to his advancement? Oh! the excellent Husbandry in him who takes
such a course as augments his Esteem, and gains the good word of all People. It
is by such a Conduct, as this, That a Great man really merits the Character of
a Person of Quality, procures the Love and Esteem of all the World, and
purchases to himself infinite Benedictions.

I know that the Language I speak is a Gothic style to most Great men; that
they imagine it is sufficient to pass for such, by being of an Illustrious
Extraction, and having a great Estate. Nevertheless, if they did but seriously
take it into Consideration, they would grant, that a Man is only Noble, in
proportion to the Greatness and Generosity of his Soul and Temper; they would
do more, they would look with more reflection, than they do, into the knowledge
of their Affairs, and would see that with the Squanderings and Dissipations
which happen in their Families and Estates, through their neglect, they might
be in a Condition to make Creatures.

At least they would thereby avoid the Injustices, which the disorder of their
Affairs ingages them in, and their Honor would be more secure; for in short we
seldom meet with such a Virtue as is proof against necessity. People cannot
resolve to diminish their Expenses, as occasions shall require, and if we could
pry and read in Peoples Hearts, we should see that this Obligation, which some
have laid upon themselves, of ending as they began, is one of the things which
has done the most injury to their Honor.

The worst I find in this, is that ones Conscience suffers thereby, and that
insensibly they grow so very much hardened in Injustice, that it troubles them
not in the least; yet the Consequences hereof are not inconsiderable, if we are
persuaded as we ought to be, and as all the World undoubtedly is, that after
this Life, we shall be rewarded or punished according to our Works.

The remedy to such great Evils, is to reconcile in our selves the Christian
and Moral Virtues. It has not been without Reason observed, that they have a
certain Concatenation between them, by which they support one another. And
indeed, have Prudence, one has Justice; have Justice, one has Honor; have
Honor, one has Conscience. This is an Abbreviation of the Qualities of a Noble
man; and who takes the contrary Bias, runs upon false Principles. Most People
imagine, that to be in esteem in the World, it is sufficient to be endued with
a Wit that is agreeable and charming, and to live at a high rate, and that
Honor and Conscience ought to be reckoned for nothing, or at least be of very
small account. Nevertheless, those same Persons would have us believe they have
Honor and Probity, though they do nothing but what is repugnant to those
Qualities; and this I do not well understand the reason of, unless there be
privileged Virtues, which the most dissolute would not dare openly to renounce.

We see People who boast highly of their Debauches, and who also speak
Sparkishly enough of Holy Matters: But we see none who boast of being
Treacherous, Ungrateful, or having neither Probity nor Honor. Not a Man
Condemns himself upon those Points, though there be an infinite number
Condemnable.

It is not so with Wit; those who have most, are those who who affect in that
the greatest Modesty. Nevertheless, they would be sorry People should believe
them; which they take care to prevent by the course they take to defend
themselves: They only make a show of renouncing it for that they very well
know, Credit will not be given to their words, and that a Virtuoso never wants
occasion to display his Talents.

But they pretend to Judgment, though it be their weak side; or rather because
it is their weak side, their Domestic Affairs are of too small an extent for,
their Capacity; they judge of all after a Sovereign manner, and there are few
things but pass their Censure: From hence we may judge to what a Degree
Judgment, Probity, and Honor, are Qualities estimable, since those who have
them not, and who are not over-fond to hide or lessen themselves in other
matters, yet are proud of being possessed of these, and cannot be brought to
own their want of them: But, to speak the Truth, their disguises are to no
purpose. We live in an understanding Age, wherein People do not long suffer
themselves to be deceived by appearances, and sooner or later we discover, as
in our true Colors, who we are.

Wherefore let him act in all the actions of his Life, as if People read in the
bottom of his Heart, and not imbroil himself with that inward Judge, who lets
nothing escape his Knowledge. Though he should reap no other Fruit of his
Knowledge, than that of being content with his self, he will not stand in need
of Pity. It does not depend on us to be happy, but it depends on us to merit
being so.

Instructions how to Write.
ABsence does almost make the only difference there is between Speaking and
Writing; there is indeed more order and exactness in Letters than in
Conversation; but after all it is still Speaking; and this was the reason that
made those say, who are the greatest Critics in this matter, That People ought
to write as they speak; This method, which is undoubtedly the best, because it
is the most natural, was not formerly in use. People took long Circumlocutions
before they came to the subject they meant to speak of, and went as far about
before they got out of it? insomuch that the commerce of Letters, which so much
contributes to rejoicing and diverting the mind, did only serve to put it upon
the Rack: One of the first whom the French were obliged to for this change, was
Voiture, and since People have so well understood he was in the Right, that
those who have followed him, have endeavored to imitate his Model.

The French write either by Letter, or by Billet, or Note. The way of writing
by Letter, was only practiced in the beginning, by Persons who wrote for
Example, from Paris to Paris; commonly too they wrote in the Third Person:
These Notes were not, for the most part signed, and they contented themselves
with ending by a, I am wholly Yours, or some such like thing.

Since, as Letters have something more Ceremonious and Painful, that they
subject People to distinctions, which oblige inferior Persons to treat others
with more respect, whether by leaving a greater Interval between the
Inscription and the first Line, or giving by Example, Your most Humble and most
Obedient Servant, to Persons who would content themselves with giving us Your
most Humble; most People, to avoid this distinction, have bethought themselves
to write by Note, and they hardly write after any other manner. Nevertheless
this does not hinder, but that in the Body of the Billet, we may manage the
Respect that is owing to our Superiors, and keep some mark of distinction with
those who are our Inferiors; for though we ought to be Civil, we must not
treat all the World alike; there is nothing so just as Subordination, and we
must keep it more Regularly in Letters, than in Conversation, because Words fly
away, and Written things remain.

People write to their Superiors, their Equals, or their Inferiors. All which
are to have their differences, which are to be regulated by Judgment: We must
neither do too much, nor too little; but if we were to incline on one side, it
would be better to be too Civil than to be wanting in Civility.

Now to make an exact distinction, he must understand the force of those
Qualities that are given in Subscriptions. Amongst those Qualities there are
both plain and redoubled, which go at least according to the Rank which I give
them in this writing; the plain are, Your most Humble, Your most Obedient, Your
most Obliged, Your most Acquired, Your most Affectionate, Your most
Affectionate to serve you, your most Affectionate to do you Service.

The re-doubled are, Your most Humble and most Obedient, Your most Humble and
most Obliged, Your most Humble and most Acquired, Your most Humble and most
Affectionate; for when we give most, we no longer say to serve you, nor to do
you Service. And indeed only Persons very inferior are treated in this manner.

There is still another Remark, which concerns most, which it is necessary to
make, which is, that though the term of Obedient be above that of Affectionate,
the Quality of most Humble, joined to that of most Affectionate, is more
submissive than that of most Humble and Obedient, by reason of two mosts which
are in the former. Moreover the Date must always be put at the bottom of the
Leaf, when we write to dignified Persons. Let my Gentleman be careful to give
the same Qualities in the Subscription, as those that are given him, when the
Persons are equal, and not make Compliments for a Third, in those Letters he
writes to Persons to whom he owes Respect.

There are five sorts of writing, Letters of Business, Familiar Letters,
gallant Letters, Love Letters, and Letters of Compliment.

When we write about Business, we must fall immediately upon the Subject, make
use of terms proper for the matter in hand, explain our minds clearly and
without Confusion; and if we are to speak of more than one Affair, as it is not
necessary that the style be sinoothe, and of a thread in that kind, so it is
best to write by Articles.

Familiar Letters carry their Title along with them, they ought to be all of a
piece; we must so order the business, that when our Friend receives them, he
may imagine he is speaking with us, may say, I see him, methinks I hear him;
this is his Character. Now though it be not necessary, they sparkle with Wit;
yet the terms must be just and fitting, and a certain turn of Quality be
observed therein, which Persons of mean Rank do seldom attain to.

Gallant Letters have a peculiar Character, they must have Wantoning and
Facetiousness in such places as are susceptible thereof. The style must be
smooth and fluent; praise nice and finely drawn; raillery flattering and
insinuating; the Periods must be short and concise, because the more there are
of them in a Letter, the more thoughts it contains; there must be nothing flat
or languishing; and as those Letters are only made to please, we must be
careful they do not prove tedious.

As Love Letters are the work of the Heart, there must be more tenderness in
them than Wit; there must be a certain respectful and touching Languishment,
which raises the Compassion of the Person we write to; they must not be long,
neither must any thing in them seem studied. But the Instructions I might give
him upon this point, would be more proper to make him distinguish the real from
the false, than teach him how to make them. As soon as a Person is deeply
smitten, he needs only suffer himself to be guided by the Sentiments of his
Heart: It only belongs to him to know the Language of Love to Perfection.

Letters of Compliment have for Object, certain Devoirs which civil Society
obliges us to pay to one another in the different occasions that are offered.
They are called Letters of Compliment, because we do not observe therein that
real Character of Friendship, which gives to understand that he who writes them
is sensibly concerned for the Good or Evil which happens to us. These Letters
ought to be Civil and Obliging, and little longer than the Compliments that are
made upon Encounters. Neverthelessmeasures must be kept in the expression;
Compliment and Dissimulation have so great an affinity, that it is dangerous to
be mistaken therein. We must take the same course that prudent People do with
the Mode, they follow it because it is an use established by Custom: but they
do not exceed it.

Poetry is also another sort of Writing; to be excellent therein, it is
necessary to have the proper Genius, and we must renounce it, if it has not
pleased him who distributes Talents to grant us that Gift. Not that there is a
necessity of making Verses; and it would be imprudence to expose our selves to
it, unless we find we have those dispositions which are requisite for that
purpose: But though the Muses were never so favorable to us, and that we had
all the Genius that can be desired to excel therein, I would not advise him to
undertake long Works. It would be pity a man of Quality should lose much time
in such like trivial things: He may make a Song, or a Madrigale upon occasion,
and I will allow him as far as Elegy, when he is in love with a Person, who may
do him an Honor in the World; but for to Rhyme for the first Comer, and to
play the Lover, is not the part of a Gallant Man. Neither must he profane his
Incense, nor turn Poetaster, especially he must never make Satyrs: Nothing
creates so many Enemies as that, and nothing is so low and fordid; for if
People have not done us any mischief, why do we do them any? And if he has
reason to complain of them, he must remember that such like Arms are very
dishonorable in the hands of a man of Honor.

But above all, in what kind soever he writes, he must keep always within his
Character. Every one may please in his Province, provided he cultivates it. A
Melancholy Man who would imitate the style of one that is Facetious, would
faulter, and never do it well. It is the same with the Facetious, who should
undertake to imitate the serious humor of a Melancholy Person. We must never
displace our selves, nor become the Copists of other.

CHRISTIAN AND Moral Maxims.
1. BE Devout without Affectation; and do not pretend to seeming so, unless you
be so indeed, for thereby you would fall into Hypocrifie, which being put
directly upon God, is a kind of Sacrilege.

2. Who endeavors to disguise himself before God, takes pains to deceive
himself.

3. To pray to God without attention, is to pray to him without hopes.

4. Who prefers the pleasures of his Body, before the Salvation of his Soul,
suffers the Man to be drowned while he is saving his Cloak.

5. If you have not more care to adorn your mind with good Qualities, than to
deck your Body with fine Clothes, you incense an Idol, and abandon a God.

6. He who takes delight in his Sin, makes his Pleasures his Executioner.

7. An habitual Sin is nourishing a Serpent, which at length stings a Man's own
Bosom.

8. Who goes slowly in the Practice of good Works, runs swiftly in the way to
Hell.

9. If you would have God hearken to your Requests, listen to those of the
necessitous.

10. Who is uneasy at the thought of Death, will be in despair at Death it
self.

11.There is no better School for a good Life, than the frequent thought of a
Holy Death.

12. The serious thought of Eternity, causes a good use to be made of Time, and
takes away the greatest part of the bitterness of Death.

13. A Man is not Convinced of the imortance of his Salvation, when that he
knows his Sin, and yet defers repenting of it.

14. Who spends his Life without Devotion, cannot end it without Despair.

15. If in your Prosperity you do not hear the voice of God, you have reason to
fear he will not hear yours in your necessity.

16.Who has no fear of God during his Life, ought to fear his Judgments after
his Death.

17. Be officious to all, familiar with few, and intimate with but one.

18. Who takes delight in frequenting with the Wicked, is in pain at the
presence of the Just.

19. Who confides in himself without Knowledge, runs a risque of repenting
without Reason.

20. He who begins an Affair without Judgment, ought not to be furprized if it
ends without Success.

21. What you undertake above your Power, cannot but produce effects below your
hopes.

22. He who is discouraged from a glorious enterprise, only by the knowledge of
the difficulties, knows not the value of Glory, nor does he deserve it.

23. If the Precipitation in the design, and slowness in the Execution, produce
favorable successes, it is only by chance.

24. If you look upon your Labor as a trouble, you will look upon your Duty as
a punishment.

25. Who in a low Fortune frames too lofty Designs, attempts with Wings of Wax
to fly toward the Sun.

26. Who falls by having raised himself too high, ought to seek for no other
reason of his fall than his own extravagance.

27. Those who show too much fondness for small matters, declare themselves
incapable of great.

28. If Justice guides you in the pursuit of profit, Tranquillity will accompany
you in the enjoyment.

29. If you look upon with Envy another man's Estate, you render your self
unworthy of possessing your own.

30. The Soul is only given to Man for Action, and those who out of laziness
keep it in a continual sloth, show that it is only in their Body, as a grain of
Salt to keep them from Corruption.

31. Pride is a puffing up of the Spirit, which no less Corrupts all the good.
Qualities that a proud man can have, than the swelling of the Stomach does
alter all the good Dispositions that a Body can be possessed off.

32. Though Anger be but a short Fury, its effects prove nevertheless long
Follies.

33. Avoid great Meals, if you are afraid of long Distempers.

34. Who ruins his Health by the excess of his Disorders, is to blame to
complain of the excess of his Sufferings.

35. An able Cook is more to be feared in your Health, than an ignorant
Physician in your Sickness.

36. An honest Sobriety, and moderate Labor, are the best Cooks upon Earth.

37. The Fumes of Wine disturb the Brain, those of Vanity the Mind, and those
of Love, both.

38. Who fills his Heart with the Love of Women, changes a Sanctuary destined
to the Holy Ghost, into a Temple of Idols, whose Worship leads him to Damnation.

39. Divine Love only makes use of its Flambeau to inlighten us, and Profane
Love only lights his to blind us.

40. Humane Love cannot have too narrow bounds; but if Divine Love is limited,
it is faulty.

41. Love is represented to us naked, not only to show us its Effrontery; but
also to teach us that it strips those of all who follow it.

42. The Covetous man spares things necessary, to furnish superfluous to others
who conn him no thanks for 'em.

43. Those who in their action, consult only Self-Love, make a Blind man their
Guide, and stumble at every step.

44. Who gives too much to his Pleasures, deprives himself of the means of
furnishing to his Necessities.

45. If you submit your Judgment to your Pleasures, you will burn your self
with a Torch that was given you for your Guide.

46. Who only consults his Reason for his Pleasures, is not to expect any help
from it in his Troubles.

47. A too great passion for superfluous things, does often plunge a man into
extreme Indigency of those which are necessary.

48. He who suffers himself to be governed by his Passions, abandons his
Freedom to the Caprice of his Slaves.

49. Who fills his Heart with his Passions, leaves no room in it for Piety, and
changes his Quality of a Christian into that of an Idolater.

50. Since the Passions are the Distempers of the Mind, Temperance alone ought
to be their Physician.

51. Who loves Gaming to excess, makes it his business to dye a Beggar.

52. Winning in Play is the Bait, which Fortune lays for our ruin.

53. Those who Game to recover what they have lost, add to the loss they have
already undergone, that of their Reason, of their Time, and most commonly of
the Money they have left.

54. The excess of Sleep, and that of Play, fills the Stomach with Crudities
and the Purse with Wind.

55. Consider more than a Moment of what you mean to say, and more than two of
what you mean to promise, for fear you come to be troubled for what you have
promised with too much rashness.

56. In many occasions you may forbear promising without Scruple, but in none
can you dispense your self from performing your Promise without shame.

57. Never speak of what you are ignorant, speak little of what you know; and
whether you speak, or say not a Word, let it be with Judgment.

58. Raillery does sometimes keep alive the Conversation, but it almost ever
creates a difference amongst the Railleurs, which ought to oblige those who
hate Quarrels to avoid it as a snare which their Wit lays for their Repose.

59. If you are not easy to bear with the weaknesses of others, you render
your own insupportable.

60. Who sees with indifference other Peoples misfortunes, ought not to think
it strange if his own be looked upon without Compassion.

61. If you mean that the Civility and Honesty of those you Converse with,
should become a Duty toward you; give 'em an Example of it, by your own
Conduct toward them.

62. Lay under your Feet the Favors you bestow, and those you receive upon
your Heart.

63. Who forgets the obligations that are done him, does not deserve to receive
any.

64. Be not slow to serve others, if you would have them fond and zealous to do
you a kindness.

65. If you are not so generous as to prevent your Friend by your Benesits, be
not so base as to receive his without endeavoring to make returns.

66. A sincere intention, though of no use, is a better return for a Favor,
than a forced acknowledgment.

67. Who proclaims a Favor he has done, does much lessen the merit of it,
because he shows by his Indiscretion, that he shared himself between his Vanity
and his Friend.

68. Who only gives to receive, makes one of the most sordid Commerces in the
World of Generosity, which is one of the most laudable Qualities of a well Bred
Man.

69. If you take delight in Lying, Truth will become a Burden to you.

70. Who excuses his Fault by a Lie condemns himself by two Reasons.

71. If Lying be common with you, distrust all that others tell you.

72. Who makes use of Cunning and of Lying to gain his Neighbors Estate,
imitates the Example of the Devil, who employed both to ruin the innocence of
the first man.

73. The ill use of our Blessings in this Life, will in the other prove one of
our greatest Stings.

74. Who is not content with a handsome Fortune, takes often great pains to
render it less, by endeavoring to augment it.

75. Who regulates his desires by the necessities of Nature, confines them
within a very narrow Compass; but who measures 'em by Covetousness, gives 'em
no bounds.

76. Be not very fond of knowing other Peoples Secrets: Be very reserved in
Communicating your own; you are no longer Master of them, from the time you
have imparted them to another, and your Example justifies his Infidelity, if he
should discover them to a third Person.

77. Who makes Parade of his good Qualities, takes away all the merit of them
by his Pride; and he who conceals his own, raises their price by his modesty.

78. High Places make weak Brains giddy, and extraordinary Fortunes disturb the
Noddles of those who have not a strong Judgment.

79. A Man stands in need of all the aid of Constancy in Adversity, that so he
may not be wanting in what is owing to himself: And of all the aid of
Moderation in Prosperity, to acquit himself of what is owing to others.

80. Prosperity shows us to others in our true Colors, and Adversity makes us
know our selves who are our real Friends.

81. Those who only come to us for our Fortune, are like Birds of Prey, who
only fly for Prey.

82. Who mistakes his Friends in his Prosperity, does not deserve to meet with
any in his misfortunes.

83. Who relies too much upon the Friendship of Great Men, sinds sooner or
later that he leaned upon a broken Reed.

84. God by an extreme Goodness, acknowledges by extraordinary Blessings, the
least Cares that we pay him; but most Great Men who are Gods upon Earth, fancy
they have overpayed by the least of their Words, the greatest of our Services.

85. Whosoever takes much care to keep the Friendship of Great Men, knows often in
necessity, that he has taken great pains to cultivate an ungrateful soil.

86. A Man whose Wit is adorned with all the sine Sciences, and yet puts 'em
not in practice, is like a good Sword that is never drawn out of the Scabbard.

87. Who advises Virtue to others, augments thereby the reasons he has to
practice it.

88. Who Prays only to please, makes his Judgment the Cully of his Complaisance.

89. The readiness we have to advise others, is oftener a sign of our
presumption, than a proof of our kindness.

90. Who confines himself with bemoaning our sufferings when he can remedy
them, is not really concerned for them; and only affords us the Tears of a
Crocodile.

91. In our greatest troubles, our first Tears are of Justice, the second of
Decency, but those which follow, are neither of Reason, nor of Decency.

92. Who only Weeps because he thinks he must Weep, has tender Eyes, but not a
sensible Heart.

93. Who imploys his Authority in doing or maintaing ill Actions, cuts his
Throat with his own Sword.

94. Physicians often poison our Bodies by their Remedies, and Flatterers often
poison our Minds by their Discourses.

95 Distrust Flatterers and great Speakers, they both aim by the wind of their
words to squeeze Money out of your Purse.

96.Who makes use of too studied Discourses to persuade us into a Crime,
imploys a perfumed Poynard to stab our Hearts.

97. The infection of the Pestilence is not so much to be feared for the Body,
as the poison of ill Company for the Mind.

98. If you mean to dye like a faithful Person, live as a Reprobate would have
wished to have lived at the hour of his Death.

99. Who out of excess of Complaisance frees his Friend out of trouble by being
his Bail, does commonly pull worse upon his own Head, which sooner or later
lets him know his want of Judgment.

100.Who reads to be instructed, and reads good things to be profited thereby,
has the relish of his mind no less depraved than that of the Body of a sick
Person who finds himself near a Table well garnished, without being able to eat.

FINIS.

