February 10. 1671-79.
I Do appoint ROBERT PAWLET to Print the TRIALS of Robert Green, Henry Berry
and Lawrence Hill: And that no other Person presume to Print the same.

WILLIAM SCROGGS.

VERITAS EX CINERIBVS REVIVISCIT AETATIS SVAE 57

The true Effigies of Sr EDMOND BURY GODFREYE Knight and Justice of the Peace
who was MURDERED by Papists the 12th day of October Anno. Domini. 1678.
AETATIS. SUAE 57.
Sold by Arthur Tooker Stationer Print Map, And, Picture Seller At The Royal
Hand and Globe Near Chareing Cross

F: H: Van. Houe. Sculp:


THE TRIALS OF ROBERT GREEN, HENRY BERRY, and LAWRENCE HILL, For the Murder of
SR. Edmond bury Godfrey Knt.

One of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of MIDDLESEX; At the
King's Bench Bar at Westminster, Before the Right Honorable Sir WILLIAM SCROGGS
Knt. Lord CHIEF JUSTICE of that Court, And the rest of His Majesty's Judges
there; On Monday the 10th. of February 1678-79.

Where, upon full Evidence they were Convicted, and received Sentence
accordingly, on Tuesday the next day following.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet at the Sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane
near Fleet Street, 1679.

THE TRIALS OF ROBERT GREEN, HENRY BERRY and LAWRENCE HILL, For the Murder of
Sir Edmond bury Godfrey Knight.
ON WEDNESDAY the 5 th. of February 1678. Robert Green, Henry Berry and
Lawrence Hill were brought from His Majesty's Goal of Newgate to the Bar of the
Court of KingsBench, to be Arraigned for the Murder of Sir EDMONDBURY GODFREY,
upon an Indictment found by the Grand Jury for the County of Middlesex, on
Monday the morrow of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary; and the Court
proceeded thus.

Mr. Just. Wild Arraigned the Prisoners. Clerk of the Crown Robert Green, Hold
up thy Hand.


Henry Berry, Hold up thy Hand.


Lawrence Hill, Hold up thy Hand.


Which they severally did. You stand Indicted by the Names of Robert Green late
of the Parish of St. Mary le Strand in the County of Middlesex Labourer. Henry
Berry late of the same Parish and County Labourer. And Lawrence Hill late of
the same Parish and County Labourer; for that you three, together with Girald
late of the same Parish and County Clerk: Dominick Kelly late of the same
Parish and County Clerk: And Phillibert Vernatt late of the same Parish and
County Labourer, who are withdrawn * Not having the fear of God before your
eyes, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devil, the twelfth
day of October, in the Thirtieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. at the Parish of St. Mary le Strand
aforesaid, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, in and upon Sir Edmond-bury
Godfrey Knight, in the Peace of God, and of our said Sovereign Lord the King,
then and there being feloniously, voluntarily, and of your malice aforethought,
did make an assault; and that thou the aforesaid Robert Green a certain Linen
Handkerchief of the value of six pence about the neck of the said Sir
Edmond-bury Godfrey, then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of thy malice
aforethought, did fold and fasten; and that thou the said Robert Green, with
the Handkerchief aforesaid, by thee the said Robert Green in and about the neck
of the said Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey in manner and form aforesaid, folded and
fastened then and there him the said Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey, did choke and
strangle, of which said choking and strangling of him the said Sir Edmond-bury
Godfrey in manner and form aforesaid, he the said Sir Edmond-bury Godfry then
and there instantly dyed: And that you the said Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill,
together with the said Girald, Dominick Kelly and Phillibert Vernatt, then and
there feloniously, voluntarily, and of your malice aforethought, were present,
aiding, abetting, comforting and mantaining the aforesaid Robert Green; the
aforesaid Sir Edmondbury Godfrey in manner and form aforesaid, feloniously,
voluntarily, and of his malice aforethought, to kill and murder; and so you the
said Robert Green, Henry Berry and Lawrence Hill, together with the said
Girald, Dominick Kelly and Phillibert Vernatt, in manner and form aforesaid,
the aforesaid Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey, feloniously, wilfully, and of your
malice aforethought, did kill and murder, against the Peace of our Sovereign
Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity. How say thou Robert Green, art thou
guilty of this Felony and Murder whereof thou standst Indicted, and have been
now Arraigned, or not guilty?

Green, Not Guilty.


Clerk of the Crown. Culprit, How will thou be Tried?


Green. By God and my Country.


Cl. of the Cr. God send thee a good Deliverance. How say thou Henry Berry,
art thou guilty of the Felony and Murder whereof thou stand Indicted, and
have been now Arraigned; or not guilty?


Berry. Not Guilty.


Cl. of the Cr. Culprit, How will thou be Tried?


Berry. By God and my Country.


Cl. of Cr. God send thee a good Deliverance. How say thou Lawrence Hill, art
thou guilty of the Felony and Murder whereof thou stand'st Indicted, and have
been Arraigned, or not guilty?


Hill. Not Guilty


Cl. of the Cr. Culprit, How will thou be tried?


Hill. By God and my Country.


Cl. of the Cr. God send thee a good Deliverance.


Cap. Richardson. I desire to know when they must be brought up to be tried?


Mr. Just. Wild. Upon Friday next.


Cl. of the Cr. You shall have a Rule to bring them up on Friday.


But on Thursday the 6 th. of February Mr. Attorney General moved the Court
that it might be deferred till Monday, that the King's Evidence might be the
more ready, which was granted accordingly.

On Monday the 10 th. of February 1678. the said Robert Green, Henry Berry and
Lawrence Hill, were brought again to the Bar for their Trial, which proceeded
as follows.

Cl. of the Cr. Make Proclaimation.


Crier. O Yes.


Cl. of the Cr. Again, Again.


Crier. O Yes, O Yes. Our Sovereign Lord the King does straightly Charge and
Command all manner of Persons to keep silence upon pain of Imprisonment.


Cl. of the Cr. Make an O Yes,


Crier. O Yes, If any one can inform our Sovereign Lord the King, the Kings
Sergeant at Law, the Kings Attorney General, or this Inquest now to be taken
of the Felony and Murder whereof Robert Green, Henry Berry and Lawrence Hill,
the Prisoners at the Bar stand Indicted, let them come forth and they shall be
heard, for now the Prisoners stand at the Bar upon their Delivery. And all
others that are bound by Recognizance to give Evidence against the Prisoners at
the Bar, let them come forth and give their Evidence, or else they forfeit
their Recognizance.


Clerk of the Crown. Robert Green, Hold up thy Hand,


Henry Berry, Hold up thy Hand,


Lawrence Hill, Hold up thy Hand.


Which they severally did. Those good Men that you shall hear called, and
personally appear, are to pass between our Sovereign Lord the King and You upon
Trial of your several Lives and Deaths; If therefore You, or any of You will
challenge Them, or any of Them, your time is to speak unto them when they come
to the Book to be sworn, and before they are sworn. Crier, Make an O Yes.

Crier. O Yes, You good Men that are Impannel'd to enquire between our
Sovereign Lord the King, and Robert Green, Henry Berry and Lawrence Hill, the
Prisoners at the Bar, answer to your Names, and save your Issues.


Cl. of the Cr. Sir William Roberts.


Crier. Vouz avez, Sir William Roberts.


Cl. of the Cr. Sir William Roberts to the Book.


Crier. Sir William Roberts look upon the Prisoners: You Prisoners look upon
the Jury. You shall well and truly Try, and true Deliverance make between our
Sovereign Lord the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar, whom you shall have in
charge, and a true Verdict give according to your Evidence. So help you God.


And the same Oath was administered to the rest, and their Names were as follow.
Sir William Roberts Barnt. Sir Richard Fisher Barnt. Sir Michael Heneage Knt.
Sir Thomas Bridges Knt. William Avery Esquire Charles Umphrevile Esquire John Bathurst
Esquire Richard Gowre E Esquire Thomas Henslowe Esquire John Sharp Esquire John Haynes Esquire and
Walter Moyle Esquire
Cl. of the Cr. Crier, Count these. Sir. William Roberts.


Crier. One, etc.


Cl. of the Cr. Walter Moyle.


Crier. Twelve, Good men and true, stand together, and hear your Evidence.
Gentlemen, are you all sworn? and you that are not sworn, pray withdraw

The Standing-place for the Jury being so thronged, that those who were sworn
had not room to stand together; the Clerk of the Crown was Ordered to make
Proclamation thus.


Clerk of the Crown. Crier make proclamation.


Crier. O yes, My Lords the Kings Justices, does straightly charge and command
all persons, that are not of the Jury, to withdraw forthwith, upon pain of one
hundred Pounds a man.


Clerk of the Crown. Robert Green hold up thy hand, Henry Berry hold up thy
hand, Lawrence Hill hold up thy hand. Which they severally did.


Gentlemen, you that are sworn look upon the Prisoners, and hearken to their
Charge: You shall understand, that they stand indicted by the names of Robert
Green, late of the Parish of Saint Mary le Strand in the County of Middlesex,
Labourer; Henry Berry late of the same Parish and County, Labourer, and
Lawrence Hill late of the same Parish and County, Labourer; for that they,
together with, etc. (as before) against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the
King, his Crown and Dignity. Upon this Indictment they have been arraigned,
they have thereunto severally pleaded Not Guilty, and for their trials have
severally put themselves upon God and their Country, which Country you are.
Your charge is to inquire, whether the Prisoners at the Bar, Robert Green,
Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill, or any of them are guilty of the Felony and
Murder, whereof they stand indicted, or not guilty, and for them which you
shall find guilty, you shall inquire what Goods or Chattels, Lands or
Tenements, they had at the time of the Felony committed, or at any time since.
If you find them, or any of them not guilty, you shall inquire, whether they,
or any of them, that you find so not guilty, fled for the same, if you find,
that they, or any of them fled for the same, you shall enquire of their Goods
and Chattels, as if you had found them guilty: But, If you find them, nor any
of them not guilty, nor that they did fly for it, say so, and no more, and
hear your Evidence. Crier make Proclamation.

Crier. O yes, If any one will give evidence on behalf of our Sovereign Lord
the King, against Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill, the Prisoners
at the Bar, let them come forth and they shall be heard.


Then Sir Thomas Stringer, Sergeant at Law of Counsel with the King in this
Cause, opened the Indictment thus; Mr. Sergeant Stringer. May it please your
Lordship, and you Gentlemen of this Jury, The Prisoners at the Bar, Robert
Green, Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill, stand indicted for that they with one
Girald a Priest, one Kelly, and one Vernat, did the twelfth of October last, at
the Parish of Saint Mary le Strand in this County, feloniously, wilfully, and
of their malice before thought, assault the Person of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey,
Knight, and that the Prisoner, Robert Green, did put about the Neck of the said
Sir Edmondbury a twisted Handkerchief, and did with that twisted Handkercheif
so choke and strangle the said Sir Edmondbury, that he immediately died, and
that the other Prisoners, Henry Berry and Lawrence Hill, with the other persons
Girald, Kelly, and Vernat, were aiding and assisting the said Robert Green to
murder the said Sir Edmondbury, and so the Prisoners at the Bar, with the said
other persons, the said Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, did kill and murder against the
Kings Peace, his Crown and Dignity. To this they have pleaded not guilty, and
for their trial have put themselves upon their Country, which Country you are.
If we prove them, or any of them guilty, you are to find it so.


Then Sir William Jones, his Majesty's Attorney General, opened the Evidence in
this manner, Mr. Atorney General. May it please your Lordship, and you
Gentlemen of this Jury, the Prisoners who stand now at the Bar, are indicted
for murder. Murder, as it is the first, so is it the greatest Crime, that is
prohibited in the Second Table. It is a Crime of so deep a stain, that nothing
can wash it away but the Blood of the Offender, and unless that be done, the
Land in which it is shed, will continue polluted. My Lord, as murder is always
a very great crime, so the murder, which is now to be tried before your
Lordship, is, it may be, the most heinous and most barbarous that ever was
committed. The murder was committed upon a Gentleman, and upon a Magistrate,
and I wish he had not therefore been murdered, because he was a Protestant
Magistrate.

My Lord, I will not spend much of your time in making my observations before
hand, because I must in this Case crave leave to do it in the conclusion of the
Evidence. For I, that have made a strict examination into this matter, do find,
that I shall better spend my time in making observations, and showing how the
Witnesses do agree after the Evidence given than before. Therefore, my Lord, I
shall at present only make a short Narrative of the fact, to show you the
course of our Evidence, that it may be the better understood and remembered by
the Jury.

My Lord, upon the discovery of the late horrid Plot. --


Lord Chief Justice. And present Plot too, Mr. Attorney: But pray go on. Mr,
Attorney General. If your Lordship please, you may call it so, for it is to be
feared they have not yet given it over: But upon the discovery of that Plot
(call it late or present) Sir Edmondbury Godfrey (whom, I suppose, the Jury all
knew, and every man, that lived there abouts, must needs remember to have been
a very useful and active Justice of the Peace) had taken several examinations
about this matter, and perhaps some more than now are extant: (but we have
proof he had some) and was very industrious in finding out the principal Actors
in this Plot, among whom, some Priests and Jesuits foreseeing their own danger,
and likewise the overthrow of a design which they had been so long in
contriving, they had several Consultations how to prevent the discovery. And as
they are men, who never stick at blood but rather account it meritorious to
shed it, though never so unjustly when their Interest may be profited by it,
they did resolve to secure themselves and their design by taking away the life
of this Gentleman. In order thereunto they had several meetings, and the place
of their meeting, you will find by the Evidence, to be at the Plow Alehouse,
and there they did consult how to take away the life of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey,
And they made several attempts to do it: one while they dogged him into the
fields, another while they sent people to spy when he came abroad, that they
might follow him into some dark Alley, or other obsure or unfrequented place,
and there dispatch him; and at last, after many attempts, they succeeded in
that wicked one, when the Murder was committed.

My Lord, there are contained in this Indictment six Offenders, all principals,
three of them, I think, are Priests, or at least two of them are so, that is,
Father Girald an Irish man, Father Kelly likewise of the same Nation, and one
Vernat, whether a Priest or Layman, I know not. These Priests (as they are
always the first that contrive mischeife, so they are always the first that fly
punishment) have taken care for themselves and run away, and left their blind
followers, the Prisoners at the Bar, whom they had drawn into this bloody act,
alone to answer for it.

The day, when this murder was committed, was Saturday the 12th of October
last; and I must desire your Lordship to take notice of the day, for upon that
much of the Evidence will depend. And we shall prove, that as they did before
send several times to Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's house to get intelligence of his
going abroad, so this very day in the morning, Hill one of the prisoners at the
bar came to his house upon pretense of business with him, and as we guess, and
have reason to believe, to learn whither he went that day: Green (another of
the prisoners) had been there before on the same errand. And so much we shall
prove to you by the people of the house Sir Edmondbury Godfrey happened about
noon, or some time in the afternoon of the same day (as we have it by the
confession of one of the parties) to be at an house near Saint Clements Church,
where these murderers had notice he was, and had prepared a trap for him as he
came back. They had appointed men to watch him and give them notice when he did
come back, and whatever his business was at the house that he was in (for it
cannot yet be known) he staid there till about seven or eight a clock at night:
And your Lordship knows that at that time of the year it is then dark. He
coming from about St. Clements Church toward his own house near Charing Cross,
notice was given to the Murderers of his approach near to Sommerset-house. And
thus they had laid their Bloody contrivance: Some of them were appointed to
meet him at the Back-gate of Sommerset-House, and to inform him that there was
a Quarrel in the Yard, and He being a man always careful to keep the Peace and
Punish them that broke it, they thought it a very apt means to train him into
the Yard. And when He came near the back-gate they did accordingly acquaint him
that Two of the Queens Servants were fighting in the yard, and that they needed
his presence to part and quiet them. He at first, thought it might be but some
ordinary idle scuffle, and was not willing to go down, but being very much
importuned by them, down he went through the back-gate into the yard, where
were indeed two men scuffling together, but counterfeitly, the one was Berry
the Prisoner here, the other was Kelly the Priest that is run away. And when
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was come, and within their reach, then, as it was before
contrived, the Fray of it self ended, and Berry goes to the lower watergate,
and Mr. Praunce (who was in that soul fact, but has since repented, and has
made this discovery) to the uppergate, to keep back any casual passengers for a
little while, till such time as the murder was over.

My Lord, Things being thus prepared, whilst Sir Edmundbury Godfrey stood
still, or was returning, having no more to do there, after the scuffle was thus
appeased, Green one of the Prisoners, coming behind him, puts a Cravat, or a
Twisted linen cloth, (which he had ready for the purpose) about his Neck. And
He, Hill, and those holy Fathers Girald and Kelly (with great veneration be it
spoken, for men of their Order to stain their hands with the blood of an
Innocent Gentleman, and that in so Treacherous a manner) All set upon him, and
very manfully, being Four upon one, and he altogether surprised, threw him down
and Strangled him. And this was done (as it is easy to imagine) without much
noise, so that I doubt not but many that were near the place might be ignorant
of it and did not hear it.

My Lord, Though the thing was done with a great Zeal, and a very good will to
dispatch him, yet it so happened, that when Mr. Praunce came back from keeping
Sentinel at the Gate, there was some life left in Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, he
did stir his feet, and thereby they perceived that he was not quite dead. But
to make through work with him, Green, (who begun, and was to give an
accomplishment to this bloody fact) takes hold of his Head and twists his Neck
round, and stamps upon his Breast, the marks of which outrageous cruelty did
plainly appear in his body after it was found

My Lord, after they had thus killed him, Girald the Priest thought he was not
yet dead enough, and was very willing to run him through with Sir Edmundbury's
own Sword, but that was not liked by the rest, lest it might be discovered by a
great effusion of blood in that place: and so they forbore it for that time.
Having thus dispatched him, they removed him to the Chamber of Hill where they
kept him some time, and after that to another Chamber. I will not be particular
herein because the Witness will give the best account of it. But after some
time, (I desire it may be observed) 'twas on Monday night (two nights after the
fact was committed) they brought him into another Room and laid him there, with
a Cloak thrown over him. And I mention this last so particularly, because he
then happened to be seen by another witness here present, who concurs as to his
lying there dead, and that he saw him by the help of a dark Lauthorn, of which,
and other Circumstances, I shall have occasion to make use hereafter.

My Lord, After he had lain in Sommerset-House some days, they thought it was
high time to remove him, or rather to expose him: for having now killed him
they did endeavor to kill his Reputation, and lay the blame of this foul
murder upon the innocent Gentleman, as if he had killed himself: And on
Wednesday night, which by computation was the 16 th of October, they carried
him out of Sommerset-House in this manner. Hill having late in the night
procured a Sedan, they made a shift by bending the body to a fit posture to
crowd him into it; and Berry one of the murderers and Porter of Sommerset-House
was of all men most proper to help them out with privacy, and therefore it was
agreed between them, that whenever a man should come before and make an hem, it
should be a sign to Berry to open the Gate. And my Lord, having put him into
the Sedan, Mr. Praunce and Girald first carried him out in it to Covent Garden,
and there they rested, being something wearied with their burden, and two more
supplied their rooms, and carried him to Long-Acre. Then Girald and Praunce
took him up again and carried him to the Grecian Church near So-ho: And when
they had him there, they got an horse ready and mounted him upon it, and Hill
was set behind him to hold him up; by which means they carried him to the place
where he was found, and there to accomplish the last part of their design,
which was to murder his Reputation after they had killed his body, they took
his own Sword and run him through, and left him in such a manner, as that
(according to the weakness of their understanding) the world should conclude he
had killed himself. In that condition was the Gentleman found. I have but
little more at present to trouble you with, and that shall be to show you what
the murderers did after they had committed this fact. They gave an account of
it the next morning to Mr. Praunce, who went no further than the Sedan went,
which was to the Grecian Church: and the Priests were so far from any remorse,
and had so little of humanity, (I believe there is none can think had much of
Divinity) that they did in a paper set down a Narrative of this Heroic Act:
and I doubt not but by this time it is sent to Rome, where it finds as great
Approbation, and causes as great Joy as their other Acts of a like nature have
heretofore done. Some days after the Fact was done, and to their everlasting
honor thus by themselves recorded, some of these Priests had a meeting at the
Queens head at Bow, and there was the Paper produced and read, at which they
were very merry, and were so loud that some of the house overheard them, and do
yet remember that they read and were merry at a paper which concerned Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey.

My Lord, This will be the course of our Evidence, and though your Lordship and
the Jury will easily believe that most of these particulars must arise from one
who was party to the Fact, yet my Lord, I will undertake before I have done, so
to fortify almost every patticular he delivers, with a concurrent proof of
other Testimony, and the things will so depend upon one another, and have such
a Connection that little doubt will remain in any man's mind that is come hither
without prepossession, but that Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was murdered at
Sommerset-House, and that the persons who stand now Indicted for it were the
murderers.


Mr. Recorder, My Lord, if your Lordship pleases, according as Mr. Attorney
has opened it, we desire we may call our Witnesses, and first we will call Mr.
Oats.


Crier, Mr. Oats, Lay your hand on the Book. The Evidence you shall give for
our Sovereign Lord the King against Robert Green, Henry Berry and Laurence Hill
the Prisoners at the Bar, shall be the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but
the Truth. So help you God.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray Mr. Oats will you give my Lord and the Jury an account
what Transactions there were between you and Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and that,
my Lord, is all we call him for.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I call this Gentleman to prove, what Examinations Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey had taken, and what was his own opinion of himself about
them.


Lord C. J. Mr. Attorney, I suppose the Use you make of it is this, to show
that that might be one of the motives to these persons to do this act because
he was forward in the discovery of their Plot.


L. Chief Just. Come Mr. Oats, pray tell your knowledge.


Mr. Oats, My Lord, upon the sixth of September last, I did go before Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, and there upon Oath gave in several depositions, and after
that I had made Oath of those Depositions, we took the Record along with us
home again. And on the 28 th. of September, after we had taken two or three
Copies of this Record, we went before Sir Edmundbury Godfrey again, and Swore
all the Copies we had taken, and so made them Records. My Lord, after that, the
business was made known to the Council by my self, and upon Monday Mr. Godfrey
came to me, which was I think the 30 th. of September, and did tell me what
affronts he had received from some great persons (whose names I name not now)
for being so zealous in this business. And my Lord, he told me that others who
were well inclined to have the discovery made, did think that he had not been
quick enough in the Prosecution, but had been too remiss, and did threaten him
that they would complain to the Parliament, which was to sit the 21 th. of
October following. My Lord, that week before Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was
missing, he came to me, and told me that several Popish Lords, some of whom are
now in the Tower, had threatened him, and asked him what he had to do with it.
My Lord, I shall name their names when time shall come. My Lord, this is all I
can say, He was in a great fright and told me he went in fear of his life by
the Popish party, and that he had been dogged several days.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Did he tell you that he was dogged?


Mr. Oats. Yes, he did, and I did then ask him why he did not take him man
with him, he said, he was a poor weak Fellow I then asked him why he did not
get a good brisk Fellow to attend him, but he made no great matter of it, he
said he did not fear them, if they came fairly to work, but yet he was often
threatened, and came sometimes to me to give him some encouragement, and I did
give him what encouragement I could, that he would suffer in a just Cause and
the like: but he would often tell me he was in continual danger of being hurt
by them.


Mr. Attor. Genesis We desire Mr. Robinson may be sworn. Which was done
accordingly.


Mr. Recorder. Pray Sir, will you tell the Court and the Jury, what discourse
you had with Sir. Edmondbury Godfrey, and what apprehensions he had concerning
this business.


Tho. Robinson Esquire, Chief Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas. My
Lord, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey and I were of a very ancient acquaintance for
above forty years, we were bred up together at Westminster- School and
continued in that acquaintance all along, except in the time of the War, and
were for many years together in Commission for the peace, both for this County
and this City, We met at the Quarter Sessions for Westminster the seventh of
October, which was Monday, as I take it, and meeting there, we went after the
Court was up and dined with the head Bailey, as the custom is; where Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey and I did discourse several things about this Plot; I said
to Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, I understand you have taken several examinations
about this Plot, that is now made public, truly, said he, I have, but, I
think, I shall have little thanks for my pains, or some such words: says he,
I did it very unwillingly and would fain have had it done by others; why, said
I, you did but what was your duty to do, and it was a very good act: pray, Sir,
have you the examinations about you, will you please to let me see them; no, I
have them not, said he, I delivered them to a person of quality, but as soon as
I have them you shall see them. But, said I, I should be very glad to
understand, Sir Edmondbury, that the depth of the matter were found out, I am
afraid, said he, of that, that it is not, but discoursing further, he said to
me, Upon my Conscience, I believe, I shall be the first Martyr. Why so, said I,
are you afraid? No, said he, I do not fear them, if they come fairly, and I
shall not part with my Life tamely. Why do not you go with a man, said I, if
you have that fear upon you? Why, said he, I do not love it, it is a clog to a
man, but, said I, you should do well to keep a man: I observe you never go with
one.

Mr. Attor. Genesis But did he tell you, Sir, that he did believe, he should be
the first Martyr?


Mr. Robinson. Yes, He did say, upon his Conscience he did believe he should be
the first Martyr, and this is all I can say of this business.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Then if your Lordship please we will in the next place call
Mr. Praunce, who was drawn in to be present at this business, and who knew of
all the fact, and will give you an account of the whole matter.


Then Mr. Praunce was sworn. Mr. Attor. Genesis Pray, Sir, begin at the very
beginning. The meetings you had at the Plow-Ale-House, and the sending to Sir
Edmondbury's House, and all the Story.


L. Ch Just, Mr. Praunce, pray tell us the first motives that were used to you
to do this thing, and the first time it was mentioned, who they were that first
mentioned it, and where.


Mr. Praunce. My Lord, it was about a fortnight or three weeks before he was
murdered, we met several times at the PlowAle-House.


L. Chief, Just, With whom?


Mr. Praunce. With Mr. Girald, Mr. Green, and Mr. Kelly. Girald and Kelly did
entice me in, and told me it was no Sin.


Mr. Recorder. Girald and Kelly did?


Mr. Praunce. Yes Girald and Kelly,


Mr. Recorder. What are they?


Mr. Praunce. Two Priests: And they said it was no sin, it was a charitable
act: They said he was a busy man, and had done, and would do a great deal of
mischief, and it was a deed of Charity to do it, and so they told the rest
besides.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Where was it they said thus?


Mr. Praunce. They said it at the Plow, and by the Waterside.


Mr. Recorder. Well said, how long was it before he died?


Mr. Praunce. A week or a fortnight before he was murdered, and Green, Hill,
and Girald met there together.


Mr. Attor. Genesis What discourse had you then?


Mr. Praunce. There they resolved that the first that could meet with him
should give notice to the rest to be ready, and so in the morning, when they
went out on Saturday --


Mr. Attor. Genesis But before you come to that, do you know of any dogging of him
into the fields.


Mr. Praunce. Yes, it was before that I heard them say, they would and had
dogged him into the fields.


L. Chief. Just. Who did you hear say so?


Mr. Praunce. Girald, Kelly, and Green,


Mr. Attor. Genesis That Green is one of the Prisoners.


Mr. Recorder. Which way did they dog him? what Fields?


Mr. Praunce. Red Lion fields, and those by Holborn.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Why did they not kill him there?


Mr. Praunce. Because they had not opportunity.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know of any sending to his House, or going to it?


Mr. Praunce. One time I do know of, and that was Saturday morning, Mr. Kelly
came to give me notice, that they were gone abroad to dog him, and afterward
they told me, that Hill or Green did go to his House and ask for him, but the
Maid told him he was not up, and then went away, and said he would call by and
by.


Hill. What time was that in the morning?


Mr. Praunce. It was about nine or ten a clock in the morning.


Hill. And had we been there before or after?


Mr. Praunce. You had been there before.


Mr. Recorder. Pray stay till such time as we have done with our Evidence, you
shall have all free liberty to ask him any Question, but you must stay till we
have done.


Mr. Praunce. As soon as they heard he was within, they came out and staid for
his coming out, and dogged him.


L. Chief. Just. Did all three of them go to his House?


Mr. Praunce. No, my Lord,


L. Chapter Just. Who was it did go?


Mr. Praunce. Only one, either Hill, or Green.


L. Chief Just. How do you know that?


Mr. Praunce. They told me so themselves, for they came to give me notice.


L. Chapter Just. Who told you so?


Mr. Praunce. It was Girald and Green both.


L. Chapter Just. Did Green tell you that he had been there?


Mr. Praunce. He told me one of them, but I am not certain which. And so, my
Lord, after that, when he came out they dogged him that day up and down.


Mr. Justice Jones. Who dogged him?


Mr. Praunce. Girald, Green and Hill dogged him into St. Clements; and about
seven a clock, Green came and gave me notice, that he was at Saint Clements,
and I came to Somerset House as fast as I could.


L. Chief. Just. Where were you?


Mr. Praunce. At my own house.


L. Chief. Just. How far did you live from Somerset House?


Mr. Praunce. I lived in Princes-Street, not far from Somerset House.


Mr. Recorder. Who was it gave you notice?


Mr. Praunce. It was Green. He told me that Girald and Kelly were watching him,
and that he was at Saint Clements.


L. Chief. Just. Where was he?


Mr. Praunce. At Saint Clements, my Lord


L. Chapter Just. Where there?


Mr. Praunce. I was not there, they told me so, and no more; and about eight or
nine a clock Hill came before up the Street, and gave us notice, that we must
be ready. And so, my Lord, as soon as Hill had given us notice, he went up to
the Gate, and staid there till Sir Edmondbury Godfrey came by, and then told
him, there were two men a quarrelling, and desired him to come, and try
whether he could pacify them; he was very unwilling; but pray, Sir, (says
Hill) you being a Justice of the Peace may qualify them, and so he went down
till he came to the bottom of the Railes, and when he came to the bottom of
the Railes, Green tvvisted his Handkerchief, and threvv it about his neck, and
threw him behind the Rayles, and there throttled him, and punched him, and then
Girald would have thrust his Sword through him, but the rest would not permit
him, for fear it should discover them by the blood. And about a quarter of an
hour after, I came down, and found he was not quite dead; for I laid my hand
upon him, and his Legs tottered and shook, and then Green wrung his Neck quite
round.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was it that took him by the Neck?


Mr. Praunce. It was Green, my Lord.


L. C. Just. Did you see him?


Mr. Praunce. No, but he did tell me afterward that he did it.


L. C. J. Who, Green himself?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, my Lord, for he boasted of it.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray what did he do to him besides?


Mr. Praunce. He punch'd him with his Knee.


L. C. J. Did you see him to do this? How do you know he did it?


Mr. Praunce. He and the rest told me so afterward.


L. C. J. Where were you at that time that the Handkerchief was twisted about
his Neck?


Mr. Praunce. As soon as he came down I went toward the Gate.


L. C. J. Who ordered you to stand at the Gate?


Mr. Praunce. It was Hill.


Mr. Serj. Stringer. You watched the Watergate, who watched the Stairs?


Mr. Praunce. That was Berry.


Mr. Recorder. Pray give an account what they did afterward.


Praunce. Why afterward --


Mr. At. G. Who told you that Green twisted his Neck?


Mr. Praunce. All spoke of it.


Mr. At. G. Did Hill? Mr. Praunce. Yes, he, and the rest.


Mr. At. G. How came you to understand that he punch'd his Breast?


Mr. Praunce. Green spoke of it himself, and so did the others.


Mr. At. G. Who were about his Body when you came down to the Gate?


Mr. Praunce. All Four.


Mr. At. G. Name them.


Mr. Praunce. Hill, Green, Girald and Kelly.


Mr. At. G. Was Berry there?


Mr. Praunce. He came to them a while after.


Mr. At. G. When?


Mr. Praunce. Before they carried him into the house.


Mr. At. G. How can you tell that?


Mr. Praunce. Because he helped them to carry him in.


Mr. Sol. G. Where was Berry before they carried him into the house?


Mr. Praunce. He was about the Stairs.


Mr. Recorder. Who was it that carried him up into the Room?


Mr. Praunce. We all did.


Mr. Recorder. Pray name all that were in the Company.


Mr. Praunce. There was Giral'd, Green, Hill, Kelly, Berry and I.


Mr. At. G. Who set their hands to do it?


Mr. Praunce. We all did help; Hill went before and opened the Door, and we
carried him into the Room.


Mr. At. G. Whose Room was that?


Mr. Praunce. It was at a Chamber of Hill's in Dr. Godwin's house.


Mr. Recorder. Was Hill Godwin's man?


Praunce. Yes, he had been.


Mr. Justice Jones. Did Berry help to carry him in?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, Berry did.


Mr. Serj. Stringer. Was there any discourse of a Sword to be thrust through
him at that time?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, Girald said he would thrust a Sword through him, but they
would not let him for fear of discovery.


Mr. At. G. What became of the Body?


Mr. Praunce. It lay there till Monday Night, and on Monday it was removed into
Somerset House, and upon Monday Night Hill did show me it with a Dark Lanthorn.


Mr. At. G. Who were in the Room then?


Mr. Praunce. Girald, and Hill, and Kelly, and all were there. And on Tuesday
Night it was brought back again: Mr. Hill would have carried him into his own
Lodging.


L. 6. J Whither did they carry him on Monday Night?


Mr. Praunce. Into Somerset House.


Mr. Justice Wild. Is not Hill's Chamber in Somerset House?


Mr. Serj. Stringer. Describe the Room Mr. Praunce, as well as you can.


Mr. Praunce. I am not certain of the Room, and so cannot describe it.


Mr. Justice Wild. But was not Hill's Chamber in Somerset House?


Mr. Praunce. It Is in the lower part of the house in a Court.


Mr. At. G. When you saw him in this Room, pray, what was thrown over him?


Mr. Praunce. There was something, I cannot tell what; for I durst not stay
long there.


Mr. Justice Dolben. What light was there?


Mr. Praunce. Only a Dark Lanthorn.


Mr. At. G. Who carried it?


Mr. Praunce. Hill carried it.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Are you sure you saw the Body there?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, I am certain of it.


Mr. At. G. What became of it after that?


Mr. Praunce. On Tuesday Night it was carried to Hill's, the Chamber where he
was first brought after he was murdered; but there was some body there, and so
they could not carry it into the Room but they carried him to a Room just over
against, I think they were Sir John Arundell's Lodgings, I cannot tell. There it
lay till Wednesday Night, and about Nine a Clock on Wednesday Night they were
removing the body into the Room where it first lay; and I happened to come as
they were removing it, and they were affrighted, and run away: But I spoke, and
Berry came back again, and got the Body up into the Room, and about Twelve a
Clock they carried it away in the Sedan.


Mr. At. G. Who brought the Sedan?


Mr. Praunce. Hill did.


Mr. At. G. Who put him into it?


Mr. Praunce. We all set our Hands to it.


Mr. At. G. Who carried him out first?


Mr. Praunce. I and Girald.


Mr. At. G. Out of which Gate?


Mr. Praunce. The Upper-Gate of the Upper-Court.


Mr. At. G. How came you to have the Gate opened?


Mr. Praunce. Berry opened it.


Mr. At. G. How came he to open it?


Mr. Praunce. Some body hemmed, and that was the Sign.


Mr. At. G. Who was it that carried the Sedan first?


Mr. Praunce. I and Girald.


Mr. At. G. Who went before?


Mr. Praunce. Green and Kelly.


Mr. Recorder. How far did you carry him?


Mr. Praunce. Into Covent Garden, and there we rested.


Mr. At. G. And who took him up then?


Mr. Praunce. Green and Kelly.


Mr. At. G. How far did they carry him?


Mr. Praunce. They carried him to Long-Acre. Then we took him up and carried
him to Soe-hoe Church, and there Hill met us with an horse, and we helped the
body up.


Mr. At. G. Who was it that rid behind him?


Mr. Praunce. It was Hill.


Mr. At. G. What did you do with your Sedan?


Mr. Praunce. We set it in a new house till we came back again.


L. C. J. You say you saw him on horseback?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, My Lord, I did.


L. C. J. How, in what posture?


Mr. Praunce. Astride, his legs were forced open, and Hill held him up.


Hill. Did I hold him?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, you did.


L. C. J. Did the others go with him?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, My Lord.


L. C. J. Who did go with him?


Mr. Praunce. Green, Hill, Girald, and Kelly.


Mr. At. G. Pray will you tell my Lord and the Jury, what account they gave
you the next morning concerning the Body, and how they had disposed of it.


Mr. Praunce. They told me --


L. C. J. Who told you?


Mr. Praunce. Hill, Kelly, and Girald.


L. C. J. What did they tell you?


Mr. Praunce. First, that they had run him through with his own Sword; then
thrown him into a Ditch, and laid his Gloves and other things upon the Bank.


Mr. At. G. Pray tell now the story of your meeting at Bow. What was the house
called you met at?


Mr. Praunce. It was the Sign of the Queens Head.


Mr. At. G. Who was it that did meet there?


Mr. Praunce. They were Priests, I cannot so well remember their names, they are
written down in this paper.


Mr. Record. Look on the paper yourself, you can read I suppose.


Mr. Praunce. There was one Luson a Priest, I think.


Mr. At. G. Where did he live?


Mr. Praunce. He was with Vernatt.


Mr. At. G. What was the occasion of your meeting there?


Mr. Praunce. Vernatt told me only it was to be merry there.


Mr. At. G. What was the man of the House his name?


Mr. Praunce. One Casshes.


Mr. At. G. Did you dine there? Mr. Praunce. Yes.


Mr. At. G. What had you for dinner?


Mr. Praunce. We had a Barrel of Oysters, and a dish of Fish: I bought the Fish
my self.


L. Chief Just. What day was it?


Mr. Praunce. The Friday after the Proclamation, that all the Papists were to
be gone out of Town.


Mr. Record. Tell what company you had there, and what Discourse.


Mr. Praunce. There was Mr. Vernatt, and I, and Mr. Girala, and that other
Priest, and one Mr. Dethicke.


Mr. At. G. Who sent for him?


Mr. Praunce. Mr. Vernatt sent a Note for him by a Cobbler.


Mr. At. G. Did he come upon that Note?


Mr. Praunce. He came presently. And when he was come, then they read all the
writing of the murder; for Mr. Vernatt should have been one at the doing of it
but something happened he could not.


Mr. At. G. Mr. Vernatt was very sorrowful at the reading of it, was he not?


Mr. Praunce. If he was, it was because he was not there.


Mr. At. G. How did he behave himself? Did he read it with any Pleasure and
Delight?


Mr. Praunce. We were all very merry.


Mr. At. G. What can you say about any body's over-hearing you?


Mr. Praunce. There was a Drawer came and listened at the Door, and I hearing
the Door a little rustle, went to the Door, and caught him listing, and said I
to him, Sirrah, I could find in my Heart to kick you down Stairs; and away he
went.


Mr. Just. Wild. Was Vernatt with you there that night he was murdered, the
Saturday Night?


Mr. Praunce. No, there was only the Six I have named.


Mr. Just. Jones. You say that you met at the Plow the first Night?


Mr. Praunce. Yes.


Mr. Just. Jones. And there you were told, That it was very charitable act to
kill Sir Edmundbury Godfrey?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, I was so.


Mr. Justice Jones. Was it agreed there that he should be killed?


Mr. Praunce. It was agreed there; and the first that met him were to give
notice to the rest.


Mr. Just. Jones. Who were there?


Mr. Praunce. Girald, Kelly, Green and I.


L. C. Just. When came Hill and Berry into this Cause? How came they acquainted
with it?


Mr. Praunce. They were in it before I.


L. C. J. Who told you they were in it?


Mr. Praunce. Mr. Girald, my Lord, told me so.


Mr. Just. Jones. Hill and Berry were not at the Plow, Where did you first hear
them speak of it?


Mr. Praunce. Girald and I have been at Berry's house diverse times.


Mr. Justice Dolben. But there were two meetings at the Plow, were there not?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, Yes, there were.


Mr. Justice Dolben. And Hill was at the last meeting, was he not?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, he was, my Lord.


Mr. At. G. Now I would ask you this Question, by the favor of the Court, Was
there any Reward proposed by these Priests for the doing of it?


Mr. Praunce. Girald and Vernatt did speak of a great Reward that was to be
given for it.


Mr. At. G. Pray, how much?


Mr. Praunce. I do not remember what.


Mr. At. G. Cannot you tell how much?


Mr. Praunce. There was to be a good Reward from my Lord Bellasis, as they said.


Mr. Justice Dolben. You had several meetings you say, Did you there resolve
what should be the way of doing it?


Mr. Praunce. Girald was resolved to kill him that Night; and if he could not
get him into a more convenient Place, he would kill him with his own Sword in
the Street that leads to his own house.


Mr. Record. Who was that, that resolved so?


Mr. Praunce. It was Girald.


Mr. Record. The Priest rather then fail was resolved to do that act of Charity
himself.


Mr. At. G. I would now ask you a Question, which though it does not prove the
persons Guilty, yet gives a great strength to the Evidence. Do you know Mr.
Bedlow, Mr. Praunce?


Mr. Praunce. I do now know him.


Mr. At. G. Had you ever any Conference with him before you was committed to
Prison?


Mr. Praunce. Never in all my life.


Mr. At. G. Were you ever in his Company in your life before, that you know of?


Mr. Praunce. No, not that I remember.


Mr. At. G. Well, you shall see how far he will agree with you.


Mr. Record. Now they may ask him any Questions, if they please, for we have
done with him.


L. C. J. Let them if they will.


Hill. My Lord, In the first place I humbly pray that Mr. Praunce's Evidence
may not stand good against me, as being perjured by his own Confession.


L. C. J. How?


Hill. I suppose my Lord, it is not unknown to you that he made such an open
Confession before the King.


L. C. J. Look you Sir, I will tell you for that, I do not know that ever he
made a Confession to contradict what he had said upon his Oath.


Hill. He was upon his Oath before.


L. C. J. Yes, he had accused you upon Oath, but afterward, you say he
confessed that it was not true; but that Confession that it was not true, was
not upon Oath: How is he then guilty of Perjury?


Hill. My Lord, if a man can swear a thing, and after deny it, he is certainly
perjured.


L. C. J. If a man has great horrors of Conscience upon him, and is full of
fears, and the guilt of such a thing disorders his mind, so as no make him go
back from what he had before discovered upon Oath, you cannot say that man is
perjured if* he don't forswear it: But I believe no body did believe his
denial, because his first discovery was so particular, that every man did think
his general denial did only proceed from the disturbance of his mind. But have
you any mind to ask him any Questions?


Mr. Record. We can prove, that immediately after he retracted his recantation.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Try if you can trap him in any Question.


Hill. Pray what hour was it, that I went to Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's?


Mr. Praunce. About 9 or 10 a Clock, I am not certain in the hour.


L. C. J. No, no, a man cannot be precise to an hour; but prove you what you
can.


Hill. I have a great many Witnesses besides the Justice of my Cause, that I
was not out of my house that day.


L. C. J. You shall be heard for that, but the present matter is, Whether you
will ask him any Questions or no?


Hill. My Lord, it is all false that he says, and I deny every word of it, and
I hope it shall not be good against me.


L. C. J. Well, Mr. Berry, will you ask him any Questions?


Berry. Mr. Praunce, who was in my house at that time you speak of?


Mr. Praunce. There was your Wife there, and several other persons besides.


Berry. Who were they?


Mr. Praunce. There were diverse people, it is an Alehouse.


Berry. But who? Can you name any of them?


Mr. Praunce. There was Girald, and Kelly and I.


L. C. J. Why, did you not all know Mr. Praunce?


Berry. My Lord, I knew him as he passed up and down in the house


L. C. J. Why, what an Answer is that? what do you mean by his passing up and
down in the house?. Did you never drink with him?


Berry. Drink with him, my Lord? Yes.


L. C. J. Yes? Why people don't use to drink as they go along.


Berry. It was in other Company that came to my house, no acquaintance of mine.


L. C. Just. Was not Mr. Praunce known by you all Three? Which of you can deny
it? What say you Hill?


Hill. My Lord, I did know him.


L. C. Just. What say you Green?


Green. Yes, I did know him?


Mr. At. Genesis But yet my Lord, we shall prove in the Course of our Evidence,
that upon their Examinations, they did deny they ever knew him; But because the
Prisoners give us this Occasion, I desire Mr. Praunce may give an Account of
one thing. He was Concerned in this very Fact, and there was no other way to
get any Proof of it, than by the discovery of one among themselves. He was once
of that Religion, or else he had never been Concerned in this thing. And your
Lordship will find, that Mr. Praunce, whilc he was of that Religion, and not
sure of his Pardon, was under some Disturbances and Fears, which prevailed with
him to come before the KING, and deny what he had Sworn. But my Lord, which is
very Observable, this Gentleman that had made that denial before the KING, was
so far Convinced, that he had done amiss in it, and so troubled that he had
done it, that he desired Capt. Richardson (as soon as he Returned back to
Prison) to carry him back to the KING again: for he must go back, and make good
that Confession which he at first had made* For it was every word True. And
being for the KING, we desire Capt. Richardson may be Sworn.


Mr. Just. Wild. Can you tell where Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was dogged.


Mr. Praunce. No my Lord, I cannot.


Mr. Just. Wild. You say they did tell you, that they Dogged him up and down;
Did not they tell you from whence they Dogged him, when they killed him?


Mr. Praunce. No, they did not.


L. C. Just. Mr. Richardson, were you by when Mr. Praunce denied all that he
had Confessed?


Capt. Richardson. My Lord, upon the Sunday Night before the Prorogation of the
last Parliament, I Received a Letter from one of the Lords of the Council, to
bring up Mr. Praunce before the Lords of the Committee for his Examination.
When I brought him thither, I found Mr. Praunce was disturbed, and desired to
speak with the KING; and I carried him into the Kings Closet, where he fell
down on his Knees, and said, He was Innocent, and they were all Innocent; and
that was the Substance of all he said. I then had him up to the Council, where
he said the same thing. The Lords asked him, Whether any body had been
Tampering with him, he answered no. My Lord, when I came home, I was no sooner
got within the Doors, but he begged of me (for Gods sake) to go back to the
KING, and to acquaint Him, not only that what he had now said, was False; but
that all which he had sworn before, was Truth. And if his Majesty would send
him a Pardon, he would make a great Discovery. And my Lord, more than that, he
said, It was Fear, that made him Recant; and he gave a full satisfaction, that
it was only out of an Apprehension that his Life was not secure, that his Trade
would be lost among the Roman Catholics; and in case he had his Pardon, and
were Saved, he should have been in danger of being Murdered by them.


Lord Chief Justice. Now you have an Account Mr. Hill how he came to Deny, and
how soon he Recanted his Denial.


Mr. Just. Jones. You are upon your Oath Mr. Praunce, Is this all true that he
has said?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, my Lord, it is.


Mr. Recorder. How has he behaved himself since that time?


Capt. Richardson. As soberly as can be, since he had his Pardon.


Mr. Attorney General. Pray, since that time, have you had any Discourse with
him? And how did he Carry himself?


Capt. Richardson. Very soberly.


Mr. Attorney General. Did he express any Abhorrence of the Practice of that
Church?


Capt. Richardson. Yes, my Lord, he did so.


Mr. Attorney General. I hope it will make all People Abhor and forsake them in
time, if these be their Practices. In the next place my Lord, we will call Mr.
Bedlow, who, though he was not present at the Murder, yet he saw the Body
after it was Dead in Somerset House, which goes to the Matter as to the Place;
and he will give you some Circumstances which will very much Corroborate the
Testimony of Mr. Praunce.


Mr. Justice VVild. What time was it before they carried him in, after they had
killed him.


Lord Chief Justice. Brother, I think they say, between eight and nine they
Decoyed him down through the Watergate. Was it not so?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Justice VVild. How long had they killed him before they carried him into
the Room?


Mr. Praunce. About a quarter of an Hour.


Mr. Justice VVild. Had he his Sword about him?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, it was found run through him.


Mr. Justice VVild. Did Sir Edmondbury Godfrey himself draw his Sword?


Mr. Praunce. No, he was Strnngled by Surprise, by getting a thing about his
Neck, and prevented him of drawing his Sword.


Lord Chief Justice. They were Persons that were ready prepared for him, they
would not Permit him to Defend himself.


Mr. Sergeant Stringer. My Lord, before Mr. Bedlow be Sworn, I desire a little
to open what we call him to. My Lord, there were four Priests that did design
this Murder. Le Fair, and Welsh, and Girald and Kelly, besides the other
Priests; and they Treated with Mr. Bedlow for Four Thousand Pounds to undertake
to Kill a Gentleman. My Lord, he did Promise to undertake it, but failing of
his Promise, afterward. Le Fair met him, and told him it was done. And told
him, he should have half that Reward to help to carry him off; and withal,
carried him into the Room where the Body was. And he will tell you, that
Praunce was in the Room when he saw him; and though he never knew Praunce
before, yet when he met with him in the Lobby of the Lords House, he knew him
again, and Charged him as the Man that Committed this Fact. And he will
Acquaint your Lordship, that Le Fair saw the Body likewise, and gave Mr.
Bedlow an Account of the Murder, with the same Circumstances that Praunce now
Relates it.


Then Mr. Bedlow was Sworn. Mr. Recorder. Mr. Bedlow, Pray do you direct your
Discourse to the Jury.


Lord Chief Just. Mr. Attorney, Pray do you Ask him your Questions, that you
may put him in that Method you would have him take, to give his Evidence.


Mr. Attorney Genesis My Lord, I would first Ask him this Question: What
Conference he had with any persons, Priests or Others, about Murdering any body?


Mr. Bedlow. My Lord and the Jury, I have at other times, and in other places,
proved what Familiarity I have had with the Priests and Jesuits; and (...) I
have (...) the Court, and Others, about it, yet I have done my Duty in
endeavoring so to do. My Lord, I have been several times Treated with, not
only about the Plot, but by several Persons about Murdering of a Gentleman.
They never told me who it was that was to be Murdered; but if I would Undertake
it, they, that is, Le Fair, and Prichard, and Mr. Kaines, and several other
Priests, who discoursed with me about it, would find out some to Assist me, and
my Reward should be very Considerable.


Lord Chapter Just. When was this?


Mr. Bedlow. It was in October last, about the beginning, or latter end of
September.


Lord Chapter Just. Well Sir, Go on.


Mr. Bedlow. I did Adhere to them all along, for I had a mind to Discover two
Years ago, but was prevented; and I only drilled them on, to know the Party,
that I might prevent them. But they would never Discover the Party.


Mr. Attorney General. Prithee come to this particular part of the Story.


Mr. Bedlow. Afterward they set me to insinuate my self into the Acquaintance
of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, not telling me they had any design upon him.


Lord Chapter Just. Who did?


Mr. Bedlow. Le Fair, and Pritchard, and Welsh.


Lord Chapter Just. Girald was not one, was he?


Mr. Bedlow. No my Lord. But they told me that afterward they would have me
introduce them into his Acquaintance. And I had been, I think, Six or Seven
days together with Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, at his House, and had got much into
his Acquaintance.


Mr. Justice Wild. By what means did you get into his Acquaintance?


Mr. Bedlow. Why, I pretended to get Warrants for the Good Behavior against
persons, that there were none such.


Lord Chief Just. Well, and what then?


Mr. Bedlow. This was the Week before the Saturday that he was Killed; and I
was there every day but Saturday. On the Friday I went to the
Grey-Hound-Tavern, and I sent my Boy to see if Sir Edmondbury Godfrey were at
Home. Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was not at Home then.


Lord Chief Just. When was that?


Mr. Bedlow. The very Day before he was Killed. If he had been at Home, I would
have gone over to him, and would have desired him to come over to them.


Lord Chief Justice. Were the Priests there?


Mr. Bedlow Yes, my Lord, there was Pritchard, and Le Fair, and Welsh, and
Kaines, and another; five Jesuits: and as I said, I sent my Boy to see if he
were at home, and he brought me word he was not; and if he had, I was to have
gone to him, to have fetched him thither, that they might Insinuate themselves
into his Acquaintance. And indeed, they had Tongue enough to wheedle themselves
into any one Acquaintance. So he not being at home, we came into the City, two
of the Jesuits and I.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Which two?


Mr. Bedlow. Le Fair and Welsh. The next Morning. Le Fair came to my
Chamber, and I was not then within; but by Accident I met him, about four of
the Clock in Lincolnes-Inn-Fields. We went to the Palsgraves Head Tavern; where
falling into Discourse, he told me there was a Gentleman that was to be put
out of the way; that was the Phrase he used, he did not really say Murder
him; for they don't count it Murder.


Lord Chief Justice. No, No, they put it into softer Terms.


Mr. Bedlow. They told me it was to be done to Night. I asked who it was,
they said it was a very material Man: For he had all the Informations that Mr.
Oats. and Dr. Tongue had given in; that several had been employed in the doing
of it, that several Attempts had been made, and that they had missed several
Opportunities, and had not done it till then; but if he should not be taken out
of the way, and the Papers taken from him, the business would be so Obstructed,
and go near to be Discovered, to that Degree, that they would not be able to
bring this Design to pass, but must stay till another Age before they should
Effect it. I asked him again, who it was, he said he would not tell me, but it
was a very material Man. I told him, that according to my Promise I would
Assist; but in such a Case, I should need a great many Men to be with me, he
being so considerable a Person. I asked him then, where the Money was, that was
formerly promised? he told me no worse a Man was Engaged for it, than my Lord
Bellasis, and Mr. Coleman had order to pay it.


Mr. Justice Jones. What was that Reward?


Mr. Bedlow. Four Thousand pound.


Lord Chief Justice. Who was it that first named this Gentleman to you to be
Sir Edmondbury Godfrey?


Mr. Bedlow. They never named him to me at all.


Lord Chief Justice. Let us know when you first knew it to be Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey.


Mr. Bedlow. I parted with him then, but came not according to my Promise. I
was to meet him at the Cloisters at Somerset House that night; but I knew their
Design was to Murder some body, and I would not come. I saw him no more till
Monday Night, then I met him in Red-Lyon-Court, where he put up his Cane to his
Nose; as who should say, I was to blame in not keeping my Promise. And we went
together to the Grey-Hound-Tavern in Fleet Street, where he charged me with my
breach of Promise. I told him I was taken up by other Company, and unless they
would tell me who it was I was to Kill, I would have no hand in it: For I did
not know but that it might be my own particular Friend. And I would not murder
any private person, unless I knew who it was, and for what Reason. Well, says
he, we will tell you more anon if you meet me to night at Somerset House, at
nine a Clock. I did meet him exactly at that time in the Cloisters, where we
walked and talked a great while. And then he took me into the middle of the
Court, and told me, you have don ill, that you did not help in this business;
but if you will help to carry him off, you shall have half the Reward. Why said
I, Is he Murdered? Yes, said he; May not I see him, said I? Yes, you may, said
he: and so took me by the hand, and led me into the Room through a dark Entry.
In the Room were a great many, I cannot tell who they all were.


Mr. Attorney Genesis How many were there?


Mr. Bedlow. There might stand a great many behind one another. I saw Four or
Five.


Mr. Justice Jones. What kind of Light had they, Mr. Praunce?


Mr. Praunce. It was a middle-sized Lanthorn.


Mr. Just. Jones. Was it a small Light, or a great Light?


Mr. Bedlow. It was a small Light.


Mr. Justice Jones. Had they no Light, but that Lanthorn?


Mr. Bedlow. No: And they did not open it till I had had a turn about in the
Room.


Lord Chief Justice. Did they discourse of carrying him away then?


Mr. Bedlow. Yes, they did.


L. Chapter Just. Did you know him, when he lay Dead there?


Mr. Bedlow. Yes, your Lordship shall hear how I came to know him. One stepped to
the Body, and threw off the thing that laid upon him, and I went and Looked upon
him; and he had got about his Neck, such a kind of a fashioned Cravat as this
about my Neck; and I went to try, and could not get my Finger in betwixt. So I
saw him, his Bosom was all open, and I knew him presently: For those Jesuits
that were there, were not those who had employed me to insinuate my self into
his Acquaintance; and so they thought I had not known him. I Asked who it was,
they said it was a man that belonged to a person of Quality. I was mightily
struck and daunted, when I knew him: I would sain have persuaded them to have
Tied Weights at his Head and Feet, and Thrown him into the River, and
afterward I would have dragged for him, and took him up there. But they did
not think that so safe. No (said they) we will put it upon himself, there are
none but Friends concerned. I Asked Le Fair, how they would get him out? They
said, In a Chair. Then I Asked them, which way they would get him into the
Chair, and out of the Gate. They said The Porter was to sit up to let them Out.


Mr. Recorder. What Porter?


Mr. Bedlow. The Porter of the House.


Mr. Recorder. Who, Berry?


Mr. Bedlow. Yes. As for that Hill, or the Old Man, I do not know that I ever
had any particular knowledge of them; but only I looked upon them as
ill-designing men, seeing them in the Chapel.


Lord Chief Just. Did you see ere a one of the Three Prisoners there at that
time?


Mr. Bedlow. No my Lord: But I have such a Remembrance of Faces, that I could
tell, if I saw them again, any that I did see there, though the Light was but
small. They told me They had Strangled him; but how, I did not know. When they
pressed me to help to carry him out, I then Excused my self, and said, It was
too Early to carry him out yet; but about Eleven or Twelve a Clock would be a
better time. And I assured them I would come again. Said Le Fair to me, Upon
the Sacrament you took on Thursday, you will be at the Carrying Off of this Man
at Night. I promised him I would. And he went away, and left me there. I made
what speed away I could, for I was very Unsatisfied in my self; having so great
a charge upon me, as the Sacrament of the Alter, which after the discovery of
the Plot, was Administered to me twice a Week to conceal it, I could not tell
how to discover: I went then to Bristol, but very restless and disturbed in my
mind; and being persuaded by what God was pleased to put into my mind, calling
to remembrance that some Murders had been already committed, and greater ones
were daily intended, I was at last convinced, and could not longer forbear
discovery. I wrote to the Secretary of it, and went to the Parliament and gave
in my information. And one day I met with Mr. Praunce in the Lobby, and knew
him, and apprehended him.


Mr. At. G. I will ask you one question, Had you any discourse with Mr.
Praunce between the time you saw him with the Body, and the day he was
apprehended.


Mr. Bedlow, No, I never saw him to this day, to have any converse with him.


Mr. Justice Wild, Did not you see Hill that night when you were to have
carried him away?


Mr. Bedlow, No my Lord.


Mr. Justice Wild, Nor Green, nor Berry?


Mr. Bedlow, Green I did see about the Court, and Berry I was told was to open
the Gate that Monday night. But my Lord, when they found I did not come again,
they desisted that night, and kept it off longer, for fear I should come again
to stop them.


Mr. At. G. He did not refuse to help them, but promised to do it and failed:
and they finding that he had failed them, would not let the body lie where it
was for fear of discovery, but removed back again.


Mr. Justice Dolben, What did Praunce say, when you first took notice of him?


Mr. Bedlow, I understood aftewards that he was taken upon suspicion, because
at that time, his Maid had made a discovery, that he was about that time out of
his Lodgings. And while he was there in the Constables hands Mr. Oats came by,
and he desired to see him; and presently after I came thither, and the
Constable asked him, Mr. Praunce, will you see Mr. Bedlow? No, he said, he
would not: Then he put his Hat over his eyes that I might not see his face, and
kept it so. The press being great, and being desirous to be private my self, I
spoke to the Guard to put all out that had no business there, and they cried
out, that all should avoid the Room but Mr. Bedlow and his Friends. And when he
was going out with the rest, he lift up his Hat to see his way; and though
before I did not mind him, yet I happened at his passing by me to cast my eyes
upon his face, and presently knew him, and cried, Oh! pray Sir stay, you are
one of my friends that must stay here. And I presently charged my Guards to
take charge of him. Says the Constable, he is my Prisoner: Is he so, said I?
Then you have a very good Prisoner, and pray look safe to him. And then when I
went into the House of Lords, I made out my charge against him.


Mr. Recorder, Now if the Prisoners have any questions to ask Mr. Bedlow, they
may have free liberty to do it.


Hill, I never saw him before in my life.


L. C. J. Do you know any of them?


Mr. Bedlow, I know Mr. Berry, and Green very well.


L. C. J. Pray Mr. Praunce, was the Dark-Lanthorn at Hill's Lodging, or at the
other place?


Mr. Praunce, At the other place.


L. C. J. Look you here Mr. Praunce, They carried him to Hill's on Saturday
night, and he lay there till Monday night: What time on Monday-night was it
that they removed him into Somerset House?


Mr. Praunce, I was not there when they did remove him.


L. C. J. What time did you see him there?


Mr. Praunce, About Nine or Ten a Clock.


L. C. J. What time was it that you saw him there Mr. Bedlow?


Mr. Bedlow, It was after Nine my Lord.


Mr. Praunce, They had then removed him to Somerset House, and Mr. Hill asked
what they intended to do with the Body? They said, they would carry it out that
night, but they did not. But there the Dark-Lanthorn was, and on Tuesday-night
they removed him back again.


Mr. At. G. Now my Lord, if you please, we shall go on to call some Witnesses
that were not present at the Murder; for direct Evidence, as to that, can come
only out of the mouth of some that were concerned in it; but to corroborate by
concurrent circumstances, the Testimony which has been already given. And
first we shall call the Constable, to prove that he found Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey in the Fields, in the same manner in which Mr. Praunce says they told
him they left him.


L. C. J Mr. Attorney, you promised you would prove, that when these persons
were examined, they did deny before the House of Lords, that they knew Praunce.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, in that we were mistaken, I understand now, it was only
Berry denied that he did know Girald.


L. C. J. Why, did you never know Mr. Gerald?


Berry, Never in my life.


L. C. J. Mr. Praunce, have not you seen Girald with Berry?


Mr. Praunce, Yes, I have, but they usually went by several Names.


L. C. J. Did you ever see Girald in Hill's company?


Mr. Praunce, Yes, that I have.


L. C. J. Was there no Sentinel set that Monday-night, that Saturday-night, and
that Wednesday-night?


Mr. Praunce, My Lord, I am not certain, I took notice of none; if there were
any, they were at Berry's House, and he opened the Gate, when we came out with
the Sedan.


Mr. At. G. Mr. Berry, I suppose, could take order with the Sentinel, and give
them some entertainment in his own Lodge.


Then Mr. Brown the Constable was Sworn. Mr. Recorder, Pray, in what posture
did you find Sir Edmundbury Godfrey?


Mr. Brown, I found him, my Lord, in a Ditch, with his Sword through him, and
the end of it was two handfulls out of his back.


L. C. J. Was he Bloody?


Mr. Brown, There was no Blood at all, there was no Blood in the Ditch.


L. C. J. Was the Sword sticking in his Body?


Mr. Brown, Yes, My Lord, but there was no Blood at all when it was taken out;
they had run it into another place, but that happened to be against a Rib, and
so it could not go through; but there was no blood there.


Mr. Justice Jones, Was there any bruises on his Breast?


Mr. Brown, He did look black about the Breast.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, I would ask, whether his Neck were broken?


Mr. Brown, Yes, I suppose it was.


L. C. J. How do you know it?


Mr. Brown, It was very weak, and one might turn his Head from one Shoulder to
the other.


L. C. J. Where was his Stick and Gloves?


Mr. Brown, They were on the Bank-side.


L. C. J. Whose Sword was it?


Mr. Brown, His Servants said it was his own.


Mr. At. G. Pray, had he any Money in his Pocket?


Mr. Brown, Yes, a great deal of Gold and Silver.


L. C. J. Ay, Ay, for they count Theft Sin, but not Murder.


Mr. Justice Wild, They left that, to let men think he murdered himself.


L. C. J. Well, will you ask this Witness any questions before he goes?


Capt. Richardson, They say they will ask him none.


Mr. At. G. Then we desire to call the Chyrurgeons that viewed and opened the
Body, Mr. Skillard, and Mr. Cambridge; both whom were Sworn.


Mr. At. G. We begin with Mr. Skillard, Pray, Sir, inform my Lord and the
Jury, Did you see the Body of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey?


Mr. Skillard, Yes, I did view the Body.


Mr. At. G. When? what time did you see it?


Mr. Skillard, About Twelve of the Clock.


Mr. At. G. What day of the Week was it?


Mr. Skillard, On Friday, the next day after he was found.


Mr. At G. Did you observe his Breast? how was it?


Mr. Skillard. His breast was all beaten with some obtuse weapon, either with
the feet or hands, or something.


Mr. At. G. Did you observe his neck?


Mr. Skillard Yes, it was distorted.


Mr. At. G. How far?


Mr. Skillard. You might have taken the Chin and have set it upon either
Shoulder.


Mr. At. G. Did you observe the wound?


Mr. Skillard. Yes, I did. It went in at one place and stopped at a Rib, the
other place it was quite through the Body.


Mr. At. G. Do you think he was killed by that wound?


Mr. Skillard. No, for then there would have been some evacuation of Blood,
which there was not. And besides his bosom was open, and he had a Flannel
Wastcoat and a Shirt on; and neither those, nor any of his Clothes were
penetrated.


Mr. At. G. But are you sure his neck had been broken?


Mr. Skillard. Yes, I am sure.


Mr. At. G. Because some have been of opinion, that he hanged himself, and his
Relations to save his estate run him through; I would desire to ask the
Chyrurgeon what he thinks of it.


Mr. Skillard. There was more done to his neck than an ordinary suffocation;
the wound went through his very heart, and there would have appeared some
blood, if it had been done quickly after his death.


Mr. At. G. Did it appear by the view of the body that he was strangled or
hanged?


Mr. Skillard. He was a lean man, and his muscles if he had died of the wound,
would have been turgid: and then again all strangled people never swell,
because there is a sudden deprivation of all the spirits, and a hindering of the
Circulation of the blood.


Mr. At. G. How long do you believe he might be dead before you saw him?


Mr. Skillard. I believe four or five days. And they might have kept him a week
and he never swelled at all, being a lean man. And when we ripped him up, he
began for to putrify, we made two incisions to give it vent, and the liquor
that was in his body did a little smell. The very lean flesh was so near turned
into putrefaction, that it stuck to the Instrument when we cut it.


Mr. Recorder. My Lord here is another Chyrurgeon, Mr. Cambridge; Pray Sir are
you sworn.


Mr. Cambridge. Yes, I am.


Mr. Recorder. When did you see the body of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey?


Mr. Cambridge. Upon friday, the very same day the Gentleman did. I found his
neck dislocated, and his breast very much beaten and bruised. And I found two
punctures under his left Pap, the one went against the Rib, the other quite
through the body under the left Pap.


Mr. At G. Do you believe that wound was the occasion of his death?


Mr. Cambridge. No, I believe it was given him after his death.


L. C. J. And his neck was broke?


Mr. Cambridge. His neck was dislocated, Sir.


Mr. At. G. Why, that is broken. Now my Lord we shall call Sir Edmundbury
Godfreys Maid, Elizabeth Curtis. Swear her. Which was done.


Mr. Recorder. Your Lordship knows that Mr Praunce did say in the beginning,
that they had been several times at his House inquiring for him: now we call
this person to tell you what she knows about that.


Mr. At. G. Elizabeth Curtis, look upon the Prisoners, and tell my Lord and
the Jury whether you know any of them or no.


Elizabeth Curtis. This man that I now hear called Green, my Lord, was at my
Masters about a fortnight before he died.


L. C. J. What to do?


Eliz. Curtis. I don't know, but he asked for Sir Edmondbury Godfrey.


L. C. J. What time of the day was it?


Eliz. Curtis, It was in the morning.


Mr. At G. What did he say?


Eliz Curtis, He asked for Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and when he came to him, he
said, Good morrow, Sir, in English, and afterward spoke to him in French, I
could not understand him.


Mr. Recorder, I desire she may consider well, and look upon him.


Eliz. Curtis, That is the man.


Green. Upon my Soul I never saw him in all my life.


Eliz. Curtis, He had a darker colored Perriwig when he was there, and was
about a quarter of an hour talking with my Master.


Mr. At. G. Are you sure this was the man?


E. Curtis, Yes, I am, and that other man Hill was there that Saturday morning,
and did speak with him before he went out.


L. C. J. That you will deny too?


Hill, Yes, I do.


L. C. J. How do you know he was there?


E. Curtis, I was in the Parlor at that time, making up the fire.


L. C. J. Had you ever seen him before that time?


E. Curtis, No, never before that time. I went into the Parlor to carry my
Master his Breakfast, and brought a bunch of Keys with me in, and there Hill
was with him. And I went up stairs about some business, and came down again
wanting the Keys, which I had left upon the Table; and Hill was all that time
with my Master.


Mr. Sol. G. How do you know he was there?


E. Curtis, I was in the Parlor and stirred up the fire, and he was there a
good while.


Mr. Just. Jones, How long after did you see him again?


E. Curtis, Not till I saw him in Newgate.


Mr. Just. Jones, How long was that afterward?


E. Curtis, A month ago. But it is not the man that brought the note to my
Master.


Mr. At. G. What note?


E. Curtis, A note that a man brought to my Master that night before.


Mr. At. G. What is become of that Note?


E. Curtis, My Lord, I cannot tell, my Master had it.


Mr. At. G. Prithee, tell us the story of it.


E. Curtis, There was a man came to my Masters House, and asked if Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey were within. He said he had a Letter for him; and showed it
me, it was tied up in a knot. I told him my Master was within, but busy; but
said I, if you please I will carry it into him: he did so, and I gave it to my
Master; when I went out again, the man staid and asked for an Answer: I went in
again and told my Master that the man required an Answer. Prithee, said he,
tell him I don't know what to make of it.


Mr. Just. Wild, When was that?


E. Curtis, On Friday night.


Mr. Just. Wild, When? The Friday night before he was murdered?


E. Curtis, Yes.


Mr. At. G. But you Swear that Hill was there the Saturday morning.


E. Curtis, Yes, he was.


Mr. Sol. G. In what Clothes was he then?


E. Curtis, The same Clothes that he has now.


Mr. Just. Wild, Are you sure they are the same Clothes?


E. Curtis, Yes.


Mr. Sol. G. Here is a great Circumstance my Lord. I asked her what Clothes he
was in when he came to Sir Edmondbury's; and she says, the same that he has
now.


L. C. J. Have you ever shifted your Clothes?


Hill, No indeed, I have not.


E. Curtis, But for the man that brought the Note, I cannot Swear it is he.


Hill, But she did say when she came to see me in Newgate, that she never saw
me in my life; and my Lord I hope I have sufficient VVitnesses to prove where I
was that morning.


L. C. J. She says, she cannot Swear you were the man that brought the Note.


Hill, My Lord, I desire she will tell me about what time it was I was there.


E. Curtis, It was about nine or ten a Clock.


Mr. At. G. That agrees with Mr. Praunces exactly in point of time. Now if
your Lordship please, we will proceed and call Mr. Lancellot Stringer, and Mr.
Vincent.


Mr. Recorder, My Lord, we do call these Witnesses to prove, that these men had
meetings with Mr. Praunce at the Plow.


[Then was Lancelot Stringer sworn.] Mr. Recorder. Pray tell my Lord and the
Jury whether you know Mr. Prance.


L. Stringer. Yes, Sir, I do.


Mr. Recorder. Have you seen him at the Plow at any time?


L. Stringer. Yes, Sir, I have.


Mr. Recorder. In what company there? Was Mr. Green there?


L. Stringer. Yes, he was.


Mr. Recorder. Which was he? He points to him.


Mr. Recorder. And who else?


L. Stringer. There was that Hill.


Mr. At. Genesis How often?


L. Stringer. Several times.


L. C. J. How long before Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was murdered?


L. Stringer. I cannot tell, my Lord.


L. C. J. Do you remember any other company was with him?


L. Stringer. Yes, there were several other company.


Mr. Recorder. Name them.


L. Stringer. There was Mr. Fitz-Girald and Mr. Hill.


Mr. At. Genesis And yet Hill says he never saw Girald.


L. Stringer. And there was Kelly, he was another of them, and Prance.


L. C. J. Did you know Vernatt?


L. Stringer. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. How now? What say you to it Mr. Hill, and Mr. Green? Were you never
at the Plow, drinking with Mr. Prance?


Hill. Yes, my Lord, several times.


L. C. J. What say you, Mr Green?


Green. I have drank with him there.


L. C. J. Do you know Girald?


Hill. I know one Girald?


Mr. Sol. Genesis Now will your Lordship please to let me prove, that at the
Council he owned he knew Girald and Kelly, and now it is proved he has been in
Kelly's company, he says he does not know Girald.


Hill. My Lord, that was a mistake, for I do know Kelly by sight, that is, I
knew two Men that used the Chapel very much, and he was one of them.


L. C. J. But you, Witness, say you have seen Girald and them together?


L. Stringer. Yes, I have.


L. C. J. How many times?


L. Stringer. I cannot tell how many, my Lord, several times.


L. C. J. Have you seen them twice together?


L. Stringer. Yes, I have.


Mr. Recorder. Now to settle it I would ask him, with your Lordships favor,
when he came to live with his Master. You, young Man, when did you come to live
with your Master at the Plow?


L. Stringer. Why, I have been with him two years.


Mr. Rec. But when was it you came last to live at the Plow?


L. Stringer. In Bartholomew-tide last.


Mr. Recorder. It was but five Weeks before Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was Murdered.


L. C. J. Do you, Green, know Mr. Girald?


Green. Yes, I do.


Mr. Recorder. Then pray Swear Mr. Vincent. [Which was done.


Mr. Recorder. Come, pray Sir, do you live at the Plow?


Vincent. Yes, Sir, I do.


Mr. Recorder. Then pray, do you tell my Lord, and the Jury, if you know any of
the Prisoners at the Bar, and which of them.


Vincent. I know Mr. Green.


Mr. Recorder. Do you know any body else?


Vincent. Yes, I know Hill, and I know Mr. Berry.


Mr. Rec. Have you seen these persons at your House?


Vincent. Yes, I have.


L. C. J. With whom?


Vincent. I cannot tell every body with whom they were.


L. C. J. Were they there with Praunce?


Vincent. Yes, Sir.


L. C. J. Did you know one Girald?


Vincent. Yes, Sir.


L. C. J. Has he been at your house?


Vincent. Yes, Sir, he has.


L. C. J. Who was with him?


Vincent. I cannot tell justly.


L. C. J. Did you know Kelly?


Vincent. Yes, I did.


L. C. J. Has he been there?


Vincent. Yes, he has.


L. C. J. In what Company?


Vincent. With Praunce.


L. C. J. And with any of the Prisoners?


Vincent. Yes, but I cannot tell particularly with whom.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Now, my Lord, as these were meetings before the fact was
committed to consult how to do it; so we at the beginning told you of a meeting
after it was done, and that was at Bow. We shall therefore call some Witnesses
as to that; and they are Richard Carry, and William Evans. First swear Richard
Carry. [Which was done.


Mr. Recorder. Do you remember you were sent of a message from the Queens-Head
at Bow, and whether? Pray tell my Lord, and the Jury.


Carry. I remember it very well; there were three Gentlemen that sent for me to
the Queens-Head, and I being sent for did come, and when I came up stairs, they
asked me if I knew Poplar, I said I knew it very well. Then they asked me if I
knew Mr. Dethick, I told them I thought I did. Then said they, you must carry
this Letter to George Dethick, Esquire at Poplar, and deliver it to his own hands,
and to no body else. Accordingly away I went, and carried the Letter: I went to
the door, and asked if he were within; his Man said he was above stairs, but
they would call him to me; and calling him to me, Sir, said I, there are some
Gentlemen at the Queens-Head at Bow that have sent me with a Letter to you. So
he looked upon the Letter, and, says he, go and tell them I will be with them
presently. So, may it please you, my Lord, I came again, and when I came, the
Gentlemen were there still. Well, said they, go and drink a Glass of Claret,
which stood upon the Table, and they gave me Sixpence, and I went away.


Mr. Recorder. Pray look upon Mr. Praunce, can you remember whether that man
was there?


Carry. There were three of them, and he looks like one.


Mr. Recorder. Mr. Praunce, do you remember this was the man you sent?


Mr. Praunce. Yes, my Lord, this was the same man that was sent.


L. C. J. Well, call the other.


[Then William Evans, the Boy of the House at the Queens-Head, was sworn] Mr.
Recorder. Hark you, do you remember any Company that was at your Masters house
two or three Months agon?


W. Evans. Yes, I do.


Mr. Recorder. Do you remember that you heard them talk any thing there?


W. Evans. They pulled out a Paper and read it.


L. C. J. You Boy, do you know Mr. Dethick?


W. Evans. Yes, I do.


L. C. J. Was he there?


W. Evans. He did come to them, my Lord.


Mr. Recorder. What had they to Dinner there?


W. Evans. They had Flounders.


Mr. Recorder. Who bought them?


W. Evans. One of them, I cannot tell who.


Mr. Recorder. What had they else?


W. Evans. A Barrel of Oysters.


Mr. Recorder. Pray give my Lord an account what you observed and heard.


W. Evans. Sir, I know nothing but that they pulled out a Paper, and read it,
and named Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Name. And while I was at the door, some body
came and threatened to kick me down stairs.


L. C. J. He says just as Mr. Praunce said in every particular.


Mr. Attor. Genesis Now if it please your Lordship, we desire to call Sir Robert
Southwell, to prove what Mr. Praunce said before the Council, and how
particular he was; and did to some of the Lords, who were sent with him to
Somerset House, point out the places.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We call him to show, that when Praunce was examined before the
King, he was sent with some of the Lords, and Sir Robert Southwell, to
Somerset House, where he pointed with his Finger, and showed the places where
all was done, and so we shall show your Lordship and the Jury, how exact he was
in every thing.


Then Sir Robert Southwell was sworn. Mr. Recorder. Pray Sir Robert, will you
tell your knowledge?


Sir Robert Southwell. My Lord, I was upon the twenty fourth of December
waiting upon his Majesty in Council, and Mr. Praunce was sent for, to speak his
knowledge concerning this Murder, and he then gave a general Account of things,
which, because it did relate to that Bench, and this Corner, and that Room, and
that Passage, and that Gallery, it was not understood by the Board, and
thereupon his Majesty thought fit to appoint my Lord Duke of Monmouth, and the
Earl of Ossory, and Mr. Vice-Chamberlain to the Queen, to go thither, and take
the Examination upon the place, and Report it to the Board: And I, being Clerk
of of the Council, though not in waiting at that time, and having taken notice
of what Mr. Praunce had there deposed, I did wait upon those Lords, and took
the Examination upon the Place. And what I did take upon the place, This was
done here, and that there, I drew up into a Report, and the Report is Signed by
those two Noble Lords, and was read that Afternoon at the Board; and to that I
referr my self.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Pray Sir Robert, Did he show the particular places to those
Lords?


Sir Robert Southwell. Yes, he did. First, the Bench whereon they were sitting
when Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was coming down; then the Corner into which they
drew him when they had strangled him; then the place where one Berry went to
stay, which was at the Stairs that lead to the Upper Court, then a little door
at the end of the Stables, which lead up a pair of Stairs, and at the head of
the Stairs a long dark Entry, and at the top of those Stairs, a door on the
left hand, which being opened, showed us eight steps, which lead up to the
Lodgings that were Dr. Godwins: In which Hill was said to be inhabitant for
seven years before. And as soon as we were gone two steps, there was a little
Closet or Cabinet on the right hand, in which there was a Bed, and there he
showed my Lords, This is the place where we handed him up first, and here we
left him, said he, in the care of Hill for two nights.


Mr. Justice Wild. You were there, Sir Robert Southwell upon the place, when he
showed them these things?


Sir Robert Southwell. Yes Sir, I was there.


Mr. Justice Wild. Was it answerable to what he had declared to the King and
Council?


Sir Robert Southwell. Yes, it was answerable to all things he had said in the
morning.


Mr. Justice Jones. And suitable to what he says now?


Sir Robert Southwell. Yes, suitable to what he says now, but only now he
says more than he said then. And as to what he says about the Chambers of Sir
John Arundell, they could not be Sir John's Lodgings, for they were not capable
of receiving a Person of that Quality.


Mr. Praunce. I said, I did believe they did belong to Sir John Arundell.


L. Chief Just. They were Lodgings perhaps that belonged to his Servants,
though not to him.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Sir Robert, I desire to know, whether Mr. Praunce, when he
showed these places, and made these Descriptions, did he do it with any
hesitancy, or did he do it readily?


Sir Robert Southwell. Hitherto, my Lord, he went directly and positively, as
if any body should walk to Westminster Hall door. But afterward, when the
Lords did desire to know whither the Body was carried, he said, it was into
some Room of the house by the Garden; for this is an Outer part of the House,
which any body may do any thing in, without their knowledge that are within.
And he undertook to lead them to the place as well as he could; and so away we
went through the long dark Entry that leads into the Outer Court of the Great
House; and crossing the Quadrangle, he leads us to the Piazza, and down a pair
of Stairs, and so far, said he, I am sure I went; then, as soon as we were down
the Stairs, there is a great Square Court, then he began to stagger, as if he
did not know his way, but there was no way but to go on hovvever, and on we
went, and coming cross the Court, we came into several Rooms, and going
through them, we came up Stairs again, and so into several other Rooms again.
Sure, said he, we were here, but I cannot tell, and he was in a great
Distraction what Room he savv the Body in; but, said he, thus far, I am
certain I am right; which was according to the Paper, and I refer my self to
that.


Mr. Justice Wild. But, you say, that what he had said to the Lords in the
Council, was the same that he said when you were by upon the place.


Sir Robert Southwell. Yes.


L. Chief. Just. His doubtfulness of the Room does assert, and give Credit to
his Testimony, and Confirms it to any honest man in England. Here, says he, I
will not be positive, but having sworn the other things which he well
remembered, positively, he is made the more Credible for his doubtfulness of a
thing which he does not remember, which a man that could swear any thing would
not stick at.


Mr. Justice Jones. Besides, he was not there but by night, and all the Light
he had was a dark Lanthorn.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Now, Sir Robert, I would ask you one Question, if you please, Do
you remember that Hill was Examined at the Council about this matter?


Sir Robert Southwell. My Lord these are the Notes that I took upon these Men's
Examinations, if your Lordship pleases they may be read.


Mr. Recorder. Sir Robert, We ask you but as to one particular thing, therefore
if you please to look upon it, and refresh your Memory, you may read it to your
self, and tell us only the substance; which he did.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Now Sir, if you please, Do you remember that Hill was there?


Sir. Rob. Southwell. Yes, I find he was Examined.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Did not he deny there that he knew Kelly, but that he knew
Girald?


Sir Rob. Southwell. Yes, I do find it here set down that he did deny he knew
Kelly, but that he knew Girald.


Hill. I said I knew one Girald, but not that.


Mr. Record. But before the Council he said he knew Girald, not one Girald.


L. Chief Just. This way of Answering is like the Examination that was taken
lately amongst some of them. A Person was asked when he saw such a Priest? He
denied that he had seen him in fourteen days. But then comes one and proves to
his face, that he was with him in Company all Night, within a Week and Iess. I,
says he, that is true, but I said I had not seen him in Fourteen Days. And so
they may take Oaths to serve the King faithfully all the Days of their Lives,
but in the Nights they may murder him, and keep their Oaths for all that.


Mr Just. Dolben. I would know, whether the Girald you know be a Priest or no?


Hill. He is not.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Then you do not know Girald the Priest?


Hill. No, I do not.


Mr. Recorder. Call Mr. Thomas Stringer. And he was sworn.


Mr. Recorder. Pray Mr. Stringer, will you tell my Lord and the Jury what it
was that Mr. Berry said about any directions he had to keep all Persons out of
Somerset House, about the twelfth or fourteenth of October last?


Mr. T. Stringer. My Lord, upon his Examination before the Lords of the
Committee, Berry did say he had Orders from the Queen, or in the Name of the
Queen, That he should suffer no Strangers, nor any Persons of Quality to come
into Somerset House.


Mr. At. Genesis When was it he was to keep them out?


Mr. T. Stringer. The 12th 13th and 14th of October.


Mr. At. Genesis What, three days?


Mr. T. Stringer. Two or three days. And he said that the Prince did come, and
he did refuse him, and sent him back again.


Mr. Record. Did he say he ever had any such Directions before?


Mr. T. Stringer. No: he said he never before had any.


L. Chapter Just. It was a very unlucky thing that he had it then.


Berry. The Prince might have gone in if he would.


Mr. T. Stringer. You said you did refuse him, you had order to let none come
in.


L. Chapter Just. Had you any such Order?


Berry. Yes, my Lord, I had such an Order from the Queen's Gentleman Usher.


L. Chapter Just. Had you never had such before?


Berry. Yes, I have had before, since the Queen came to Somerset House.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Stringer swears you said you had not any before.


Berry. Yes, I had.


L. Chapter Just. Why did you deny it then?


Berry. I did not deny it; besides, there were several went in.


Mr. Record. We have proved indeed, five or six did go in.


L. Chapter Just. For how many days had you that Order?


Berry. Two days.


L. Chapter Just. Which two days?


Berry. The eleventh and twelfth, I think thereabouts.


Mr. Record. Did you say before the Lords, that you never had such Orders
before?


Berry. No, I did not.


L. Chapter Just. Mr. Berry, When you were examined before the Lords, Did you not
say you never had such Orders before?


Berry. No, I did not say so, my Lord, as I know of; for they did not examine
me about that.


L. Chapter Just. You said you would prove it under his own Hand. Prove that.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Stringer, Did he write his Name to his Examination?


Mr. T. Stringer. Yes, he did to one Examination.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray look upon that, Is that his Hand?


Mr. T. Stringer. This was read to him before he Signed it, and then he did
Sign it.


Mr. At. Genesis I would sain show it to him, to see whether he Would own it or
no.


Berry. Yes, that is my Hand.


Then the Clerk of the Crown read it. Cler. of the Cr. This is subscribed by
Henry Berry. The Information of Henry Berry, Porter at the Gate of
Somerset House; taken before the Right Honorable the Marquess of Winchester.
This Deponent says, That about the 12th, 13th, and 14th of October last, he
had Order to tell all Persons of Quality, that the Queen was private, and that
they were not to come in; and this Deponent says, The Queen continued so
private for two days.


L. Chapter Just. Where is that part of the Examination wherein he said, he never
had any such Order before?


Mr. T. Sringer. He did say so, but it is not in that that has his Hand to it.


Mr. Just. Wild. Pray, my Lord, observe this is a kind of reflecting Evidence,
and I Would have no more made of it than the thing will bear.


L. Chapter Just. They only bring it, and make use of it against Berry, as a
pretense of his.


M. Just. Wild. But it is a very reflecting Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis Surely there is no body here that offers it as such: We use it
only to this purpose, to show that Berry, who was a Party to this Murder, did
use all the means that he could to keep it private; and ^ndeavoured to prevent
Strangers coming in that Night to discover it, and therefore pretended these
Orders.

If he had any such Orders, I suppose he will prove them, we do not say he had
them; but it is a great Evidence, when he pretended to such privacie, that he
and his Fellows had something to do that was not fit to be known by every body.


Mr. Record. He may make use of any body's Name, and pretend what he will; but
I suppose he will prove it from the Gentleman Usher, if it be true.


Mr. At. Genesis We have one Witness more to call, my Lord, and that is one Far.
Call Stephen Far.

Which was done, and he sworn.


Mr. At. Genesis He is a Neighbor to Berry, and will give your Lordship an
Account what Applications have been made to him, to tamper with him for Money,
to keep away, and not give Evidence in this Cause. Pray Sir, are you Mr.
Berry's Neighbor?


Far. Yes Sir, I am.


Mr. At Genesis Pray then tell what you know.


Far. I know him very well, his Wife has been with me last Week, and asked me
if I knew what time he was with me on Wednesday, the 16th of October. I desired
time to recollect my self: And she called four or five times after, and I did
recollect my Memory and told her, That I was not with him at all that Wednesday.


L. Chapter Just. Why, this was reasonable, and fair enough to do.


Mr. At. Genesis It was so, my Lord, but pray had you no Money offered you?


Far. No Sir, none at all; and I told her I could not remember that I was with
him that day.


Berry. But you may remember it very well, when I came from the Queen, I came
to you.


Far. My Lord, I was out of Town that Wednesday, from two a Clock in the
Afternoon, till nine at Night.


L. Chapter Just. Well, well, this is nothing: The Woman was willing if she could,
to have counterproved the Evidence, and what she did was fair; she offered no
Money, nor did it in an indirect way.


Mr. At Genesis My Lord, We have now done with our Evidence for the King, and
leave it till we hear what they say.


L. Chapter Just. What do you say for your selves, you shall have all the free
liberty you will desire?


Hill. In the first place, I take God to be my Witness, that I am wholly
innocent, as to the Matter that is charged upon me: And as to what is said,
that I dogged Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey; I can prove that I went into my Lodging
at eight a clock, and did not stir out.


L. Chapter Just. Come, call your Witnesses.


Hill. Mary Tilden, Katherine Lee, Mrs. Broadstreet, and Daniel Gray.


L. Chapter Just. Let them come in there.


Then Mary Tilden was first examined. Mr. At. Gen This is Doctor Godwin's
Niece, and his Housekeeper.


L Chapter Just. Well, what do you ask her?


Hill. I desire to know what you can say about my being in my Lodging, and not
going out.


Mary Tilden. He has lived in our Family seven or eight Years.


L Chapter Just. Your Family, What is your Family?


Mary Tilden With my Uncle?


L Chapter Just. Who is Your Uncle.


Mary Tilden. Doctor Godwin; we left him in the House always when we were
absent from it, he was always a trusty Servant, never kept ill hours, always
came home by eight a Clock at Night.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Always, For how long?


Mary Tilden. Ever since we came over last into England.


Mr. Just Dolben. When was that?


Mary Tilden. In April last.


L. Chapter Just. Were you there that Night Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey was killed?


Mary Tilden. I was.


L. Chapter Just. What Night was that?


Mary Tilden. I don't know, my Lord, I heard of it in the Town.


L. Chapter Just. When did you first hear of it?


Mary Tilden The Thursday that he was found.


L. Chapter Just. Did you not hear of it on the Wednesday?


Mary Tilden Yes, I did.


L. Chapter Just. Who could tell you the Wednesday before?


Mary Tilden. Why, my Lord, in the Town it was said he was missing from
Saturday, and a Thursday he was found.


L. C. J. What can you say concerning Hill, that he was not out after eight a
clock that night?


Mary Tilden. He was a very good Servant to my Uncle, and never kept ill hours,
but always came in by eight a clock or before.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Were not you out your self that night?


Mary Tilden. No not I, never out after that hour.


L. C. J. Pray how can you give such an account of Mr. Hill, as if he was
always in your company?


Mary Tilden. He came in to wait at Table, and did not stir out afterward.


L. C. J. Pray what Religion are you of? are you a Papist?


Mary, Tilden. I know not whether I come here to make a profession of my Faith.


L. C. J. Are you a Roman Catholic?


Mary Tilden. Yes.


L. C. J. Have you a dispensation to eat Suppers on Saturday-nights?


Mr. Recorder. I hope you did not keep him company after Supper all night.


Mary Tilden. No I did not, but he came in to wait at Table at Supper.


L. C. J. I thought you had kept fasting on Saturday-nights.


Mary Tilden. No, my Lord, not on Saturday-nights.


Mr. Justice Jones. How many Dishes of Meat had you to Supper?


Mary Tilden. We had no Meat, though we did not fast.


L. C. J. Can you speak positively as to this night, the Saturday that he was
killed?


Mary Tilden. He was at home that night.


L. C. J. And where was he the Sunday?


Mary Tilden. He was at home.


L. C. J. And you are sure he was at home every night?


Mary Tilden. Yes, while we were in Town.


L. C. J. Where was you all that Wednesday-night you speak of?


Mary Tilden. I was at home in my Lodging.


Mr. Justice Wild. How is it possible for you to say, that Hill, who was not
your constant Companion, did not go out afterward?


Mary Tilden. No, he was not my constant Companion.


Mr. Justice Wild. How then can you charge your Memory that he was at home?


L. C. J. Come, you are to speak truth, though you are not upon your Oath. Can
you charge your memory to say, that he came in constantly at eight a clock at
night?


Mary Tilden. Yes, I can, because I saw him come in constantly; and when he
came in, I always sent my Maid to bar the door.


L. C. J. Maid, can you say that he was always at home at night?


Mary Tilden. I can say he never was abroad after eight at night.


Mr. Recorder. Why you did not watch him till he went to bed, did you?


Mary Tilden. We were always up till eleven a clock at night.


Mr. At. G. Was he in your company all that while?


Mary Tilden. I beg your pardon; if your Lordship saw the Lodgings, you would
say it were impossible for any to go in or out, but that they must know it
within. We were constant in our hours of going to Supper; our doors were never
opened after he came in to wait at Supper.


L. C. J. You may say any thing to a Heretic for a Papist.


Mr. Justice. Dolben. This is a mighty improbable business.


Mr. Justice. Wild. Where was he a Wednesday-night?


Mary Tilden. At home.


L. C. J. They have a general Answer for all Questions.


Mr. Justice Jones. Who kept the Key of your Lodgings?


Mary Tilden. The Maid.


Mr. Justice Jones. Has Hill never kept the Key?


Mary Tilden. No, my Lord, the Maid.


Mr. Justice Jones. How do you know but that the Maid might let him out?


Mr. Praunce. My Lord, Mrs. Broadstreet said at first there was but one Key;
but before the Duke of Monmouth she said there was six or seven Keys.


L. C. J. Look you what tricks you put upon us to blind us. You come and tell
us that he was every night at home by eight a clock, and did not stir out, for
there was but one Lock, and the Maid kept the Key; and yet there were three or
four Keys to it.


Mary Tilden. There was but one Key to that which kept the door fast.


L. C. J. Praunce, how many Keys were there?


Mr. Praunce. She confessed there were four or five.


Mr. Justice Wild. What time was it that you carried him out of Somerset House
on Wednesday-night?


Mr. Prance. It was about ten or eleven of the clock. Hill went to fetch the
horse.


Mary Tilden. We had never been out of our Lodgings after eight a Clock, since
we came to Town.


Mr. Justice Jones. When were you out of Town?


Mary Tilden. In October.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Nay, now, Mistress, you have spoiled all; for in October
this business was done.


Mr. Justice Jones. You have undone the man, instead of saving him.


Mary Tilden. Why, my Lord; I only mistook the Month.


L. C. J. You Woman (speaking to Mrs Broadstreet what Month was it you were out
of Town?


Broadstreet. In September.


L. C. J. It Is apparent you consider not what you say, or you come hither to
say any thing will serve the turn.


Mary Tilden. No, I do not, for I was out of Town in September, came to Town
the latter end of September.


L. C. J. You must remember what you said, that you came to England in April
last, and from that time he was always within at eight a clock at night.


Mary Tilden. Except that time that we were out of Town, which was in September
the Summertime. And it is impossible but if the Body was in the House, as
Praunce said it was, but I must see him, or some of us must. I used to go every
day into that little Room for something or other, and I must needs see him if
he were there.


L. C. J. You told me just now you were not upon Confession; and I tell you now
so, you are not. Then Mrs. Broadstreet was examined.


Mr. Justice Jones. Well, Woman, what say you?


Broadstreet. We came to Town upon a Monday, Michaelmas-day was the Sunday
following; and from that time neither he nor the Maid used to be abroad after
eight a clock: we kept very good hours, and he always waited at Supper, and
never went abroad after he came in to wait at Supper: and the Lodging was so
little, that nothing could be brought in, but they must know that were within.


L. C. J. This is a lower Room than the Chamber, is it not?


Mr. Praunce. It Is even with the Dining Room, my Lord.


L. C. J. What say you, Sir Robert Southwell?


Sir To. Southwell. My Lord, it is an extraordinary little place; as soon as
you get up eight steps, there is a little square Entry, and there is this Room
on the one hand, and the Dining Room on the other. I think there is a pair of
stairs to go down at one corner of the Entry, as I think, but the Body was
laid in a little square Room at the head of the steps.


L. C. J. And must you go into the Room to go to the Dining Room?


Broadstreet. No, it is a distinct Room; but the Key was always in the door, and
every day some body went into it for something or another.


L. C. J. Will you undertake to say it was always in the door?


Broadstreet. Yes, it constantly was.


Mr. Justice Wild. For my own part I will not judge you: but that his Body
should be carried there about nine a clock at night a Saturday-night, and
remain there till Monday-night, it is very suspicious, that if you were in the
House, as you say you were, and used to go into that Room every day, you must
either hear it brought in, or see it.


Broadstreet. But we did neither, my Lord.


Mr. Justice Dolben. It is well you are not Indicted.


Broadstreet. Mr. Praunce, you know all these things to be false, Mr Praunce.


Mr. Praunce. I lay nothing to your charge; but you said before the Duke of
Monmouth, that Hill was gone from his Lodgings before that time.


L. C. J. What say you, Sir Rob. Southwell?


Sr. Rob. South. There arose a little quarrel between them about the time that
Mr. Hill did leave those Lodgings. Prance said it was a Fortnight after; Hill
said when he was upon his Examination, that the same Saturday that Sr.
Edmondbury was missing, he was treating with his Landlord, and from that time,
to the time he went to his new House, it was about a Week or a Fortnight.


L. Chapter Just. But he did pretend he was gone before?


Broadstreet. No my Lord, I did not.


L. Chapter Just. To Witnesses upon Oath Swear it, and you said it your self, and
gave it under your Hand.


Broadstreet. My Lord? --


L. Chapter Just. Nay you will not hear, but you will talk, you say one thing now,
and you set another under your Hand.


Mr. At. G. Have you not a Brother that is in the Proclamation, one
Broadstreet a Priest?


Broadstreet. I have a Brother whose name is Broadstreet.


Mr. At. G. Is he not a Priest, and in the Proclamation?


Broadstreet. I hope, I must not Impeach my Brother here I said upon my Oath he
came to Town a Monday, and Michaelmas day was the Sunday following, and
Lawrence Hill went away a Fortnight after.


Sr. Rob. South. She Swore then two or three Days after Michaelmas Day.


L. Chapter Just. You must know we can understand you through all your Arts. It was
not convenient for you at that time to say, that Mr. Hill went away about a
Fortnight after Michaelmas, for then the thing that was charged to be done part
of it in your House, would have been within the Fortnight, for it was the 12 th
of October, but then you said only two or three Days.


Sr. Rob. South. She did say my Lord, that about Miclemas two or three or four
Days after he went away:


Broadstreet. I beg your pardon, I only said I could not tell the time exactly.


L. Chapter Just. Well have you any more to say.


Mary Tilden. There was never a Day but I went into that Room for something or
other, and if any body came to see me, there was so little space that the
Footmen were always forced to be in that Room.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Were you there upon Sunday?


Mary Tilden. Yes, my Lord, I was.


Mr. Just. Dolb. Well I will say no more, call another Witness.


Hill. Katharine Lee.


L. Chapter Just. What can you say, Maid?


Lee. My Lord, I did never miss him out of the House at those Hours.


L. Chapter Just. May be you did not look for him.


Lee. I did go down every Night to the Door to see if it were locked, and I went
into the Parlor to see that things were safe there.


L. Chapter Just. You are a Roman Catholic, are you not?


Lee. Yes, I am.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Might not he go out of the House, and you never the wiser?


Lee. Yes, for I did not watch him continually.


Capt. Richardson. All that she says may be true by the Place. The Servants
keep down a pair of Stayres in the Kitchen, and any one may come in or go out
having so many Keys, and they not know it that are below.


Lee. I went into the Chamber every morning as I went to Market.


Mr. Just. Wild. Have a care what you say, and mind the Question I ask you,
Were you there on the Sunday in that Room where they say Sr. Edmondbury
Godfrey's Body was laid?


Lee. I cannot say that I was in that Room, but I called in at the Door every
Day, and I was the last up every Night.


Mr. Just. Wild. I Will say that for thee, thou have spoke with more care then any
of them all.


Then Daniel Gray was Examined L. Chapter Just What can you say? What Questions do
you ask him?


Hill. I desire him to speak what he can say, where I was those 5 Days that Sr.
Edmondbury Godfrey was missing.


Gray. I kept my Brother Hill Company, from the 8 th of October, till he took
his House, which was about the 22 or 23.


L. Chapter Just. What time did you use to go to Bed?


Gray. About 9 or 10 a Clock at Night.


L. Chapter Just. What time did he go?


Gray. When I did, but I did not see him go to Bed.


L. Chapter Just. Where did you ly?


Gray. At my own House.


L. C. Just. And you went home about 8 or 9 a Clock at Night to go to Bed?


Gray. Yes I did.


Mr. Just. Jones. You say he took his House the 8 th of October, when did he go
thither?


Gray. Yes, he took his House the 8 th of October, but he did not go thither
till the one or two and twentieth?


Mr. J. Dolb. But you cannot tell what he did at night.


Gray. No not I.


Mr. Just. Dolbin. But you were in his Company till 8 or 9 a Clock at Night?


Gray. Yes my Lord I was.


L. Chapter Just. How far did you live off of him?


Gray. About a Bows shoot.


L. Chapter Just. Look you Mr. Hill he does you no service at all, for he says he
left you about 8 or 9 a Clock at Night, and he does not know what you did
afterward. Have you any more?


Hill. Robert How.


L. Chapter Just. Come what say you?


How. My Lord, I met with Mr. Hill the 5 th of October, he asked me whither I
was going, I told him home, I wish said he you would go a little back with me,
I am about taking of an House, and I would have you view the Repairs,
accordingly we did go, and treated in the House about an agreement, for said he
I will not agree with you, to the Landlord, till we know what must be repaired.
On Tuesday morning we met again about 8 a Clock.


L. Chapter Just. What day of the Month was that?

How. the Eight. And a Wednesday about Noon we began to work for him, to
repair his House, and we wrought that Week every Day, and for twelve Days and
an half in all, and he was every Day with us looking after Coals or Beer or
something. on Saturday the 12 th of October we Dined together, and parted with
him about one or two a Clock, and about two a Clock I went back again to my
Work, and he said he was going toward Covent Garden in St. James, but he came
back again, and I was gone first, I asked my Man whether he was gone or no, he
said, he was there, but did not stay.


L. Chapter Just. What time was that?


How. A little before Night.


L. C. Just. What Hour did your Man say that he was there?


How. About an Hour before they left Work.


L. Chapter Just. What time was that?


How. About four a Clock I think it was.


L. Chapter Just. Can you say where he was that Night?


How. No I cannot.


L. Chapter Just. What Religion are you of, are you not a Protestant?


How. Yes, my Lord I think so.


Mr. Recorder. My Lord asks you, are you a Protestant.


How. I was never bred up in the Protestant Religion.


Mr. Prance. He is a Catholic my Lord, he was the Queens Carpenter.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Nay now you spoil all, you must do Penance for this, what
deny your Church?


Hill. What time was it a Saturday Morning I was with you?


How. About nine a Clock.


L. Chapter Just. How long did he stay?


How. From nine to two.


L. C. J Are you sure 'twas Nine?


How No man can swear punctually to an hour.


L. C. J. What think you of Ten?


How. It was thereabouts.


Mr. Recorder. If I am rightly informed by the Clerks, he is Outlawed for
Recusancy.


L. C. J. Is he so? pray let us know that.


Harcourt, one of the Clerks of the Crown Office. My Lord, I have made out
several Writs against him, for several years together, and could never get any
of them Returned.

Hill. He tells you that I was with him from Nine a clock on Saturday morning,
till One.


Mr. J. Jones. But that is but as true as he is a Protestant, and how true that
is, you know.


Hill. Here is another witness, Mr. Cutler.


Tho. Cutler. Upon the Twelfth of October, Lawrence Hill did come into my house
about four or five a clock in the evening, and he staid there till between
Seven or Eight, and then his wife came for him, and said some Gentlewoman was
ready for her Supper, and so he went home; and I saw him no more, till the day
after he was taken.


L. C. J. Look you here, he speaks only about Seven or Eight a clock. Well,
have you any thing more to say?


Hill. There is one Richard Lazinby.


Lazinby. My Lord, I was with him on Saturday the twelfth of October at the
door, about twelve a clock.


L. C. J. And you dined with him and How.


Lazinby. Yes, Sir.


L. C. J. But you did not see him afterward?


Lazinby. Yes, I did see him on Wednesday night, from five to seven at night.


L. C. J. What time was he carried out of SomersetHouse?


Mr. At. Genesis About eleven or twelve a clock at night.


Lazinby. That is the last time I was with him.


L. C. J. Well, have you any more?


Hill. Here is one Mr. Archbold, my Lord.


Archbold. My Lord, I had occasion for a Tailor, and I came to this man's house,
to seek for one Mr. Gray, that had formerly wrought for me.


L. C. J. When was that?


Archbold. That was on Monday night. And he having formerly wrought for me, I
found him at this man's house; so Mr. Gray asked me, What News? I told him, Very
good News; For Praunce was taken for the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.
Says Hill, I am glad of that, I wish they were all taken. I came the next day
after, and they told me he was taken out of his Bed, for the Marder of Sir
Edmund bury Godfrey.


L. C. J. Was it that very night that you came, that he was taken?


Archbold. Yes, it was.


L. C. J. You said he spoke of it before you at seven a clock, and you left him
about nine, and he was taken that night, what then?


Hill. Why, then I had time enough to make my Escape, if I had thought my self
Guilty.


L. C. J. As no doubt you would, if you had thought they would have been so
nimble with you.


Archbold. He knew it the day before.


L. C. J. Well, have you any more to say?


Mrs. Hill. There is Mr. Ravenscroft, my Lord.


L. C. J. What, that Ravenscroft that is sent away?


Mrs. Hill. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Then the Marshal must send for him, if he be a witness for the
Prisoner. In the mean time, What can you say for your self, Mr. Green?


Green. My Lord, I would call my Landlord and his wife.


L. C. J. What are their Names?


Green. James Warrier, and his wife.


L. C. J. Call in Greene's wife, and all her Witnesses.


Then Mrs. Hill, the Prisoners wife, offered a Paper to the Court, containing
Observations upon the Indictment, which she desired them to read; but it was
refused, and she bid to give it her Husband. Then James Warrier was examined.
L. C. J. What say you to your Landlord?


Green. I ask him no Questions at all, but desire him to tell what he knows.


Warrier. I will say, that the twelfth of October, he was at my house half an
hour after seven, and he was not out of my house till after ten.


L. C. J. How can you remember that day? What day of the week was it?


Warrier. It was a Saturday.


L. C. J. How do you remember it was so?


Warrier. I have recollected my memory.


L. C. J. By what?


Warrier. By my work, and every thing exactly.


L. C. J. When did you begin to recollect your self?


Warrier. A pretty while ago.


L. C. J. How long after Sir Edmund bury Godfrey was murdered?


Warrier. A month after.


L. C. J. What made you to recollect your self a month after?


Warrier. Because he was in Prison in the Gatehouse.


L. C. J. When was he taken up?


Warrier. He was taken up in Somerset House, and not in my house.


L. C. J. But when did you recollect your self?


Warrier. When he was in Prison.


L. C. J. But I pray remember the time when you did recollect your self, and
the occasion that made you recollect your self when he was taken up.


Warrier. I remember it very well, for he had been in my house but 14 days
before he was taken up.


Sir Tho. Stringer. He was not taken up for the Mudrer of Sir Edmund bury
Godfrey, till the 24 of December.


Mr. J. Wyld. Pray did you never think of this till he was in Prison?


Warrier. It was when he was taken up.


L. C. J. But pray when you came to recollect your self, how did you come to do
it?


Warrier. I recollected it by my work.


L. C. J. But what gave you occasion to recollect your self since he was in
Gaol?


Sir Tho. Stringer. My Lord, he was put into Gaol, for refusing to take the
Oaths; but he was not at all charged with the Death of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey
at that time.


L. C. J. When was he put in for the Death of Sir Edmundbury?


Sir The. Stringer. The 24 th of December.


L. C. J. Then there is all the remaining part of October, all November, and
the former part of December was past, how could you recollect your self of the
particular day?


Warrier. I called it to mind by my work.


Capt. Richardson. My Lord, I will rectify this mistake: since their
Arraignment, I went to them, to know what Witnesses they had, and Green told
me of his Landlord and Landlady; I then asked them, If they could say any thing
as to this particular day? And they said they could not do him any good at all.


Warrier. I did not then call it to memory.


L. C. J. When did you call it to memory?


Warrier. I did say I could not do it then presently, as I have done since in
five or six days.


L. C. J. How could you recollect it then?


Warrier. By the time he came into my house, which was a week before, and by
the work that was done.


L. C. J. What could the work do as to this? Can you tell by that, any thing
that is done at any time? Where were you the ninth of November last?


Warrier. Truly I cannot tell.


L. C. J. Why how came you then to recollect what you did the twelfth of
October, when you did not know where you were the ninth of November?


Warrier. I can tell a great many tokens, he was but 14 or 15 days in our
house.


L. C. J. What did he do the twelfth of October, that you remember so
particularly that day?


Warrier. Sir, I remember other days besides that; but I say I never knew the
man out after nine a clock, in my life.


L. C. J. Have you any body else, for this man I cannot tell what to make on it?


Green. Here is the man's wife to give Evidence.


L. C. J. First consider what you say.


Mrs. Warrier. To tell you the truth, I thought the man so clear of this Fact,
that I never trouble my head with it; but when Captain Richardson came to my
house, I told him that he was never in our house by daytime, except being
Cus^ion-layer in the Chapel, he used to come at half an hour after eleven, and
many times he did desire me, because we were Protestants, to put in a little
flesh meat with ours; sometimes he would sit down and eat his meat in the
Kitchen, and his Wife with him; and his Wife would say to him, it is a
troublesome time, pray see that you come home betimes. I did not at all remember
the day of the month at the first, nor the Action; but my Husband and I have
since remembered. We were desired by them once to eat a Fowl with them, and my
Husband did command me the Sunday after to invite them to dinner with us, and I
went in the morning very early, I think, and bought a dozen of Pigeons, and
put them in a Pie, and we had a Loine of Pork roasted; and when he was gone to
the Chapel on Saturday in the afternoon, his Wife came to me and said, my
Husband is not well, and when he comes home will ask for something of Broth;
and away she went to Market to buy something to make Broth of. While she was at
Market, her Husband came home, and asked where his Wife was? why, Mr. Green,
said I, she is gone to Market: what an old Fool, said he, is this, to go out so
late, such a night as this is? but said he again, I will go to the
Coffee-house, and drink a Dish of Coffee, and pray tell my wife so. In the mean
time she returned, and by that time she had been above a little while, he came
in again. And Mr. Green being there, my Husband came in, and called to me,
prithee, sweetheart, what have thou got for my Supper? prithee, said I,
sweetheart thou art always calling for thy Victuals when thou come in. Then
Mr. Green goes to the stairs, and calls to his Wife, and bids her bring him
down some victuals, and she brings down the Bread and Cheese, and he stayed
there till it was nine a Clock; and then says Mr. Green to his Wife, let us
go up, for there is a Fire.


L. C. J. What day was this all this while?


Mrs. Warrier. Why, it was the Saturday fortnight after Michaelmas day.


L. C. J. Why might it not be that day three weeks?


Mrs. Warrier. It was that day he was missing.


Mr. At. G. Why there was no Alarm taken of it a Sunday.


L. C. J. When did you begin to recollect what day it was, that they said he
was missing?


Mrs. Warrier. On Friday morning our Milkman came and told us, that one Mr.
Godfrey was found murdered; now I knew one of the Exchange of that name, and
thought it might be he. And when we went up with him to his Chamber, we sat
there till the Tattooe beat.


L. C. J. All the thing is, how do you know it was this Saturday?


Mrs. War. It was the Saturday fortnight after Michaelmas day.


Mr. J. Dolben. Are you sure it was the Saturday fortnight after Michaelmas day?


Mrs. Warier. Yes, we did look upon the Almanac, and reckon it so.


M. J. Dolben. Then that was the 10 th of October.


L. C. J. Why you told him you could do him no good, and indeed you do not.


M. J. Jones. You and your wife speak of the same time, don't you?


Warrier. Yes.


L C. J. Have you any more Green?


Capt. Richardson. There is the Maid, let her come in.


L. C. J. What say you Maid?


Maid. I can say that he came in the Saturday fortnight after Quarter-day,
pretty betimes.


L. C. J. Can you speak of any other time besides that Saturday fortnight?


Maid. I can tell he came in every night before 9 a clock.


Green. I can take my Oath I was never out of my Lodging after 9 a clock.


Hill. My Lord, here is Mr. Ravenscroft now.


L. C. J. Mr. Ravenscroft, what can you say?


Mr. Ravenscroft. What I can say, my Lord, is this; This Lawrence Hill, I have
known him 13 or 14 Years, and he served my elder Brother so long very
faithfully. Afterward he lived with Dr. Godwin toward the latter end of the
two last Years, and he married my Mothers Maid.


L. C. J. What Religion are you of?


Mr. Ravenscroft. My Father and Mother were Protestants.


L. C. J. But you are a Papist, are you not?


Mr. Ravenscroft. I have not said I am a Papist yet.


Mr. Justice Dolben. In the mean time I say you are one.


Mr. Ravense. Do you so, then pray go to Southwark and see.


Mr. At. G. My Lord, I think, he has taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy.


L. C. J. Well, pray Sir go on with your Story.


Mr. Ravenscroft. If it please you, upon a Saturday, a little before
Christmas, there was somebody taken, I think it was one M. Praunce, for I
never saw the man, neither do I know him at all: and it was reported that he
was taken upon the Death of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, and I was glad to hear it.
My house was in the Savoy. and my Fathers house is in Holborn; and I used often
to go and see my father, and coming home again, I went to see the Maid at her
new House, she had not been long there, and she was standing at the Door of the
House. I asked her what News? says she, here has been a man here that tells us
that Praunce has discovered several of the Murderers of Sir Edmund-Bury
Godfrey, and they talk up and down strangely of it, and ask me whether my
Husband be acquainted with him? then said I to her, is he? she answered me very
well, they have been often together, and so she told me the people did mutter
and talk of her Husband; but said I, what says your Husband to it? says she, he
desies Praunce and all his works. Said I, where is your Husband? said she, he
is within; I was very glad to hear it, for, said I, he living in Somerset
House, and being acquainted with Praunce, I am glad to hear that your Husband
can be so Courageous; so I went away and came again thither the next morning,
and found he was taken the night before. All that I say then, is that it, was a
good Evidence of his innocence, that when he had notice of it he did not Fly.


L. C. J. So then your discourse was after Archbold had been there.


Mr. Ravenscroft. Archbold was there before me, and had spoken this in their
Company. I spoke with her that night, and the next morning too; and all that I
say is, it Fight be a sign of Guilt, as no doubt it is, Adam ubi es? and
Couragiousness is a sign of innocence, then this man is innocent.


L. C. J. But you say she told you they were acquainted.


Mr. Ravenscroft. My Lord, I have one thing more to say. Upon the occasion of
these things, this Woman has been often with me, and has desired to know of
me what Defense she should make, for I saw Hill's Wife and Berry's Wife were
all simple people without Defense for themselves, and they did desire that I
would Examine and see some of the Witnesses and see how it was, and she had
gotten me some papers, and I Conferred them together, there are witnesses that
will attest the Copy.


Mr. At. G. What is all this to the purpose? only this Gentleman has a mind to
show that he can speak Latin.


Mr. Ravenscroft. I thank God I can speak Latin as well as any man in the Court.


L. C. J. Well, all this is nothing.


Mr. Ravenscroft. I declare it my self, if this man were Guilty, rather than I
would speak for him, if there wanted a Hangman, I would do it my self.


L. C. J. Well Berry, what have you to say?


Berry. I desire Nicholas Trollop, and Nicholas Wright, and Gabriel Hasket, and
Elizabeth Wilkes, and Corporal Collet may be called.


Corporal William Collet first Examined. Berry. Did not you place a Sentinel on
wednesday night?


Collet. What wednesday do you speak of Sir?


Berry. That night the Queen went from Somerset House to Whitehall.


Collet. Yes. This Nicholas Trollop I placed there first, the 16. of October.


L. C. J. How do you remember that?


Collet. Because I have been called to an account before, and have given good
Reasons for it. Our Company was at Somerset House when the King came from
New Market, and the Queen went to Whitehall. Afterward we were bid to fetch
our Sentinels off about 3 or 4 of the Clock in the afternoon.


L. C. J. Did you leave any Soldiers there?


Collet. No, we did not, all our Company went to Whitehall.


Mr. Justice Dolben. Are you sure there were no Soldiers that night there?


Collet. Yes, we were commanded with a party to go thither again that night.


L. C. J. What did you do then?


Collet. I placed the Sentinels by the Porters order.


L. C. J. Who was that, Berry?


Collet. No, it was one that used to go about, and give Orders where we should
set them.


L. C. J. How did you place them?


Collet. This man I placed from 7 to 10, then Nicolas Wright releived him at
10, and stayed till one.


L. C. J. At what place?


Collet To the Strand-ward.


Mr. Justice Wild. That was the Gate they carried him out at.


L. C. J. Do you hear, whereabouts did you set the Sentinels? within the gate?


Collet. Yes, within the wicket.


L. C. J. That way he was carried out.


Nicholas Wright. There was no Sedan came out in my time.


Trollop. There was one came in in my time while I stood there.


Lord Chapter Just. Was it an empty Sedan?


Trollop. I suppose it was, but we had no Order to keep any out.


Mr. Just. Wild. But you might know whether it was an empty Sedan or no, by the
going of it through the Wicket.


Collet. There is an empty Sedan that stands there every Night.


Trollop. It was set down within the Gate.


Mr. Just Jones. If any Sedan had gone out, you would not have staid them,
would you?


Collet. No, my Lord, we had no Order to stop any.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How can you then be positive, that no one did go out?


Trollop. None did go out again in my time.


Mr. Just Dolben. Could not the Porter open the Gate, as well as you?


Collet. Yes, my Lord, he could, but I should have seen him then: he did not
open it in my time.


Mr. Just. Wild. Let me ask you but one Question; Did not you go to drink, nor
tipple all that time?


Trollop. No, nor walk a Pikes length off the Place of Centry.


Mr. Just. Wild. Has not Berry an House there, hard by?


Trollop. Yes, but I did not drink one drop.


Mr. Just. Dolben. How can you remember so particularly, so long ago?


Trollop. Why, I was twice before the Committee.


Mr. Just. Dolben. But how long ago was it, that you were questioned about
this thing, after this Night?


Trollop. A matter of a Month, or Six Weeks.


Collet. For we were examined before Praunce was taken up.


Lord Chapter Just. You Trollop, Can you say whether it was the Sedan that used to
be within?


Trollop. No, I cannot, but it was brought in in my time, and did not go out
again.


[Then Gabriell Hasket was examined.] Berry. You Stood there, Sir, from One to
Four.


Hasket. Yes, after the Clock struck One, I was put Sentinel, and stood till
Four.


Lord Chapter Just. What Night?


Hasket. That Night the King came from New Market, and the Queen went from
Somerset House.


Lord Chapter Just. What day of the Month was that?


Hasket. The Sixteenth.


Lord Chapter Just. What day of the Week?


Hasket. Wednesday.


Lord Chapter Just. Did not you drink at Berry's then?


Hasket. No, I did not.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you see Berry then?


Hasket. No I did not.


Lord Chapter Just. He was gone before you came.


Berry. I was fast enough a Bed at that time.


Lord Chapter Just. Well, what say you more?


Berry. Here is my Maid, Elizabeth Minshaw, to give her Evidence, where I was
that Night the Queen went from Somerset House.


Mr. Just. Jones. What can you say?


Minshaw. May it please you, my Lord, my Master was within Doors, and about the
Gate, when the Queen went away.


Lord Chapter Just. Who is your Master?


Minshaw. Mr. Berry. He was about the Gates all the Forenoon.


Lord Chapter Just. When was that?


Minshaw. The 16th. October. Wednesday. And as soon as the Queen was gone, my
Master went out to Bowls; and when he came home again, he said he had been at
Bowls.


Lord Chapter Just. What time did he come home?


Minshaw. It was Dusky, and he was not absent all Night an hour, till he went
to Bed.


Mr. Just. Wild. When did he go to Bed?


Minshaw. My Lord, I suppose he went to Bed about Twelve a Clock.


Mr. Just. Wild. They do not charge him with any thing but what was done about
the Gate.


Mr. Just. Dolben. What time did you go to bed that Night?


Minshaw. Why I went to Bed about Twelve a Clock.


Mr. Just. Dolben. And you saw him no more that Night?


Minshaw. No, my Lord, but he must go through my Room to go to Bed at Night,
and therefore I suppose he was a Bed.


Mrs. Hill. I desire Mr. Praunce may Swear why he did deny all this?


Lord Chapter Just. Stand up, Mr. Praunce, that Gentlewoman does desire to know,
what induced you to deny what you had said?


Mr. Praunce. It was because of my Trade, my Lord; and for fear of losing my
Employment from the Queen, and the Catholics, which was the most of my
business, and because I had not my Pardon.


Mrs. Hill. I desire he may Swear whether he were not tortured?


Mr. Just. Dolben. Answer her, were you tortured to make this Confession?


Mr. Praunce. No, my Lord, Captain Richardson has used me as civilly as any
man in England; all that time that I have been there, I have wanted for nothing.


Lord Chapter Just. See what he says; That he did not make this Confession by any
Torture, but he made his Recantation through fear, and the thoughts of death,
because he had no Pardon; and fear that he might live in want, by the loss of
the Trade, prevailed with him to deny what he had confessed.


Mrs. Hill. It was reported about Town, that he was tortured.


Mr. Just. Jones. No, it was no such thing; it was only the tortures of his
Conscience, for being an Actor in so great a Sin.


Mrs. Hill. There are several about the Court, that heard him cry out: And he
knows all these things to be as false, as God is true; and you will see it
declared hereafter, when it is too late.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you think he would Swear Three men out of their Lives for
nothing?


Mrs. Hill. I desire he may be Sworn to that particular thing.


Mr. Ju. Jon. He is upon his Oath already, and Swears all this upon his Oath.


Mrs. Hill. Well, I am dissatisfied; my Witnesses were not rightly examined,
they were modest, and the Court laughed at them.


Berry. The Sentinels that were at the Gate all Night, let nothing out.


Lord Chapter Just. Why you could open the Gate your self.


Berry. He says, he could have seen if the Gate had been open; and that as he
saw, the Gates were never opened.


Mr. Just. Dolben. Well, the Jury have heard all, and will consider of it.


Mrs. Hill. Here is another Witness, my Lord; Mr. Chevins.


Lord Chapter Just. Well Sir, what say you?


Chevins. I have nothing to say, but that I heard Mr. Praunce deny all.


Lord C. J. Why he does not deny that now. Well, have you any more?


Chevins. We have no more.


Mr. Attor. Genesis My Lord, I must crave leave to speak a word, or two; and the
Evidence having been so very long, I shall be exceeding short. I intended (when
I began to open the Evidence) to have made some Observations after the Evidence
ended; to show how each part of it did agree, and how the Main was strengthened
by concurrent Circumstances. But in truth, the King's Evidence did fall out
much better than I could expect, and the defense of the Prisoners much weaker
than I could foresee. So that, I think, the proof against the Prisoners is so
strong; and so little has been alleged by them in their Defense, that it
would be but loss of time to do, what I at first intended. Only I will observe,
that Mr. Bedlow does agree with Mr. Praunce, as far forth as is possible; that
is, in those parts of the Fact of which he pretends to have any knowledge. Yet
had they never any communication one with another, as both have Sworn. And your
Lordship will observe in how many particulars they do agree; namely, as to the
Dark Lanthorn, as to the Covering of the Body in the Room; how they intended to
carry the Body out in a Sedan, and the rest. So that if they had laid their
heads together to contrive a Story, they could hardly have agreed in so many
circumstances; and yet this they do without discoursing with each other
beforehand.

My Lord, I must likewise observe to you, that the Servants of the Plow
Alehouse concur as to the Meetings there: The Maid agrees as to the Prisoners
coming to Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's House, and to the time, viz. that Saturday
Morning; nay, to the very Hours of Nine, or Ten a Clock; That the Constables
Relation of the posture in which the Body was found in the Field, does
perfectly agree with the Account that the Murderers gave thereof to Mr.
Praunce the next Morning. The Chirurgions do agree with Mr. Praunce, as to the
manner of Sir Edmonbury Godfrey's being killed, the strangling, the bruising of
his Stomach, the twisting of his Neck. And the Witnesses from Bow make it out,
that Dethick was sent for; that they had a Dinner there. The Boy proves that he
overheard them reading something about Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and that they
were very Merry; and that for his listening, he was threatened to be kicked down
stairs.

So that, I think, there never was an Evidence that was better fortified with
circumstances than this: My Lord, I shall be bold to say, here is certainly as
much Evidence, as the matter is capable of. It is not to be expected that they
should call Witnesses to be by, when they do such foul Facts; so that none can
Swear directly the very Fact, but such a one as was an Actor in it. All
Circumstances relating to the Fact, both before, and after, are made out by
concurrent testimony. And, my Lord, I must observe, that it was a Murder
committed through zeal to a false Religion, and that Religion was a bond of
secrecy. We all know, his Majesty has been graciously pleased by his
Proclamation, to propose a Pardon, and a Reward to the Discoverers. And yet
almost without effect; Their zeal to their false Religion was a greater
obstacle, than the Proclamation was an incitement, to the Discovery. And I do
believe, if Mr. Praunce had not had some inclination to change his Religion,
you had still been without so clear a Discovery of this Work of Darkness, as
now you have. I shall say no more, but conclude to the Jury with that saying,
that I remember in the Book of Judges, (in the case of a Murder too, though of
another Nature,) Judge. 19. 30. The People said there was no such deed done, nor
seen, from the day that the Children of Israel came out of Egypt: And I may
say, there was never such a barbarous Murder committed in England, since the
People of England were freed from the Yoke of the Pope's Tyranny; and as it is
said there, so say I now, Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, I would only make one Observation to your Lordship,
which is this; I do not find they do in the least pretend to tax Mr. Praunce,
that any Person has bribed him to give this Evidence; nor, that there was the
least Reward ever proposed to him to bear Witness against them, not so much as
the hopes of that Reward contained in the King's Proclamation; yet Mr. Praunce,
if he had had a mind to bear false Witness, might have laid hold of that
opportunity; but so far was he from pretending to discover any thing, that he
denied all when he was first apprehended. But after he was in Hold, and likely
to be brought to Justice, and lying under the conviction of a Guilty
Conscience, then, and not till then does he discover it.

There is no Objection in the world to be made, but that since this Discovery,
Mr. Praunce has retracted what he said before, but he gives you a very good
account of it; the Terrors of Conscience he then lay under, the Fears that he
should not be pardoned, and the apprehensions he had from the Threats on their
side, and the danger of his utter ruin, put him upon that Denial.

But, my Lord, He tells you likewise, That as soon as ever he was brought back
to the Prison, he owned all he had said at first, and desired he might be
carried back again to Testify the Truth of what he had first Sworn to. This,
my Lord, he gives you an Account of, and the same Account does the Keeper of
the Prison give too. I have nothing to say more, but only just to observe the
many Circumstances whereby Mr. Praunce his Testimony is fortified. Mr. Bedlow
does agree with him in every Circumstance as far as his knowledge went: The
Maid of the House agrees with his Testimony; that says, She saw Green at Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey's several times, though here he denies he knew him. That she
saw Hill there that very Morning her Master was missed: That he talked with her
Master a Quarter of an hour: That she knew him by a very good token; not only
by his Face, but also that he had the same Clothes on then he has now.

Mr. Praunce has likewise told you of another Circumstance, the meeting at the
Plow-Alehouse, where they laid the whole Design of Intrapping Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey: and herein he is Fortified by the Concurrent Testimony of the Master
of the House, and the Servant too, though they now deny that ever they had been
in his Company there; or that they so much as knew Girald; though when they
were examined at the Council Board, they said, they knew Girald, but not
Kelley: and now they are pressed with it here, Hill retreats to this, That he
knows one Girald, but not Girald the Priest.

My Lord, I think the Matter is so fully, and so plainly proved beyond
exception, that there needs no great Repetition in the Case: It is impossible
that Mr. Praunce a man of that mean Capacity should invent a Story with so many
Circumstances, all so consistent, if there were not truth at the bottom of it.
He shows you the particular places, from place to place, where they decoyed him
in, and how they disposed of him, to the time they carried him out. And in each
of these Circumstances, there is not the least improbability or cause to
disbelieve him. It has been already so fully repeated, and the plainness of
the Evidence is so convincing, that I need not make more Observations upon it;
But submit it to your Lordship and the Jury.


Then the Lord Chief Justice directed the Jury in this manner:
Lord Chief Justice. Look you, Gentlemen of the Jury, This is an Inquisition
for Innocent Blood that has been shed, and your business is to see if you can
find out the Murderers.

We would not add Innocent Blood to Innocent Blood: but on the other-side, If
you have received Satisfaction so much as the Nature of the Thing can bear,
then the Land is defiled, unless this be satisfied.

Now for that I will urge the Witness and their Testimony no further than it
does appear; for You and We are all upon our Oaths to do uprightly, neither to
Spare Murderers, nor Condemn the Innocent.

In the first place, We began with Mr. Oats, and he told you, that he had
some Converse with Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and that he was threatened by some,
and had no good will for his pains, in taking those Examinations he had taken,
and he was afraid his Life was in danger. This he tells you was the Discourse
beforehand, and this is produced to lead you to consider what sort of persons
they were, of whom he was likely to have these Fears; for his Fears did arise
from his having done his part, as a Justice of Peace, in taking the
Examinations upon Oath.

For the Testimony of the Fact they produce first Mr. Praunce, wherein you will
do well to observe all the degrees that he goes by, before the Fact, and all
the Circumstances in the Transaction of that Affair, and the Parties by whom it
was to be Acted: First he tells you how long it was before they could entice
him to consent to such a Villainy as this was, To Murder a Man; he tells you by
whom he was thus enticed, which makes the Story more probable; that is, by
Girald and Kelley (two Priests) and he tells it you still more probably by
their Doctrine, that it was no sin; but it was rather an Act of Charity to kill
a Man that had done, and was like to do them mischief: So that if you consider
the persons that Preached to him, and the Doctrine they taught, it carries a
great show and presumption of Truth in it self. When they had met together at
the Plow several times (which was denied by some of them, but is most
manifestly proved by the Master of the House, and the Boy) and the wished for
time was come; for they were to watch the opportunity, and Mr. Praunce was to
be at home, and they would call him to give his helping hand; he tells you,
That Mr. Hill did go that Morning; for though he talks of an Errand before, yet
to keep to that which is most pressing in the Evidence, he went to Sir
Edmondbury's House. This he seems to deny; but the Maid does Swear it expressly
upon him; and says, She came first to him, and went up Stairs, and then came
back again, and still he was there. And she swears positively she knows him by
his Face, and by the Clothes he then had on, which are the same Clothes he has
on now, and that that is the Man that was with her Master; and this, which they
cannot disprove, half proves the matter.

What had he to do at Sir Edmondbury Godfry's House? But that would be an hard
puzling Question to be put to him; What did you there? And therefore he is to
deny it; but the Maid proves it upon him, as well as Praunce. So that I would
have you consider how many VVitnesses you have to one thing or another, all
conducing to this point.

You have first Mr. Oats, that tells you the Discourse that passed between Mr.
Edmondbury Godfrey and him, the Maid tells you, that both these Men were there,
one at one time, and the other at another; and you have Mr. Praunce that knew
the whole Affair, who tells you so likewise, and that they were resolved to do
the Work that day, in so much that if they could not do it, as they had
before contrived it (and Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was sensible that he was Dogged
up and down) Girald did resolve to dog him to his own Door, and kill him in
the Lane that leads to his House, he would have run him through himself; and
this Girald is one of those Priests, whose Church counts it no sin, but an Act
of Charity, to Murder a Christian, to propagate Christianity.

When they had waylaid him and watched his coming, from what place Mr. Praunce
cannot tell; for he knows nothing but what they told him, and they only named
in general, that he was Lodged in St. Clements; and thereupon one comes to
acquaint him, that they would entice him in at the VVatergate, by
Sommerset-House, and they would do it with art enough, for they never want a
contrivance for so charitable an Act; and it was upon this pretense, that there
were Two men a wrangling and fighting, and then he being a Justice of the
Peace, was a Person that would part the Fray easily.

And it was a probable invention: for Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was a Man that was
as willing to do all acts of Justice as any one, and as little afraid to do it;
for the Witness tells you before, that he said, if they did do him a mischief,
they must do it basely, for he did not fear the best of them upon fair play.
Then when he was desired to get himself a Man to follow him, he slighted the
advice: And we all know, that he was a Man of singular Courage, and therefore
it was the easier to lay a trap for him. Then says Praunce, When he was got
in, Berry and I were to have several Posts, which we were to go to, I to one
place, and Berry to another; and I staid, says he, till Green threw the Cravat
about his Neck, and was assisted by Girald and the rest that were there. And
then, as soon as we could imagine the thing to be done, Berry comes in, and
Praunce comes back from his standing, and by some Motions finds that he was
alive, and that till Green twisted his Neck round; which the Chirurgions say
was plainly a Broken Neck, and nothing of the Wounds which were in his Body
were given him while he was alive.

When they had done this, he tells you, they carried him to Mr. Hill's Chamber:
Berry, Girald, Kelly and the rest, all helped him in, and there they leave him.
Then Praunce goes away. This was on Saturday-night. Then Praunce comes again on
Munday-night, and finds him removed to another Chamber hard by, where he saw
him by the light of a Dark Lanthorn, with something thrown over his face; and
afterward on Tuesday-night following, they did remove him back to Hill's
Lodgings, and there he lay till Wednesday-night, when they carried him out.

Says Praunce, I saw him that night; I was the Man that helped to carry him
out, for it was Praunce and Girald that carried him first, and it was Green and
Kelly who went before, and took him up afterward. He tells you, they set him
upon an Horseback, and Hill behind him. They carried him out in a Chair, which
was a thing that used to come in and go out there, and so the less notice would
be taken of it. I will observe to you afterward on the Prisoners behalf, what
is said for them to all this.

But as to Praunce, you see he has given you an Account from the top to the
bottom, from the first Transaction between them, from the time of his being
called by them to help in the Murder, and from his seeing the Handkerchief
twisted about his Neck, his Neck twisted round; how they disposed of his Body
at first, what removes they made, and when they carried him out, who were in
company, who relieved them, and what became of him at last.

He says, he saw him set up before Hill on Horseback, and they told him, they
had thrown him in a Ditch, and Girald had run him through with his own Sword,
and in that posture, and in that place, the Constable found him: The
Chirurgions tell you, that it was by the twisting of his Neck, and the
Strangling, that he was killed, and not by the Wounds; and the very bruisings
which Praunce speaks of, were found upon the view of the Body. So that here is
not any one thing, that is not backed either in some particular circumstance or
other; besides Mr. Praunce's Testimony, who (alone) could give the Narrative of
the Fact.

And it is no Argument against Mr. Praunce in the world, that he should not be
believed, because he was a party, or because he after denied what he first
said: First, because you can have no body to discover such a Fact, but only one
that was privy to it: So that we can have no Evidence, but what arises from a
party to the Crime: and in the next place, his denial after he had confessed it
to me, does not at all sound as an act of falsehood, but fear; it is not a good
Argument to say that he is not to be believed, because he denied what he once
said: for he tells you, he had not his Pardon, he was in great Consternation;
the horror of the Fact it self, and the loss of his Trade and Livelihood was
enough to do it. But how short was his denial, and how quick was his
Recantation! for he denied it before the King not upon Oath: he Swore it upon
Oath, but he denies it upon his Word only; but by that time he got home to
Newgate with Captain Richardson, he fell down on his knees, and begged him for
God's sake to carry him back to the King, for what I did say at first, said he,
is true, and this denial is false. And here could be no tampering, no
contrivance made use of; no, it is plain there could be no art used to make him
retract from his first Testimony. And these are the particulars as to Praunce
his Evidence.

Then comes Mr. Bedlow, and tells you, that he was commanded by le Fair, and
the Priests he was acquainted with, to insinuate himself into the acquaintance
of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey; they did not tell him why; they themselves knew
privately wherefore, and they did intend him as an instrument to do it, as
appears afterward. He tells you, he got into his acquaintance, by pretending
to go for Warrants for the good Behavior and the Peace, as he knew Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was willing to have the Peace kept; and he was with him
every day almost, for a Week or more.

Then the Priests come a little nearer, and tampered with him to kill a man, an
ill man for their turn, and that Mr. Bedlow should be very well rewarded, he
should have Four thousand pounds to kill that Gentleman; but still they kept
the name secret. He promised them fair, but broke his word. Afterward he meets
this Companion that he had most confidence in, and being taxed with his breach
of Promise, said he, I had business, I could not come. Well, said his
Companion, you should have been as good as your word; but the thing is done,
the person is killed, and I would have you help to carry him away. He promises
to do it, and to meet him at Somerset House; accordingly he comes upon Monday
in the Evening, and about 9 or 10 of the Clock at night, Mr. Bedlow swears,
that in this Chamber that Praunce says he was laid in, he did see the Body, by
the help of a dark Lanthorn; and his Face was covered with a Cloak or a Mantle,
or some such thing thrown over him.

And these two men, viz. Mr. Praunce and Mr. Bedlow, as the Counsel have
observed, had not any Confederacy together, for they both swear, that they
never had any converse at all; and if it be so, then it is impossible for two
men so to agree in a tale with all circumstances, if they never conversed
together, but it must be true.

It is hardly possible for any man to invent such a Story, for Praunce it is, I
believe. I find it is no hard thing for the Priests to contrive such an
Action; but for two Witnesses to agree in so many material Circumstances with
one another, that had never conversed together, is impossible.

If all this had been a Chimaera, and not really so, then Praunce must be one
of the notablest Inventors in the world: And there must have been the mightiest
chance in the world, that Mr. Bedlow and he should agree so in all things; and
that the Maid should swear that Hill was there that Morning; and that the
Constable should find the Body, just as they told Praunce they had left him.

So that upon the matter you have two Witnesses almost in every thing; for Mr.
Bedlow, seeing him in the place murdered, is a plain Evidence that the thing
was done; and all the other Witnesses, speaking to Circumstances both before
and after, make the Evidence plain, that these were the Persons who did it. And
I see nothing incoherent in all Mr. Praunce's Testimony.

I would not urge this so, if I was not satisfied in my own Conscience that the
Relation is true in the Prisoners defense, there is but one thing, that has
any sort of weight; for the young Gentlevvoman talking of his being constantly
at home at eight of the Clock, is nothing, for she says they always go to Bed
about nine a Clock, and they give no Answer to this, but that it could not be
done in their House but they must know of it; but do not show how that must
needs be; so that all their Evidence is slight, and answers it self, or else
not possible to be true. All the Testimony that is considerable in this matter,
is that which Berry produces; and that is concerning the Sentinells who kept
the Guard that Wednesday Night the Body was carried out, and he says there was
no Sedan carried out. And although this Evidence be produced but by one of
them, yet it is to the Benefit of them all three; for if it were certain and
infallibly true, that the Sentinells did so watch at the Gate, that no Mortal
could go out of the place; and if the darkness of the Night might not hinder
him from seeing what might go out; or that Mr. Berrys Voice being known to him,
he might not call to him, and so Mr. Berry might open the Gate without any
great Caution, or more particular Observation by the Sentinel, so that this
might escape his observation or remembrance, and yet that the Sentinel be an
honest Man and speak true as he thinks to his best remembrance, which I leave
to your consideration. But there is one thing the other Sentinel tells you,
that about eight or nine a Clock (for he went off at tenn) there was a Sedan
brought in, and he did not see it go out; and so says he that watched from tenn
to one, and this is the only thing which has any Color in it, in behalf of the
Prisoners. But he that says there was no body went out, says also that he never
saw the Sedan; but the Sentinel that was relieved, says; that he saw it go in.
Now how far that single Testimony of Nicolas Wright the Sentinel will weigh,
who says that none went out, I leave with you, which may be mistaken either by
reason of the darkness of the Night, or those other Particulars I have observed
to you.

But this is all that can overthrow the whole series of the Evidence that has
been given by Mr. Prance, upon whom I find not the least reflection, except you
will call that one, which to me as it is circumstanced, is rather an Argument
for him then against him, viz* his going off from what he said. And what Sr.
Robert Southwel says is regardable, that when he showed them the Place where he
was strangled, the House to which he was first carried, he did it very readily
and confidently, but was puzzled to find out the Room where he was removed, when
he saw him by the dark Lanthorn, and would not possitively assert where it was,
which shows the integrity of the Man, who would else have gone through without
bogling; for if all were a Ly, why should he stick at one thing more then
another, but have shown some Room or other? but when he was confident, he
appeared so, and when he was doubtful he appeared so, and so showed himself an
honest Man.

These are the particular matters, and as near as I can remember, all that has
been materially offered for the Prisoners against the Kings Evidence. For the
Testimony of the Landlord Warrier and his Wife, it is plainly spoken of another
time, for it was the Saturday after the Thursday he was found, the 19 th of
October. So that they speak nothing but what is true, and yet nothing to the
Purpose; for the Question is of that which was done the 12 th, but they speak
of a time when the Tragedy was passed, so that there is only the single
Evidence of one Witness, the Sentinel, which must be opposed to all the
concurring Evidence given against them.


Berry. There was Sentinells placed at every one of the Gates.

L. Chapter Just. That is nothing, for we speak only of this Gate, the great Gate,
but I will tell you what there is that does not arise from these Witnesses, but
from the nature of the thing they were about, and the Persons that transacted
it, that gives credit to the Testimonys of the Witnesses, so as to incline any
one to believe them, as things stand at this day in reference to the known
design of the Priests to subvert our Religion, for they must justify one ill by
another, and the mischiefs they have done will not be safe, unless they do more.

And for the Priests being the Preachers of Murder, and your sin, that' it is
Charity to kill any man that stands in their way. Their Doctrine will make you
easily believe their Practice, and their Practice proves their Doctrine; such
courses as these we have not known in England till it was brought out of their
Catholic Countries; what belongs to secret Stranglings and Poysonings, are
strange to us, though common in Italy. But now your Priests are come hither to
be the Popes Bravo and to Murder Men for the honor of his Holiness; and as
they are Inhumane, so they are Unmanly too: for Sr. Edmondbury Godfry had not
been afraid of two or three of your Priests, if they would have dealt fairly
with him.


Berry He was a Gentleman that I never spoke with in all my life.

L. Chapter Just. You must say and believe as your Priest will have you, and in
such actions as these, as your Priests suggest to you, so does the Devil to
your priests; If you are upon the matter necessitated to what they will have
you think; for though your Priests Preach up freedom of Will, yet they allow
none to the understanding. They hold you may do good or evil, but will not
suffer you to understand right and wrong, for you cannot be perfectly theirs,
if you have any thing of your own to guide your selves by.

I know that every body of that party is apt to say their Priests own no such
thing, but it is notoriously known to all the World that they both Print it and
Practice it. What shall any of you dispute the Power of a Pope says a Jesuit,
or of a Pope and a Council say the most moderate Priests? Have you power to say
how far you will be a Papist and how far not? you may as well bound the Sea,
and bid it go thus far and no farther, as limit the Popes Authority. I wonder
any Man should be of that Persuasion, and yet keep his Reason, much less turn
from our Religion to theirs, if he considers how they impose, and what
Mischiefs and Blood you are involved in, by your Priests that have Allarmed the
Nation. For I will affirm, the greatest mischief the Papists have received,
come from their Priests, who have such unworthy and unmanly ways of setting up
their Religion: What do they think it an Act of Charity to kill men, or is the
Christian Religion or yours, to be promoted by such means as these? No
Gentlemen, it is the fault of your Doctrine, and it is a monstrous mistake in
you, if you think that you have any power of your own, whilst you continue in
their persvvasion.

I know some will ascribe all to Conscience that guides them, and that even
these mischiefs are but the effects of their Religious obedience; but they are
indeed the Consequences of the blindness of their obedience. I wonder how any
Man can have the Face thus to disorder a whole Nation, and yet pretend
Conscience for it. Let no Man tell me, Oh! Sir, We desire none of these
Mischiefs you talk of: What, not if Religion requires it, or if the Pope says
it does? Has not the Council of Lateran decreed, that every Popish Prince
ought to root out Heresy upon pain of Damnation? You must: can you go and tell
the Pope how far you will believe, or what you ought to do? You may as well
tell me that if he were once with us, and had the Power he once had, he would
leave us to our selves, and that if he had the same Ability, he would not have
the same Tyranny.

And therefore all the Roman Catholic Gentlemen in England would do very well
to consider, how much it concerns Christianity not to give offense; And if they
cannot at this time live in a Protestant Kingdom with security to their
Neighbors, but cause such fears and dangers, and that for Conscience sake, let
them keep their Consciences, but leave the Kingdom. If they say, why should not
we stay here while we do no mischief; alas that is not in your power. You cannot
be quiet in your own Religion, unless you disturb ours; and therefore, if to
show your Consciences, you acquit the Country, and let the inconveniences
light on your selves only, I should then think you had Zeal, though not
according to Knowledge; and not ascribe it to any Plot, but to the simplicities
of understanding.

But in short, there is a monstrous Evidence of the whole Plot it self by this
fact; for we can ascribe it to none, but such ends as these, that such a man
must be killed; for it must be either because he knew something the Priests
would not have him tell, or they must do it in Defiance of Justice, and in
terror to all them that dare execute it upon them; which carries a great
Evidence in its self, and which I leave to your consideration, having remembered
as well as I could, the proofs against them, and all that is considerable for
them. Add to this, the Condition that we are in at this time, and the eagerness
of the pursuit that these Priests make to gain the Kingdom, that for my own
part I must put it into my Litany, That God would deliver me from the delusion
of Popery, and the Tyranny of the Pope: for it is a Yoke which we who have
known Freedom cannot endure, and a Burden which none but that Beast who was
made for Burden, will bear. So I leave it to your Consideration upon the whole
matter, whether the Evidence of the Fact does not satisfy your Consciences,
that these men are Guilty. And I know you will do like honest men on both sides.


Then the Jury withdrew to consider of their Verdict, and after a short space
returned again. Cl. of the Cr. Gentlemen, answer to your Names. Sir William
Roberts.

Sir William Roberts. Here, and so the rest.

Cl. of Cr. Gentlemen, are you all agreed of your Verdict?

Omnes. Yes.

Cl. of Cr. Who shall say for you?

Omnes. Our Foreman.

Cl. of Cr. Robert Green hold up thy hand, (which he did) Look upon the
Prisoner; how say you, is Robert Green Guilty of the Felony and Murder whereof
he stands Indicted, or not Guilty?

Foreman. Guilty.

Cl. of Cr. What Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements?

Foreman. None to our knowledge.

Cl. of Cr. Henry Berry, hold up thy hand, (which he did) Look upon the
Prisoner. How say you, is Henry Berry Guilty of the Felony and Murder whereof
he stands Indicted, or not Guilty?

Foreman. Guilty.

Cl. of Cr. What Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements?

Foreman. None to our knowledge.

Cl. of Cr. Lawrence Hill hold up thy hand, (which he did) How say you, is
Lawrence Hill, Guilty of the Felony and Murder whereof he stands Indicted, or
not Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.

Cl. of Cr. What Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements?

Foreman. None to our knowledge.

Cl. of Cr. Hearken to your Verdict as the Court has recorded it. You say that
Robert Green is Guilty of the Felony and Murder whereof he stands Indicted.
You say that Henry Berry is Guilty of the Felony and Murder whereof he stands
Indicted. You say that Lawrence Hill. is Guilty of the Felony and Murder
whereof he stands Indicted; And that neither they, nor any of them, had any
Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, at the time of the Felony committed, or
at any time since to your knowledge. And so you say all.


Omnes. Yes.

Lord Chapter Just. Gentlemen, You have found the same Verdict that I would have
found if I had been one with you; and if it were the last word I were to speak
in this world, I should have pronounced them Guilty.


At which words, the whole Assembly gave a great shout of Applause. Mr. At.
Genesis Will your Lordship please to give Judgment this Evening, I know it is not
usual the same day.

Mr. Justice Wild. My Lord, I am ready.

L. C. J. No Brother, I am to sit at Nisi prius this Afternoon, and it is time
we broke up the Court.

Cl. of Cr. Cap. Richardson, you shall have a Rule to bring them up to morrow;
and then the Court broke up.

On Tuesday the 11 th. of February, the Prisoners were brought again to the Bar
in order to receive their Sentence; and the Court proceeded thus. Mr. Recorder,
My Lord, as I was directed by Mr. Attorney, these Prisoners being Convicted of
Murder, I do for the King pray Judgment upon them; but I must first acquaint
your Lordship, that immediately after their Conviction, one of the Officers, a
Tipstaffe, pretending it was his Fee, took their Clothes off their backs.


L. C. J. Who is that Officer?

Mr. Recorder, One Ashby.

L. C. J. Call him, Why do you offer to meddle with these men's Clothes?

Ashby. It has been an ancient Custom this 40 years, some of us have known it,
that the Marshal has the upper Garment of all Prisoners tried at this Bar.


L. C. J. Is there any such Custom Mr. Waterhouse? Speaking to a Clerk of the
Crown-Office.


Waterhouse. No my Lord, that I know of.

L. C. J. Here is Mr. Waterhouse that has known the practice of the Court this
Threescore years, says there is no such thing. Either restore them their
Clothes, or we will take some other course with you. Are they in your Custody
pray?


Mr. J. Dolben. I do not know that my Lord, I think they always plead in
Custody of the Marshal.

Mr. J. Wyld. But this seems a very barbarous thing, to take their Clothes off
their backs.

Mr. J. Dolb. It does so Brother, and they must be restored.

L. C. J. Yes, yes, you must restore them.

Ashby. They shall be, my Lord.

Mr. Recorder. I pray your Judgment.

L. C. J. Ask them what they can say to hinder Judgment.

Cl. of Cr. Robert Green hold up thy hand, (which he did) Thou have been
Indicted of Felony and Murder, thou have been thereupon Arraigned, thou have
pleaded thereunto not guilty, and for thy Trial thou have put thy self upon God
and thy Country, which Country has found thee guilty, what have thou to say
for thy self, why the Court should not proceed to give Judgment of Death upon
thee, and award Execution according to the Law?


Cap. Richardson. What have you to say for your self?

Green. I declare to all the world, that I am as innocent of the thing charged
upon me, as the Child that is in the Mothers Womb. I die innocent, I do not
care for death, I go to my Savior, and I desire all that hear me to pray for
me. I never saw the man to my knowledge alive or dead.


Cl. of Cr. Henry Berry, hold up thy hand, (which he did) Thou have been
Indicted of Felony and Murder, etc. What can thou say? etc.

Berry. I do declare I am not guilty of any thing in the World of this.

L. C. J. We do not expect much from you, and it is no great matter; for your
Confession will do us little good, but only for your selves. We regard it not
otherwise, because the Evidence was so plain, that all mankind is satisfied
there is no scruple in the thing; and we know you have either downright
denials, or evasions, or equivocating terms for every thing; yet in plain
dealing, every one that heard your Trial has great satisfaction; and for my
own particular, I have great satisfaction that you are every one of you guilty.


Cl. of Cr. Lawrence Hill, hold up thy hand, (which he did) Thou have been
Indicted of Felony and Murder, etc. What can thou say? etc.

Hill. I have nothing to say for my self, but that God Almighty knows my
Innocence.

Cl. of Cr. Crier* make an O yes.

Crier, O yes, Our Sovereign Lord the King does straightly charge and command all
manner of persons to keep silence whilst Judgment is giving upon the Prisoners
Convicted, upon pain of Imprisonment; Peace about the Court.

Then Mr. Justice Wyld, who as second Judge in that Court, pronounces the
Sentence in all Criminal Matters, (except High Treason) spoke to the Prisoners
thus:


Mr. J. Wyld, You that are the Prisoners at the Bar, you have all three been
Indicted for a detestable Murder, and thereunto have pleaded not guilty, and
put your selves for your Trial upon your Country, and your Country, upon a
clear and pregnant Evidence, I believe to the Satisfaction of all good men,
that were indifferent, have found you guilty. I have little Comfort to say any
thing to you, because I observe your Obstinacy at the Bar; but it is so
generally among you all, you will confess nothing to the Death.


Green. God forbid Sir.

Mr. J. Wyld. But though I am of another Persuasion than you, and know you have
no Charity for me, yet I have Charity for you. And if I shall say any thing, it
is out of a zealous Affection I have for your Souls; God knows, I speak it upon
no other grounds; though the Offense be horrid, yet I commiserate your persons.

For the Nature of your Offense it is Murder; He that sheds man's blood, by Man
shall his blood be shed; for in the Image of God created he him. So says God
to Noah, intimating and declaring thereby, That the intention of God Almighty
in the making of that Law, was the preservation of mankind: and that he will
not admit or suffer his Image to be defaced or destroyed. If it shall be
accounted Treason against Earthly Princes to deface their Images, is it not
much more Treason against the great God of Heaven and Earth, to deface his
Image, who is the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. The Greatness of this Sin
struck such a damp and horror upon the Soul of Cain, that it made him cry out,
his Punishment was greater than he could bear, or, as our Bibles have it in the
Margin, his Iniquity was greater than could be forgiven; and it shall come to
pass, that whosoever meets me, shall slay me. Being Conscious to himself,
that it was just and lawful, that whosoever did meet with him should slay him.
And God himself does set forth the hainousness of this offense, when he tells
him, his Brothers blood cried to him, that is, cried unto God from the Earth,
for Vengeance. Blood it is of a crying nature, and will never cease crying,
till it find out the Manslayer.

It is an Offense so heinous in the Eye of God, that he will not endure it in a
Beast; God says, he will require it of a Beast. And does God require Blood of
a Beast, a brutish Creature void of all Reason, and will he not require it much
more of Man, whom he has endued with those two great Faculties of Reason and
Understanding? And certainly if Murder in general be enquired after, I may well
say this of yours, there has not been committed a more impudent and barbarous
Murder in this Civilized Nation by one Subject upon another. And observe how
you did effect this Murder, with baseness enough. See the baseness of it: As
the Devil was the Father of Lies, so he was a Murderer from the beginning; and
you first begun your Murder with an Hellish studied and premeditated Lie.
Knowing that this Gentleman was a person very vigorous in the Execution of his
place, that would omit no Opportunity of doing his Office; you pretend you have
occasion for him, and by this means draw him into your snare; where what you
do, you do cowardly and basely, first disarm him, then fall all upon him, and
murder him; as the Prophet David says of the ungodly man, first gets the
Righteous man in his Net, and then ravisheth him.

Had such a thing as this been acted by us Protestants in any Popish Country in
the World, I doubt there would scarce have been one of us left alive. They
would not have taken this course that has been taken with you, to admit us to
a fair Trial; no, they would have made their own hands their Avengers: But God
be praised, we are of another Religion, and of another Persuasion. We leave
Vengeance to God, and under him to the Magistrate, who bears not the Sword in
vain, as you now find.

If I could abstract folly from wickedness, certainly it was one of the
greatest pieces of folly and sottishness in the world: For what could be your
end in it? Did you think that all the Magistrates in England were lodged in Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey? that if he were taken out of the way, there were not men of
Spirit and Courage, as faithful and diligent as he was? Trouble not your
selves, nor let those of your Persuasion trouble themselves, there are a
numerous Company of Magistrates in this Kingdom, that will do the same thing,
and act in, and execute their Offices with the same Courage.

And as to the manner of the Murder, whom have you destroyed? A Magistrate; For
what? For the Execution of his Office. One that was a Conservator of the Peace;
and whose study it was to preserve you in Peace, on him you have violated the
Peace, and nothing less would satisfy you than his precious Life. An Affront
to the Law, to the Magistrate, to the King, to the Nation; yea to God himself,
upon whom an higher Affront could hardly have been put. For the Magistrate is
Gods Ordinance, God has set him up to avenge himself upon the wicked, and to
reward the good; and he does not bear, as it is a sign by you he has not born,
the Sword in vain.

I might say much more concerning the hainousness of this Offense; but had I
the tongue of Men and Angels, I could not say enough to set out the horror of
it. And now let me tell you, I do not speak this to insult and domineer over
you; I praise God I am of another spirit; he knows I have another end in what I
say, and my end is merely this, to persuade you from the foulness of your fact,
to make a good use of it; that the horridness of your sin, may make the greater
and deeper impressions on your Spirits; and so make your repentance more
sincere and efficacious. Had you as many years to live as you have hours, it
were little enough to bewail this horrid Offense. But on the other side, as
that will be little enough, yet let me give you this comfort, you have time
enough, if you make a good use of it, to make your peace with God.

Pray let me dehort you from one thing; and that is this, Do not be of the
Opinion of those wicked miscreants the Jesuits, that have put you upon this
matter; for I have so much Charity for you as to believe, they made it a matter
of Religion to you, and justifiable upon that account. Do not think so, for the
Law of God is indispensible, and no power under Heaven can License to murder.
So that though the Offense in them is abominable, yet in you it is an Offense
too, and an horrid one. And when you have considered it as such, I then desire
you to take a right course to make your peace with God: For you must pass under
another Judgment than that of man, and that shortly you must stand before the
Judge of Heaven and Earth. And therefore if by this means you can prevent that
future Judgment, you will have Just cause to thank God that you had your
punishment here on earth. Therefore let me advise you to spend every minute you
have left, in a free acknowledgment of all your Offenses: For certainly some
sin went before, or this had never come after. One sin dogs another, and makes
way for the Commission of another.

And what must you rely upon? not upon any trash or trompery, not upon any
merit of your own, there is but one Savior and Mediator, the Lord Jesus
Christ. And I would advise you in the words of that great Cardinal, one that
was one of the greatest men of your Religion, Bellarmine I mean, who, having
made a scrutiny, which was the safest way for securing Heaven, made the
conclusion thus, To trust Only upon the Lord Jesus Christ for Life and
Salvation; which I advise you to do.

I have now done what I intended to say to you; and what I have said, I spoke
to deliver my own Soul, and upon no other account. I now pronounce the Judgment
which the Law has appointed to pass upon such Malefactors; and that is this;

That you go from hence to the place from whence you came, and from thence to
the place of Execution, where you shall be severally hanged by the Neck, till
you are severally dead; and the Lord have mercy upon your Souls.


Hill, I humbly beg one favor, that I may have the privilege to see my Wife
and Children, and my Brother, before I dye, sometimes.

L, C, J, God forbid else,

Hill, Any day I hope my Lord.

L, C, J, Captain Richardson, let them have the liberty of seeing their
Friends, but do it with care and caution.

Mr. J, Wyld, And I will say this more to you, if you will have any Religious
Protestant Divines to come to you, they shall be sent you, but none of your
Priests.

Hill, I desire only my Relations.

Mr, J. Wyld, You shall have them, and we offer you the others.

Green, I have no Relations that are Catholics, but two, and they are not
Priests. God bless the King; and I desire all good people to pray for us.

L, C, J, Mr. Astry let the Rule be entered for their Execution on Monday next.
Cl, of the Crown, Captain Richardson, you shall have the Rule for their
Execution on Monday next.

Then the Keeper carried away the Prisoners to the Gaol to be reserved till
their Execution.

On Friday the 21 st. of February following, the Prisoners, Robert Green and
Lawrence Hill, were Executed, according to the Sentence pronounced against
them. FINIS.

