THE TRIALS AND Condemnation OF THOMAS WHITE, alias WHITEBREAD, Provincial of
the Jesuits in England, WILLIAM HARCOURT, Pretended Rector of London, JOHN
FENWICK, Procurator for the Jesuits in England, JOHN GAVAN alias GAWEN, And
ANTHONY TURNER, All JESUITS and PRIESTS; FOR HIGH TREASON: IN Conspiring the
Death of the KING, The SUBVERSION of the Government, and Protestant Religion.

At the Sessions in the Old-Bailey for LONDON and MIDDLESEX, on Friday and
Saturday, being the 13 th and 14 th of June, 1679.

Published by Authority.

Dublin, Reprinted, 1679.

THE TRIALS, etc.
On Friday the 13th. of June 1679, at the Sessions House in the Old-Bayley, the
Court being met, at which all the Judges of England were present. Proclamation
was made of Silence and Attention whilst the King's Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, and of Jail-deliver were openly read, and after the usual
Proclamation of attendance upon the Sessions, the Court proceeded to call the
Jurys impannelled, and to the Trials of the Prisoners thus.

Cl. of Cr. SEt Thomas Whitebread, John Fenwick, William Harcourt, John Gavan,
Anthony Turner, and James Corker to the Bar,


Cap. Richardson. They are all on.


Cl. of Cr. Thomas White alias Whitebread, Hold up thy hand.

John Fenwick, Hold up thy hand.

William Harcourt, alias Harrison, Hold up thy hand.

John Gavan, Hold up thy hand.

Anthony Turner, Hold up thy hand.

James Corker, Hold up thy Hand.


which they all severally did.

And James Corker presented a Petition to the Court, to this effect.

That about 8 months since the Petition Was committed for refusing to take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, that he had lately received notice to
prepare himself for his Trial against this present day, but that the same was
afterward contradicted, and that yesterday a Gentleman informed him from the
Attorney General, that a Bill was found against him of High treason, and that
he was to prepare himself for his Trial thereupon accordingly; and forasmuch as
the Petitioner is altogether ignorant of the matters charged upon him in the
same, and by reason thereof, is absolutely surprised, and unprepared for his
defense, and diverse Gaol-deliverys having been held since his first
Commitment, and he never called to his Trial; he does humbly beseech their
Honors, that he may not be Tried till the next Sessions, and that in the mean
time, he may have Copies of such informations as are given in against him.

L. C. J. Mr. Corker, have you really any witnesses, without whom you cannot
make your Defense.


Corker. No, my Lord I have none.


L. C. J. You do not understand my Question, do you want any witnesses, now,
that you may have another time?


Corker. I am a stranger to the things charged upon me.


L. C. J. Can you not tell, whether you have any witnesses or no? the matter is
this, both for you and all the rest of you, that there may be no exception; you
are upon the Trial of your lives, and we upon our Oaths, and therefore I speak
it, if so be you have any witnesses, because you pretend you are surprised, if
you have really any, whereby you can make a better defense for your selves,
then now, the Court will incline to your request; but if you have not, then
it is in vain to tarry.


Corker. My Lord, I verily believe I shall have Witnesses.


L. C. J. As for the copy of the Indictment it is never granted to any persons,
and therefore must not be to you.


L. C. J. N. You must give us clear satisfaction, that you are real in your
pretenses; and must give us the names of your witnesses where they live, and
let us know what they can say for you, that we may be satisfied; for such a
general alligation as this, any man living may make.


Mr. Recorder. He was one of the ten that was appointed by the Council to be
tried*


L. C. J. Why, you had notice a week ago,


Corker. But it was contradicted the next day.


Capt. Richardson. I heard Mr. Clare say that he should not be tried then.


Mr. At. Genesis He had notice together with the rest, but he was not in the
first Order of Council for the Trial of these persons, he sent to the Clerk to
know who were to be tried and his name was left out; and so understood he was
not to be tried. On Tuesday last I moved that he might be put into the Order,
and so he was, and now there is an Order of Council for it; but he had notice a
week ago as well as the rest.


Capt. Richardson. I gave them notice that all were to prepare for their Trial
as this day, and in order to that, I went to the Council, to see what Order was
taken about it, and the Clerk showed me their names, amongst which Corker was
left out, and I told him Corker had notice of Trial, and therefore I desired I
might have an Order for him too; they told me that there was no Order taken
about him.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I would have all the Gentlemen have all the fair play
in the world, therefore if he can satisfy your Lordship, that he can have any
Witnesses that he has not now, I am content his Trial should stay to another
time,


L. C. J. You shall hear the Indictment read, and there you will know what sort
of Treason it is you are charged with, and after that you will make your
answer, whether you have any witnesses.


Mr. Recorder. My Lord, it will be necessary, that I give your Lordship an
account of one thing. On Saturday night there came a Gentlewoman to me on the
behalf of all the Prisoners, and said there were some witnesses, that she was
under apprehension would not appear for the prisoners, unless they had some
order, her name she told me was Ireland, and she came in the name of all the
prisoners, she said: I told her if she would bring me a Note of the witnesses
names they did desire, they should have all the assistanec the Court could give
them for the getting of their Witnesses thi^ day; but since that time I never
heard of the Gentlewoman, or from the Prisoners.


L. C. J. Mr. Corker, you will do well to take notice, what you are charged
withal, and afterward tell us if there are any witnesses that can say any
thing for your defense, at your Trial for those matters.


Clerk of Cr. You stand indicted by the names of Thomas White in the Parish of
St. Giles in the Fields in the County of Middlesex Clerk, otherwise called
Thomas Whitebread of the same Parish and County Clerk, John Fenwick of the same
Parish and County Clerk, William Harcourt of the same Parish and County Clerk,
otherwise called William Harrison of the same Parish and County Clerk, John
Gavan of the same Parish, and county Clerk, Anthony Turner of the same Parish
and County Clerk, and James Corker of the same Parish, and county Clerk.

For that you, as false Traitors against the most Illustrious, most Serene, and
most Excellent Prince, Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. your Supreme
and Natural Lord; not having the fear of God in your hearts, nor weighing the
Duty of your Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the
Devil, the cordial love, true, due and natural Obedience, which true and
faithful Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King, toward him should and
of right ought to bear; wholly withdrawing and devising, and with all your
strength intending the peace and common tranquillity of this Realm to disturb,
and the true Worship of God within this Kingdom of England used, and by the Law
established, to overthrow, and the Government of this Realm to subvert, and
Sedition and Rebellion within this Kingdom of England to move, stir up and
procure, and the cordial love and true and due obedience, which true and
faithful subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King, toward him should, and
of right ought to bear, utterly to withdraw, put out, and extinguish, and our
said Sovereign Lord the King to Death and final Destruction to bring, and put,
on the four and twentieth day of April, in the thirtieth year of the Reign of
our said Sovereign Lord, King Charles the second, at the parish of St. Giles in
the Fields, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid; You the said Thomas White
otherwise Whitebread John Fenwick, William Harcourt otherwise Harrison, John
Gavan, Anthony Turner and James Corker, with diverse other false Traitors
subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King, to the Jurors unknown, falsely,
subtly, advisedly, maliciously and traitorously did purpose, compass, imagine
and intend Sedition and Rebellion within this Kingdom of England, to move, stir
up and procure, and a miserable slaughter among the subjects of our said
Sovereign Lord the King to procure and cause, and our said Sovereign Lord the
King of his Kingly State, Title, Power and Government of his said Kingdom of
England utterly to deprive, depose, cast down and disinherit, and him our said
Sovereign Lord the King to death and final destruction to bring and put, and
the Government of this Kingdom of England and the sincere Religion of God
within the same, rightly and by the Laws of the same established, at your will
and pleasure to change and alter, and the State of this whole Kingdom of
England, through all its parts well instituted and ordained, wholly to subvert
and destroy, and War within this Kingdom of England against our said Sovereign
Lord the King to levy: And to accomplish and fulfill your said most wicked
Treasons and traitorous imaginations and purposes; You the said Thomas White
otherwise Whitebread, John Fenwick, William Harcourt otherwise Harrison, John
Gavan, Anthony Turner and James Corker, and other false Traitors against our
said Sovereign Lord the King, to the Jurors unknown, the said four and
twentieth day of April, with Force and Arms, etc. in the Parish aforesaid, and
County aforesaid, falsely, maliciously, subtly, advisedly, devillishly and
traitorously did assemble, unite and gather your selves together, and then and
there falsely, maliciously, subtly, advisedly, devillishly and traitorously
did consult, consent and agree our said Sovereign Lord the King to Death and
final Destruction to bring and put, and the Religion of this Kingdom of
England, rightly and by the Laws of the same established, to the Superstition
of the Romish Church to change and alter, and the Government of this Kingdom of
England to subvert; and that one Thomas Pickering and one John Grove should
kill and murder our said Sovereign Lord the King, and that you the said Thomas
White otherwise Whitebread, John Fenwick, William Harcourt otherwise Harrison,
John Gavan, Anthony Turner, James Corker and other false Traitors against our
said Sovereign Lord the King, to the Jurors unknown, should therefore say,
celebrate and perform a certain number of Masses, then and there amongst your
selves agreed on for the soul of the said Thomas Pickering; and for that cause
should pay to the said John Grove a certain sum if money then and there amongst
your selves agreed on; and that you the said Thomas White otherwise Whitebread,
John Fenwick, William Harcourt otherwise Harrison, John Gavan, Anthony Turner
and James Corker and other false Traitors to the Jurors unknown, in further
prosecution of the Treasons and traitorous Consultations and Agreements
aforesaid, afterward the said four and twentieth day of April, at the Parish
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, falsely, subtly, advisedly, maliciously,
devillishly and traitorously did severally each to the other engage your
selves, and upon the Sacrament traitorously swear and promise to conceal, and
not to divulge the said most wicked Treasons and traitorous compassings,
consultations, and purposes aforesaid amongst your selves, had traitorously to
kill and murder our said Sovereign Lord the King, and to introduce the Romish
Religion within this Kingdom of England, and the true reformed Religion within
this Realm, rightly and by the Laws of the same established, to alter and
changes and that you the said Thomas White otherwise Whitebread, John Fenwick,
William Harcourt alias Harrison, John Gavan, Anthony Turner and James Corker
and other false Traitors, to the Jurors unknown, in further prosecution of your
said Treasons and traitorous intentions and agreements aforesaid, afterward
the said four and twentieth day of April, at the Parish aforesaid, and County
aforesaid, falsely, subtly, advisedly, maliciously, devillishly and
traitorously did prepare, persuade, excite, abet, comfort and counsel four
other persons to the Jurors unknown, subjects of our said Soueraign Lord the
King, traitorously our said Sovereign Lord the King to kill and murder, against
the Duty of your Allegiance, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King,
his Crown and Dignity, and against the form of the Statute in that Case made
and provided.

How say thou Thomas White alias Whitebread, art thou guilty of this High
Treason whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


Whitebread. My Lord, I desire to speak one word; I am advised by Council, and
I may, and ought to represent it to this Court for not only my own life, but
the lives of others of his Majesty's Subjects, are concerned in it, That upon
the 17 th of December last, I was tried upon the same Indictment, the Jury was
impannell'd and called, I put my self into the hands of the Jury, and the
Evidence was brought in and examined, particularly against me, and was found
insufficient, so that the Jury was dismissed without any Verdict, I humbly
submit my self to your Lordships and this noble Court, whether I may not have
Counsel in this point of Law, to advise me, whether I may and ought to plead
again the second time, for according to Law, I am informed, no man can be put
in jeopardy of his Life the second time, for the same cause.


Lord Chapter Just. You say well Mr. Whitebread.


Whitebread. I speak it not for my sake only, but the sake of the whole Nation,
no man should be tried twice for the same cause, by the same reason, a man may
be tried twenty or a hundred times.


Lord Chapter Just. You say well, it is observed Mr. Whitebread; but you must know,
that you were not put in jeopardy of your Life for the same thing; for first
the Jury were discharged of you; it is true, it was supposed when you were
indicted, that there would be two Witnesses against you, but that fell out
otherwise, and the Law of the Land requiring two Witnesses to prove you guilty
of Treason, it was thought reasonable, that you should not be put upon the Jury
at all, but you were discharged, and then you were in no jeopardy of your Life.


Whitebread. Under favor my Lord, I was in Jeopardy; for I was given in charge
to the Jury, and it is the case of Seyer, in 31. Eliz, he was indicted for a
Burglary committed the 1 st. of August, and pleaded to it, and afterward
another indictment was preferred, and all the Judges did declare, that he could
not be indicted the second time, for the same fact, because he was in Jeopardy
of his life again.


Lord Chapter Just. Surely, you were not in Jeopardy, and I Will show you how you
were not, suppose you had pleaded, and the Jury were sworn.


Whitebread. They were so in my case.


Lord Chapter Just. It Is true they were, but supposing that presently upon that,
some accident falls out, a Witness is taken sick, and be feign to be carried a
way, or for any reasonable cause, it should be thought fit by the Court to
discharge the Jury of it, that they should not pass upon your life, are you in
Jeopardy then?


Lo. Ch, Just. North. I would have you be satisfied with reason, and the course
of Law that other men's lives are under, as well as yours. The Oath the Jury
take, is that they shall well and truly try, and true deliverance make of such
Prisoners, as they shall have in charge, the charge of the Jury is not full,
till the Court give them a charge at the last, after evidence had, and because
there was a mistake in your case, that the evidence was not so full as might
be, the Jury, before ever they considered concerning you at all, they were
discharged, and so you were not in Jeopardy, and I in my experience know it to
be often done, and it is the course of Law, the Clerks will tell you it is
frequently done here and at other places; and this is not the same Indictment,
and it contains further matter, then that you pleaded to before. And then if
you will make this Plea good that you go upon, you must allege a Record, and
show some Record to make it good, and that cannot be, because there is none,
and so it will signify nothing to you, as you have pleaded it.


Whitebread. I desire the Record may be viewed, it remains with you, I do only
present this to your Lordship and the Court, and desire I may have Counsel.


L. C. J. No, not all, there is no entry made of it.


Whit. I desire that Counsel may advise me, for I am advised, that according to
the Law of the Land, I ought not to plead again, and I hope your Lorships, will
be of Counsel for me


L, C. J. Look you, Mr. Whitebread, there is no entry made upon it, and the
reason is because there was no Trial, and there was no Trial, because there was
no Condemnation or Acquittal, if there had been, then you had said something.


Whitebread. That which I ask is, whether I ought not to be condemned or
acquitted.


L. C. J. No, it is only in the discretion of the Court. For if a man be
indicted for murder, and some accident should happen, (when the Witness come to
prove it) that he should be taken ill, and so be carried away, should the
murderer escape?


Whitebread. That is not my case, you may do as you please.


L. C. J. But we show, that it is in the discretion of the Court to discharge
the Jury upon such accidents, and then the party is not in Jeopardy.


Whitebread. I have only prayed your Lordships discretion in this.


L. C. J. You ought to plead, and most plead.


L. C. J. North. I suppose if any of my Brethren are of another Opinion, then
what we have expressed, they would say so.


Court. We are all of your Opinon.


L. C. J. All the Judges of England are of the same Opinion.


Mr. Record. It Is the constant practice.


L. C. J. It Is frequent in all places, it is no new thing.


Whitebread My Lord I am satisfied.


Cl. of Cr. Thomas White alias Whitebread, art thou guilty of the High Treason
whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty?


Whitebread. Not guilty.


Cl, of Cr Culprit, How will thou be tried?


Whitebread By God and my country.


Cl. of Cr. God send thee a good deliverance.


John Fenwick, art thou guilty of the same High Treason, or not guilty?


Fenwick. Not guilty.


Cl. of Crown. Culprit, How will thou be tried?


Fenwick. By God and my Country.


Cl. of the Crown, God send thee a good deliverance.


Fenwick. I was tried before with Mr. Whitbread, our case is the same, the
only reason, why (I presume) we were not proceeded against, was because the
second witness declared he had nothing to say against us, that was Mr. Bedlow,
who said, as to Mr. Whitbread and Mr. Fenwick, I have nothing to say against
them; if he had given the same Evidence against us, as he had done against the
rest, we had been condemned, and had suffered, and so I suppose we ought to
have been discharged.


L. C. J. No, it was not reasonable you should be discharged, it remains in the
discretion of the court, not to let a man, that is accused of a great and
capital crime escape, if there be one witness that swears expressly: do you
think it reasonable such a man should go scotfree, though there wanted two that
the Law requires? You were not in danger, your lives were not in Jeopardy,


Fenwick. My Lord, we were in the same danger with those Three that suffered.


L. C. J. No, we never let the Jury go together to consider whether you were
guilty, or not guilty, we did prevent your making your defense, because we
thought it not a sufficient Charge.


C. of C. William Harcourt alias Harrison, how say thou, art thou guilty of
the high Treason whereof thou stand indicted, or not guilty.


Harcourt. Not guilty.


Cl. of Cr. Culprit, How will thou be tried?


Harcourt. By God and my country.


Cl: of Cr. God send thee a good deliverance. How say thou John Gaven alias
Gawen, art thou Guilty of the same High Treason, or not Guilty?


Gavan Not Guilty?


Cl, of Cr, Culprit, how will thou be Tried?


Gawen. By God and my country,


Cl. of Cr. God send thee a good deliverance. How say thou Anthony Turner,
art thou Guilty of the same High Treason, or not Guilty?


Turner, Not Guilty.


Cl. of Cr. Culprit, how will thou be Tried?


Turner, By God and my country.


Cl. of Cr. God send thee a good deliverance


L. C. J. Mr. Corker. you have heard the Indictment read^ (...) what it
consists of, a Traitorous endeavor to subvert the Government, to More (...)
King, to change the Protestant Religion into Popery; if you have any witnesses
that can be serviceable to you as to these matters, name who they are, and
where they live; if you cannot, you had as good take your Trial now, as at
another time.


Corker. I not only have no witnesses ready, but there are substantial
circumstances, which peradventure may arise, which may induce your Lordship to
believe me innocent, and therefore I humbly beg, I may stay some short time to
consult with those that are better skilled in the Law than I am.


L. C. J. What do you mean to have counsel assigned you?


Corker. My friends, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. Every man knows his own case be^^, you have been bread a
Scholar, and so you cannot be so ignorant as other men ar^ you can tell whether
you have any Witnesses that you think are material for your defense.


Corker. That day of the 24 th of April spoken of in the Indictment, I truly
and really believe I was not in Town that day; but I cannot positively prove
it, because I heard not of it before.


Lord Chapter Just. Is there any body that can testify where you were that day?
can you name any one?


Corker. Yes, I believe I can name one, and that is one Alice Gaton, that is
now 30 miles out of Town at Tunbridge, who can prove where I did go about that
time.


Lord Chapter Just. I Will tell you what, if my Brothers will, this woman you suppose
can say something for you, we will respite your Trial for to day, send some
body for her, and we will Try you to morrow.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Or any other Witnesses, for as to this 24 th. day of
April it is known to all the world to have been the day of the Consult. But
because you pretend a surprise, I must tell you, that Mr. Attorney sent you
notice with the rest; but because you might be led into another opinion that
the Council did not order it, you have the favor to be put off till to morrow:
Get your Witnesses ready if you can.


Lord Chapter Just. If you have any other Witnesses, or desire any order for their
appearance, let us know it.


Corker. I desire I may have liberty to have my Trial put off till Monday.


Lord Chapter Just. North. No, it cannot be, Monday is the Assogin day, and then
the Commission will be out.


Lord Chapter Just. Call the Jury.


Cl. of Cr. Thomas White alies Whitebread, hold up thy hand (and so as to the
rest.) You the Prisoners at the Bar, those men that you shall hear called and
personally appear, are to pass between our Sovereign Lord the King and you,
upon Trial of your several lives and deaths; if therefore you or any of you
will challenge them, or any of them, your time is to speak unto them as they
come to the Book to be sworn, and before they be sworn. Call Sir Philip
Matthews.


Whitebread. We Challenge him my Lord, that there may not be any further
trouble, it is our general Petition, that none of those that were for any of
the former Trials may be of this Jury, they having already passed their
Judgment upon the Evidence they have heard.


Lord Chapter Just. You may Challenge them. And therefore (speaking to the Clerk of
the Crown) don't take any that were upon the last Jury for this cause*


Gavan. Nor any of the former Juries; we do this that we may avoid giving your
Lordship any farther trouble, because if we should stay upon particulars we
should too much trouble the Court.


Lord Chapter Just. North. Look you, I will tell you by the way, you have the
liberty to Challenge peremptorily so many. All we can do, is to give direction
to the Clerk, if he do not pursue it, we do not know them, we cannot tell, you
must look after that.


Mr. Recorder. You have the Books, wherein are notes of all their names by you.


Then The Jury that were Sworn, were these Twelve. JURY.
Thomas Harriott. William Gulston. Allen Garraway. Richard Cheney. John
Roberts. Thomas Cash. Rainsford Waterhouse. Matthew Bateman. John Kaine.
Richard White. Richard Bull, and Thomas Cox.


Cl. of Cr. Crier, count these Thomas Harriott.


Crier. One, etc.


Cl. of Cr. Thomas Cox.


Crier. Twelve, good men and True, stand together and here your Evidence


Then the usual Proclamation for Infornation was made, and the Jurymen of
Middle-sex Summoned and not Sworn, were dismissed till next morning eight of
the Clock.

Cl. of Cr. Thomas White alias Whitebread, hold up thy hand, (and so to the
rest) You Gentlemen that are sworn, look upon the Prisoners, and hearken to
their Cause; they stand indicted by the names of Thomas White, etc. ( put in
the indictment Mutatis Mutandis) and against the form of the Statute in that
case made and provided. Upon this Indictment they have been Arraigned, and
thereunto have severally pleaded not Guilty, and for their Trials have put
themselves upon God and their Country, which Country you are. Your charge is to
enquire whether they, or any of them are Guilty of the high Treason whereof
they stand Indicted, or not Guilty. If you find them, or any of them Guilty,
you are to enquire what Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements they had at the
time of the High Treason committed, or at any time since; If you find them or
any of them not Guilty, you are to Enquire whether they fled for it if you find
that they fled for it, you are to Enquire of their Goods and Chattels as if you
had found them Guilty; If you find them not Guilty, nor that they nor any of
them fled for it, say so and no more, and hear your Evidence.


Then Mr. Belwood, of Counsel for the King in this cause, opened the Indictment
thus:

Mr. Belwood. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury.


The Prisoners at the Bar, Thomas White alias Whitbread, John Fenwick, William
Harcourt alias Harrison, John Gavan and Anthony Turner, together with James
Corker, stand Indicted of High Treason; it is charged in the Indictment, That
the 24 th of April, in the 30 th year of the King that now is, These persons,
with other Traitors unknown, did purpose and conspire to stir up sedition and
Rebellion: to cause a miserable slaughter of the Kings Subjects; to depose the
King of his Government, and bring him to death; and to change the Government
and Religion by Laws established, and to Levy war against the King. And it is
further charged in the Indictment, that pursuant of this intention of theirs,
and the better to bring it to pass, They did Assemble, Consult and agree,
First, to bring his Majesty to death, to Murder the King, and thereupon to
change the Religion Established by Law, to the Superstition of the
Romish-Church, and to subvert the whole Government; and it was agreed that
Pickering and Grove should Murder the King, and that therefore Whitebread, and
the rest of the Persons Indicted, should say a Number of M^sses for the Soul of
Pickering. And Grove, for this piece of service, was to have a Sum of Money.
And the Indictment says further, that these persons did take the Sacrament to
commit this Treason with more secrecy; and that they did likewise Prepare,
Excite, Abet and Counsel Four other unknown Persons to kill the King at
Windsor. All these Facts are said to be done Advisedly, Maliciously,
Traitorously and Devilishly, and against their Allegiance to the King; To this
they have pleaded Not Guilty; if the Kings Evidence prove it, you are to find
it so.

And then Sir Creswell Levinz, one of the King's Learned Council in the Law,
proved the charge thus,

Sir Cr. Levinz May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury;


Th^se Prisoners at the (...) by Persuasion Papists, by Order and D^^^^^ th^^
are all Priests. By the Law of the Land, viz: By a Statute made the 27th of
Eliz. They are all Guilty of Treason for being Priests, and they might be Tried
as such, and ought todye for it, but that is not the Fact that they are Charged
with, nor will they have the satisfaction to^ay that they suffer for their
Religion; No, they are charged with a Treason of a blacker and darker Nature.
And tho I must tell you, that it is now almost 100 years ago since that Statute
was made against Priests coming into England, Yet Examples have been very rare
that any of this sort of Men have dyed for their Religion, within that Queens
time, or any of her Successors; yet they have dyed upon worse accounts, and
upon such accounts as they are now brought to this Bar for, Such is the
difference between their Religion and Ours, they have been suffered to live
here under a Law by which they ought to dye. They kill the Protestants by
Thousands, without Law or Justice, witness their Bloody doing at Mirendol,
Their Massacre as Paris, Their Barbarous cruelty in Ireland, since the year
1640. And those in Piedmont since 1650. But these are not the crimes they are
charged with, they are not accused for their Religion, but for the blackest and
darkest Treason that men can be charged with. They are charged with an
endeavor to Murder the King, under whose protection they lived, This murder
of the King has been carried on in the Design of it, with all the malice and
Resolution that can be from the first time that we can give you an account of
it, which was the 24th. of April 1678. When these persons and several others,
did first Assemble about other matters of their own, and among the rest to
Murder the King: there they came to Resolution that it should be done, and
persons were appointed to do it, these were Grove and Pickering, who have been
Executed for it; They were to kill the King in St. James'- Park but it pleased
God, that the Flint of the Pistol failed, to which we are more beholding than
to them that he escaped that time. They were not satisfiyd with that, but they
send down Four Butchers to murder him at Windsor, who being disappointed, they
sent down Others after that to Murder him at New Market; and when all these
failed, they had Recourse to that Treacherous and Unmanly way of Poisoning him,
and hired one so to do, and they did not only intend to Murder the King, but
to make it good by force when they had done. They intended to raise an Army;
they had got Commissions to several persons in the Kingdom to command these
Forces. They designed to raise 50000 men to maintain the Injustice when then
they had done it. And that was not all, they had a recourse to Foreign
assistance, and depended upon Foreign succors, if they were not made good at
home. Gentlemen, they have been disappointed in all these things; they had an
intention further (as I find it in my brief,) to make a general Massacre of all
Protestants here. A thing that they have done, and we have heard of abroad, but
thanks be to God, we never knew it Experimentally at home. And I hope God that
has preserved us hitherto, will preserve us still.

The mercy these Men have met with, in being suffered to live under the danger
of the Statute, by which they might have justly dyed, has not prevailed upon
or bettered them at all, but been turned into Monstrous Ingratitude, and made
them more desperate than other people would have been. Gentlemen, when all this
is opened, I must tell you, if th^se Persons be innocent, God forbid they
should suffer, but if they be Guilty, surely they are not fit to live among
Men: And truly if they be Guilty, they do not only deserve to dye, but to dye a
more Cruel and miserable death then either the mercy of our Prince, or the
moderation of our Laws has provided for such Offenders. I shall detain you no
longer but will call the Witnesses, and then you shall Judge whether they be
Guilty or not. And we begin with Mr. Oats. (Who was Sworn.)

Sir Cr. Levinz. Pray what can you say to these Gentlemen? begin with Mr. (...).


Lord Chapter Just. Mr. Oats, apply your Evidence as distinctly as you can to one
Person at first, unless where the matter will take in all, or more then one of
them.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I have Evidence I desire may be called in, I shall have
occasion to use them.


Gavan. It may be inconvenint. He may instruct his Witnesses.


Lord Chapter Just. North. No, he shall not, for we will take care of that; But
name your Witnesses.


Dr. Oats. There is Sir Richard Barker, Mr. Walter a Minister, Mrs. Mayo,
Philip Page, Mr. William Smith, and one Mr. Clay, Mr. Butler, Mrs. Sarah Ives.


Mr. Just Atkins. Take a Note of their Names, and send for them.


Lord Chapter Just. Now, Mr. Oats, go on with your Evidence. And when there is
occasion to make use of these persons, they shall be called.


Dr. Oats. The prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Whitebread, was made and constituted
Provincial so as it was publicly known to us in the month of December last was
12 month, and he did Order by Virtue of his Authority one Father George
Conyers, to preach in the Sodality of the English Seminary, on the Holyday
which they call St. Thomas of Canterbury, i. e. Thomas of Beckets day, in which
there was Order given that Mr. Conyers should Preach and assert this Doctrine;
That the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were Heretical, Antichristian and
Devilish: accordingly this Order was Executted, and the Sermon preached. Mr.
Whitebread in the month of January, wrote Letters (or at leastwise in the
beginning of February, I will not be positive as to the time, because it does
not occur to my memory,) to St. Omers, concerning the State of Ireland, of
which he had an account from Archbishop Talbot, who wrote him word, that there
were several Thousands of Irish, that were ready to Rise, when the Blow should
be given in England.


Lord Chapter Just. was that in Whitebreads's Letter?


Doctor Oats. Yes, my Lord, and Mr. Whitebread did say, He did hope it would
not be long ere it was given. Now, my Lord, by the word Blow, we did use to
understand and had instructions to understand, the death and murder of the
King; and in the month of January, I think it was, that he sent over two
Jesuits into Ireland, to see how the state of Affairs stood there: in the
beginning of April they returned, of which we had an account from Mr.
Whitebread, by Letters, wherein there was mention of a Consult to be held in
the month of April old Style, and May new Style; and according to the Order
there given, there met at that Consult, the Prisoners at the Bar, Whitebread,
Fenwick, Harcourt, and Turner, and if it please your Lordship, all these at
that Consult did Sign a Resolve, Mr Whitebread at his Chamber, which was at
Wild-house, Mr. Fenwick at his Lodgings in Dru^y-lane, and Mr. Harcourt, who
had some at his Chamber in Duke-Street. But my Lord, I am to premise this
before I go any further, that the Consult was begun at the Whitehorse Tavern in
the Strand, and there they did agree to send Father Carry, to be their
Procurator at Rome; and after some such things were done, they adjourned into
several Clubs or Colloquies, or what you please to call them. One was at Mr.
VVhitebread's Chamber, another at Ireland's Chamber, that is Executed, another
at Harcourt's; and another at Fenwick's. now here was a Resolve Signed by these
Prisoners at the Bar, in which.


Lord Chapter Just. That is four of them, Whitebread, Fenwick, Harcourt, and Turner.


Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. Was Gavan there?


Dr. Oats. I dare not, my Lord affect him with that, because I cannot be
positive, but I Will give you my Evidence against him by and by. My Lord, these
four Gentlemen, with the rest of their Accomplices, did Sign a resolve, which
was this, That Pickering, and Grove should go on in their attempt to dispatch
the King; and this they did resolve upon, and gave it as their Judgment, as a
very excellent expedient. My Lord, after this Consult we did return, (we were 8
or 10 that came over) and may it please your Lordships, in the month of June,
(I think it was June) he came to Flanders, in order to visit his Colleges,
being Provincial of the Jesuits of England: He did stay there (as near as I can
remember) till the 10 of June, and enquiring of the Fathers how Squares went in
Town, among other expressions he used, this was one, That he hoped to see the
black Fools head at Whitehall, laid f^st enough, and that if his Brother should
appear to follow in his footsteps, his Pasport should be made too, (or to that
purpose) he should be dispatched. Upon the 13 th. of June old Style, the 23.
new Style, I had orders to come for England, according to which Order I came,
and did take the Pacquet-Boat, as near as I can remember, the 24 th, which was
14 th old style, and we landed at Dover the 25 th very early in the morning;
and when I was at Dover, I met with the prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Fenwick, and
he, my self and some others, did take Coach, and come as far as Canterbury,
after we had eaten and drunk there we came six miles further, where there was a
Box seized by the Searchers of the Town of Borton, and this Box was brought up
by Mr. Fenwick, and directed to one Blundel, and the Superscription was (as
near as I can remember) in these words, To the Honorable Richard Blundel Esquire.
at London. And this prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Fenwick did desire that the
Searchers would send it to him, (it was full of Beads and Crucifixes, and such
things) to the Fountain Tavern near Charingcross, and writ a Letter to him, by
the name of Mr. Thompson, a that was the name he usually went by, when he came
to Dover, and he had then brought some Students there, to send over to St.
Omers,


L. C. J. When went Fenwick?


Dr. Oats. When I came to Dover, I met Fenwick, by the name of Thompson, going
to send over the Students, and Fenwick did say, if they had searched his
pockets, as they had searched his Box, they had found such Letters as would
have cost him his life; for says he, they were about our concern in hand. Then
we came up to London, and arrived at London the 17th. of June old style, for we
lay a part of the way at Sittenburgh in the morning, and in the afternoon we
came to Dartford, and came to London Monday noon the 17th. old style. And in
the month of July there was one Richard Ashby, whose right name indeed is
Thimbleby, but he went by the name of Ashby, and this Gentleman did bring over
Instructions from the prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Whitebread, who was abroad in
Flanders, wherein he was to propose 10000 l. to Sir George Wakeman, to poison
the King, and several other Instructions there were, of which I cannot now give
you an account; and withal that a blank Commission should he filled up, and
ordered for Sir John Gage, to be a military Officer in the Army, and by that
Gentleman's own orders I delivered that Commission into Sir John Gages own hand,
on a Sunday.


Lord Chapter Just. Where had you that Commission from Whitebread?


Dr. Oats. It was signed and sealed by him, but it was a blank, and was to be
filled up.


L. C. Just. Where?


Dr. Oats. It was at Wild-House.


L. C. J. How was it filled up?


Dr. Oats. It was filled up by Mr. Whitebreads order, it was signed and sealed
blank, and he ordered it to be filled up, and me to take that Commission, and
carry it to Sir John Gage.


Whitebread. Did I order you?


Dr. Oats. You ordered Ashby, I saw the Letter, and knew it to be Whitebreads
hand.


L. C. J. Was it before he went to St. Omers?


Dr. Oats. It was while he was at St. Omers.


Whiteb. What day was it? what hour?


Dr. Oats. It was in July.


Whiteb. What time of the month?


Dr. Oats. The beginning or middle.


Whiteb. Are you sure it was in July?


Dr. Oats. I cannot be positive, but I think it to be in July, for Ashby went
to the Bath the latter end of July, or the beginning of August, and it was
before he went.


Whiteb. Who was present at the signing of this Commission?


Dr. Oats. There was present at the filling up of this Commission, Mr.
Harcourt, Mr. Ashby and Mr. Ireland.


Fenvick. Was not I there?


Dr. Oats. I think, I filled it up. I Will tell you when you were there
presently. My Lord, when Ashby went away, Fenwick went out of Town, but
returned again presently to give an account how Squares went, and really I
cannot remember where he had been, but as near as I can, it was in Essex, I
will not be positive in it; but my Lord, this same Gentleman Mr. Fenwick, with
Mr. Harcourt, did advise Mr. Ashby, that as soon as he had been at the Bath he
should go and give an account to the people in Sommersetshire, and there away,
his Circuit would be short and very easy* and he did not question, but before
he came up ^o Town again, to have the Gentleman at Whitehal dispatched whom
they called the Black Bastard, now I leave that to the Jury to expound, whom
they meant by it.


Fenwick, What time was that, Sir, pray? you must time things, or you do
nothing at all.


Dr. Oats. It was the latter end of July, or the beginning of August, it was
about the the time of Ashbys going to the Bath.


Fenw. Just now he said, it was in the beginning or middle of July.


Dr. Oats. I^e tell your Lordship what I said, that this Ashby or Thimbleby
came from St. Omers with those Orders or instructions, either the beginning of
July, or the middle of July.


Fenw. I would not interrupt you Mr. Oats, this was sometime before Mr. Ashby
went to the Bath, was it not?


Dr. Oats. It was about a day before.


L. C. J. He says a thing that is plain enough: Ashby came over about the
beginning or middle of July, with instructions about the Commission; and about
the latter end of July, or beginning of August, as he remembers, this advice
was given.


Dr. Oats. And so we are arrived at the Affairs in August, which reflects upon
these Gentlemen; but now I must speak a word to this Gentleman Mr. Gavan, the
prisoner at the Bar, whom when I saw come into the Lobby, he had gotten on a
periwig; so there was one asked me, whether I knew him? I know him now, but
truly then I did not well know him, because he was under that mask, and I could
not say any thing against him then, because he being under an ill ^avoured
peeriwig, and being a man that I knew had a good head of hair of his own, I did
not well understand the mystery of it, and so spared my Evidene at that time,
from informing the Council against him; but the prisoner at the Bar came by the
name of Gavan, and we used to call him by the name of Father Gavan: And this
Gentleman did in the month of June write Letters --


Gavan. What year?


Dr. Oats. In the year 1678. and did give the Fathers at London, an account
how affairs stood in Staffordshire, and Shropshire, and how diligent one father
Evers was to manage affairs in those countries.


Gavan. From whence were those Letters sent?


Dr. Oats. There was only the day of the month, you know it is not the custom
to date the place. When I saw the Letter first, I did not know it was his hand,
I took it upon report; but I will tell the Jury by and by, how I came to know
it was his hand: as near as I can remember, it was in the month of July, (it
was July or August) this Gentleman came to Town, and I saw this Gentleman at
Mr. Irelands chamber.


Gavan. What time of the month?


Dr. Oats. It was in July 1678, as near as I can guess.


Gavan. Upon my Salvation I am as innocent as a child unborn.


Lord Chapter Just. North. By this means you may put out any Witness in the world
by interupting them. When the Witness has done his Testimony, you may ask him
any Questions to ascertain the time or any thing; but you must not interrupt
him till he has done.


Dr. Oats. In the latter part of July I think it was, but it was as I remember
while Mr. Ashby was in town, I met him at Mr. Irelands chamber, for he was a
saying he would go see Father Ashby before he went out of Town, and he gave
such an account to Father Ireland of the affairs in Staffordshire and
Shropshire, as he had given in the Letter before; but to prove his hand, he did
draw a Bill upon one Sir William Andrews in Essex, for the payment of some
money of some little sucking Priests, that were stroleing up and down the
country. I saw him write it, and it was the same hand with that Letter.


Gavan. What did I write.


L, C. J. You drew a Bill upon such a person, and he names him.


Dr. Oats. We are now come to August.


L. C. J. But you say he discoursed about the same things with Ireland, that he
had wrote in the Letter.


Dr. Oats. Ye^ my Lord.


Gavan. And what were those same things?


Dr. Oats. Why, how the Affairs stood in Staffordshire and Shropshire, how my
Lord Stafford was very diligent. I desire to be excused as to that, because it
will diminish my Evidence in another part of it: I Will tell you part of what was
then discoursed of.


Gavan. My Lord, he is sworn to speak all the truth.


L. C. J, You must speak the whole truth, as far as it concerns any of these
perons.


Dr. Oats. He gave an account how prosperous things were in those countries,
and did say, that there was at least two or three thousand pounds that would be
ready in that country, for the carrying on the Design, I think it was three,
but it was betwixt two and three. Now my Lord we are arrived to our business in
August, about the 12 th. of August as near as I remember; but it was between
the 8 th. and the 12 th: therein I am positive; Ireland, which is executed,
took his leave of us, as if he were to go to St. Omers.


L. C. J. Where did he take his leave?


Dr. Oats. At his chamber in Russel Street. Ireland went out of Town, and
Fenwick by that means was to be Treasurer and Procurator to the Society
altogether. He had that employ afterward upon him during his absence, let Mr.
Ireland go whither he would. And the 21. of Aug. which as near as I remember
fell upon a Wednesday, Mr. Fenwick and Mr. Harcourt were met together at
Wildhouse, and some other Fathers, as Father Kaines, and one Father Blundell,
and some other Fathers whom I cannot remember.


Gavan. Was I there, pray Sir?


Dr. Oats. No, no Sir, I am not to talk to you still, I am to speak to the
Court.


Lord Chapter Just. North. We would recommend this to you, to name persons when you
speak of them.


Dr. Oats. Where I have occasion I will name them, my Lord. Mr. Fenwick and
Harcourt were together at Wildhouse, and Mr. Kaines and Mr. Blundell, and as
near as I remember, Mr. Langworth was there, but I wont be positive. And there
lay before them at Wildhouse Fourscore pounds, the most of that money was
Guineys, which was to be paid to the four Irish Russians that were to murder
the King at Windsor. After it was agreed that they should do it, and Coleman
who was executed came thither, and gave the messenger a Guiney to expedite the
journey. We drew off from Wildhouse, and went to Master Harcourts chamber, and
because Master Harcourt had there left his papers that were to be sent down to
Windsor, there he paid the messenger the money. And, that Gentleman was present
there, Mr. Fenwick, and this is another part of August's business. No sooner
was this messenger dispatched but within a day after or a day before; but it
was a day after, as near as I can remember, there was a Consult held at the
Benedictines Convent, at which Mr. Fenwick was present and Mr. Harcourt, and
there they had some more Irish news from the Irish Archbishop Talbot, who did
give an account of the Irish affairs, how they did conspire the death of the
Duke of Ormond; and desired to know how affairs went in England, and desired
some Commissions might be sent over to some particular persons, there to raise
Forces for the carrying on of the Design, and some money to be transmitted to
them. And Mr. Fenwick did bring the Commissions from Wildhouse (as near as I
remember) but he did bring them with him, and sent them down by a special
messenger to Chester, and some Letters by the Post. That of the Post I know of
my own knowledge, but that of the special messenger I had only from his own
mouth. My Lord, from the 24 th. of August, as near as I remember it fell of a
Saturday, Bartholomew day it was, but whether it fell of a Saturday I cannot be
positive, but if the Court please to inform themselves of it by their
Almanacks, they may.


L. C. J. There is no great matter in that I suppose.


Dr. Oats. But this Gentleman, Mr. Fenwick, did deliver me some money for my
necessary incident charges, but did admonish me to procure some Masses to be
said for a prosperous success upon the Design. Upon the 25 th. day, I saw Mr.
Fenwick in the afternoon at his chamber, and he was to go on the 26 th. day the
next day to St. Omers, and to carry 8 or 10 Students to go there to study
Humanity: and this is the account I have to give to Mr. Fenwick. For after I
took my leave of him here, I saw him no more till he was apprehended.


L. C. J. This was about the 26 th. of August, was it not?


Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lord, it was the 26th of August.


L. C. J. Well, go on Sir.


Dr. Oats. The 1st. or 2 d. of September we received a Letter (in the
beginning it was) from Mr. Whitebread, and this Letter they did say was a
Foreign Letter, and yet it paid but 2 pence, by which I did conclude that Mr.
Whitebread was come into England, and lay some where privately, or was not yet
come to Town. On the third of September I went to Mr. Whitebreads chamber (at
night) but he being at supper was not to be spoken with; but when he saw me the
next morning, he did revile me and strike me, and asked me with what face I
could look upon him, seeing I had dealt so treacherously with them. Now after
that I had inquired in what respect, he answered in the discovering of the
business, for there was a Gentleman that went to the King in this Business, to
whom I had communicated much of my Information by Dr. Tongue. This Gentleman
had the same colored clothes that I had, and so they not being able to give an
account of the Name of the person, gave only an account of the Habit he was in,
and therefore they charged me with it. After I had justified my self as well as
I could, Mr. Whiebread did show me a Letter which came from one Beddingfield,
alias Benningfield, which did show the Plot was discovered, and they were like
to be undone, if it had not been for the five Letters that were sent down to
Windsor and intercepted, which made all to be looked upon as counterfeit; after
that, I justified my self as well as I could. He told me he would be friends
with me, provided I would give an account of the party, and of the Minister
that went with him. And this is what I have to say against Mr. Whitebread, and
the prisoners at the Bar; but only this: because Sir George Wakeman did not
accept of 10000 l. that was proposed to him to poison the King, this Gentleman
offered that 5000 l. more should be added.


L. C. J. Which Gentleman?


Dr. Oats. Mr. Whitebread. And 15000 l. was accepted, and when it was
accepted, Whitebread did greatly rejoice that the money was accepted to poison
the King.


Whitebread, Did I tell you so?


Dr. Oats. No, there was a Letter told me so, but you were in Flanders then;


Sir Cr. Levins, What have you to say against Mr. Turner?


Dr. Oats, I speak as to his being at the Consult in April, and signing the
Resolve of the Death of the King.


L. C. J. Was Mr. Gavan at that Consult the 24 th of April?


Dr. Oats, Mr. Gavan was summoned to that Consult, but among 40 men I cannot
particularly say he was there, but I saw his Name signed as to the Kings death,
but I cannot say I saw his person.


L. C. J. Can you say you saw his Hand writing?


Dr. Oats. I do believe it was his.


L, C. J. Did you ever see any writing of his, but when he signed the Bill of
Exchange?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I never saw him write but that time. It was an ill Pen as
it seemed that he writ his Name wi^h to the consult, and I did not take so
particular Notice of the being of his Name there, till we saw the Instructions
in July, and then I did look over the consult particularly.


L. C. J, But I say, did you ever see his Hand Writing before he writ the Bill?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I never saw his hand but that time.


L. C. J. And that by your comparing was like the hand of the Letter about
Staffordshire?


Dr. Oats. By that I prove the Letter to be written from him. It was like it,
and was all as one.


L. C. J. Was it like the Hand that was to the consult?


Dr. Oats. That I cannot say.


L. C. J. I thought you had said he confessed the contents of the Letter, when
he came out of Staffordshire?


Dr. Oats. I do say this of Mr. Gavan, that he wrote such a Letter, and when
he came to Town he did give an account of all the passages that the Letter did
contain, which was concerning the raising of Money in Staffordshire, and the
parts he was concerned in: and this was the Account he gave.


L. C J. Dr. Oats, you positively say, that Whitebread. Fenwick and Harcourt
were there?


Dr. Oats, Yes, my Lord, for Mr. Whitebread was Provincial and Presidential of
the Assembly.


Sir Cr. Levinz. And Turner was there?


Dr. Oats. Yes, he was,


Sir Cr Levinz. Dr. Oats, what was that Money raised for?


Dr. Oats They said it was for the carrying on of the design.


L. C. J. And what Design was that?


Dr. Oats. Our design. And that was the Subversion of the Government, and
destruction of the King.


L. C. J. Now if you please you may ask him any Question.


Gav. Mr. Oats, you say you saw my Name to a Letter for the taking up of
money. To whom was that letter writ?


Dr. Oats. There was a letter from you to Mr. Ireland. And he did receive it
by the hands of Grove,


Gavan, Where was that money to be taken up?


Dr, Oats, My Lord, I say, that letter was received by Grove, who is out of
the way, and cannot prove it, and was delivered to Ireland,


L.C. J. I perceive your memory is not good.


Gav, I perceive his memory is very good.


Dr. Oats, This letter did give an account of the business of Staffordshire*
and the particulars of that Mr. Gavan did afterward give an account of by word
o mouth, and ^ome other things not fit to be named.


Gavan, Pray, where was it Sir, that I gave an account of it, in London, or in
the country?


Dr. Oats, In London.


Gavan, In what month,


Dr, Oats, In July it was.


Gavan, What part of July?


Dr. Oats. It was when Mr. Ashby was in Town, the beginning or middle.


Gavan. Just now you said it was in the latter end.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I beg this favor, that if the Prisoners at the Bar ask
any questions, they may be proposed to the court, for they are nimble in their
Questions, and do a little abuse the Evidence. They put things upon them that
they never say.


Mr. Just, Pemberton. propose your questions to the Bench, that you would have
asked.


Gavan, I will do so, my Lord, in whose Honor I have more confidence than in
whatsoever Mr. Oats says or swears.


L. C. J. But he tells you who you drew your Bill of exchange upon, and that
was Sir William Andrews.


L. C. J. North, Don't give the King's Witnesses ill words.


L. C. J. Have you any more to ask, any of you?


Whitebread. Yes, my Lord.


L. Ch, Just. See if you can catch him, he gives you a long and exact account
as can be given by any man in England, and pray direct your self, Mr.
Whitebread, to the Court.


Whitebread. He says he was here in April, and at the Consult* now I desire to
know, how long before that time were you and I acquainted?


Dr. Oats. Why, before that time I never saw Mr. Whitbread's face.


Whitebread. what employment were you to have? and what reward?


Dr. Oats. When I came away from St. Omers, I was to attend the motion of the
Fathers at your Chamber, and to carry the Resolve from chamber to chamber,
where the Fathers were respectively met.


Fenwick. was not you at the White-Horse-Tavern?


Dr. Oats, Yes, I was there.


Fenwick. Did you dine there?


Dr, Oats, No, our stay was short there.


Fenwick. How long did you stay in Town;


Dr. Oats. Truly I cannot tell you exactly, but from the time I came into
England, to the time I went our again, was under Twenty days.


Fenwick, Who were they that came over with you? Name the Parties.


Dr. Oa. I will tell you who they were; but it is so long since, I cannot exactly
remember.


Fenwick. You need not trouble your memory, you have them in your Narrative.


Dr. Oats, My Lord there was Father Williams the Rector of Wotton, the Rector
of Liege. Sir John Warner, Sir Thomas Preston, and some others.


Whitebread, Was not Mr. Nevel there?


Dr. Oats, I believe he was, it is like he might be there.


Whitebread. Was not Sir Robert Brett there?


Dr. Oats, I believe he might.


Whitebread. You have said so in your Narrative,


L. C. J. Perhaps a man will venture to write more than he will Swear; not that
he does Write what he does not believe, but that he knows he ought to be more
cautious in his Oath, than in his Affirmation.


Fenwick My Lord with your Lordships favor, it is upon Oath.


L.C.J.N. Fenwick you are in a Court of Law, and we must go according to the
Law, if you will prove any contradiction in him to his Oath, you must bring the
persons here that saw him take the Oath; and you must not think to take a
Pamphlet for Evidence.


Fenwick It was Sworn before a Justice of Peace, and will not, I suppose, be
denied, and therefore he must make his Evidence agree with it, being part of
his Narrative.


Gavan, You speak of one thing in August, and of another in July; which month
saw you me in?


Dr. Oats, I told you I saw you in Town in July, and when Father Ashby or
Thimbleby was in Town. And you said you would go and see him,


Just. Pemberton, He says it was in July, and that is enough.


Gavan, What time in July?


Dr. Oats, It was toward the middle or latter end.


Gavan, Was it before Mr. Ashby went to the Bath?


Dr. Oats, It was so.


Lord Chief Just. He says he saw you in Town when Ashby was in Town, which was
toward the latter end of July, or beginning of August. He cannot tell exactly
whether, but positively he says before Mr. Ashby went to the Bath.


Lord Chief Just. North, Well, to satisfy you, we will ask Mr. Oats the
Question again. Can you recollect whether it was the middle or latter end of
July?


Dr. Oats, My Lord, as near as I can remember, it was about the middle of July
that Ashby came to Town, and he did not stay in Town above a Fortnight. And it
was whilst he was in Town, and designed to go down to the Bath, That this
Gentleman came to Town, and gave account of the particulars of that Letter.


Lord Chief Just. North, You may ask him any Questions, but I would have you
observe what account he gives, That about the middle of July, Ashby came to
Town, that he stayed in Town about a fortnight as he believes, that during that
time, you came to Town, and then was this Discourse.


Dr. Oats, During that time I saw him in Town, but I know not exactly when it
was.


Gavan, My Lord, I would ask him one Question, the thing that is brought
against me, is this, He says Mr. Ashby came to Town in the middle of July; that
he stayed in Town a fortnight; that while he was there I came to Town and had
such Discourse. Now my Lord, I desire to know whether it was the first week or
last week that Ashby was in Town that he saw me.


Lord Chief Just. If he can answer it, let him.


Dr. Oats, My Lord, I cannot.


Lord Chief Just. He tells you he cannot charge his memory with it.


Dr. Oats. No, my Lord, nor will not.


Lord Chief Just. Really I believe there is scarce one in all this company able
to give an account of a particular time of a passage so long ago.


Gavan. No doubt he has an excellent memory.


Lord Chief Just. And if he had not some memorials of this, he could not do it.
And though he has memorials of the most eminent passages, yet we cannot
suppose he has of all circumstances.


Gavan, But this is the substance; and your Lorship may conceive that not
without Reason I urge it; for if Mr. Ashby came to Town the beginning of July,
and stayed but a fortnight in Town, and I came to Town while he was here, it
must be in one of the two last weeks. Now I would have it assertain'd, because
I may disprove it in one week or in the other.


Lord Chief Just. It Is true you did not amiss in asking the Question, if he
were able to answer it; but if it be either, it is enough to prove you Guilty.


Gaven. Pray was it only one time or diverse; that you saw me in London?


Dr. Oats. It was but one day, but as near as I remember: I saw you twice that
day; and I Will tell it you by a particular circumstance, that I saw you in the
afternoon when you were a little illish, and there was a cordial brought to you
by an Apothecary, that went by the name of Walpoole.


L. C. J. Here is memory refreshed by a circumstance you see. Whether was it
brought to him.


Dr. Oats, To Ireland's chamber.


Gaven, Who brought it Sir?


L. C. J. An Apothecary he says, whose name was Walpoole.


Gavan. My Lord, I never saw Walpoole in all my life.


L. C. J. I believe he is known well enough such an one as Walpoole the
Apothecary: But ask what questions you will.


Dr. Oats. I cannot say whether it was Walpoole himself, or his man that
brought it.


Gavan. I do as truly believe there is a God, and Heaven, and an Hell, as any
one here does, as I hope for Salvation, as I hope to see God in Heaven, I never
saw Mr. Oats before the day in January, when he says I had the Periwig on, and
he did not know me: And as for July, I call God to witness, I never saw him
then.


L. C. J. You were in town in July?


Gavan. Upon my Salvation I was not in London.


L. C. J. You Will prove that by and by.


Fenwick. I hope, my Lord, we may ask him any questions in the court, of our
Evidence, to make things clear?


L. C. J. Yes you may.


Turner. Did you ever see me in all your life, before you saw me at Whitehall?


Dr. O. You were then in a disguised habit, and a nasty periwig, and I did not
know you so well.


Turner. You at Whitehall, was pleased to tell me, I went by another name.


Dr. Oats, I don't value names but your person, you are the man.


L. C. J. You are the man he says,


Turner. Did you see me at the Consult?


Dr. Oats. I saw the man that speaks to me.


Turner, Who was there? and how many were present?


Dr. Oats. There were about 40. or 50.


L. C. J. When you have but one name a piece, then he can hit it right, but
when you have so many names, then you are too hard for him.


Turner. Did you see me at the Whitehorse?


Dr Oats, That I will not say; for when they were in lesser Clubs or
Colloquies, I was sure of better acquaintance with them.


Turner, Where was it you saw me?


Dr. Oats, At Mr. Fenwicks Chamber.


Turner, At Whitehall, you said, it was at Wild-House.


Dr. Oats, My Lord, because the chiefest part of the consult sat at
Wild-House, we called all it the consult at Wild-House.


L. C. J. I Will* your defense will be little else but captiousness, to disprove
him in circumstances of time, place, persons, or numbers; now all these are but
little matters to the Substance: It Is true, Mr. Whitebread, If you can prove you
were not at that place a that time, it will do you great Service. Have you any
thing more to say to him?


Lord Chapter Just. North, I hope your witnesses are in readiness, that you were
sp^ (...) ^f, to fortify your Testimony?


Dr. Oats, Yes, my Lord, they are, I desire they may be heard.


Lord Chief Justice, By and by, when occasion is.


Jury, My Lord, I desire he may be asked one Question.


L. C. J. Mr. Garraway, what Question would you ask him*


Jury, Where it was that he saw Mr. Turner at the Consult.


Dr. Oats, I saw him at Fenwick chamber, where he was a member of the Consult;
and being so, I saw him sign the Resolve of the Kings death.


Lord Chief Just. Did you see him?


Dr. Oats, Yes, I did.


Sir Cr^sw. Levins, Then we desire Mr. Dugdale may be sworn: (which was done.)
Come, Mr. Dugdale, pray will you tell my Lord and the Jury, what you know
concerning Whitebread and Harcourt? First about Whitebread.


Mr. Dugdale, My Lord, I have very little acquaintance with the man, I have
seen him at Tixall, with my old Lady Aston.


Lord Chief Just. When?


Mr. Dugdale, I dare not speak the time, but appeal to him himself, about the
truth of it.


Lord Chief Just. Is it years ago?


Mr. Dugdale, It is two or three years ago.


Lord Chief Just. Well, what can you say against him;


Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Whitebread did write a Letter that I saw under his own hand,
enclosed in a Letter from Mr. Groves, to Mr. Ewers, wherein he gave Mr. Ewers a
caution, to be sure to choose those that were very trusty, it was no matter
whether they were Gentlemen or no, so they would be but stout and courageous:
This was the purport of the Letter, I cannot say the words exactly, but that he
should chose those that were hardy and desperate, or to that purpose.


Lord Chief Just. Pray where was it you saw that Letter?


Mr. Dugd. At Tixall.


Lord Chief Just. How came you to see it?


Mr. Dugdale, Because all the Letters were directed to me, that came to Mr.
Ewers enclosed in Mr. Groves Letters: And so I intercepted the Letter and read
it.


Lord Chief Just. What was Mr. Ewers?


Mr, Dugdale, A Jesuit, my Confessor; for I was entertained by Mr. Gavan to be
in the conspiracy of the Kings death, and so I was by several others.


Lord Chief Just. You were not acquainted with Mr. Whitebreads hand, were you?


Mr. Dugdale, My Lord, I only came acquainted with Mr. Whitebreads hand, by
seeing him write a Letter at Tixal, which he delivered to me to send.


L. C. Just. I pray let me understand you: You say that Mr. Whitebread did
write a letter to Mr. Ewers, enclosed in one from Mr. Grove, wherein he advised
that he should entertain lusty stout fellows, and no matter whether they were
Gentlemen, or to that effect: Now I ask you how you do know that was
Whitebreads hand? or was it his name only that was to it?


Mr. Dugdale, My Lord, I saw his name at it.


Lord Chief Just. When you saw that Letter: had you ever seen his hand before?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord, I saw it to another Letter which I saw him write.


^^rd Chief Just. And that was like the hand in the Letter to Ewers's, was it?


(...) Dugdale, Yes, I do almost positively swear it was the same hand.


(...) Chapter Just, But what say you to Gavan and Ewers?


(...) ^^gdale, There were several Consultations in Mr. Ewers's chamber, my
(...) at Boscobel, and several other places, Mr. Gavan might he so ingenuous to
(...).


(...) Chief Baron, What were those Consultations for?


Mr. Dugdale, For conspiring the Kings death, and introducing of Popery, Mr.
Gavan was chiefly made use of, as a good Orator and learned man, ^^^d a good
Scholar to persuade people into the design, this I speak as to these person^.


Lord Chief Just. Pray go on Sir, for you shall have a full scope, for you
never were a Witness in any of the Trials before; and you may take your own
way, and you shall be heard, you shall not be interrupted; for what you say is
very considerable.


Mr. Dugdale, One meeting I think was in September last, it was a^ ^^^^l, and
there was my Lord Stafford, and several others.


Lord Chief Just. Was Gavan there?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, Mr. Gavan was there, I suppose he will not deny it.


Mr. Justice Pemberton, Don't rely upon that, he will deny it, you may be sure,
go on. You say he was there?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, and that was to carry on the Design: And I was by to hear. I
think Mr. Ireland was in the country then, there was you, (speaking to Mr.
Gavan) Mr. Peter's, Mr. Lewson, and Mr. Ewers, at this Consult, and there was
another, my Lord Stafford, and others that I cannot now name.


Gavan, What time?


Mr. Dugdale. It was in September, 1678.


Gavan, What day?


Mr. Dugdale, I think it was 21. September.


Lord Chief Justice, What was that Consult and Conspiracy about, in short?


Mr. Dugdale, It was for the introducing of Popery, and taking away the Life of
the King, I being a person chosen out for that purpose, and was to besent to
London by Mr. Harcourt, to be under the tuition of Mr. Parsons.


Lord Chief Justice, Pray who mentioned this? was that the first time that ever
they discoursed of the death of the King?


Mr. Dugdale, No, my Lord, it was two years ago, but I speak of a shorter time.


Lord Chief Justice. Who began the discourse?


Mr. Dugdale. Mr Gavan often discoursed of it, and encouraged me to it.


Lord Chief Justice, Who broke it first to you? who seemed that principal man?


Mr. Dugdale, Ewers and Gavan.


Lord Chief Justice, By the Oath that you have taken, repeat it once more, for
this is new to Us.


Gavan, It Is so to me too, upon my soul, for upon my conscience I never heard
of it before.


Lord Chief Justice, It Is a mighty confirmation of what was before discovered.


Mr. Dugdale, But I speak to Mr. Gavan, and appeal to him himself.


Gavan, Look upon me with confidence if you can.


Mr. Justice Pemberton, You must not threaten the Kings Witnesses.


Mr. Dugd. Mr. Gavan, I desire you to inform the Lords, and all here present,
whether I was not under your Tuition? and whether you knew any unjust action by
me?


Gavan, You were never under my Tuition.


Lord Chief Just. Did you ever know him?


Gavan. Yes my Lord, he used to come sometimes where I was, and so we were
acquainted: and I lived within 11 miles of Tixal, my Lord Astons, and having
acquaintance in that Family, Mr. Ewers whom I know very well, I used to come
there sometimes, but I never was in his Chamber in my life. In what Room of my
Lord Astons house was this Discourse?


Mr. Dugdale, Some of it was in the little Parlour, and some in Mr. Ewers's
Chamber.


Gavan. Were any present there? And who were they?


Mr. Dugdale, I have told you there was Mr. Ewers, and Mr. Lewson, and Mr.
Peter's, and some others; and for a further Confirmation of this, That Mr.
Gavan may know that I had a great zeal for him, and that they did love me well,
I gave them an Estate, or else I believe they would not have trusted me so well
as they did. I gave them 400 l. to pray for my Soul, and for the carrying on of
this Design, and when they told me they doubted they should want money, I
promised them 100 l. more for the carrying on the work. Upon which Mr. Gavan
promised me that I should be Canonized for a Saint.


Mr. Just. Pemb. Mr. Gavan himself.


Mr. Dugdale. Yes my Lord.


Mr. Belwood. What do you know of any Foreign Assistance?


Lord Chapter Just. I would seign have all the world hear this; pray what was
Discoursed in the Parlour in my Lord Ashon's house, and in Ewer's Chamber?


Mr. Dugdale. It was about taking away the King's life, and introducing the
Popish Religion.


Lord Chapter Just. By the Oath you have taken, was that their Discourse.


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, my Lord, They were contriving how to kill the King and
introduced Popery.


Sir Cr. Levins. Pray, have you heard any Discourse of an Army, or about making
a Massacre?


Mr. Dugdale. It was spoken in my hearing, and there was some discourse why
they should expect Forces from beyond Sea, and this Gentleman said ( meaning
Mr. Gavan) though they Beyond the Seas had Troubles enough upon themselves, yet
if we could effect it, men and money would not be wanting. I will add nothing
more than the Truth in what I say.


L. Chapter Just. You deliver your Testimony like a sober modest man upon my word.


Sir Chr. Levins. What say you as to a massacre*


Mr. Dugdale. My Lord I have at some Consulations heard speak of it, but the
chief thing that they aimed at was first, there was a letter that came out of
Paris, and came through Mr. Harcouort's hands, and so came down into the
Country, to prove that it was the Opinion of them at Paris, and St. Omers, to
fling all this upon the Presbyterians, that is, the Death of the King, That if
any thing of that nature should happen, they should be ready to give the first
Alarm, and give out, That it was those still King-killing Presbytorians, that
had done the Fact: And so they thought they should easily have brought in the
Episcopal party into their Company to revenge themselves of the Presbyterians.


Lord Chapter Just. It was prity Advise indeed, to have it first laid on the
Presbyterians, that they might get Protestants to join and cut them off, and
then their own Throats should be cut.


Mr. Dugdale, And then my Lord, there was to be a massacre; and if any did
escape, that they could not be sure of were Papists, they were to have an Army
to cut them off.


Mr. Belwood, Did he ever use any Arguments to you, to prove the lawfulness of
the Design?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord, he has, and showed me several Examples for
confirming me in it.


Lord Chief Justice, What, for killing the King?


Mr. Dugdale, For the killing of any, to introduce their own Religion.


Mr. Belwood, Pray, will you name some.


Mr. Dugdale, He endeavored to prove it by Scripture, I cannot now call the
Text to mind; but it was to show, how it was lawful and good to destroy any for
the advantage of their Religion, and then he showed the Example of Father
Garnett. How several of his Relics being beyond Sea, great miracles had been
done by them.


Lord Chief Justice, And so now there is by St. Coleman too.


Sir Cr. Levins, What Letters have you received from Mr. Harcourt?


Mr. Dugdale, I have received several Pacquets of Letters from several persons
beyond Seas, which were, by his instruction, communicated by Mr. Grove, to Mr.
Ewers, which Letters did contain Treason in them, for the introducing of
Popery, and killing and destroying the King.


Lord Chief Just. How can you tell that?


Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Harcourt has given it under his own hand, and I have
intercepted the Letters, and read them.


Lord Chief Justice, You were acquainted with the hand?


Mr. Dugdal^ (...) my Lord.


Lord Chief (...) (...) read the Letters then?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, my Lord, I did.


Lord Chief Justice, How many Letters have you intercepted, have you interepted
Twenty?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, 100 my Lord: Mr. Harcourt was the first that gave
intelligence into the Country (as I know of) of the death of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey.


Sir Cr. Levins, Tell when it was given and how.


Mr. Dugd. I have made it out already upon Oath, and I have Witnesses to prove
it.


Sir Cr. Levins, Pray Sir tell it now.


Mr. Dugdale, It was directed to Mr. Ewers, and it was three days before he was
found, for it was received on the monday, and he, as it is proved, was killed
on the Saturday. The words were these, This very night Sir Edmondbury Godfrey
is dispatched. And I very much rejected Mr. Ewers for this Action, and then
told him, This will overthrow the Design or I will be hanged.


Lord Chief Just. What day did you receive the Letter?


Mr. Dugdale, I have proved I received it on a monday.


Lord Chief Just. But pray what date did it bear?


Mr. Dugdale, That Letter must come by Saturday Post, for it said, This night
Sir Edmondbury Godfrey is dispatched.


Lord Chief Just. He did not name any body, by whom?


Mr. Dugdale, No, but it said he was killed, and we knew by whom.


Mr. Justice Pemberton, And are you sure that was Mr. Harcourts letter?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, for he did usually sign his letters with two letters W. H.
which stood either for Harcourt or Harrison.


Mr. Belwood, Did you acquaint any body with this, or did you conceal it?


Mr. Dugdale, I did go to an Alehouse that is hard by my Lords the next day,
which was Tuesday, and there I asked, if they did not hear some news of a
Knights being killed at London? And I have an Evidence here, if your Lordship
please, I will call him, who I desire may testify the same thing.


Lord Chief Just. Yes, by all means.


Sir Cr. Levins. Mr. Dugdale, Pray, will you give us some more account of the
letter that came from Mr. Whitebread to Mr. Ewers.


Mr. Dugdale. I remember one particularly, but I cannot tell what number I have
seen.


Sir Cr. Levins, Did you see more than that one?


Mr. Dugdale, I particularly remember that.


Lord Chief Justice, What was that one particularly?


Harcourt, My Lord, I desire to ask him one Question, When was the last time
that you received any letters from me?


Mr. Dugdale, The last I received from you (to my best remembrance) was that
about Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and it was in October.


Harcourt, I have not writ to that person this year and half.


Lord Chief Justice, Let that man be called, that proves this business of the
death of Sir Edmondbury, and the talk of it.


Mr. Dugdale, mr. Harcourt, you know very well, that when Mr. Ireland was last
in the Country last year, you were to send him the Answers that came by letters
from Saint Omers, and those were sent down to my Lord Astons, and I saw them,
eight of those letters, I am sure. And I can prove it by one circumstance, two
of them came relating to Mr. Edward Astons death, from Paris; I intercepted
them, and talking of it, that I could conjure, and tell of the death of Mr.
Edward Aston, before any of his Friends knew of it. And Mr. Ireland writ a
chiding letter about it, that he had not heard it sooner, and you sent down
word, That you did write those letters, and ye^ you say you have not written to
me of a Twelvemonth, or more.


Harcourt, This Gentleman does pretend to know my hand, and it is true, I have
writ several letters for Mr. Ewers, and directed to him; but as to this time he
speaks of I have left off writing for diverse years. He pretends to know me, and
yet this Gentleman before the Committee of Commons in Parliament, which was
yesterday was 5 weeks, as well as he knew my hand, came and said I was a
Gentleman he did not know. He came also to entrap me at the Gatehouse before
those Gentlemen of the Committee of the House of Commons; but because he said
he knew my hand so very well, and testify, those expressions in the letter, I
must say this, I never did write any such letter, nor did I ever in my life
seem to approve of any man's death or murder. But the thing is this, he pretends
to know my hand, and to prove it, the Gentlemen desired me to write my own hand
and my name, and he in the mean time did withdraw; and three of them did write
their names, and afterward they called him in again, and asked him which was
Harcourts hand, and he was not able to say which it was.


Lord Chief Just. You write more hands, as well as have more names, and can
counterfeit your hands as well as change your names.


Mr. Justice Pemberton, You speak before your time, and your bare word goes for
nothing.


Lord Chief Justice, But Mr. Dugdale, where is your Witness?


Harcourt, I don't know any thing of this.


Lord Chief Justice, But if he calls up a Witness, of whom you can have no
suspicion, that can testify that at this time Mr. Dugdale spoke about the
death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey? What will you say to that?


Harcourt, I believe there is no such thing at all.


^ir Cr. Levins, My Lord, here is Mr, Chetwin, pray swear him?


Which was done

L. C. J. Mr. Chetwin, Do you remember that Mr. Dugdale came to you any time
last ^ummer, and what time, and what discourse had you.


Mr. Chetwin, My Lord if your Lordship please, I was most part of the Summer in
the Country, I came into Staffordshire about the 29th of August. My Lord, there
is a Gentleman, one Mr. Sanbidge, that is a Kinsman of my Lord Astons, that was
very well acquainted with the Family where I was, which was half a mile off my
Lords, and used to come and play with me at Tables. My Lord, at that very time
in October he came to me, and there says he, Do you hear nothing of a Justice
of Peace in Westminster, where you live, that is killed? or to that effect. No,
said I, and I had Letters yesterday, and heard nothing of if. Says he, I was
this morning at Elds, and there a Girl of the House told me, Mr. Dugdale had
been there, and reported, that there was a Justice of Peace of Westminster was
killed; but who he should be I never heard named, and on Saturday following my
Letters brought it down to me.


L. C. J. when was it that this was spoken?


Mr. Chetwin, it was Tuesday morning, (as I remember) and that by very good
circumstance, I went that day for Lichfield, the Saturday after the News came
to me to Lichfield, that Sir Edmundbury was found murdered.


L. C. J. The Jury will do well to observe this in point of time, Sir
Edmundbury-Godfrey was killed, as it was since proved, a Saturday, but on
Monday he was missed, on Thursday he was found, and on Saturday the News was
spread all over the Country. Now said he, the Tuesday before the news came
down, which must be the Tuesday after the Saturday he was killed, one comes
from the Alehouse, and asks, do you not hear of a Justice of Peace at
Westminster that is killed? for the Wench at yonder Alehouse says Mr. Dugdale
was here this morning, and reported that such an one was killed: So that it is
most Notorious, as any thing in the World can be, that this thing was known to
them, before any of us knew what was become of him.


Mr. Justice Pemberton. How do you further know it to be upon Tuesday?


Mr. Cherwin, I know it to be that Tuesday, my Lord, very well, for we all went
about such a time to my Cousins Mothers, to stay a Week there, and after I
returned back, and on tuesday, the 15th of October, I went to the Race to
Lichfield, and stayed till Saturday there, and came thence to London, and was
here the Wednesday, being the first day of the Term. But I remember
particularly the first information Mr. Dugdale gave in the Country, came to my
cousins hands from the Mayor of Stafford, and I happened to see him, I think it
was Christmas day. It came enclosed in a letter upon the apprehension of Mr.
Dugdale I remember I met him, and he told me of it, and said he, the Parliament
did nor sit that day: so he went to acquaint the Lord Lieutenant of the County,
that is, the Duke of Monmouth with it, who carried it to the King. But when Mr.
Dugdale was sent for, my cousin went down, and writ me a good character of him.
As soon as ever Dugdale came to Town, before he went to be examined by the
Council, as I remember, I went with some Gentlemen to speak with him, and said
I to him, can you say any thing about Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Death? Said he,
I remember such a Letter came at such a time from Father Harcourt, to Father
Ewers, wherein were these words; This Night Sir Edmundbury Godfrey is
dispatched: And said he, I remember I asked the Question of Ewers Is not this
likely to spoil all the design? No, said he, he was a man that prosecuted
persons that went to debauched Houses, and it will be sa^^ to be some of them,
that did revenge themselves of him, or words to the same effec^ This made me
recollect the time I had the discourse with the Gentlemen in the country I
happened to be out of town when the murderers of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey were
Tried, as soon as ^ came to town, and found that the murderers of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey were cond^^ned, I was at a Coffee-house, enquiring how it
was managed? some I found slighted, others did not know what to make of it. Was
not mr. Dugdale there, said I? No, said they. Then I presume, said I, that a
very material evidence was omitted. Upon this I went to Mr. Dugdale's Chamber,
and there said I to him, What was the reason you were not produced as an
Evidence, at the Trial of Sir Edmonbury Godfrey's, murderers? Said I, you told
such a thing, and I hope you told Truth, for I don't hear that you have ever
contradicted it, that you saw a Letter about the monday after he was murdered.
In my judgment it is very material, if you have sworn it; If your deposition be
true, or else you did ill to report it. Said I, pray let me see the Copy of
your deposition, sworn before the Council. He showed it me, and there was not a
syllable of it that I could see, but afterward appeared to be there.


L. C. J. That is not very material, if the thing it self be true.


Mr Chetwin. But its not being there, made me remember it.


Mr. Recorder Pray set up mr. Dugdale again. Now pray tell the Contents of mr.
Whitebread's Letter.


Mr. Dugdale. The Contents of it was, to encourage mr. Ewers to go on to be
careful whom he did entrust, that they should be such fellows as were
desperate, hardy, courageous and stout, or to that purpose; it was no matter
whether they were Gentlemen or no, so they were but courageous and desperate.


Mr. J. A. What were they to do?


Mr. Dugdale. For the killing of the King.


L. C. J. Was that in Whitebreads Letter?


Mr. Dugdale mr. Whitebread did write those words, they were in the Letter.


Whitebread. Was that very word in the Letter, for killing the King?


Mr. Dugdale. It was, that they should be stout and courageous persons.


L. C. J. For what end?


Mr. Dugdale. It was for taking away the King's life.


L. C. J. I ask you, recollect your self, was it by way of description of some
Design or Plot, that those persons were to be chosen out? or was it in
downright words for killing the King?


Mr. Dugdale. To the best of my remembrance they were those very words.


L, C, J. It was much he would write such words in a letter.


Mr. Dugdale. I was one that was made choice of about it.


Mr. J. Pemberton. Were you to be one?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, I was.


Mr. J. Pemberton. Mr. Gavan, you know who it was you entertained for this
Business, and you could trust them.


L. C. J. How were these letters conveyed? Were they sent by the Ordinary Post?


Mr. Dugdale, Yes, they were, and they trusted me with them, because being
directed to me* if they were intercepted, I should be hanged, and they saved.


Mr. J. Pemberton, Upon these letters, what were you entertained to do,


Mr. Dugdale. my Lord, I was entertained before by my Lord Stafford, and mr.
Ewers


Mr. J. Pemberton, What to do?


Mr. Dugdale, To kill the King.


Whitebread. Pray Sir, How came you to see these letters? Did you intercept
them and read them your self?


Mr. Dugdale. I did intercept them, and open them of my own self.


Whitebread. Pray take notice of what he says Gentlemen.


Mr. Recorder, The Jury do take notice.


L. C. Baron, Do you know any thing against mr. Turner, and mr. Fenwicks?


Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Ewers has told me by word of mouth, that he was to carry on
the Design in Worcestershire, but I saw him with mr. Ewers and Lewson, and
others, when he was going to his Brother Turners then in Nottinghamshire, and
they did consult and agree there, in my hearing to all that I have said before.


Turner, What did I assent to*


Mr. Dugdale, Why this Design, you and mr. Ewers and Lewson, and others, agreed
to what I said before.


Turner Where was this?


Mr. Dugdale, At Tixal and other places.


Turner. In what month.


Mr. Dugdale. It was about two years ago, about the beginning of the Business.


Turner, Where was it?


Mr. Dugdale. It was at Mr. Ewers Chamber, you know me very well.


Turner. I have not been in Staffordshire these four years.


L. C. J. why, don't you know him Mr. Turner?


Turner. I do know I have been there a matter of three or four times in my
whole life, but have not been there these four years.


Mr. J. Windham, Have you any thing to say against Fenwick.


Mr. Dugdale, I don't know that ever I saw him before.


Mr. Recorder, But he speaks fully as to the other Four.


Sir Chr. Levins, Call Mr. Prance, and swear him.


Which was done

Sir Chr: Levins, Come on Mr. Prance, What can you say to Mr. Fenwick or any of
the others?


Mr. Prance, Mr. Harcourt, I made him an Image of our Lady about a year ago,
and when I was receiving money for it, (it was to be sent into Merry-Land) you
told me then that there was a design of killing the King.


Lord Chapter Just. Who told you?


Mr. Prance Mr. Harcourt that very time.


Sir. Chr. Levins. When was it?


Mr. Prance, It was when it was sent to Merryland in the Portugal's Countries
you know it well Mr. Harcourt.


Harcourt, I know nothing of it?


Sir, Chr. Levins. Pray let him alone till we have done with him.


Harcourt, I desire but to know when it was.


Mr. Prance, When I received the money for the picture, it was a year ago.


Sir Chr. Levins, What say you to Mr. Fenwick.


Mr. Prance, I was in Mr. Ireland's chamber in Russel Street, and there was
Ireland, Fenwick, and Grove, and they were talking of 50000 men that should be
raised and be in readiness to carry on the Catholic cause, and settle the
Catholic Religion. I asked who should Govern them? they told me my Lord
Bellasis, my Lord Powis, and my Lord Arundel,


Lord Chapter Just. Who told you so?


Mr. Prance Mr. Fenwick.


Lord Chapter Just. How long ago?


Mr. Prance, About a fortnight Michaelmas last. Mr. Grove came to me two or
three days afterward to buy two or three Silver Spoons to give away at a
Christning, and then I asked him what Office he should be in, he told me he
could not tell; but he told me my Lord Arundel, my Lord Bellasis, and my Lord
Powis, had Commissions for these things to give.


L. C. J. This Grove told you.


Mr. Prance. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. But what did Fenwick tell you?


Mr. Prance* He told me who were to govern the Army, my Lord Bellasis, my Lord
Powis and my Lord Arundel of Wardour.


Sir Chapter Levins, Had he any discourse with you about Trade?


Mr. Prance. He said, I should not fear Trade, I should have Churchwork enough.


Mr. Belwood. Pray speak that again.


Mr. Prance. I asked him what shall we poor Tradesmen do if you have civil
wars. in England? O, said he, you need not fear having trade enough, you shall
have Church-work enough to make Images, Cha^ices, and Crucifixes, and Vases,
and such like things.


Mr. Belwood. If you will ask Mr. Prance any questions, pray do.


Fenwick, My Lord, I am certain of this, that he never saw me at Mr. Ireland's
chamber in that company, not did I ever speak of any such thing before him.


Mr. Prance. Mr. Ireland, and he have been sitting together whole hours, and
consulting about some concern or other, mischief no doubt, My Lord, I went to
Mr. Fenwick's chamber after my Ghostly Father was dead.


L. C. J. What was his Name.


Mr. Prance, Father James. And he importuned me to come to confession to him; I
told him I was not yet very well satisfied who I should go to, to be my Ghostly
Father.


Fenwick, When was this Mr. Prance?


Mr. Prance, Before Michaelmas about a week or eight days.


L. C. J. Did not you know him Mr. Fenwick?


Fenwick, Who Father James? yes very well, and I know Mr. Prance, but not upon
that account.


Mr. Prance, And I brought you a Table home for the Altar at the same time.


Mr. J. Pemberton, Who was it importuned you to have him for your Confessor?


Mr. Prance. It was Mr. Fenwick, and I told him when I did come to Confession,
I would come to him. And he enjoined me on^e or twice to say nothing of what I
heard said.


L. C. J. If Harcourt have any questions to asked him, let him.


Harcourt, Can you say that ever ^^pose to you about any such Business?


M. Prance. Yes, as sure as I stand in this place, and you in that. And one
Thomson came with you when you paid me for four Candlesticks.


L. C. J. Do you know Mr. Thompson?


Harcourt, Yes I do.


L. C. J. Had you any Chandlesticks from Mr. Prance.


Harcourt, I had a great while ago.


Mr. Prance, He paid me 44 l. that time for them.


Mr. Recorder Call Mr. Bedlow.


Who was Sworn

Sir Chr. Levins, What can you say to any the prisoners at the Bar?


L. C. J. What can you say as to Mr. Whitebread and Mr. Fenwick?


Mr. Bedloe, My, Lord, I do not question but Mr. Whitebread and Mr. Fenwick
will object against me my refusing to give in Evidence against them at the
former Trial, but I think that there are some upon your Honorable Bench, that
can make my Apology for not giving in all my Evidence aginst them then; for it
was not convenient, because it would have stopped a Design I was then upon, and
could not get off from, that was about Mr. Reading, whom I was then treating
with, for Mr. Whitebread and Mr. Fenwick, as well as the Lords in the Tower,
and he told me that he would depend upon my confidence and Justice as to the
Lords, according as I did deal with these men; if I brought them off, he would
believe and the Lords in the Tower believe that I would bring them off too. So
that I did make an Apology them in the Court, that I could not safely say all
that I had to say at that time. Some of the Justices I believe do remember it,
and in that which I did give in against them, I did not say all nor half that I
could have said.


Whitebread, Did you say any thing of that at the last Trial?


Mr. Bedloe, I will answer that matter to the Court, but it is the measure they
always take to entrap the Witness; for now I am out of a country that will
give me an indulgence and dispensation to speak exactly to a day or an hour; as
their St. Omers Witnesses have.


L. C. J. But what say you now to them?


Mr. Bedloe, I did then say that I did see M. Whitebread, and he has been in
several consultations for the carrying on of the plot; but then I did it with a
caution, that I never heard of Mr. Whitebread. that he was so very much
concerned; and indeed I had no reason to say so, because I heard him my self,
and could not well speak from the hearsay of another. And as for Mr. Fenwicke,
I never heard him give in any Answer; but I have seen Fenwick, at the Consult
there.


L. C. J. Have they ever told you any thing concerning the Killing of the King?


Mr. Bedloe, Whitebread told Coleman at Mr. Harcourt's Chamber the manner
offending the four Russians to Windsor about September.


Harcourt, I never saw him twice in all my life before.


Mr. Belwood, Do you know of any Reward those Russians were to have?


Mr. Bedloe, Yes, I saw Harcourt take the money out of a cabinet, I think it
was fourscore or One hundred pounds, the sum I don't well remember. Harcourt
paid them the money by Mr. Coleman's order, and gave the messenger a Guiney
from Mr. Coleman to drink his Health. Mr. Coleman was gone a little before I
came in, and so I could not know that Coleman gave it, but he said so.


Sir Chr. Levins. What was Pickring and Grove to have?


Mr. Bedloe, Grove was to have 1500 l. and a Promise of the Favor of the Lords,
1500 l. was the Sum appointed at Mr. Harcourts chamber, and doubtless in
several other places, but there I heard it from Mr. Whitebread, and Prichard,
and le Fair, and Kaines; and Pickering was to have a number of masses, I cannot
tell exactly how many but they were so many, as at 12 d. a mass, would amount
to be equal to Mr. Grove.


Mr. Belwood, Pray, Sir, what was that for?


M. Bedloe, For killing the King. But Pickering had been disciplined before,
and received a Check from the Superiors, because he had been negligent, and
slipped many opportunities. One time the Flint of his Pistol was loose, another
time there was no Powder in the Pan, another time he had charged with all
Bullets, and no Powder.


Lord Chief Justice, Did you see Harcourt deliver the Guiney for the Expedition
of the Windsor Business.


Mr. Bedloe, Yes, my Lord, as from Coleman, to drink his Health.


Mr. Belwood, Pray, was either Whitebread or Fenwick knowing of the Agreement
when it was spoken of?


Mr. Bedloe, I have seen Fenwick at Harcourts, and Whitebreads chamber, when it
was spoken of; they were all of one Opinion, they had decreed it. I never saw
Whitebread but twice at Harcourts chamber, where one time was Harcourt himself,
at another time was Pritchard and le Fair, and others; at which time Sir
George Wakemans Business was spoken of, and because he would not accept the
10000 l. 15000 l. was agreed to be given him; and upon Sir George's Trial, I
shall let you know where he had the money too, but I desire to be excused at
present. I shall speak it to morrow.


Lord Chief Justice, What did they consult there?


Mr. Bedloe, They were consulting how it should be done, and what should be
done, if they did not do it. Then Ireland proposed, that the most certain way
was to do it at his morning walks in Newmarket; Fenwick was to go, and with him
went Grove, Pickering and Coniers: I heard seven or eight of them were to go.


Lord Chief Baron, What say you to Turner?


Mr. Bedloe, Of Mr. Turner, I know nothing but what I have heard others say.


Lord Chief Baron, What say you to Gavan?


Mr. Bedloe, I know nothing of him, but only I have heard Mr. Harcourt say, he
has been a great manager of this Business.


Lord Chief Justice, That is nothing to the purpose what others say.


Mr. Bedloe, Mr. Harcourt is no stranger to my bringing of Pacquets and
Portmantles over to him, from beyond the Seas.


Harcourt, He never brought but one in all his lifetime.


Mr. Bedloe, What, Did I never bring but one Packet? Have not I brought
diverse, and diverse Portmantles?


Harcourt, You never brought a Portmantle in your life.


Mr. Bedloe, I have brought diverse.


Harcourt, You know I never saw you but twice in my life before to day, and
when I met with you at the Privy Council.


Mr. Bedloe, My Lord, the Tria^s have been so put off, that I could never get
all my Witnesses together, but I have 7 or 8 of my Witnesses that are out of
Town, that would make this very clear. My Lord, there was never a Packet of
letrers that I brought over to Mr. Harcourt, but did contain in it a Design of
the Subversion of the Government; and it must be more than two Pacquets that I
have brought over; for I have brought letters from Watton, and letters from St.
Omers, and letters from Bruges, and from Paris, and from Valledolid and
Sallamanca; and all these letters contained in them the management of this
Plot, how far they had proceeded beyond Sea, and Answers how far they had
proceeded in England from him and to them to and again from time to time in
carrying on the Design of Subverting the Government, and altering the Religion;
wherein was given an account of the Army and Forces that were to be raised,
both here and beyond Sea; what Contributions were made or expected at home or
abroad, all was lodged in Mr. Harcourts hands, at least wise an account of the
greatest rare. And I have been sent to Mr. Langhorn with Papers from Harcout
about this Affair to Register them; and of that I shall give you an account
upon Mr. Langhorns Trial.


Lord Chief Justice, Well now ask him what you will.


Whitebread, Sir I desire to ask you one Question.


Mr. Bedloe, I desire it may be asked the Court.


Whitebread, I desire to ask him whether he was a Lieutenant in Flanders or no?


Mr. Bedloe, Yes, I was.


Whitebread, Of Horse or Foot?


Mr. Bedloe, Of Foot.


Whitebread, Take notice there is no such Officer of Foot in all Flanders.


Mr. Bedloe, I was then in the Regiment of the Prince of Freizland.


Whitebread, There are no Lieutenants in all the Flanders Companies, only
Captains and Alfaras.


Mr. Bedloe. My Lord, I had a Commission, and I have a Commission to be so, and
I desire I may send for it.


Lord Chief Justice, It is no very material thing, as soon as it comes they
shall see your Commission.


Harcourt, You say you have had Papers from me, and been very familiar with me;
Pray how can this be, when, as I did declare before the Lords in Council, that
was the third time I ever saw your face? The first time he came to me, he
brought letters from Dunkirk five years ago; when I opened them, I found them
directed to other persons, and to them I sent them, my name being only used in
the outside Cover, and it seems upon that confidence that he had in me at that
time, not long after he came to my chamber, and told me he had lately become a
Roman Catholic, and by that means had lost his Friends, and that he then was
in want, and unless I did assi^t him it would be very hard with him; though his
Father disserted him, yet he had some Friends, whom he expected would do
something for him, and then I will repay you.


Lord Chief Justice, When was this?


Harcourt, The second time that I ever saw him in all my life, and this is four
years since. Then said I, what will serve your turn, he told me twenty
shillings, which I lent to him, and I never saw his face afterward till I met
him at the Privy Council, and therefore how should a man believe a word he says?


Lord Chief Justice, But how shall a man know that what you say is true?


Mr. Bedloe, I will make it appear at the Trial of the Lords, that I sent to
him for ten pounds, and had it* I cannot now prove it without bringing some
Witnesses that I have behind a Curtain, and I will not discover them till then,
they shall not know who they are.


Mr. Justice Windham, Will you ask him any Questions?


Mr. Bedloe, My Lord, I have not said the one hundredth part of what I can say
honestly, and like a Christian, of Mr. Harcourt.


Harcourt, You may say what you will, but you wont speak Truth.


Mr. Bedloe, Mr. Harcourt went with me to Mr. Colemans, when I carried over the
Consult. There was the greatest part of the Design in that which I was to carry
over to Saint Omers, and that Consult did I fetch from Mr. Coleman, and Mr.
Harcourt was with me, and I had thanks from Mr. Coleman for my Fidelity in the
Business, and Expedition in bringing and carrying the Pacquets. I was
recommended to my Lord Arundel, by Mr. Harcourt, and was promised by his
Lordship all the Friendship and Favor imaginable, when the Times were turned.


Lord Chief Justice, Why here you see, he names several places and times,
wherein he met with you.


Harcourt, Not one word of all this is true.


Mr. Bedloe, I desire you to ask Mr. Harcourt, my Lord, Whether he was not in
August, or September last, in company with me and Le Fair.


Harcourt, Le Fair, I know no le Fair.


Mr. Bedloe, Le Fevre then.


Harcourt, Le Fevre, I believe I did see at that time, but not since.


Mr. Bedloe, Prichard did recommend the care of me to him.


Lord Chief Just* There he names another time, when you and Prichard were there
together.


Mr. Bedloe, Prichard was my Confident, and my great Friend, and told them,
This is a person whose Fidelity you have tried, in carrying over such and such
letters, and therefore you may very well trust him, and take care of him: and
so he recommended me as one that was really sit to understand the bottom of the
Design. And Prichard did tell me before them,, that the King's death was
intended as a part of it; and he sent me again another time to Mr. Harcourt,
but it was about no material business; and Harcourt gave a Bill of Exchange to
carry to what Citizen I don't know, but to Sir Geo^ge Wakeman, to have 2000 l.
by whose Orders, as they said, your Lordship shall know upon his Trial, but I
saw Harcourt give him the Bill of Exchange.


Mr. Justice Dolben, Who gave the Bill?


Mr. Bedloe, It was Harcourt my Lord.


Harcourt, Who was by when this Bill was given?


Mr. Bedloe, Kaines and Sir William Anderson*


Harcourt, How was this Bill drawn?


Mr. Bedloe, It was drawn upon a Citizen, and lest in your hands.


Harcourt, I desire he may name the Citizen, and if he can, make it out; if he
do, it will appear upon the merchants Books.


Mr. Bedloe, Sir George Wakeman received a Bill of Exchange from Mr. Harcourt,
and he was told here is a Bill of Exchange for 2000 l. as part of a greater
Sum; to which Sir George Wakeman answered, that 15000 l. was a small Reward for
the settling of Religion, and preserving of the three Kingdoms from Ruin, but
if it were not for such a Woman, he would never undertake it, but for her he
would do any thing. And after he had given Sir George Wakeman the Bill, Sir
George Wakeman opened it, and read it, but I did not read the name that was to
it.


Fenwick, My Lord, it seems not sufficient proof that he says, he saw a Bill of
Exchange, unless he says from whom, and to whom, that it may be proved by the
Books, or otherwise.


Lord Chief Justice, You say well, Mr. Fenwick, if so be he had been the person
concerned in the Bill, that he were either one that drew it, or was to receive
the money then it were strange that he would not know the parties to it; but I
must tell you, where he was not one nor the other, it was a collateral matter.
Do people take notice of every particular Bill of Exchange that they see, which
they are neither to pay nor receive?


Fenwick, But what reason does he give your Lordship or the Jury to believe
that there was such a Bill, unless he does produce either the Bill or the
person that paid it?


Mr. Bedloe, I did only see the Bill out of Mr. Harcourts hand, but it was read
there only by Sir George Wakeman.


Lord Chief Justice, Is it a pin matter whether there were such a Bill or no,
or whether he had mentioned it or no?


Fenwick, But seeing he has mentioned it, I say there is nothing of proof of
it, but only his bare word.


L. Chief. Just. Yes, there is his Oath.


Sir Cr. Levins, And I desire the Jury to take notice how unreasonable a thing
it is that you ask. You would have Mr. Bedloe produce the Bill of Exchange that
was given to Sir George Wakeman to receive money.


Mr. Bedloe, I have only one word more. Sir George Wakeman received the Bill of
Exchange from Mr. Harcourt, read it himself, folded it up, and went and
received the money; and that the Court will be pleased to see my Commission,
for now I have is here.


Which was read by my Lord Chief Justice North, and several others.

Sir Cr. Levins, We have only this one matter to trouble your Lordship and the
Jury with. You perceive by the Evidence that has been given that the main
matter begins at the Consult of the 24 th. of April, when the Consult was, now
to fortify this Evidence, we are now to produce a Letter that was written from
one Petre at St. Omers, Jesuit, wherein is mention made that he was to give
notice, mr. Whitebread had appointed a general meeting just at that time in
London, at which they were to consult of very great matters; and they were to
be very private in their coming to, and appearing about the Town. And this
Letter was taken amongst Mr. Harcourts Papers, and to prove it we call Sir
Thomas Doleman.


Who was sworn.

Sir Cr. Levins, Pray what can you say where this letter was found?


Sir Thomas Doleman, It was found amongst Mr. Harcourts Papers, in a bag of his
Papers that was committed to my care to search.


Lord Chief Just. Can you tell what day you found it?


Sir Th. Doleman, It was a matter of six or seven days after Mr. Oats had
given his information of this Plot to the Council.


Harcourt, What Paper is it?


Mr. Justice Atkins, Hear it first.


L. C. J. It is a letter found amongst your Papers.


Harcourt, Who is it from?


Lord Chief Just. It is from one Mr. Petre, do you know such a one?


Clerk of Crown, It is subscribed E. P.


Harcourt, Yes, my Lord, I do, I will deny nothing of the truth.


Then the Letter was read in haec verba, Honored Dear Sir,
I Have but time to convey these following particulars to you, First I am to
give you notice, that it has seemed fitting to our master Consult Prove. etc.
to fix the 21th of April next Stilo veteri, for the meeting at London of our
Congregation; on which day all those that have a Suffrage, are to be present
there, that they may be ready to give a beginning to the same on the 24th,
which is the next day after St. George's day: You are warned to have jus^
suffragii, and therefore if your occasions should not permit your to be
present, you are to signify as much, to the end, others, in their ranks, be
ordered to supply your absence. Every one is minded also, not to hasten to
London long before the time appointed, nor to appear much about the Town till
the meeting be over, lest occasion should be given to suspect the Design.
Finally, Secresy, as to the time and place, is much recommended to all those
that receive Summons, as it will appear of its own nature necessary.

Tertio pro Domino Solono Disco. Benefact Prove. Luniensis.

I am straightened for time, that I can only assure you, I shall be much glad of
obliging you any ways,

SIR, Your Servant Edward Petre.




L. C. J. Come now Mr. Harcourt, will you expound this Letter to me that speaks
of this meeting and privacy?


Harcourt, Y^s my Lord, tho it was not my Letter yet I will tell you what the
meaning of it was. That Letter was writ to one, who had Jus Suffragii, a Right
to come and vote in our Congregation, which, according to the Constitution and
Orders of our Society, is within the Compass of three years, where they meet
about the particular affairs of the Society.


L. C. J. What was it about?


Harcourt. It was about choosing an Officer, choosing a Procurator to send to
Rome; that was the chief point, and secresy was a thing that was recommended to
every one, as it was fit it should be, we living in a country where every ones
eye was upon us, and we were an Eyesore to them, we ought to be cautious of
meeting in such Numbers as might give an Offense, and this was the only thing
indeed.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr, Harcourt, you say well, but we are not to be altogether
disciple* of yours so as to have no sense of our own, and to be imposed upon so
weakly as this. Here is the thing, says the letter, I would not have you come
too soon to London, nor appear too much in public far fear of discovering a
design, which requires secrecy in its own nature. What, was that your design
of choosing a Procurator? Tell me but one thing that can bear the name of a
Design, which must have that secrecy in it, that people must not appear much
about Town, and that in its own nature require, such a thing,


Whitebread, my Lord, the thing it self is Evident what was the Design.


L. C. J. Come, Mr. Whitebread, you will do it better.


Whitebread, It is Evident it was a design to choose an Officer.


L. C. J. Why, good mr. Whitebread, do any write after that manner? Were you to
write to any one, or ask the Jury, if they were to choose some Collector for
the Receipt of some charitable money that should be employed for the relief of
Protestants in France: Do you think any man would say, do not appear much in
London before hand, nor come to soon, for fear of discovering the Design, which
in its own nature requires Secrecy: will this endure the name of a Design?


Whitebread, First, it i^ a very hard thing to bring so many men's lives in
danger merely upon the interpretation of a word, which may as properly signify
one thing as an other. Is it not proper for me to say I have a Design to Dine
with such a man to morrow, or he l^ke?


L. C. J. It Is true now, but H^ar^en --


Whitebre^d* But that was the thing Designed, to have a Congregation for the
choosing of an Officer, and it was, I think, very properly said, and that it
should be kept secret was as prudential a thing as possibly could be. Was it
not proper here, because our profession was not publicly permitted in this
Kingdom; and therefore that was the reason why secresy was enjoined? And this
upon my salvation was all that ever was in ended or thought.


L. C. J. North, This now is the interpretation you put upon the Letter, but we
understand by the Witnesses what was done at that meeting.


L. C J ^o^k you, mr. Whitebread, this letter without Question has been well
studied by you a^; and it requires it mightily.


Whitebread It needs none


L. C. J. This is not the natural Exposition of the words of the letter that
you give, but a forced one; for first, there is a difference between saying I
do design to dine to day, though it be a usual matter, but it is another
thing, when I call a thing by the name of a Design accompanied with a requiring
of Secresy in its own nature, and when I give advice that they must not appear
in Town too soon, nor too much about the Town, for fear of discovering the
Design, which in its own nature requires Secresy: must all this amount but to
the choosing of an Officer? You Will never make one Papist of all this Company, if
you make no better work of it.


Whitebread. My Lord, I humbly desire your Lordship would not strain a word
which may be well enough said, whether it be properly said or no.


L. C. J. It Is not one word alone, but it is the whole sense.


Whitebread. It Is evident there was Just cause of Secresy, because of our
Profession.


L. C. J. Mr. Whitebread, It Is not one word that is relied upon, for the
business is pursued. It Is not said pray meet at such a time, but be careful you
do not discover the design; If it had been only said so, it would have been a
strain to have made this Construction of a single word, to make this that
Design, but as it is here we make no such Construction; It had been hard indeed
to put that meaning upon it as you do even then, for it is seldom so used, for no
man writes after that manner; but when it follows in a continued sense of so
many lines, be sure you meet on the 24 th. of April, the day after St. Georges
day, but come not too soon to Town, nor appear to much about the Town, for fear
of Discovering the Design, which you know in its own Nature does require
Secresy: Can we make any such Interpretation of it? If you have no better
Arguments than these, you must have people lose their understandings, or have a
very blind obedience to yours, or it will never down. Ay, Come mr. Gaven, how
do you say is the meaning of this?


Gaven, For my part I Will assure your Lordship I was not there, but this is
known to all the Christian World, that there is such a meeting in Spain,
France, Germany etc. that wherever the Jesuits are, once in three years they
have a meeting among themselves for the settling of their Affairs. Indeed the
words have given your Lordship an occasion to raise a Difficulty what the word
Design should mean, which I do give this Answer to Your Lordships Difficulty
is, that the word design here should not be made use of to send one poor Jesuit
to Rome. my Lord do but mark the end of the Congregation, and you will say to
us that we might well use that word, because the word may import some great
business of Concernments now what business of greater concernment for poor
Religious men to meet together about, than those things that may promote their
better state in another world, and the Regulation of what is amiss in their
Order, my Lord, upon my Conscience and Salvation this was the end of the
Congregation, to meet and see what is amiss in the Order, who do their duties,
and who not, who are irregular in their Offices, and whose Office is vacant and
to be supplied.


Lord Ch, Just. But must no body come to Town, nor appear too much about the
Town for this?


Gaven. Therefore my Lord, as to the word [ Design] it concerning the whole
spiritual good of the whole body of the English Jesuits, it might well be used
for the Consultation of that Body, about all their good, Temporal and
Spiritual, which was all concerned in it.


L. C. J. These are a many words, but to no purpose.


Gaven Now, my Lord, for the second thing that you Object, your Lordship
remembers very well, that the Continuation of the sense in so many lines made
the thing the more suspicious, that more was intended by it than so: Now to
this I shall be able to answer, if there can be given a particular reason why
we should ad that word of Secresy to the other of Design, having Answered to
the one part, we now give an answer to the other, and so to the whole. Now my
Lord, because of the time, the Parliament was then sitting, and that we might
not offend the King and all Civil Magistrates (whom we honor from our hearts
and Souls) that word was used that it might be kept secret.


L. C. J. It was not out of Love to the Parliament, it was the nature of the
thing required it, nor was it out of any fear you had of them. I did never
find, though you are as good at it as ever any I met with (for I never met with
a Priest that had much more understanding) but really you do not Answer me. You
are so far from Scholars, and arguing like such, that you do not maintain the
matter with common and rational understanding, but only heap up so many vain
words (like a Rope of Sand put together) which has no natural Coherence, for
you cannot possibley make this reasonable, that the people should have so much
Caution, that they should have not come too long to Town beforehand.


Gaven, Not to be taken notice of.


L. C. J. Not to appear in Town when they come.


Gaven, Not to be taken notice of.


L. C. J. I say so, you cannot tell why all these Cautions should be used
merely for choosing an Officer.


Gaven. My Lord, our Lives depended upon it, if we were taken, being such men
as we are.


L. C. J. You can make nothing of it, and you will find it an hard task to
Answer it; for if half the Evidence that has been given were not given, yet
this Letter of your own, which cannot be denied, is an unanswerable proof. It
does monstrously confirm Mr. Oats's Testimony to be undeniable as to the
meeting at the Consult; for he, four or five days before hand, comes and tells
the Council the very day which five or six days after this Letter makes good*
which is found in Harcourts Custody. Then there was a Consulation upon the day,
the very day that Mr. Oats says, and what he calls a Consultation, your own
Letter says is a Design.


Gaven. It was a Design of a Congregation.


L. C. J. What sense is there in that, will any man in England, or did any man
in England ever say, take heed of discovering our design of going to Church or
choosing a Collector?


Gaven. There is reason for the one and reason for the other too.


L. C. J. I would appeal to your selves and all here present, what the natural
import of such a Letter is, whether it does not carry a matter more than
ordinary; whether its natural Intendment does not look at that? And the next
thing is this, does any man write plainer then this, when they write of a thing
that is of such a nature? Is not the Danger too great to hazard that fact,
which they call the nature of the thing, to entrust it in a Letter? Is it not
vain to put that in a Letter in words at length, which they, to whom it is
writ, know what the thing means? And if it should be further known than they
would have it, the thing could never be done? And if you consider the person
that written, a Jesuit or a Priest, are Priests ever plain? And will you expect
plainness here, when, in things of Ten thousand times less moment, they don't
write plainer? Is it not known, you have not a Proselyte, that you do not keep
under Obligations as close as your Confession are? Have you not taken here as
it is sworn, a Sacrament of Secrecy? Is there a woman that you convert but in
the Dark? Or a Papist made out of a Preist's hole? Are not all your deeds under
ground? and do you work with any Light, but that of a Dark Lanthorn? This is
plain, unless you give a better answer to this Letter, the Letter will hang
about your necks.


L. C. J. North. Mr. Oats will tell you what the Design was.


Mr. J. Elis He can tell you what it was.


L. C. J, The letter speaks it self.


Dr, Oats Mr Gavan and they now tell your Lordship what this consult was for,
but they denied this consult at first, when there was but one man to justify
it. I justfied it before Mr; Fen. who denied it at the Council Board, though
now they pawn their Salvation upon the justification of it.


Fenw, I never denied that there.


L. C. J. Come, have they any thing to say for themselves?


Mr. Bedlow, My Lord, whereas, as Mr. Gavan says, that in obedience to the
King and Parliament they would have their consultations secret, and that they
always desired to conceal themselves then; the time of Sessions of Parliament
was the only time that I and others have been employed to fetch over more
Jesuits than at any other particular time.


Dr. Oats, And there are more of them then in the Court of Requests, and in
the Lobies, barefaced, and threatening the Protestants, than at any other time.


M. Bedloe, We used to fetch them against the Parliament always; they were in
less danger then than at other times.


L, C. J. You could give a very good interpration of the Letter, I supposed,
that Mr. Dugdale speaks of, that came from Whitebread, That he should be sure
to entertain such as were hardy, stout Fellows: I suppose you can make all
this to signify nothing more than a design for a Game at Cudgels.


Sir Cr Levins, If your Lordship please, we must desire that one Letter more
may be read. Your Lordship has been told of Commissions for the raising of an
Army, here is a touch of them mentioned in this letter found amongst Mr.
Harcourt's letters too.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Harcourt, you had best attend, here is another letter
found amongst your papers, concerning some Commissions. You look ill to your
letters; you are to blame indeed, Mr. Harcourt.


Sir Cr. Levins, Pray, Sir Thomas Doleman, look upon that Paper, and tell us
how you came by it.


Sir Thomas Doleman, This letter in my hand I found amongst Mr. Harcourt's
papers, about some two days after I found that other that was read before.
Having heard Mr. Oats give in his information to the Council, That there were
several Commissions given out to several persons, and finding some doubtful
clauses and Expressions in the letter, I did present this letter to the
Council, and made a mark upon it, Enquire what is meant by the word Patents.


Lord Chief Just. Pray let it be read, because we shall desire a little more of
their interpretation.


Cl. of Cr. It is signed Christopher Anderton' Hilton, Feburary the 5th, 1677/8.


Dr. Oats, Hilton, that is, Rome.


Lord Chief. Just. Mr. Harcourt, you understand, that by Hilton is meant Rome*


Harcourt, Yes, my Lord, I do.


L. C. J. Well, then go on, and read it.


Cl* of Cr Worthy Sir, I know not from whence it proceeds, but I perceive that
both your Letters and mine have bad fortune by the way; for my corrospondents
with you complain, they hear not from me, whereas I write constantly entire
Pacquets; and since the Bills I received from your self for Sr. William Goring,
and for Mr. Ireland, from Mr. Shelly, I have not had one letter but that I
received this week, which in part made recompense for the former, for it
brought me three of yours, and one of Mr. Ireland 's for which I render you
many humble thanks, and acknowledge the fifteen pounds from my Lord Castlemain,
though Mr. Ireland made no mention of it in his. We are all here very glad of
the promotion of Mr. Tho. Harcourt. When I writ that the Patents were sent,
although I guess for whom they were, yet I knew not for certain, because our
Patrons do not use to discover things or resolutions till they know they have
effect. And therefore in these kind of matters I dare not be too hasty, left
some might say, A Fools Bolt is soon shot.


Lord Chief Just. What is the meaning of these Patents?


Fenwick, This Gentleman will tell you, my Lord.


Whitebread, My Lord, they were the Patent for my being Provincial.


Lord Chief Just. How many Patents had you?


Whitebread. But one, my Lord.


Lord Chief Just. Is that Patents?


Whitebread, Literae Patentes.


Lord Chief Just. Is it Patent or Patents?


Clerk of Cr. Patents.


Lord Chief Just. Read those words again,


Clerk of Ca. We are all here very glad at the promotion of Mr. Tho. Harcourt,
when I writ that the Patents were sent, although I guess for whom they were,
yet I knew not for certain, because our Patrons do not to discover things or
Resolutions, till they know they have effect.


Lord Chief Just. Now you have not interpreted well this neither.


Sir Cr. Levins. It is said, I knew not for certain who (they) were for; but to
make it clear, I would desire Mr. Whitebread to answer me one Question, how
long is it, Sir, since you were made Provincial?


Whitebread, The 14th of January was twelvemonth.


Sir Cr. Levins. And this was dated the 5th of February, which was after your
Commission.


Whitbread. That may be, and they not know till then.


Lord Ch* Just. And so you expound those latter words of the Letter, That the
Resolution of making you Provincial was not discovered till the effect was
known.


Whitebread, Because it is not known, whether the person that is nominated
might not be excepted against: and it is Literae Patentes.


Lord Chief Just. But here is but one person to answer the word Patents, and
there should be more than one man.


Whiteb. Every Patent is called Literae Patentes, though it be but for one
person.


Mr. Recorder, They were in great doubt that you would refuse the place, I
warrant.


Dr. Oats. He is bound in pain of Damnation not to disobey his Superiors, if
they choose him to a place, he must take it upon him.


Whitebread, It is not the first, second, or hundredth time that one has been
appointed by the Superior to a place, and has refused it; and if I had known
the hundredth part of what I do now, of the trouble of the place, I would never
have accepted it.


Mr. Recorder. Ay, if you had known the difficulty of this Design, you would
never have engaged in it, especially if you had known what is come to pass.


Whitebread, No, Sir I never had a hand in any such thing in all my life: this
is coram Deo that I now speak, and as I am to appear before the great Tribunal
at the day of Judgment, I know nothing of all this matter.


Dr. Oats, My Lord, these Patents, of which this Letter makes mention, a great
many of them came down in the months of April and May before.


Lord Chief Just. Methinks he interprets them plainer than you do.


Lord Chief Baron, Now what have you to say every one of you for your selves,
make your defense?


Lord Chief Just. Mr. Whitebread, do you begin.


Dr. Oats, While the Prisoners Evidence is calling in, I desire that my
Witnesses may be sworn.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, Mr. Oats, be quiet, there is no need of it yet, till they
have made their defense.


Lord Chief Just. But send for them that they may be ready.


Whitebread, My Lord, that which I have to say for my self is this, I thank
God, my Lord, I am not afraid of death; but I should be very loath to die
unjustly, and I hope your Lordship will consider, that every man's blood is dear
to him, and is concerned for his own life to preserve it, he ought to be
allowed liberty and freedom to preserve himself as much as he can. Life is a
thing not to be thrown away, but charily to be looked after, and that there is
such a thing as taking away men's lives by Perjury as well as by a Knife or
Pistol, is without contradiction. Now whoever comes against a man for his life,
I suppose he is to be looked upon not only by the Prisoner, but also by the
Jury and the Court, that he ought to be Probus Testis, and a man fit to be
admitted to be a Witness. Now I have something to offer, That Mr. Oats is not
any such person. Your Lordship was pleased to say, That he was the person who
proved the Design mentioned in the Letter that was read. Now I hope your
Lordship will give me leave (and I hope I may do it without offense to this
Court) to say that he is perjured in what he says.


Lord Chief Just. You mean that his Evidence is false, you may do it if you can.


Whitebread, He says he came over hither, and was here present the 24th of
April with me, and that I did appoint him to do such and such things, and
discovered the whole business to him. Now I desire your Lordship would be
pleased to consider whether this were probable, and whether I had not been a
very much mistaken man all this while to trust a man with such a business, and
whether I ought not rather to be sent to Bedlam than Newgate for trusting such
a man as he, whom by his own confession I never saw till that time. It Is not
rational that a man would trust him; and then, my Lord, that this business
should be discovered to him, a man that depended wholly upon us to live, and
had no livelihood but what he had from us, who maintained him at St. Omers long
as well as the best man in the house.


Lord Chief Just. Did you do it?


Whitebread, Yes, my Lord, I did.


Lord Chief Just. You should consider how in that you answer your self.


Whitebread. I, that is, when I came to the Office, and I and my Predecessors.
When I was Superior I found him not a fit man for that purpose and design he
pretended to. He was very zealous to be entertained amongst us, and therefore I
desired him to absent himself.


Lord Chief Just. Why was he not fit to be employed among you?


Whitebread. For several reasons of our own: First of all it was doubtful,
whether he was a good Catholic; for he had oftentimes maintained several
Propositions that were not soundly Catholic: and then secondly, he led a very
idle life, and he was not found a man we were obliged to accept of, and
therefore we desired him to retire. And to that purpose we furnished him, gave
him a good Suit of Clothes, and a Perriwig, and four pounds in his purse* and
he promised me to pay me again when he had sold his Library, which he said he
had a very good one in London, but he never did. But that I should be so
strangely overseen and mad, as at the first sight of such a man a^ this, to
trust him with such a great intrigue as this was, and to write in such a plain
strange manner, and send by Post to Mr. Dugdale, as your Lordship did and
justly might wonder at, had been a madness. It was much that any man would
write so plain of such a thing. But then my Lord, the chief thing is this, That
I hope your Lordship will give us leave to produce our Witnesses to prove, that
he was not from Saint Omers from the tenth of December till the 23d of June
following, and never lay out of the House but one night from December till June.


Lord Chief Just. Name your Witnesses.


Whitebread, I desire first Mr. Hilsly may be called.


Lord Chief Just. Call him; but I Will tell you what is strange, You say it is
wonderful that you should trust a man you had so little Opinion of his
Abilities or Fidelity, but I wonder that you should maintain him after that.


Whitebread, No, my Lord, we did not.


Lord Chief Just. You say you did.


Whitebread, No my Lord, he pretends he was here in England sent over by us,
but we will prove he was not.


Lord Chief Just. But you maintained him abroad?


Whitebread, That was before.


Lord Chief Just. Is it so great a wonder that you should take into your
Confidence and Consultation that man, whom for a considerable time before you
had maintained abroad?


Whitebread, But my Lord, I suppose there is some difference between charitable
acts to a man in want and a Scholar, and trusting him with such an intrigue as
this.


Fenw, Pray my Lord, be pleased to take notice, that this man's Evidence all
along is, that he saw such and such letters from such and such persons. They
have no Evidence but just that they saw such and such letters, and how is it
possible that a man who was turned away from Saint Omers for his misdemenours,
that I should show all my letters? Now my Lord, I have had a thousand letters
taken from me, not any of these letters had any thing of Treason in them, or
soliciting of persons to come into England, let the letters be produced, and
then your Lordship will see what is in them, All the Evidence that is given
comes but to this there is but saying and swearing I defy them all to give one
probable Reason to satisfy any reasonable uninteressed man* judgment how this
could be.


Lord Chief Baron, There can be no reason given why you should sign an
instrument to kill the King.


Lo C. J. You say there is nothing but saying and swearing, but you do not
consider what you say in that matter. All the Evidence and all the Testimony in
all Trials is by swearing. A man come; and swears that he saw such a Bond
sealed, or heard such words spoken, this is saying and swearing, but it is that
proof that we go by, and by which all men's lives and fortunes are to be
determined. But then, say you, it is wonderful, that since they say they saw
such and such letters, they should not produce them; why? they did not belong
to them: Ay, but then say you, it is strange they should not find one letter in
all those numerous papers that were taken that contains any traiterous matter;
but I say, it is forty times more a wonder that one should be taken, than for
all the rest to be undiscovered. I suppose Mr. Harcourt amongst those Papers
that he let be surprised did not think that letter that has been read to have
been of such consequence, nor the sense of it to be so bad.


Fenwick, I dreamt no more of my apprehension when I was taken, than the day of
my death, it was so unexpected, nor what I should be accused of: I had no fear
of it, no thought of it, so that I took nothing out of the way. They took five
or six thousand pound Bonds and Bills, besides letters; methinks something of
the Effects of those letters might be produced, and some of the design appear.
For God's sake, where are the Commissions signed, and moneys paid?


Lord Chief Just. They talk of a Patent. Mr. Whitebread construes it, that it
is his Commission; if so, does it lie in Oats or Bedlow's power to show that
Commission? (this is just like that of the Bill of Exchange) neither does it in
any of the letters.


Fenwick, Here is Mr. Hilsly, my Lord.


Whiteb. My Lord, we pray, we may have the favor that they may be sworn.


Lord Chief Just. North. By law they cannot.


L. C. J. N. In no Capital case against the King can the witnesses for the
Prisoner be sworn, but I will say this to the Jury, That they are not sworn,
is, because they cannot, but the Jury is to take great heed of what they say,
and to be governed by it, according to the credibility of the person and of the
matter.


Gavan, My Lord, if you please to give me leave; my Lord Coke in his Institutes
says expressly, That there is no positive Law against it, his words are, there
is not so much as scintilla Juris against it.


L. C. J. No. We know that the constant usage and practice is so, and you
cannot produce any man, that in any Capital case had his witnesses sworn
against the King.


L. C. J. My Lord Coke says otherwise, That the evidence should be so plain
that nothing could be answered to it; and therefore no evidence should be sworn
against the King.


Gavan, My Lord, those are the words of my Lord Coo.


L. C. J. You argue against the known practice of all Ages.


L, C. J. No. There never was any man in a Capital cause sworn against the
King. The common Law is the custom of the Kingdom, and we are bound to know
it, and must all be governed by it.


Whitebread, In mr. Ireland's Trial, page 35, 36. he says, he came over with Sir
John Warner, Father Williams, and mr. Hilsley from St. Omers,


Mr. J. Pem. Nay, you must not resort to the printed Trials for evidence.


Fenwick, If we can prove him perjured at any time, I hope we may.


L. C. J. Suppose upon the taking of those printed Trials they mistake, shall
mr Oat therefore be thought guilty of perjury? If you have any thing to ask of
your Witnesses which you can apply to the evidence given now, you may.


Fenw. Mr. Oats, did not you your self own then you came over with mr. Hil^sh?


Dr. Oats, Ask me any question about what I have given to day, and if the
Bench think it rea^^nable (...) answer it.


Fen. My Lord, he (...)m that he came over with these persons, in which he is
for swrrn.


L. C. J. He is not convicted of perjury, and therefore that must not be urged.


Fen, My Lord, we will prove by witnesses that were at the Trial, that he did
affirm so: And I do desire now to know ^f you M^^^, whether ever you came over
with mr Helsly.


Dr. Oats, That which I said then, and that which I say now, is, because you
should not puzzle your selves) that one Mr. Hilsly did come over with us when
we did.


Hilsly, My Lord, I did not.


L C, J, How can you tell?


Hilsly. I left him at St Omers.


L. C. J, What say you Mr. Oats?


Dr. Oats, It Is true, mr. Hisly did leave me at St. Omers, because he went out
a Sunday morning, and I came out of the monday morning, but I overtook him at
Calis.


Hilsly. my Lord, that is false, and I have a great many here that can prove it.


L. C. J. What Religion are you of?


Hilsly, I am only to serve his Majesty.


L. C. J. Are you not to serve God too?


Hilsly, I am first to serve God, and then his Majesty.


Mr. J. Pemberton. Are you a Catholic?


L. C. J. Are you a Roman Catholic?


Hilsly. Yes, my Lord, I am.


Mr. J. Pemberton. Be not ashamed of your Religion, do not deny that, your
Provincial here can give you a dispensation for what you say.


Hilsly, I hope a Roman Catholic may be a lawful witness?


L. C. J. Yes, I deny it not. This is that you say, you left him at St. Omers;
you must call more Witnesses to back him: Master Oats says it is true you left
him at St. Omers, but he overtook you at Calis.


Dr. Oats. This Gentleman lost his money at Calis, and Father Williams did
relieve him by my means.


Lord Chief Just. What say you to that?


Hilsly. Why my Lord, yes, it is true I did lose my money there, but it is
nothing to the purpose, for I will affirm, I was never in the ship with him in
all my life.


Dr. Oats. I desire he may be asked, whether he be in the degree of a Priest
or not?


L. C. J. That would be a hard question to put to him to make him accuse
himself. It would bring him into danger of Treason.


Mr. J. Pemberton. He is a Boy very fit to make a Jesuit of.


L. C. J. How could he then come to know this?


Hilsly. I confess it is true, that Mr. Oats did never come over with me. And I
have Witnesses to prove that they saw him there next day at St. Omers, and two
or three several weeks after.


Sir Christopher Levins. Mr. Oats has another Circumstance to prove it by.


Dr. Oats. He went away from us by the way, and did not come up with us to
London.


Hilsly, I know how he understood ^his: There was a Gentleman that the
Witnesses will prove he was very familiar with the 2d. of May, that told him.


L. C. J. Is that Gentleman here?


Hilsly: Here is one here to prove it.


L. C. J. And did he tell him how you lost your money?


Hilsly, Yes, my Lord, I suppose so.


L. C. J. I speak seriously, I do not understand how he could come by these
things.


Parry, my Lord, I can testify if it were lawful for us o wear, and prove that
he was at Saint Omers that day, when he says he came over.


L. C. J. What is your name?


Parry, my name is William Parry.


L. C. J. What Countryman are you?


Parry, I am a Flintshire man.


L. C. J. When was he at St. Omers?


Parry, He was there that 25th. day, that day he says he came over.


L. C. J. Was he there all day:


Parry, He did not stir thence all the day.


L. C. J. How can you tell that?


Parry, I dined with him; that day he went into the Infirmary, he did not go
out of the College, he was sick.


Fenwick Mr. Parry, how long did Mr. Oats stay there, at St. Omers?


Parry He staid till after the 20th of June, I am sure; for on the 20th of June
I know he was present by a very good circumstance, he was at an Action of ours,
a Latin Play.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, as to the going into the Infirmary at that time, I deny
it. My Lord, (if your Lordship please) I will show that this Gentleman is not
only a Votary of the Jesuits, but has been one of the Sodality several years.
And they have Dispensations, and are bound by an implicit obedience to say
what the Jesuits bid them, who are their Superiors.


L. C. J. What say you to the 20th. of June, the time he says you were there at
the seeing of the Play?


Dr. Oats, my Lord, as to that twentieth of June, I was there, and there was
an Action at that time, for I was then returned thither from London.


Parry, I deny all that, for he never stirred out of the College.


L. C. J. Youngman, in what Quality were you there?


Parry. I was a Student there, a Poet.


L. C. J. How can you say he did not stir thence all the while?


Parry. I know by a particular thing; I dined and supped with him there, but
when he was in the infirmary, but the particular passage was this. He did there
fall out with a Gentleman that was in the Infirmary too.


L. C. J. When was that?


Parry. It was ^t the time that he says he came away.


L. C. J. When w^^^ he (...)?


Parry The 25^h of April, Old Style, and staid a matter of three or four days.


Dr. Oats. Will you be pleased to take notice of this? he says that Hilsley
left me at St. Omers when he cam^ (...), and that the next day he dined with
me, and that I went into the I^fi^ni^^, ^h^^, he says, was the 25th of April,
Old Style. Now we will run to a g^^ ad humin^m, (...) this ^^re the 25th of
April, Old Style, how did Mr. Williams me^t with Mr. Hilsly i^ Cali^, ^^d
r^store him his money, when the 24th old style Mr. Williams was at the co^sul^
(...) London?


L, C. J. When was it that you say Mr. Hilsley was at St. Omers?


Fenwick Answer my Lords Question.


Parry He went away the 24th of April,, as I Remember,


Lord Chief Just. What, Old style?


Parry, Yes, old style acccording to the reckoning there.


D. Oats. But, my Lord, upon the Oath that I have taken; if he mean new style,
all that this Gentleman has said about this is false, except that I was there
the 20th. of June.


Lord Chief Just. Was it new style or old style that you say Mr. Hilsly went
away?


Mr. Recorder. He does not know new style from old style,


Parry. He went the 24th. that is the old style beyond Sea,


Whitebread, I do desire he may answer, whether he does know that Mr. Oats was
ever out of the house from the time he came in December till June, but one
night.


Parry. No, he never was out but one night at Watton.


Lord Chief Justice, From what time to what time?


Parry It was but two days and one night.


Lord Chief Just. What time was it that he was there first?


Parry, He came thither in December.


Lord Chief Justice, And he did stay there all the while?


Parry. He did not stir from the College till the end of June; and never went
out but a day or two, as I know of.


L. C. J. Not as you know of; but might not he go, and you not know of it.


Parry. I am sure of it?


L. C. J How can you tell?


Parry. Not a Scholar goes from thence to England, but the whole College rings
of it.


Gaven. And then, my Lord, when they go out they go in Secular Clothes, that
none but must know when any person leaves the College,


Dr. Oats. My Lord, in such cases, though it is true in a general sense, yet it
is but a general Rule, and every general Rule admits of its exceptions, and my
case was a particular Exception. I put on the habit of the House as soon as I
did return from London, and did not appear as if I had gone out of the House,
nor did I know that it was known that I had been out; for I did never appear in
a secular habit.


Whitebread, What his Clothes were, does not change the place he sat in; he
being ancienter than the Boys, had a privilege to sit in a particular place,
which must be known to all the House at Dinner and Supper. He was visible every
day there.


L. C. J. I do believe it; and therefore he says, not only that he was reported
to be there, but that he saw him there almost every day.


Then another Witness for the Prisoner stood up.

L. C. J. What say you, young Lad?


Doddington, I say, my Lord --


L. C. J. What is your name?


Doddington, Doddington.


Dr Oats, Pray, my Lord, ask him if he went by that Name at St. Omers.


Mr. J. Pemberton. What was your Name at St. Omers?


Doddington My name was Hollis there.


L. C, J. How old are you?


Doddington Eighteen years and an half.


L. C. J. What can you say? where was m^, Oats?


Doddington, He never went out of the College, but one night to Watton, till
the end of June.


L. C. J. When came he into the College?


Doddington, A fortnight before Christmas, I did not mind the day, he says
himse^^ it was the 10th of December.


Lord Chief Just Was he there till June?


Doddington. Yes, he never went out till June but one night.


Lord Chief Just. Where was that? At Watton?


Doddington. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chief Just. How do you know that?


Doddington. I only know that by what all the house said.


Lord Chief Just. Did you see him every day, except that day?


Doddington, I cannot say I saw him every day, because he was in the Infirmary
once, and he was there that very day after Mr. Hilsly went away.


Lord Chief Just. What day was it that Mr. Hilsly went away?


Doddington, The 24th of April new style; and that day he fell sick, and went
into the Infirmary the next.


Lord Chief Just. What day of the week was that?


Doddington, It was of a Sunday.


Lord Chief Just. And when did you see Mr. Oats?


Doddington, On monday or Tuesday, I am not certain.


Lord Chief Just. How often did you see him from the 24th of April to June? Did
you see him every other day?


Doddington, Yes, that I am sure of, for every other day, I am not certain
every day.


Lord Chief Just. Are you positive?


Jury, We desire to know what time of the year he was in the Infirmary.


Doddington, I discoursed with him in the Infirmary two or three days after Mr.
Hilsly went away.


Lord Chief Just. But what time of the year was it?


Doddington, He was there first in Winter, and then afterward he was in at
this time, which was in April.


Lord Chief Just. Have you any more to say?


Doddington. I can say more, that I saw Mr. Oats the second of May with one
Blood or Burnaby, and I am sure I saw him in his company.


Lord Chief Just. Where did you see him?


Doddington, I saw him walking in the Garden with Mr. Burnaby.


Mr. Just, Pemberton, When did you come into England?


Doddington, I came over the 24th of April.


Lord Chief Just. How long have you been in England?


Doddington, About two months,


Mr. Just. Pemberton, Why did you come over, were you sent for over upon this
oc^asion?


Doddington, No, I was not.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, Why did you come over?


Doddington. I came over partly upon the Kings Proclamation.


Lord Chief Just. What Proclamation was that?


L. C. Just. North, That those that were in the Seminaries should come over
again.


Doddington. And partly because I had not my health.


Fenwick, Mr. Gifford, what do you know about Mr. Oates's coming from St. Omers?


L. C. J. When came you from St. Omers?


Gifford, I came over about a month ago.


Lord Chief Just. Upon what occasion?


Gifford, To Justify that Mr. Oats was there all the while that he says he was
here.


L. C. J. You speak like an honest man, there is no hurt in that.


Fenwick, we did send for him over.


L. C. J. When did you see Mr. Oats there?


Gifford. I saw him the first of May was twelvemonth with us, and the 21. of
April.


L. C. J. And how long after that?


Gifford, I was in his Company for a whole week after, I am sure.


L. C. J. You say the first of May he was there, how can you tell?


Gifford, The first of May there came one Mr. Burnaby to the College, and he
fell into acquaintance with him, and I saw him with him. He was with us an
whole week at least every day after dinner. We have an hour always after dinner
to recreate in, and this Gentleman was there with us and Mr. Burnaby; for Mr.
Oats seeing us in the Garden at first, put himself into our company, and kept
with us.


L. C. J. Was he not in the Infirmary?


Gifford, Not at that time, my Lord.


L. C. J. When was he in the Infirmary?


Gifford, The day after Hilsly went away.


L. C. J. Do you remember that?


Gifford, Yes, I do.


L.C. Just. North. How long did he stay in the Infirmary?


Parry, About three days.


Lord Chief Just. And for how long together did you see him after Mr. Hilsly's
departure?


Gifford, I can swear that I saw him at least till June, if I can believe my
own eyes.


Lord Chief Just. Your Religion does not allow you to believe your own eyes.


Gifford, I can in my conscience say, I believe I did see him every day or
every other day.


Lord Chief Just. Which do you say, Did you see him every other day, or every
day?


Gifford, If I say I saw him every other day; that is sufficient.


Lord Chief Just. Do you know that he went out of the College at any time?


Gifford, Yes, he went for one night.


Lord Chief Just. Whither?


Gifford, To a place called Watton.


L. C. Just. What did he go thither for?


Gifford, For his Relaxation.


Lord Chief Just. How came you to take such particular notice of him that he
was there?


Gifford, It is impossible but we should see him, and take notice of him, for
we dine all together in one Room, and we could not but take notice of him, for
he was at a distinct Table by himself.


Lord Chief Just. How many are there that dine in one Room?


Gifford, One hundred and fifty.


L. C. J. How could you know him when there were so many?


Gifford, He was at a distinct Table by himself, between the Boys and the
Religious.


Then stood up another, one Palmer.

L. C. J. Well, what do you ask him?


Fenwick. The same Question as the rest.


L. C. J. When came you from St Omers?


Palmer. I came two or three months ago.


Lord Chief Justice, Why did you come over?


Palmer. I had no mind to stay any Longer.


L. C. J. Where does your Father live?


Palmer, By Windsor.


L. C. J. When did you see Master Oats?


Palmer. I saw him the first day of May new style, and I know it for a
particular reason there were strangers dined at the College that day,
whereupon Mr. Oats, and several other Boys played at Nine pins, in the
Afternoon I saw them.


L. C. J. Why, you do not count a^l Boys there, do you?


Palmer, All but those that are the Religious.


L. C. J. Why, you did not count Mr. Oats a Boy, did you?


Palmer, He was none of the Religious: He sat indeed at a Table by himself,
but he went to School with the Boys, and we called all the Scholars Boys.


Lord Chief Just. How often did you see him?


Palmer. I Will tell your Lordship, I saw him the first of May, for that reason;
the second of May I saw him with Master Burnaby, a man that he had never seen
in all his life before, and we wondered that he had so much impudence to
insinuate himself into his company.


Lord Chief Just. What is he?


Palmer, He is a Gentleman that is now in Flanders.


Lord Chief Just. How do you know that Master Oats had no acquaintance with
him before?


Palmer, Because I know he was in England, and came over while Master Oats was
actually at St. Omers.


Lord Chief Just. But he might be of his Acquaintance in England.


Palmer. I heard Master Burnaby say, he never saw Master Oats in all his life
before. The second of May I saw him at the Action, the fifth of May Master
Killingbeck went away, and I saw Master Oats actually there then, and one
Master Poole went away, and I remember Oats was there for a particular reason;
he was a kind of a weak man, something soft, not over-wise, and we were asking
him why he would go away by himself, and talking of it afterward, says Master
Oats, I will not say positively those were the words, but that was the sense,
He does not go alone, for there goes Esquire Poole and Esquire Fool together.
The eleventh day we had an Action, a Play also whereupon there was a particular
place for the Musicians to play in, where no one else was to sit; Master Oats
would sit there, and thereupon there was one Master Watson quarreled with him,
and they had like to have fought.


Lord Chief Just. This was the 11th of May?


Palmer, Yes, my Lord, new style, and the other was the 5th.


L. C. J. But you saw him betwixt that time?


Palmer, Yes, my Lord, I did.


Lord Chief Just. And so for how long?


Palmer, I saw him at four a clock in a morning reading Father Worsleys
Controversies, and so for several days together.


Fenwick, Did he go away before June?


Palmer, No, he did never stir till June.


Sir Cr. Levins. Did not you go sometime by the name of Sanders or H^ll?


Palmer, No, only by the name of Thomas Palmer.


Sir Cr. Levins, Hark you Sir, who maintained you at St, Omers? Do not you
know one Mr. Caryl?


Palmer, No my Father maintained me.


Lord Chief Just. Who is your Father?


Palmer, Sir Philip Palmer.


L. C. J. What Country Gentleman is he?


Palmer, Buckinghamshire.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, He is Cup bearer to the King.


Then stood up one Master Cox.

L. C. J. How long have you been from St. Omers?


Cox, Two months.


L. C. J. What Country man are you?


Cox, I was born at Brussels to serve you.


L. C. J. Do you know Master Oats?


Cox, Yes, I did very well.


Lord Chief Just. Where?


Cox, At Saint Omers.


Lord Chief Just. When?


Cox, I left St. Omers seven months ago, and I came away in the month of
November after Master Oats. My Lord, I can prove that he was there in April
and May. I went from St. Omers to Brussels, and from Brussels I came straight
to London.


Lord Chief Just. But when did you see Master Oate there?


Cox. I can prove I saw him at St. Omers when he says he was in England, and
that by this circumstance. Master Pool who was my Music Master was sick there,
and Mr. Oats was often with him.


Lord Chief Justice, Were you there all the time he was there?


Cox, Yes, I was, till he went away.


Lord Chief Just. When did he go away?


Cox, Master Oats went away in the month of July.


Lord Chief Just. Are you sure of that?


Cox, Yes, my Lord, I am.


Lord Chief Just. Not in June?


Cox, No, my Lord, July.


Lord Chief Just. Why he differs from all the rest?


Cox, My Lord, I can prove he was at St. Omers when he says he was in England.


Lord Chief J. Why what month did he go away?


Cox, My Lord, I can prove that Mr. Oats was never absent from St. Omers, till
he went away for good and all.


Lord Chief Just. When was that?


Cox, He went after the Consult of the Jesuits, which he says was in England in
April.


Lord Chief Just. Come, come, Answer me plainly if you can in what month Mr.
Oats left St. Omers?


Cox, I say Mr. Oats was never absent from St. Omers till the Consult of the
Jesuit, was over, which he has confessed himself to be at.


Lord Chief Just. When was that?


Cox, Why it was after May, it is no matter what the month was whether June or
July. ( at which the people laughed.)


Cox. What do you laughed at Sirs? Why, suppose I mistake the month it is no
matter.


Lord Chief J. Look you we are now upon a Question of time, and you cannot tell
that a man i^ there at a certain time, unless you can prove the certain time
when he came away?


Cox, I can prove that he was there till after the Consult of the Jesuits, (
and then the people laughed again)


L. C. J Ay, I ^elieve you there, it is enough for you, but you have done a very
great prejudice to those persons that you came for, for you come to prove the
conclusion, but do not take notice of what Mediums you are to use. Say you, if
I can but prove that he was there till after the consult of the Jesuits, that
is the thing in Question, and I need no more, but this is serving a turn only:
Pray can you tell me what month he came to St. Omers?


Cox, Yes, he came thither in the month of December.


L. C. J. And when did he go away again?


Cox, He was never absent from St. Omers out of the view of the Scholars,
except one night that he went to Watton, and one day when he was in the
Infirmary, but even at that time he was seen by some of the Scholars.


L. C. J. Yet you cannot tell the time that he went away?


Cox, He was never absent all the while.


Mr. Justice Windham. Do you know when the Consult of the Jesuits was? upon
what day?


Cox, He says he went away with Mr. Hilsley, but he did not, I can prove the
contrary.


L. C. J. No, no, he says he followed him and overtook him at Calis.


Cox. That is false, and I can prove it by this Circumstance: one Mr. Conquest
was to go for England that day, and he came into the Refectory, and told us a
story of this Mr. Conquests being unwilling to rise in the morning to go for
England.


L, C. J. When did he tell that story?


Cox. That day that he was to go for England,


L. C. J. How long was that after Mr. Hilsley went away?


Cox. The day after.


Gaven. When was the time that Mr. Conquest went for England?


Cox. In the month of May as we count.


L. C. J. What time in the month of May?


Cox. It was the fifth: and he says that Mr. Pool and Mr. Nevill were in
England with him, but I can testify that they were not absent, for one of them
was my musick-master.


Lord Chief Just. Was he there all May?


Cox. Yes, that I can testify upon my Oath.


L. C. J. And all June?


Cox. Yes, my Lord, but if I prove he was not in May in England it is
sufficient.


L. C. J. Upon my word you deserve a sharp penance for running into that fault
2 or 3 times: you have done them no kindness in this matter.


Gaven. If your Lordship will take advantage of every Circumstance, young men
may not remember the particular day of his going away.


L. C. J. But you hear how he delivers his Evidence, it is as if he had been
instructed, you must come and prove that Oats was not in England in April and
May, and that will do our business, for he tells you it is sufficient, but we
will have it proved to satisfy us.


Cox. But why should I say more than I know?


L. C. J. You mean, more than you are instructed about. I only ask you one
short question, Do you know when Mr. Oats left St Omers? Name the month.


Gaven. If you don't remember the time, say so?


Cox My Lord, I cannot Remember it.


L. C J. Then call another. ( Who stood up.)


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I desire they may be Examined apart.


L. C. J. You need not trouble your self about that. What is your name?


Billing. My name is Thomas Billing.


L. C. J. When came you from S. Omers?


Billing I came 3 months ago I think my Lord.


L. C. J. Do you know Mr. Oats?


Billing, Yes, my Lord, very well.


L. C. J. When did you see him at St. Omers?


Billing, My Lord, I saw him when he came the same day, or the day after.


L. C. J. When was that?


Billing, In December my Lord, the 10th. of December.


L. C. J. And he staid there how long?


Billing, Till the Latter end of June.


L. C. J. was he never absent?


Billing. I can very well remember that he went to Watton in the Christmas. I
was then in he Infirmary my self, and he and his Companion came in there to see
us, and said he had been at Watton.


L. C. J. But he was twice in the Infirmary, was he not?


Billing. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. When was the second time?


Billing, The second time was in April, I went in the week before Christmas, on
St. Thomas of Canterbury's day I came out again.


Lord Chapter Just. But you say the second time was in April?


Billing. Yes.


Lord Chapter Just. How long was he there then?


Billing. Truly I was not with him then, but I think 3 or 4 days.


Lord Chief Just. Were you in the College then?


Billing. Yes my Lord I was.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you see him in the College from time to time?


Billing Yes, I did.


Lord Chapter Just. How long?


Billing. For all the time that he staid.


Lord Chapter Just. How long was that?


Billing. That was from December till the latter end of June.


Lord Chapter Just. Was he there all May?


Billing. Yes, my Lord. He says he was 8 days in England, but he could not be
so, for he entered himself into the Sodality the 25 th of March, and not long
after his admission, he was put to read every Sunday morning at 6 a Clock. And
after that he began once to read he never was absent from that time, till the
time he went away.


Lord Chapter Just. Why did he read when he was sick?


Billing. He was not sick upon the Sunday.


Lord Chapter Just. You say he was sick in April?


Billing. Yes my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. But was he not sick of a Sunday in April?


Billing. He was only a little indisposed, and frequented the infirmary in the
day time for a matter of 3 or 4 days.


Lord Chapter Just. Did he read at the time he was sick in the infirmary?


Billing. He was not sick an whole week.


Lord Ch Just. Did it reach to a Sunday?


Billing, No, my Lord that I remember.


Lord Chapter J. How long did he continue there?


Billing Til toward the latter end of June.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you see him once in 2 or 3 days?


Billing. Yes my Lord I did constantly. And upon the second of May, ^^ve^
particularly remember, looking out into the Garden, I saw Mr. Blunt walking in
the Garden, and Mr. Oats with him: And observing him to be very intimately
familiar with him, I a^ked some that were with me, Does, this Sampson, for he
went by that name in the College, says I, does Sampson know Dick Blunt? no
said they, and we wondered at his confidence having no greater acquaintance, I
saw him that day walking in the Garden with that Blunt.


L. C. J. That was the second of May?


Billing, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J, And he was constantly in this Gentleman's company that day?


Billing. Yes, and moreover the same day this Sampson* was walking with one
John Rushton in the Garden, and seeing me walk alone, Thomas, says he have you
never a companion? No Sampson said I, well said he prithe come to us. So I was
with him walking a little while, and then this Blunt and one Henry Howard were
playing one with another, throwing stones at one another Shins. At which he
was displeased, and said ^f they would not be quiet he would go tell the
Rector. Howard was hasty and spoke angerly to him, and said if he would not be
quiet he would beat him: But Mr. Oats persisting, and daring of him, says h^,
what do you dare me? and come up to him and throws up Mr. Oats his heels, With
that mr. Oats looked very fre^fully upon him and withdrew himself into the
Infirmary, as we thought to speak to the Rector. And by these particulars, and
such as these I remember to have seen him every day, one day with another, or
every other day at St. Omers till he went away which was in June.


Then stood up another, one Townely.

L, C. J. Come mr. Townely, do you know mr. Oats?


Tow. Yes, my Lord:


L. C. J. When came you from St Omers?


Townely I came a week before Easter.


Lord Chapter Just. When saw you this same Mr. Oats at St. Omers?


Townley. I saw him in June.


Lord Chapter Just. When else?


Townley. In May.


Lord Chapter Just. When else?


Townley. In April.


Lord Chapter Just. Was he there in all April, all May, and all June?


Townley. No, not all June. He went away as I take it about the 10 th of June?


Lord Chapter Just. Pray how often did you see him? Did you see him every day?


Townley. I conversed with him every day. He was partly a Scholar and partly a
Father: and sat at a Table by himself. He went to School as a Scholar; It Is
true indeed, he did not learn as the rest of the Boys did, but he went to
School at the Boys did, and was at a Table from the Fathers as the Boys were,
but apart and alone.


Lord Chapter Just. But how often did you see him? was it every other day?


Townley. Yes, I believe I did.


Lord Chapter Just. What for all April and all May?


Townley. Yes.


Lord. Chapter Just. How came you to take such particular notice of it that you can
say, you saw him every other day?


Town^ley. If I constantly dine with one, or if he be at a single Table alone,
he cannot be absent, but I must take notice of it: and he was neither as a
Father nor as a Scholar but betwixt both, and therefore the more to be taken
notice of.


Lord Ch Just. This then you say, He siting by himself and being distinct from
all ^he others, you might more easily observe his absence than any others. This
is that you say?


Townley. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. You say well. Call another.


Then stood up one Fall.

Lord Chapter Just. When came you from St. Omers?


Fall. about Two months ago.


Lord Chapter Just. When did you see Mr. Oats?


Fall. I saw him when I was in my Syntax, and now I am in Poetry.


L. C. J. What month did you see him in?


Fall. When he came first as I rember it was at Christmas.


L. C. J. Christmas last?


Fall. No, it was Christmas was twelth month, Christmas 1677.


L. C. J. How long did you see him there?


Fall, I saw him there from that time till June, only when he was at Watton.


L. C. J, Was he never sick?


Fall. I saw him in the Infirmary my self.


L. C. J. How can you tell when a man is sick?


Fall, I do not pretend to do that, but he was in the Infirmary as a sick man.


L. C. J. How came you to take particular notice of it?


Fall, I took no particular notice, but I have recollected my memory.


L. C. J. Upon what occasion?


Fall, Upon this occasion.


L. C. J. How often did you see him?


Fall, I saw him every day.


L. C. J. How long have you been in the Convent?


Fall, My Lord I have been there two years and an half. (Then stood up John
Hall.)


L. C. J When came you from St. Omers?


Hall, in July my Lord.


L. C. J How long have you been there?


Hall seven years and upwards.


L. C. J. How long is it since you came from thence?


Hall In July in the year 1678.


L, C. J. And did you see M^. Oats there then?


Hall, No, my Lord,


L. C.J, When did you see him there then.


Hall, I saw him there in April, May, and June


L. C.J. What all June?


Hall No, my Lord.


L. C. J. How long in June?


Hall, He went away about the Twenty third of June.


L. C, J. How came you to take such particular notice Mr. Oats was there all
this while?


Hall, I was a servant there.


L. C. J. In what way?


Hall, A Resectorian, a Butler.


L. C. J, Did you keep Books of what meat and drink they had?


Hall, No, I laid their Table, drew their Beer and laid the Bread.


L. C. J. And did you serve Mr. Oats with bread and Beer every day?


Hall, Yes my Lord, most Days.


L. C. J. Did you serve the Infirmary?


Hall, No, my Lord.


L. C. J. But you say you served him every day?


Hall. Yes, my Lord, the most of the time he remained there, I acknowledge he
was in the Infirmary.


L. C. J. How long?


Hall. Four or five days, or thereabouts.


L. C. J. Was he in the College in April?


Hall, Yes my Lord, all along.


L. C. J. And all May?


Hall, Yes my Lord, I saw him all May, I laid his Table near the door at a
particular place where he always sat.


Jury, My Lord, we desire to know what employment he is of now?


L. C. J. Hall, what made you come into England?


Hall, My Lord, I had not my health there.


L. C J. How long had you lived there?


Hall Seven years and upwards.


L. C. J And when began you to be sick?


Hall, I had not my health at Christmas in December, 1677.


L. C. J. What employment have you here, for you had a good place there?


Hall, I live at home with my Father and my friends.


L. C. J. What is your Father? where lives h^?


Hall, He is a Gentleman, he lives in Radnorshire.


L. C. J. When came you to London?


Hall I came to England in July, 1678.


L. C. J. But you say you Father is in Radnorshire, when came you here to
Lnndon?


Hall, I have been here about a month, I was summoned up as a Witness.


Then one Dallison, was called who did not appear, and one Manshall appearing,
but speaking French and no English, and an Interpreter not being ready, he was
for the present by the consent of the Prisoners set aside. And then stood up
one Cook.

L. C J. When came you from St. Omers?


Cook, In January Last


L. C. J. And where have you been ever since?


Cook, Here in Town my Lord.


L. C. J. Does your Father live here in Town?


Cook, No, my Lord.


L. C. J. Do your friends live here?


Cook, No, my Lord.


L. C. J. You came over upon this occasion did you?


Cook^ Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. When did you see Mr. Oats there?


Cook, I saw him in last June,


L: C J: And was he there in July?


Cook, No, my Lord,


L: C: J: What time did he go away?


Cook, The 23 d, the Eve of the Feast of St: John Baptist.


L: C: J: How do you know?


Cook, I made him some Clothes:


L: C: J: Are you a Tailor?


Cook, Yes:


L: C: J: How often did you see him?


Cook, Every day:


L: C: J. How came he to keep you company?


Cook, I could not choose but see him, sometimes I saw him 20 times a day.


L. C: J. Where was he in April?


Cook, He was there all April.


L.C. J. He might be absent one day or so, and you see him not,


Cook, He used to come twice a week to my shop for things.


L. C. J. Was he there all May?


Cook, Yes.


L. C. J. You say you saw him every other day?


Cook Yes, my Lord.


Sir Chr. Levins Why Sir there are 150 Scholars there, how can you tell he was
there so well?


Mr. J. Pemberton: Can you tell every one that was there all that time?


Cook, No, I cannot tell every one that was there, but he was particular enough.


Lord Chief Just. Did you live in Town as a Tailor or in the College?


Cook. In the College.


Mr. Belwood, Was Mr. Oats at Watton any part of the time?


Cook, Yes, he was.


Mr. Belwood, What day? what month?


Cook, I cannot justly say the day, but it was in April,


Lord Ch^ef Just. How long was he absent?


Cook, Only one night as it shall please you.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, Hark you, how came you to take notice that he was at
Watton one night?


Cook, It was talked of among all the Scholars.


Lord Chief Just. How can you remember what was said a year ago of one man?


Cook, It was reported all over the House.


Gaven, In one place of his Narrative, he says, he came over with Sir John
Warner, and Sir Thomas Preston.


Lord Chief Just. North, That is nothing to the purpose. If you can contradict
him in any thing that has been sworn here, do.


Gaven. If we can prove him a perjured man at any time we do our business.


L. C. J. You should have proved him a perjured man before. How can we prove
one Cause in another? and then too he had been provided to make his defense,
Can he come prepared to make good every thing that he has said in his life?


Dr. Oats, Can I come to make good my Evidence against all I have done in my
life?


Lord Chief Just. Look you, if so be he has forsworn himself in any former
Trial, if that would appear you have all the reason to make use of it, but you
have not taken the right way, you should have indicted him and tried him for
perjury in the former Trial, and then he could not have been heard at all in
this.


Whitebread, We were all Prisoners close shut up.


Lord Chief Justice, We know you have a party strong enough, and willing enough
to convict him of Perjury if they could; but look you Gentlemen here is the
thing, if you can give such Evidence as will satisfy the Jury that he was
absent all April and all May you have said a great thing. His Evidence will be
quite contradicted.


Whitebread, He says he came over with Sir Thomas Preston and Sir John Warner
and others.


Lord Chief Just. He says nothing of it now.


Dr. Oats, May it please you my Lord, I will answer it if you please.


Lord Chief Just. They desire to know who came over with you when you came over
in April.


Dr. Oats, I will tell you, and to convince the Court, that in neither of the
Trials I did contradict my self, I say, I did name some persons at one time
that I did not name at another. There came over with me the Rector of Liege,
Sir John Warner, Father Williams, Father Marish, Father Warner, Sir Tho.
Preston and others.


Lord Chief Just. This is dea^ing plainly with you.


Then stood up one Bartlett.

Lord Chief Just. What Countryman are you?


Bartlett, I am a Dutch man.


Lord Chief Just. Can you speak English?


Bartlett, Yes a little.


Lord Chief Just. When came you from Saint Omers?


Bartlett, I came from Saint Omers the 23 of May in the year 1678. new style.


Gaven, My Lord, this man is come over to testify, that Oats is perjured in a
circumstance about Sir John Warner.


Lord Chief Just. He is to contradict Mr. Oats testimony, for he says he came
over with Sir John Warner, and you say Sir John did not come at that time.


Gaven, Yes.


Lord Chief Just. Well when did Sir John Warner come over from Saint Omers?


Bartlett, Whither?


Lord Chief Just. Into England:


Bartlett, Sir John Warner* has not been in England all May, and all the month
of April.


L. C. J. Where was he?


Bartlett, He was at Watton, I did see him there.


L. C. J. Were you there all that time?


Bartlett, Yes, I was.


Lord Chapter Just. North, Were you there all May?


Bartlet, Yes, I was:


L, C, J. When did you come over into England last?


Bartlett, The 23 th of May


L. C. J. How long have you been in England?


Bartlett, About 5 or 6 weeks.


Lord Chief Just. What is your Name?


Bartlett, My Name is Bartlett.


Lord Chief Just. But you say that you came over the 23 th of May.


Bartlett; I did not come over till the latter end of June.


Lord Chief Just. Just now you said, you came over the 23 th of May.


Bartlett, No, my Lord, I thought you had asked the question when Mr. Oats
came over.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, He says so, as your Lordship says before.


Lord Chief Just. How do you know when Mr. Oats came over?


Bartlett, I heard so beyond Sea.


Then one Carlier a Foreigner appearing, and not being able to speak English,
Mr. Tisser the Undersheriff of Middlesex was sworn truly to interpret his
Testimony.

L. C. J. Mr Tisser, you are only to tell us what he says. Ask him when he came
into England last.


Mr. Tisser, He says, my Lord, it was between seven and eight weeks ago.


Lord Chief Just. Ask him, if he knows where Sir John Warner was last Summer
was a year ago.


Mr. Tisser, He says, my Lord, he was in Watton for two years last past.


L. C. J Ask him where he was all April was twelvemonth, and all May:


Mr. Tisser, My Lord, he says, that the last Sunday in April, Sir John Warner
was at his house at Watton.


Lord Chief Just. And where was he all May?


Mr. Tisser, In the same house.


Lord Chief Just. Ask him how he does know.


Mr. Tisser, My Lord, he says, that he was a Gardener there.


L. C. J. It seems he says to the same effect as the last Witness did. Call
another.


Who did stand up.

L C. J. What is this man's name?


Gaven, His name is Charles Verron.


L. C. J. Does he speak any English?


Gaven, No, he does not.


L. C. Just. Then, Mr. Tisser, ask him if he knows Sir John Warner, and where
he was April and May was twelvemonth.


Lr. Tisser, He says, my Lord, that he was at Watton all April and May, and
continued there till September.


L. C. J. Pray ask this man what quality he is of there.


Mr. Tisser. He goes along with a Vessel between Saint Omers and Watton, and
that he knows it to be true.


Lord Chief. J. Ask him, if he did see him every day.


Mr. Tisser, He says, generally, my Lord, daily.


Lord Chief Just. Ask him what Religion he is of.


Mr. Tisser, He says he is of the Roman Religion.


Then stood up one Baillee.

Lord Chief Just. Ask him, Mr. Tisser, if he knows Sir John Warner; and where
he was all April and May was twelvemonth.


Mr. Tisser, He says the same, that he was at Watton all April and May.


Lord Chief Just. Ask him how he can tell.


Mr. Tisser, He says he is a Servant of the House.


Lord Chief Just. And did he see him there daily?


Mr. Tisser, My Lord, he says that he gave him directions to make a Bastyment,
that he is a Mason, and that he did give him directions daily about it, and
that he saw him every day.


Lord Chief Just, Look you, Gentlemen of the Jury, he speaks to the same
purpose that the three Witnesses before spoke to; he says he is a Mason, and
that he built a Bastyment there by direction from Sir John Warner, and that Sir
John Warner came daily to give directions about it.


Then stood up John Joseph.

L. C. J. Do you know Sir Thomas Preston?


Joseph, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. When did you see him?


Joseph, In the months of April, May and June:


L. C. J. Where was he then?


Joseph, He was at the English House at Liege.


Lord Chief Just. Did you see him there? how often did you see him there?


Joseph, I saw him there every day almost.


Lord Chief Just. What occasion had you to see him? what were you there?


Joseph, I was Porter of the Gate.


Lord Chief Just. And did you see him all the month of April?


Joseph, Every day, most commonly.


Lord Chief Just. Did you see him once in a day or two?


Joseph, I did see him in April, May and June.


Lord Chief Just. That you might do; but did you see him very day?


Joseph, Every day most commonly, I cannot absolutely say, but two or three
days in a week.


Sir Cr. Levins, Pray do you know of any time that Sir Tho. Preston was absent
from Liege.


Joseph, He was in the time of the vacancy.


Sir Cr. Levins, Was he not absent in April or May?


Joseph, No, my Lord.


Lord Chief Just. When are the vacancies?


Joseph, In August, my Lord.


Then stood up one Peter Carpenteer.

Lord Chief Just. Do you know Sir The. Preston?


Carpenteer, Yes, my Lord, very well.


Lord Chief Just, Where did you know him?


Carpenteer, I knew him at Liege.


Lord Chief Just. How often did you see him there in April and May.


Carpenteer, Every day I saw him there all April and May.


Lord Chief Just. What Office had you there?


Carpenteer, I was Caterer.


Gaven, My Lord, we have no more Witnesses as to this point. But, my Lord, my
Case is different from the others: Mr. Oats says he did not see me in the
Congregation, but he says, he afterward saw my hand to the Consult. Now, my
Lord, I have a Witness to prove that I was at that time at Wolverhampton in
Staffordshire. No body has a right to sit in the Congregation till he become a
professed Jesuit, which at that time I was not.


Lord Chief Just. He does not charge you to have been there, though he says he
saw your hand to it.


Gaven. My Lord, I was then in the Country.


Lord Chief Just. North, That will do you some, and yet but little service, if
you can prove your self at Wolverhampton at that time: but call your Witnesses.


L. C. J. Mr. Gaven, he says, he saw a Letter of yours giving an account how
affairs stood in Staffordshire and Shropshire, and that afterward in July, and
before that Gentleman Mr. Ashby went to the Bath, he heard you discourse of the
same matter: And though he cannot charge his memory to say he saw you the 24 th
of April, yet, says he, I did see his hand to the Consult; and being asked how
he knew your hand, he says he knew it by your writing a Bill of Exchange in his
presence.


Gaven. I could not sign the Consult at London, and not be at London.


Lord Chief J. North. I believe in such a business you care not how many hands
you have; but we will not prevent you calling your Witnesses. You are upon your
life, don't spend the time, call them quickly.


Lord Chief Just. What do you call them to prove?


Gaven. To prove that I was at Wolverhampton the 24 th and 25 th of April.


Lord Chief Just, Pray hear what he says himself. You say, Sir, you saw his
hand to the Consult that was in April; pray when was it that you saw it?


Dr. Oats. It was in June or July.


Lord Chief Just. North. You might set your hand afterward to it, if you were
not there then.


Lord Chief Just. You say you were then in Staffordshire, and might not you set
your hand afterward when you came to Town? I will tell you, Mr. Gaven, in
April they met, and had such a Resolution; you were then in Staffordshire,
might not you come to Town in July following, and set your hand to what was
agreed in April before? And you cannot contradict him, but by showing that all
June and July you were not here: For if you prove your self never so much to
have been at Wolverhampton in April, that will not serve the turn. You seem to
make a very great defense of this: All that Mr. Oats says, is, that the 24 th
of April he was present where there was a Consult had about the death of the
King, and diverse persons set their hands to the Resolve. Mr. Gaven afterward
was in Town, and then, says he I saw his hand set to the Consult: I will not
charge my memory to say he was present but I will tell you why I believe it was
his Hand, because I saw him draw a Bill of Exchange, and that was just like the
same Hand.


Gaven. Aye but, my Lord, I was not here in April.


Lord Chief Just. But this proves, in effect, that you set your hand to the
thing afterward. And now if you should prove your self never so plainly not to
have been there in April, you do not come to the thing: it is still a non
liquet whether you were here in July or no. And Mr. Oats does not positively
charge you as to April. Well, call your Witnesses, and prove what you will.


Catherine Winford was called, and appeared.

Gaven. I desire you would be pleased to ask her, where I was the 23 th of July.


Winford. My Lord, I am very sure he was a Sojourner at our House the most part
of the Summer, in June and July both: In July the 23 th he went away from my
House, and took another Lodging more convenient for that which he had to do.


Lord Chief Just. Where? in what Town was this?


Winford. At Wolverhampton in Staffordshire.


Lord Chapter Just. was he never away from you all that time?


Winford. No, and then he went to another Lodging in the Town.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you say that he sojourned with you all June and July till
the 23 th?


Winford. He sojourned with me longer; but I only name those months, because
they are only in question.


L. C. J. Where did he go when he went from you?


Winford. He took another lodging in the Town.


L. C. J. And did you see him then?


Winford. I saw him then every day, or every other day.


L. C. J. Are you a Roman Catholic?


Winford. Yes, my Lord, I am so.


L. C. J. Call another.


Gaven. Call Mary Poole. ( Who stood up.)


L. C. J. Do you know Mr. Gaven?


Poole. Yes, my Lord.


L. C, J. How long have you know him?


Poole. This six or seven years.


L. C. J. Pray do you know where he was this time Twelvemonth?


Poole. He was at Mrs. Winfords House at Wolverhampton.


L. C. J, How do you know?


Poole, I was a Servant there in the House.


Lord Chapter J. And where was he in April?


Poole. He was at my Mistresses House.


L. C. J. And where was he in May?


Poole. my Lord, I believe he was there.


L. C. J. And why do you believe he was there?


Poole, Because I do not remember his going forth, till the latter end of July,
and he was there in June too.


L. C, J. You answer readily as to June and July, why did you stick at the
month of May, more than the other Months? for you know, when I asked you where
he was in April, then you said he was at home; why do you doubt whether he was
there in May or no? pray tell us why it is not as certain to you that he was
not there in May as that he was there in June; why do you doubt more of it?


Poole. I do not doubt but that he was there.


Lord C. J. But why did you not answer then as readily to the one as to the
other?


Poole. My Lord, any one may mistake.


L. C. J. This you were not prepared for, and it was a question you did not
come ready to answer: are you a Roman Catholic?


Poole. Yes, my Lord. ( Here the people laughed.)


L. C. J Look you, you must know there is no other use to be made of it, but
only to show, that Protestants are so averse to Popery in England, that they
will not endure a Roman Catholic in England. But they are good Evidence, and
competent Witnesses, I must tell you that, and no man must deny it: for though
you deny Heaven to us, yet we will not deny Heaven to you, nor Witnesses;
though you say Heriticks will be damned, yet we hope they will never, while
they do not follow your practices. ( At which the people gave a great shout.)


L. C. J. You must pardon the peoples shouting; for you have turned their
hearts so, that there is no living for a Papist in England, I will maintain it.
( And then the people shouted again.) You shall have all the Justice that can
be, and all the favor the Law will allow.


Gaven. If there be but a place for us in Heaven, I am contented. My Lord, I
desire you will be pleased to ask this Mrs. K^^th, Winford, whether she does
not remember that I came from my Lord Aston's the Monday before.


L. C. J. Mrs. Winford, what say you? do you remember any passages about the
time he left your house?


Winford. My Lord, I did not know directly and positively what I should come to
answer, and therefore I cannot recollect my self.


L. C. J. Do you know that he went to any Gentleman's house some time before he
left your house?


Winford. Yes, my Lord, he went often abroad.


L. C. J. To whose?


Winford. To my Lord Astons.


L. C. J. How long before?


Winford. I cannot tell.


L. C. J. How long did he stay at my Lord's? did he ever stay five or six days?


Winford* I cannot tell.


L. C. J. My meaning is this in plain English, to ask you plainly, and you
ought in Conscience to speak the truth as much as if you were upon your Oath:
for you are in the presence of God, who will judge you as severely for a
falsehood in this Case, as in the other. I would ask you whether he could not
possibly be absent, and make a step to London, and you be never the wiser?


Windford. My Lord, I am as confident as I can be of any thing in the world, of
the contrary.


L. C. J. Might not he be in London the latter end of June or July, and you not
know it, when he pretended to go to my Lord Aston's?


Winford. I do not know, but I am very confident he did not.


L, C. J. But was he absent long enough to have done it? can you charge your
memory with that?


Winford. It was possible it might be so, but I am confident it was not,
because I used to order my maid to get him his Linen ready upon any Journey,
and he had none now.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, he took a Chamber to go into the Exercise; now, my Lord,
he taking a Chamber on purpose for this very thing, he might pretend that, and
come to London the while, and they not know it, because he was shut up; for
none are to come at them.


Winford. My Lord, I know not any such thing of him; but this is a Rule amongst
them, that when they are so shut up, if there be a necessary occasion to come
to them about any particular business, as sending them Linen or so, they have
admittance to them.


L. C. J. Were you employed upon any such extraordinary matter?


Winford. My Lord, I used to go and see him, and carry him his Linen.


L. C. J. And can you charge your memory with that?


Winford. Yes; my Lord I can.


L. C. J. When, the Latter end of July?


Winford. Yes, my Lord, I often went to see him then, when he was gone from my
house.


L. C. J. Where was he for all the former part of July till those eight days?


Winford. He was at my own house.


L. C. J. When went he first into this recluse way?


Winford. He went from my house the 23th. of July.


L. C. J. Was he not close when he was with you?


Winford. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. And the last eight days you had access to him.


Winford. Yes, I had.


L. C. J. I ask you, Are these people shut up at a certain time, and there is
no coming to them upon any occasion?


Winford. My Lord, most of those days I did see him, indeed he was shut up; but
upon any kind of business, as carrying of the Linen, and sometimes a pair of
Gloves, and other things of his own, or sometimes to speak with him about
business, were admitted to him.


L. C. J. I see your Confinements are not so great as you would make them to be
or he would have us think. I ask you once more, whether you can say that during
the months of June and July, it was not possible for him to make a step to
London, and you never the wiser?


Winford I am very confident he did not; he was not absent long enough to do it.


Sir Cr. Levins. You said just now, you could not say positively but he might
be absent for five or six days.


Winford. I do not believe he did: for he had no linen with him, which he used
to have, when he went to London.


L. C. J. But supposing he had no linen, might he not go to London and you not
know of it?


Winford. I Cannot tell whether he was absent or no long enough to do it.


Gaven. Pray, my Lord, let me speak; as I live, an innocent man will be lost
else. He says expressly I was in Town in July; and gives this argument for it,
That Mr. Ashby was in Town, and he met me with him.


L. C. J. No, no, Mr. Oats was not so positive: he says it was either in June
or July; but he rather thinks it was July. But Mistress, might not he in the
beginning of July be absent so long as a man might go to London and return
again, in the first three weeks of July, I mean?


Winford* My Lord, I cannot charge my memory, because I did not know what I
should be asked, and so could not recollect my self. I only say I am confident
of it, because he always told me when he went such a Journey, that I might make
provision of Linen to sit him for it.


L. C. J. Your reasons are weak, because he used to tell you that you might get
him linen: men upon extraordinary occasions do extraordinary things; so that
you are not to govern your self by what he used to do in his acquainting you,
or you in providing his linen. This was no ordinary Errand, and therefore I
don't ask you whether he had linen from you or no; but you are only to charge
your self with remembering whether he could not be absent long enough out of
your sight to have been such a Journey.


Gaven. Pray, my Lord, give me fair play. He does charge it expressly, and is
precise to a day: He says I was here in July after that Ashby was come to
Town, and before that he went out of Town: And he says that Ashby came to Town
in the middle of July, and went out of Town about the latter end of July or
beginning of August* Now, my Lord, I say this, he saying that Ashby, came to
Town the middle of July, and staid there a fortnight, and then went to the
Bath, and that I came to Town while that he was there; if I prove that I was in
Staffordshire from the 15th. or 16th of July to the end of the month, then I
shall clear my self evidently; for he does in effect charge me to be here some
time in that fortnights time, and I prove that all the latter part of July I
was in the country.


L. C. J. He does not charge it to a day, but he says it was about a fortnight.


Dr. Oats. Mr. Ashby came to Town in the beginning or middle of July; I rather
think it was the middle, but I dare not upon my Oath be positive as to the
time; and in that time Mr. Ashby staid in Town, mr. Gaven came to London: for I
remember he said he would go and see Father Ashby, who was then at Wild-house.


L. C. J. Prove where you were now all July. Call your Witneses.


Gaven, I prove that I was at Wolverhampton from the 23th to the end of the
month.


L. C. J. Call your witnesses to prove where you were the beginning, that can
speak expressly to it.


Gaven: My Lord, I have them not here.


L. C. J, Why then would you make us lose all this time?


Gaven, My Lord, I will tell you; hear the words of an ingenuous man being as I
was innocent, not knowing What they intended to charge me with, I in my mind
run over all that I could imagine I had at any time done that they could lay
hold on. If I had been guilty of any thing, my own conscience would have told
me of it; and I should have provided to have given some Answer to it: but being
innocent, I was to ransack my memory to sum up all the passages of my life,
where I had been, what I had said, what I had done, that would give them any
occasion of accusing me. And because I did imagine they might think I was here
the 24th of April, I brought witnesses for that; and because I did imagine that
they might speak of some Consults in April, I sent up for such witnesses at my
own charge, as could testify where I was then.


L. C: J. But you have not one Protestant that testifies for you.


Gavau, And now, my Lord I humbly cast my self upon the Honor and Justice of
this Honorable and Just Court; to which I submit my self with all my heart and
soul, having used all the remedies I can. I have cleared my self as to the
main day, the 24th of April, whereon all the pretended Plot lies: And I Will
bring Witnesses that shall swear I was not in London in August; and if my
eternal Salvation lay upon it, I could averr I was not in London: and I wish I
may be made an example of justice before all the world (in the sight of God I
speak it) if I be not the most innocent person in the world, And, my Lord,
seeing there is only his Oath for it, and my denial, I have only one demand: I
don't know whether it be not an extravagant one or no; if it be, I don't desire
to have it granted.


L. C. J. What is that Demand?


Gaven, You know that in the beginning of the Church (this learned and just
Court must needs know that) that for one thousand years together, it was a
custom, and grew to a constant law, for the Trial of persons accused of any
capital Offense, where there was only the accusers Oath and the Accused's
denial, for the prisoner to put himself upon the Trial of Ordeal, to evidence
his own Innocence.


L. C. J. North, We have no such law now.


L. C. J. You are very fanciful, Mr. Gaven you believe that your cunning in
asking such a thing, will take much with the auditory; but this is only an
artificial Varnish: You may do this with hopes of having it take with those
that are Roman Catholics, who are so superstitious as to believe Innocence
upon such desires; but we have a plain way of understanding here in England,
and that helped very much by the Protestant Religion: so that there is scarce
any Artifice big enough to impose upon us. You ask a thing that sounds much of
a pretense to innocence, and that it would be a mighty suffering if you should
miscarry, because you ask that you know you cannot have. Our Eyes and our
understandings are lest us, though you do not leave their Understannings to
your Proselytes; but you are mistaken, if you think to impose that upon us that
you do upon them: and you do so impose upon them. But i will tell you, there is
scarce any man with us that can be a Papist: for you cannot deceive and gull
us, as you have done all that you have perverted to your way.


Gaven, Is it any harm, my Lord, to ask whether I might not be so tried?


L. C. J. North, look you here, Mr. Gaven, the time is far spent; if you have
any thing to say, we will hear you, if you have any witnesses, call them, and
we will examine them: but if not, the other Prisoners must be admitted to make
their defense as well as you.


Gaven. All these six can prove that I was at Wolverhampton the last week in
July.


Then another Witness stood up for him.

Gaven, Where was I in July?


Witness, I cannot speak to all July; but, my Lord I can declare, that Mr.
Gaven was in Staffordshire the last week of July every day, I am confident.


L. C. J. Where was the first three weeks in July?


Witness, I cannot speak as to that; but in the last week in July he came to an
apartment of an house that I lived in.


L. C. J. Cook you, Mr. Gaven, you see what this Evidence is; she says that you
were in Staffordshire the last week in July, for you had an apartment in the
house she lived in. Call another. ( Who stood up.)


L. C. J. Where was mr. Gaven in July last?


2 Witness, My Lord, I saw him my self at the latter end of July for very many
days, for he was in a Room of the house that I lived in, I am sure, most of the
last week.


L. C. J. Where was he the last fortnight?


2 Witness, I am confident I saw him all the last fortnight, but I cannot be
positive


L. C. J. Call another. ( Who stood up.)


L. C. J. Where was mr. Gaven in July?


3. Witness. My Lord, I lived in the same Town with him, and I do not remember
that he was out all July, but the last week he was in our house.


Lord Chief Just. Well, call another. (Who stood up.)


Lord Chief Just. Where was Mr. Gaven in July last?


4 Witness, He was in July last, the last week, in a part of our house.


Lord Chief Just. So then he came home from London the 23 th or 24 th of July.
Well Mr. Gaven have you any more Witnesses to any other purpose? for here are
enough to this.


Gaven, No, my Lord.


Lord Chief Just. Mr. Whitebread, have you any Witnesses to call?


Wh, My Lord, I have only this, and I desire to be heard in this point, to
prove that Mr. Oats was mistaken in his Evidence that he gave at the last Trial
against Mr. Ireland.


L C. J Look you, I must break in upon you; you have been told so often, all of
you have been told it, and yet you are upon the former Trials again. You are
now upon your trial for your life, if you could have disproved any thing that
he said at a former trial, you should have taken a legal way and convicted him
of perjury; but now to charge him with a printed Paper is not fair. You must
speak to what he says now.


Whitebread. He says the same now. But all that I say is this, If he be not
honest, he can be witness in no case. I suppose if any one can prove him not
Probus Testis, his Testimony is not to be received in any case.


Lord Chief Just. But how will you prove that? Come on, I Will teach you a little
(...) ^ill come to contradict a Witness, you ought to do it in a matter which
is the present debate here; for if you would convict him of any thing that he
said in Irelands Trial, we must try Irelands Cause over again. But if you will
say any thing against what he says now, do.


Whitebread, That which I would alledg is this, If he be convicted of perjury
in one case, he is not to be believed in another.


Lord Chief Just. You say right, if he be convicted.


Whitebread, He is not only then an incompetent Witness, for he cannot be said
to be probus testis, but he is improbus. Now this is that I can prove.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, Nay, you must show it by a Record.


Lord Chief Just. You cannot have so little understanding, you that have been,
and were to be so great a man among them, had been Provincial, and was to have
been somewhat else. I have told you already, that to prove him to be a man that
has no faith in him he must be convicted. You must have indicted him, and
convicted him, of the thing wherein he did commit perjury, and then he had been
prepared to justify himself. But shall you come now, and at this your Trial,
and prove what he said at Staleys Trial, and Colemans Trial, and Irelands
Trial? And must we examine what matters have received a verdict and a judgment
there? for consider what will be the consequence of it; if it should be false,
you there arraign a verdict. You should have convicted him of the falsehood
first.


Whitebread, I desire the Jury to take notice, that he does not stick to the
Testimony that he gave then, for if he does it was false.


Lord Chief Just. They must not take notice of any thing that was done at a
former Trial, unless it be spoken of now.


Lord Chief Just. North, Do not call any Witnesses to prove what he said then,
but to disprove what he has said now.


Lord Chief Just It Is a pretty hard matter to make a Priest understand one, for
what I see. If the Witness shall not gain credit with the Jury that he came
over with Sir Thomas Preston, Sir John Warner; if they are satisfied by those
many Witnesses, ten or twelve at least, that it is false, they ought not to
believe him; but as to that Testimony they ought to believe your Witnesses, but
he is not presently guilty of perjury: for if they should not give ^redit to
Mr. Oats, you must indict him, and another Jury must pass upon him before he
is convicted: for it is one thing to be forsworn and perjured, and another
thing to be proved so; and he is not proved to be so, but by a Record for that
purpose.


Harcourt, If so be our Witnesses cannot be looked upon as good Witnesses, then
there can be no Commerce abroad in any other Country.


Lord Chief Just. They are no doubt good Witnesses till they be proved
otherwise, and they are left to the Jury to believe as they think fit.


Harcourt, Now here are diverse things that are brought against my self by Mr.
Bedlow, Mr. Prance, Mr Oats, and Mr Dugdale; if the Witnesses that I bring,
because they are Roman Catholic, are not good Witnesses, then I am in an hard
case.


Lord Chief Just. North, Look then, you mistake the thing; those that are not
Witnesses, we do not hear at all; but our hearing them at all, proves that we
look upon them as good Witnesses. But when a man is a Witness, he is either of
more credit, or of less credit, according to Circumstances; and it is a proper
question to ask them, Whether they are Roman Catholics: but they are Witnesses
without all question.


Harc I say, my Lord, these persons are known to be every one of them very bad
and flagitious persons, and that every one of them have undertaken this course
merely to get a livelihood: they are men of desperate fortunes, they get a
living by swearing fast, they find that the best trade.


Lord Chief Just. North, If you have any other Witnesses, we will hear them. If
you have have no other Witnesses, then we must hear what the Kings Council
reply, and then it will be your turn to say what you can in your defense.


Gaven, I have Witnesses here. It is not indeed a positive Evidence, but a
negative Evidence; and I have a Brother and a Sister in Town, and upon my
salvation I never came to Town but I came to their house.


Lord Chief Just. That will signify nothing. Mr. Harcourt, have you any more
Witnesses? if you have them, pray call them.


Harcourt, It Is in vain to call them, if they be not to be believed because
they are Roman Catholics.


Sir Cr. Levins, It Is a mistake; we do not refuse any Witnesses because they
are Roman Catholics.


Lord Chief Just. No, we have not refused any one Point yet.


Lord Chief J. North, If you have any more, pray call them, and don't spend the
time.


Lord Chief Justice, Call a Priest or two if you will, we will hear them.


Harcourt, Mr. Oats did accuse me of paying fourscore pounds at my chamber,
and he did say afterward it was at Wildhouse, I have persons to justify what
was done at my own chamber; and he says, Mr. Ireland was by; now here are
Witnesses to prove that Mr. Ireland was in Staffordshire all the month of
August, therefore he could not be present.


Lord Chief Just. Does he say any such thing now?


Mr. Just. Pemberton, That was urged before; pray do not insist upon that, it
has received a Trial.


Lord Chief Just. I Will tell you what he says, and I Will ask him the question:
Dr. Oats, it is supposed by your testimony that Mr. Ireland and Mr. Harcourt
were together when this fourscore pounds was paid for the Villains that went to
Windsor to murder the King?


Dr. Oats, I never said such a word.


Harcourt, Here it is in the Trial.


Lord Chief Just. I stand not by the Printed (...) is no Record in Law. In
short, Were Mr. Ireland and Mr. Harcourt together (...) time?


Dr. Oats, No they were not.


Gaven, He did then say, that he did receive of Mr. Ireland, the 2 d of
September, 20 s. that he borrowed of him: now the 2 d of September he was at
Boscobel.


Dr. Oats, My Lord, I was not positive as to the day; but as near as I
remember (those were the words I said) it was the second of September; but
whether it was the first, second, seventh, eighth, or ninth, I would not be
positive in it.


Then the Prisoners called Pendrel and his Wife, and Gifford and his Wife; and
Gifford stood up.

Gifford, My Lord, I was here the last Sessions, where I did testify the
seeing of Mr. Ireland in Staffordshire on the 24 th of August, Bartholomew-day,
and the next day after; at which time Mr. Oats said that he saw him here in
Town. But Mr. Oats could not be particular in every thing; but at last he came
to a circumstance, and averred that the first or second of September he did
receive Twenty shillings of Mr. Ireland in Harcourts Chamber; he said it was
about the Fast day.


Dr. Oats, That was as near as I remembered.


Gifford, Here is in Court at least six people that know it; I saw him several
other of those days there; but these six people converted with him every day.


Mr. Just. Pemberton, How do you know all that?


Lord Chief Just. North, Come, come, you must not speak as to what he said in
Irelands Trial.


Lord Chief Just. What time was it that Mr. Harcourt and Mr. Ireland conferred
together about this same business?


Dr. Oats, My Lord, I do not charge Ireland, but I charge Harcourt with being
at Wildhouse, and that there Coleman met him, and that there was the greatest
part of the money, which was carried back to Harcourts Chamber, and given to
the person that was to carry it down to Windsor; but Mr. Coleman was gone away
before, and had lest a Guiney behind him which was given to the messenger for
expedition.


Lord. Chief Just. I am mistaken if you have not testified that Ireland was in
Town in August and September with Harcourt.


Dr. Oats, Ireland took his leave of London betwixt the 8 th and the 12 th of
August, as to go to St. Omers.


Lord Chief Just. Here is the matter, they must have right, though there be
never so much time lost, and patience spent. Say they, We must prove and
contradict men by such matters as we can; people may swear downright things,
and it is impossible to contradict them; but we will call Witnesses to prove
those particulars that can be proved: ^ay where Mr. Ireland was in August?


Dr Oats, He took his leave of us in Town in August, and that was between the
eighth and twelfth at Harcourts Chamber.


Lord Chief Just. What do you infer from Irelands being there then?


Dr. Oats, I Will tell you what I design in it: your Lordship may perceive that
I did methodize my Evidence according to the time; for I said this was our
business in April, this in July; and now we come to the business of August,
said I, we took our leaves of Mr. Ireland between the eighth and twelfth. I
said in July Mr. Fenwick was out of Town, but then if your Lordship remembers I
said he was in Town, and took his leave of Mr. Ireland between the eighth and
the twelfth of August.


Lord Chief Just. Was Mr* Ireland in Fenwicks company at that time in August?


Dr. Oats, Yes, my Lord, he was when he took his leave.


Lord Chief Just. Did they talk then of this business?


Dr. Oats, They took their leaves of one another, but as to what particular
things of the Plot they spoke about, I don't remember.


Lord Chief Just. Look you now, mind what he says, Ireland and Fenwick were
together in August between the eighth and the twelfth, but being asked, Whether
they were met on purpose to talk of the Plot? he says he does not remember the
particulars.


Here the Lady Southcott, her Son, and her Daughter were called.

Lord Chief Just. Did you say that Fenwick there at the Bar had converse with
Ireland in August for the carrying on of the Plot?


Dr. Oats, Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. My rule is this in doubtful cases, when men are upon their lives, I
had rather hear what is impertinent, than not let them make a full defense.


Lord Chief Just. North, I had rather hear things at a venture, than forbid
things at a venture.


Lady Southcott stood up.

Lord Chief Just. How long were you in Mr. Irelands Company?


Lady Southcott, From the fifth of August to the sixteenth.


Lord Chief Just. What every day?


Lady Southcott, Yes, every day.


Dr. Oats, My Lord, here is Sarah Pain who before has testified what she has
known in this matter. If your Lordship please I desire she may be called in
readiness to speak to it.


Lord Chief Just. Are you sure it was the fifth?


Lady Southcott, Yes, as sure as I can be of any thing.


Mr. Recorder, Dr. Oats, you had best keep your Evidence entire till the last.


Then Sir John Southcott was called, and appeared.

Lord Chapter Just. Did you know mr. Ireland?


Sir John Southcott, Yes, I did know him by face.


Lord Chapter Just. Where did you see him?


Sir John Southcott I saw him the fifth of August at St. Albans.


Lord Ch Just. And did he travel along with you?


Sir Jo. Southcot, Yes, he did travel along with us the sixth, seventh, eighth
and ninth.


Lord Chapter Just. How many days did he travel along with you?


Sir John Southcott, He trave'ld along with us four days together I am sure.


L. C. J. What from the 5th to the 9th?


Sir John Southcott. Yes, Sir.


L. C. J. Is this all that you can say?


Sir John Southcott. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. But we would know where he was afterward; did you see him after the
9th?


Sir John Southcott, My Lord, I saw him at St Albans, and we went from thence
to Northampton, and from thence to Coventry, and from thence to my Lord Astons,
that is four days; and I saw him Thursday, I saw him Friday, Saturday, and
Monday following. Tuesday I had occasion to go further into the Country, and he
went along with us; so I saw him Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday,
afterward.


L. C. J. Why then you saw him at least twelve days?


Sir John Southcott, Yes.


L. C. J. Have you any more?


Then Mr. Edward Southcott stood up.

L. C. J. Were you here when Ireland was tried?


Sir John Southcott, No.


L. C. J. Did you see Mr. Ireland in August last?


Mr. Southcott, The third of August he came down to my Lord Astons at Stanmore,
they said so; but I cannot swear he came that night, but I saw him very early
the next morning; the 5th we went to St. Alban, and we kept on till we came to
Tixall; and I was in his company from the 4th to the 16th.


L. C. J. Why, you hear what he says, he was in company with him every day from
the 4th to the 16th.


Gaven, Call Mrs. Harewell and her Daughter, Mrs. Gifford, and Mrs. Pendrell.


Then Mrs. Harewell stood up.

L. C. J. Did you see Mr. Ireland in August last?


Harewell. I saw Ireland in August last, the 17th day: He came then to my House
at Wolverhampton, and there he continued every day, and lay in my house every
night till the 26th, day.


Then young Mrs. Harewell stood up.

Harewell. Mr. Ireland came to our house in Staffordshire the 17th of August,
and stayed there till the 26th; I saw him every day, unless it was Friday, the
day before Bartholomew-day, when he went to Litchfield, and returned again.


Gaven. My Lord, there is a prisoner now in Newgate that can testify the same.


L. C. J. North. Would you ask your fellow if you be a Thief? he is in for the
same offense.


Gaven. My Lord, I desire to know, if a man be not convicted of the same
offense, whether he be not a good Witness?


L: C: J: North. If he stand charged with the same Plot, his Evidence is of
little weight.


Then Elizabeth Keiling stood up.

L: C: J: Did you see Mr. Ireland in August?


Keiling, Yes, my Lord, I did.


L: C: J: Where did you see him?


Keiling. I saw him at Wolverhampton, there he was from Saturday the 17th, to
Monday, and then I went to see my Mother, and came back again on Thursday, and
found him there, and there he was till the 26th.


Gaven. Call Mr. Pendrell and his Wife.


Then Pendrell stood up.

L: C: J. When did you see Mr. Ireland?


Pendrell. I saw him the second and third of September.


L. C: J. Where did you see him?


Pendrell. At Boscobel.


L. C. J. And what, did you see him in August?


Pendrell. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. How do you know you saw him then?


Pendrell. My Wife being paid for his diet, set down the day.


L. C. J. What, he came to sojourn with you, did he?


Pendrell. They were with me for their Meals, and so my Wife set it down.


L. C. J. Why, do you set down the day of the month when any one comes to you?


Pendrell. Yes, my Lord, when we are paid for their Diet, we do.


L. C. J. What, do you keep a public House?


Pendrell. I keep the Royal Oak.


L: C: J: Methinks you should have a great deal of company if you live there;
and it is hard you should charge your self to remember a particular person you
did not know before.


Pendrell. My Lord, he told me his name was Ireland, and several others did so
too.


L: C: J: You had as good have let such trivial Evidences as this alone, But go
on.


Then Mrs. Pendrell stood up.

L. C. J. Do you know Mr. Ireland?


Mrs. Pendrell. I did know by report it was he.


L. C. J. Where did you see him in August or September?


Pendrell. At Boscobel, my Lord.


L. C. J. Did you never see him before that time?


Mrs, Pendrell. No my Lord


L. C. J. Do you know it was the same man that suffered?


Mrs. Pendrell. I will take my oath of it.


L. C. J. How I when you never saw him before that time?


Mrs. Pendrell. I was in Town when he dyed.


Then stood up Mis. Gifford.

L. C. J. When did you see Mr. Ireland?


Gifford. My Lord Mr. Ireland came to Wolverhampton the 17th of August, and he
stayed there till the twenty sixth, it was of a Monday, I remember it by
several circumstances.


L. C. J. Did you know Mr. Ireland?


Gifford, I never saw him before.


L. C. J. Do you know it was the same that dyed?


Gifford. My Lord, here was my brother in Town, who saw him executed, and he
did assure me ^e was the same. And I saw him again the second of September, and
the 7th. of September again, and the 10th. and the 11th. My Lord, he was the
same man, I believe, because my brother told me so.


Mr. Gifford. I saw him in the Country, and I saw him executed.


Then another Mrs Gifford stood up.

Mrs. Gifford. I saw him at Pancrass Fair in Staffordshire.


L. C. J. Was it the same man that was Executed?


Mrs. Gifford, My Lord I cannot say that, I did not see him suffer but my
Sister and I were at a Window, and she showed him to me, and said that was Mr.
Ireland, and told me how long he had been in England.


L, C. J. How do you know that was the man that was executed? did you see him
tried here?


Mr. Gifford. Yes, my Lord I did.


L. C. J. And that was the same man.


Mis. Gifford Yes It was, my Lord.


L, C. J. When was it your Sister showed you him?


Mis. Gifford. I saw him upon the seventh of September.


Then stood up one Mr. Bedle.

L. C. J. When did you see Mr. Ireland?


Bedle, I saw him at a place called Millage in Staffordshire the second of
September.


L. C. J. Are you a Roman Catholic?


Bedle. If I must make a confession of my faith, I will. But I saw him there,
and they said it was Mr. Ireland the Jesuit.


L. C. J. Had you no acquaintance with him before?


Bedle. No.


L. C. J. How do you know it is the same man that suffered?


Bedle. I do not know that, but I suppose it was the same.


Turner. I am accused for being at Tixall a consult in September, I desire to
know who saw me there, for I have not been there these four years.


L: C: J: Mr. Dugdale saw you there.


Turner. What Witnesses besides?


L. C. J None but he for that.


Mr. Recorder Has Mr. Fenwick any more Witnesses to call?


Fenwick, My Lord, I have not any.


Then was Captain Hill called.

Fenwick, My Lord, he can prove something against Mr: Bedloe* He says, he lived
in good repute; but the Captain will tell you he was in the Marshalsey, and
lived a poor mean life, and all the time sed upon the Basket.


L: C: J: North. He was guilty of the same Treasons that you are guilty of,
there is his fault.


L: C: J: No doubt he was a naughty man, he was with you in this Plot:


Fenwick, I can prove by Sir James Butlers Clerk that he cheated a Cutler of a
Silver hilted Sword.


Then Sir James Butlers Clerk was called, but he having more than one; and the
person meant, not being there, there could nothing be examined about that.

L: C: J: North, He has had the Kings Pardon for all that:


Fenwick, He was forced to run the Country for a many Cheats, and was forced to
borrow 4^ or 5 s, to redeem his Boots, My Lord does his Pardon make him a good
Witness? Then we will prove something since his Pardon.


L. C. J. No doubt he was bad enough while he was with you.


Whitebread, My Lord, I think I have a plain Demonstration against mr. Bedloe
since his Pardon; he did at my last Trial say that he had nothing to say
against me, and now he com^s and gives fresh Evidence against me.


L. C. J. North, That is an Objection that will not take away his Evidence, but
only goes to the lessening of the credit of it. He says he was in Treaty with
Mr. Reading about you. and the Lords in the Tower; and to beget a confidence in
him that the Lords ^n the Tower should receive favor from him, and come off by
his means, he was to be easy to you too, which made him lessen his Evidence at
that time. This is that he ^ays, the weight of it must be left to the Jury. And
he said at that time he had more to say at time and place convenient.


Whitebread, There is no such thing in the Trial. He has alleged great
matters against me, therefore it is evident he did falsify his Oath; for if he
were to swear the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, and he did
not say the whole truth, he is perjured; if he did, he can say nothing against
me now.


L. C. J. North, Mr. Whitebread, you have your objection, and it must be
observed to the Jury. You repeating of things signify nothing.


Then Captain Hill stood up.

Fenwick, Pray Sir, what do you know of Mr. Bedloe?


Mr. Just. Pemberton. But don't ask any thing before the Pardon.


Cap. Hill, I knew him in the Marshalsey.


Fenwick. In what condition was he there, Sir.


Capt. Hill, He was a poor man, as I be, and lived upon the Basket.


Harcourt. How long ago is it since you knew him there?


Capt. Hill. In May was twelve Month.


L. C. J. That was long before his pardon. But he might be an honest man for
all that. though he were as poor as you. Are you an honest man.


Cap. Hill, Yes, I think so.


L. C. J. And so might he be, well, have you any more


Prisoners, No.


Sir Cr. Levins. Gentlemen of the Jury, you have heard the Prisoners, and they
have had a great deal of time to make their defense; but the greatest part of
their defense has been to invalidate the Testimony of Mr. Oats; and what is
the Evidence they have brought against him? they tell you first, That he did
not come over, in that company that he says he came over with. And whereas he
has sworn he was here the 24 th, of April, they have taken a great deal of
pains by fifteen or sixteen Witnesses to prove that he was all the time at St
(...) and that Sir John Warner and Sir Thomas Preston who he tells you come
over in company with him, never stirred from the places of their Residence, that
this Liege and Watton, all that time: but this, Gentlemen, you must observe,
that if Mr. Oats were out of the Case, all these persons except Mr. Turner are
proved guilty of the Treason they are charged with; and yet I shall set up his
Testimony, and make him clear, notwithstanding whatsoever has been alleged
against him Gentlemen, to take them in order, mr. Whitebread has mr. Dugdale,
mr. Bedloe and mr. Prance, to prove him Guilty, let what will come of mr.
Oats, all of them speak to him.


Lord Chapter Just. Prance, do you speak any thing against Mr. Whitebread?


Mr. Prance, No.


Mr. Record. It was Fenwick and Harcourt.


Sir Cr. Levins, But there is Bedlow and Dugdale against Mr. Whitebread, and
therefore, Gentlemen, there are two have sworn against him, besides Oats; and
there is two against Mr. Fenwick at least, nay, there are three, for besides
Oats there i^ Bedlow and Prance; as to Mr. Harcourt, there is Bedlow, Dugdale
and Prance, besides Mr. Oats; as to Mr. Gaven, there is Oats and Dugdale;
indeed there is none but Oats and Dugdale against Turner; so that as to the
three first however there are two Witnesses besides Mr. Oats, that is, against
Mr. Whitebread, Mr. Fenwick, and Mr. Harcourt. Now as for Mr. Oates's
Testimony, and what they have to say to him; in the first place, they have
brought a young Gentleman, Mr. Hilsley, and he says he did not come over with
him, and there it is one against one, but Dr. Oats has sworn it, and has
given you such convincing Circumstances how he lost his money, etc. so that I
leave it to you which of the two is in the right, and ought to be believed. But
then, my Lord, as to the rest of the Witnesses, here are a great many brought
over to prove that Mr. Oats was all the while at Saint Omers; but I shall
bring you a considerable number of Witnesses to prove that Dr. Oats was then
in London, and that all these persons are mistaken. They do all pitch upon the
first of May, to fix it upon a time wherein he says he was here in Town: But
Gentlemen, I hope you did observe, that as to other things and time that were
not so necessary as to this matter, there they were pleased to mistake, and to
differ one from another, to contradict one another, for some of them said he
went away and lest Saint Omers the tenth day of June, others the 23th, others,
which was the same Flemish Gardener, that he staid till July. Truly half that
variance in the time which is necessary would serve our turn, we are but for
eight days time, that is, he was not above eight or ten days here, truly these
Gentlemen will be sure to speak punctually to all those eight days that hurt
the Prisoners, but they will vary thirty days at another time that hurts them
not. Why may they not be mistaken as well with that portion of time, as they
were in the other wherein they so much differed one from another?

But I shall give you most infallible proof by and by, that Mr. Oats was in
England at that time that he said he was in England. My Lord, as to that of Sir
John Warner, truly we have sent for a Witness, but we did not know of the
Objection before; they have now brought you the Gardener, and he did say
positively at first that Sir John Warner was there all that while, but being
asked again how he knew it, he said it was the talk of the Country, and so
some of the Witnesses did speak to Sir Thomas Preston. But then I did desire to
know of these Witnesses, whether these persons were never absent from these
places or not, they told me they were absent for some time in the Vacancy.


Gaven, That was in August.


Sir Cr. Levins, You are very good at expounding I know, but what those
Vacancies were I am not certain; but being apt to mistake a little, they might
mistake the time too, and they might extend their journey beyond their Vacancy,
Mr. Gaven he has made a mighty Defense I must confess, endeavoring to prove
that he was out of Town all June and July, and in April and May before, and
truly he has brought some Witnesses that have spoken very far for him as to
those months, but I will desire you to observe, as I know you did, that the
three last Witnesses that knew him very well did affirm positively that he was
there the last week in July, but being asked to the week before that, and the
week before that, they could not be positive. And under favor by that Evidence
you will believe rather that he was not there, for if so be they could so
positively remember for the last week, why should they not be as positive for
the two weeks before? why these two weeks were enough to serve our turn, for it
was toward the latter end of July that which Mr. Oats has sworn upon Mr.
Gaven, that he was in Town, and talked of the same matters which he had written
the letter about. And therefore it is much to be presumed, that because the
Witnesses will take upon them as to the last week, they are sure he was at
Wolverhampton, but as to the two other weeks they could not be sure, that they
speak with some conscience, and therefore it may be true that he was here. And
the Woman said she could not say but possibly he might make such a Journey and
she never the wiser. So that under favor, Gentlemen, all that which Mr. Gaven
has so industriously endeavored to lay upon Mr. Oats, does shrink into a
very slender Evidence, and that it might well be he was at London at the time
that Oats says, the three last Witnesses speaking positively only to the last
week in July.

Then truly, my Lord, they are fixed upon another great matter to blemish Mr.
Oats as to Mr. Ireland, a person that is dead and out of the way. Mr. Ireland
has been hanged upon that Evidence, so far it was believed, but now after all
this will these Gentlemen come to question the Evidence that was given against
Mr. Ireland. They have likewise, my Lord, brought my Lady Southcott, and some
other persons, who give you an Evidence concerning Mr. Ireland, that he should
not be here at this time, but Gentlemen under favor Mr. Oats has sworn
before, and he has now sworn it again, that Mr. Ireland was at that time in
London, and Gentlemen I will confirm him in that by another Witness that did
see him here in Town at that time. And when you have two Witnesses for the King
upon their Oaths come and testify it, I hope you will belive them, rather than
other persons that testify only by hearsay. It was the matter then in Issue,
and had saved his Life if it had been true, but though it be now settled, and
none could think it would be again started, they would make that an Objection,
but by chance we have a Witness still to give you satisfaction, that Mr.
Ireland was in London at that time that Mr. Oats did swear him to be. We will
begin with that Witness about Ireland. And then we will call our Witnesses to
prove that Mr. Oats was in England, and did come over when he said he did,
Call Sarah Pain. (Who was sworn.)


Sir Cr. Levins, What time did you see Mr. Ireland in London? Did you see him
in August last?


S. Pain, I saw him about seven or eight days before I came to my Lord
Chamberlain, and that was about a week before the King went to Windsor.


Lord Chief Just. Where did you see him?


S. Pain, At his own door in Russel Street.


Lord Chief Just. Did you speak to him?


S. Pain. No, I knew him very well, and saw him, as I came by.


Sir Cr. Levins, Had not you carried many Letters to him?


S. Pain, Yes, several Letters.


Sir Cr. Levins, But where did you live before?


S. Pain, I lived at Mr. Grove's.


Sir Cr. Levins, Did not Mr. Ireland use to come there too?


Sarah Pain, Yes, he did often.


Lord Chief Just. Was any one talking with Ireland then?


S. Pain, No.


Sir Cr. Levins, How long did you look upon him? Did you see him go in? did you
see his Face or his Back?


S. Pain, I saw his face, and made him a Courtesy.


Lord Chief Just. This she said to Ireland's Face.


Mr. Just. Dolben, Your Evidence is that Mr. Ireland went out of Town the 5th
of August, and she says she saw him about that time, which must be the 12th or
14th of August.


Gaven, How does she prove it? she does not say she spoke with him.


Mr. Just. Dolben, She swears it.


Sir Cr. Levins, Now we must prove what time the King went to Windsor.


Lord Chapter Just. Sir Tho. Doleman, what time in August did the King go to
Windsor last Summer?


Sir Tho. Doleman, I believe (I cannot charge my memory so well) it was the
13th, it was about the 12th or 13th.


Lord Chapter Just. Was my Lord Chamberlain there then?


Sarah Pain, My Lord Chamberlain went after the King.


Lord Chief Just. And when do you say you saw Ireland?


Sarah Pain, I saw him seven or eight days before I went to my Lord
Chamberlain's which was before my Lord went to Windsor, and that was a week
after the King went thi^her.


Sir Cr. Levins, Now I Will tell you what she says; she says she saw Ireland a
week before she went to my Lord Chamberlains, and she saw him go into Groves
House, where he did usually go for Letters; she says she saw his face, and made
him a Courtesy; and that this was a week before she went to my Lord
Chamberlains, and that was a week after the King went to Windsor. Now the time
that Mr. Oats pitches upon is between the 8 th and 12 th of August, which by
computation is the time she speaks of.


Gaven, And our Witnesses go from the third of August to the fourteenth of
September.


Sir Cr. Levins, Call Sir Richard Barker, William Walker, Sara ^ves, etc.


William Walker was first sworn, and bid to stand up.

Sir Cr. Levins. Pray, Sir, do you know that Mr. Oats was in England the
beginning of last Summer? Pray tell your whole knowledge.


Mr Walker, Yes, my Lord, I will. I have known, Mr. Titus Oats these seven
years, and had not seen him above five years; but about two years ago I did
meet him in Newgate-market, and then again in the latter end of the month of
March 1678, or the beginning of April, I did see Mr. Oats in a disguise, in a
gray Searge Coat, and I think a gray Hat, but I did not understand it, nor did
I know him to be the man, and I was very much troubled that I could not
recollect my self who he was, and I went to bed, and could not recollect who he
was; but before I rose in the morning I did draw him within the Scheme of my
knowledge that it was Titus Oats, and to confirm my judgment in that, I did go
to a Gentlewoman, whose name I did not know, but I went thither because it was
the same place that I had seen him at a year before, to enquire what became of
Mr. Oats, and how he did: And when I came to her (in the morning early, it was
the next day after I had seen him in the Disguise) I enquired of the
Gentlewoman how Mr. Oats did, and she clapped her hand upon her Counter, being
a Tradeswoman, Oh, said she, he is an undone man. Why so, said I: said she, he
is turned to the Church of Rome, and he absconds and hides himself, I knew not
where he is; then in plain terms, said I, I saw him later than you, for I saw
him Yesterday, between nine and ten of the clock, it was at the upper end of
St. Martins-lane, near Leicester House.


Sir Cr. Levins, What time was this?


Mr. Walker, This was in April or March last was a Twelvemonth.


Lord Chief Just. Did you never see him more than then?


Mr. Walker, No, I knew his Face so well, as I looked back upon him, and he
looked back upon me, but it was with some kind of terror, and he did seem to
abscond and hide himself.


Lord Chief Just. When was this?


Mr. Walker. It was sometime from the latter end of March to the middle of
April.


Lord Chief Just. Why did you skip the beginning of April?


Mr. Walker, I am not able to remember exactly the time; for why, I did never
think to be called as a Witness about it.


Lord Chief Just. Did you speak to him?


Mr. Walker, No, my Lord, I did not.


Lord Chief Just. How long before had you spoke to him?


Mr. Walker, A year before, but in his Canonical Habit, and not before of five
years.


Lord Chief Just. North, You will not sure catch him upon a day.


Lord Chief Just. But I Will tell you what it does, it contradicts all that your
Boys, all your Witnesses say: Though it does not go home exactly to the 24th of
April, yet, if it be true, and we have no reason to believe it otherwise, it
disproves all their Evidence; for they charge him to have been at St. Omers all
March, April and May.


Sir Cr. Levins, Swear Sarah Ives. (Which was done.)


Dr. Oats, My Lord, we bring Sarah Ives to prove that this same Gentleman went
to her to enquire of her about me.


Lord Chief Just. Pray Mrs. what did that Minister say to you, and when,
concerning Mr. Oats?


Mrs. Ives, Mr. Walker came to my Shop, and asked me when I saw Mr. Oats; said
I, I have not seen him since he went beyond sea, Then, said he, I have seen him
later than you, for I was going to Lei^ester Fields, and at the end of St.
Martins-lane I saw him in a Disguise, and he looked wishly back upon me, and I
upon him, and, said he, I am certain it was the man.


Lord Chief Just. What time was this?


Mrs. Ives, It was April was a Twelvemonth.


Lord Chief Just. What time in April do you think?


Mrs. Ives, I cannot say the day.


L. C. J. But what time of the month was it?


Mrs. Ives, I don't justly know, I think it was the middle of April, or
thereabouts.


Lord Chapter Just. Call another witness.


Sir Chr. Levins, Call Mrs. Mayo. (who was sworn)


Sir Chr. Levins, Well what say you, when did you see Dr. Oats in England?


Mayo, I never saw his Face till a week before whitesontide, or a little after;
there was a young man, a Servant of Sir Richard Barker's, that knew him a long
time before; he came to me and said, Yonder is Mr. Oats has changed his coat
from a black to a white; what is he! said I; he was a Minister, but he is
either turned Quacker or Catholic; but, said I, he is not turned Quaker, for
he wears a Perriwig, and he, fell a laughing and jeering at him; said I, why do
you deride this Gentleman, when he is a friend of Sir Richard Barker's.


Lord Chapter Just. Where was mr. Oats then?


Mayo, He was in the Courtyard, and I was in the Kitchen.


Lord Chapter Just. When was this?


Mayo, The week before, Whitsontide.


L. C. J. In what month?


Mayo, It was in May.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you know him before then?


Mayo, No I did not, but I had heard much of him in the Family.


L. C. J, How soon did you see him again after that?


Mayo, About a Week after he came and brought another with him, and walked into
the Garden, and seemed to be discontented that they did not show such a
countenance to him as they used to do in the House, for the Gentlewomen had
heard he was turned Jesuit and therefore were very shye; that is, Sir
Richard's Kinswomen, my Ladies Sisters Daughters.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you know Dr. Oats now?


Mayo, Very well Sir, Afterward he came again and walked into the Garden, and
the young man I spoke of before, that is now dead, came again and took notice
of him, of the strange Garb he was in; he was in a Room that looked into the
Garden, I saw him walking there, and said he, Yonder is Oats again, and has
brought another with him; he looked out of the window, and said he, Perithee
look here, does not he look like a Jesuit? and he that was with him looked
back, and if it had not been for that, and the young man's importunity, I had
never taken notice of mr. Oats. After when I heard he was come over and gave
in his Testimony about the Plot, I would needs go see him; but he spoke very
slightingly to me, and seemed to be offended with the Family because they did
scorn him. Said I They had no reason to countenance you, because we all
understood you were turned Catholic. They did, said he, look very shye upon
me. Why said I, you must not be offended, for you know all the Family are no
friends to Jesuits and I hope never will be so; but I hope mr. Oats, you will
not forget eaten Bread, because he used to be made very much of at Sir Richard
Barker's.


Sir Chr. Levins, Is that the man that you saw there?


Mayo. This is the man, if you will put me to my Oath again, I will swear it.


Sir Chr. Levins, When was this?


Mayo, It was the week before Whitesontide, it was in May, for Whitsontide fell
in May.


Sir. Chr. Levins, Then call Philip Page. (Who was sworn.)


Sir Chr. Levins, Do you know Dr. Oats?


Page, Yes Sir.


Sir Chr Levins. How long have you known him?


Page I have known him four or five years.


L. C. J. Pray did you see him in the year 1678, last year?


Page, Yes I did:


L. C. J. At what time?


Page, About the beginning of May.


L. C. J. Where?


Page, at Sir Richard Barker's.


Lord Chapter Just. Were you acquainted with him before?


Page, I had spoke with him before.


Lord Chapter Just. How do you know it was he, did you speak with him then?


Page, Yes, I did.


Lord Chapter Just. What Habit was he in?


Page. He had a light-coloured Campaign Coat. I asked him where he had been so
long a time that we had not seen him, but he turned away from me, and gave me
no account, but after he had been in the house, made back again, and away he
went, after he enquired for Sir Richard.


Lord Chapter Just. How do you know it was in May, why might it not be in April?


Page, It was in the beginning of May, to the best of my knowledge.


L. C. J. By what material Circumstances do you remember it was in the
beginning of May? Is there any thing that puts it into your mind more
particularly?


Page. My master had a patient at that time that was sick of a Fever.


L. C. J. Where? at Sir Richard Barker's House?


Page. At Islington it was.


Jury, We desire to know what the Patients name was, for some of us know
Islington very well.


Page. I Have forgot the name.


Sir Rich. Barker, It was Aldram Milver's daughter,


L, C. J. It was about that time in May that you saw him.


Page. I did upon my Oath, and I spoke with him, and took much notice of him,
he had an old black Hat on that flapp'd, and a pair of Spanish Leather shoos.


Sir Chr. Levins, Call Sir Richard Barker. (Who was sworn.)


L. C, J. Do you know Dr. Oats?


Sir Richard Barker, Yes, my Lord, I have known his Father and him ever since
he has been a Child; I saw him the last Summer.


L. C. J. About what time?


Sir Richard Barker, At that time that they have given in Evidence I have only
this to say, I was abroad, as my business leads me often abroad into the
Country, but they told me mr. Oats came to my house in a Disguise, and that
they believed he was turned either Quaker or Papist.


L. C. J. When was this?


Sir Richard Barker, It was, my Lord, to the best of my remembrance, after
Whitsontide that they told me, but they told me a Story of him, how that he was
in two several Disguises the one was a short Hair, and then they thought he was
turned Quaker, an other time he had a Long Perriwig, and then they thought he
was turned Papist; and the first that told me was this Fellow here that is a
Coachman of mine who was mending some thing of his Coach. It happened, my Lord,
upon the visiting of a Gentleman that I was, very ill, in which time mr. Oats
was gone, and afterward when I was recovered again he came to my house to
enquire concerning Dr. Tongue.


L. C. J. When did you see him first?


Sir Richard Barker, It was my Lord to the best of my remembrance the latter
end of June, or beginning of July upon my Recovery.


Lord C. J. By the Oath that you have taken I would ask you one Question, Did
not you see him till June?


Sir Richard Barker. No my Lord: but my servants told me they had seen him in
May before Whitsuntide.


L. C. J, Did you see him in June.


Sir Richard Barker, To the best of my remembrance it was in June.


Then one Butler was sworn.

L. C. J. Come do you know Dr. Oats?


Butler Yes, very well.


Lord Chapter J How long have you known him?


Butler, I have known him these three years, before he went beyond Sea.


L. C. J. Come, you are upon your Oath, when did you see Dr. Oats, and where?
the beginning of last Sumer.


Butler. I saw him in the beginning of last May at my Masters house in Barbican.


L. C. J. Upon what occasion? what are you?


Butler. I am Sir Richard Barker's Coachman. And I was making clean my coach in
the Gate House and in comes Dr. Oats, in May; last was twelve-moneth, the
beginning of May; with his Hair cut off, close cropped to his Ears, in Gray
Clothes, a Gray Coat like a Shepherds Coat, a Yorkshire Gray, he asked me
whether Dr. Tongue was within, I told him no, nevertheless he went into the
house, and immediately came out again, and seemed to be very much discontented,
but said nothing at all to me, but passed by me, and went away.


L. C. J. And did you know him at that time he spoke to you first?


Butler, Yes my Lord, because I knew him three years before.


L. C. J. You could have then called him by his name;


Butler. Yes my Lord I could.


L. C. J. You say he came to inquire for Dr. Tongue, and was discontented that
he could not see him.


Butler. He said nothing to me when he came out, but passed away as one that
was troubled.


L. C. J. Did you you see him afterward?


Butler, Six weeks after I saw him; and then he had a long black Coat and a
perwig on.


L. C. J. But are you sure it was the same man?


Butler. I am upon my Oath.


Mr. Just. Dolben, Did you tell your mr. of his being there the first time?


Butler, I did tell Sir Richard Barker of him as soon as I saw him.


L. C. J. Sir Richard* how soon did he tell you Oats was first there.


Sir Richard Barker, It was soon after, my Lord.


L. C. J. Was it in May that he told you he had seen him?


Sir Richard Barker, He told me as soon as ever I came home, in May as I
remember.


L. C. J. Did he tell you mr. Oats was there by name?


Sir, Richard Barker. Yes, my Lord, he did: And when he told me what Habit he
was in, I wondered at it.


Dr Oats, There are several, my Lord, that did see me at that time, but they
are gone into the Country, and I cannot have them now ready: If you please now
to call Mr. Smith, the Schoolmaster of Islington. (Who was sworn.)


Sir C. Levines. Do you know Dr. Oats?


Mr. Smith, Yes, very well.


Sir. C. Le. Pray Sir, how long have you known him?


Mr. Smith, He was my Scholar at Merchant-Taylors School, where I was Usher.


Sir, C. Lev. When did you see him, the beginning of last Summer?


Mr. Smith, I saw him in the beginning of last May, that is 1678.


L. C.J. Where did you see him?


Mr. Sm. He dined with me at my house in Islington.


Mr. J. Dolben, What, the Boys at St. Omers now are gone?


L. C. J. Recollect your self well: By the Oath you have taken, did Dr. Oats
in May was twelve month dine with you.


Mr. Smith, Yes my Lord he did, and it was the first Monday in May as I
remember.


Mr. J.D. And this you swear directly and positively?


Mr. S. Yes, my Lord I do.


L. C. J. How long did he stay there?


Mr. Smith. He staid 3 or 4 hours after: And, may it please you my Lord, he was
in a Summer suit, and a colored Ribbon, a green knot upon his shoulder.


L. C. J. What did you discourse about?


Mr. Smith. About his being in Spain, and Flanders, and his Travels.


L. C. J. Had you a long discourse with him?


Mr. Smith, Yes, I had.


L. C. J, Had you nothing about the Times?


Mr. Smith. No, my Lord, not a word.


L. C. J. Did you understand he had been turned Roman Catholic?


Mr. Smith. I did know it.


Jury. my Lord, did mr. Smith see him any other time after that?


Mr. S. No, my Lord, not in 2 months, to my remembrance about the middle of
August:


Sir Chr. Levins, Call one Clay. (who was sworn)


L. C. J. Do you know Dr. Oats?


Mr. Clay, Yes, my Lord, I do.


L. C. J. How long have you known him.


Mr. Clay, Ever since April last was twelvemonth,


L. C. J. Was that the first time of your Acquaintance with him?


Mr, Clay, Yes, at Mr. Charles Howards,


L, C. J, Where were you there with him?


Mr. Clay, He lived in one corner of old Arundel house,


L. C. J. How came you acquainted with him?


M. Clay, Truly I met him accidentally at mr. Howards-house.


L.C:J. How came you to come there?


Mr. Clay, I was there to visit Mr. Howards a Friend.


L. C. J. Were you acquainted with him?


Mr. Clay. Yes, I was with Mr. Howard, and there I saw Dr. Oats.


L. C. J. When did you see him the second time?


Mr. Clay. The second time I think I saw him there too.


L. C. J. When was that?


Mr. Clay. That was in May.


L. C. J. North. How long was that after.


Mr. Clay, I think the other was in April.


L. C. J And did you see him in May?


Mr, Clay. I saw him in May too.


L. J. C. Clay, What time of the month was it?


Mr. I cannot exactly speak to that, but it was in that month as I remember, I
am morrally certain of it.


L. C. J. And when did you see him after May?


Mr. Clay: I cant tell whether I saw him after May or not.


L. C. J. Is that the same man that you saw at Mr. Howards either in April or
May?


Mr. Clay, Yes; my Lord, it is the same man.


Sir Charles Levins. Then we have done with our Evidence.


L. C. J. Come Gentlemen now what can you say to this? They have given you ^^w
their full charge.


Dr. Oats, my Lord, I have one thing more, I desire your Lordship to take
notice, this Gent. mr, Clay is a Priest in Orders, as they say.


L. C. J. I will not ask him that question; but Mr. Clay, are you a Papist?


Mr. Clay, Yes, my Lord, I am so.


L. C. J. North. Come what say you now Mr. Whitebread to this.


Whitebread, I have this to say; first, That at my last Trial when I pressed
him to declare who had seen him, when he said he was here in Town, he could
name no body, not one. I know afterward he was examined at the Committee, and
then he could name no body neither. He said he was there privately at mr.
Groves, and we can prove that he never did lie there in his life. And then he
said absolutely he had not seen much Company, he stayed but 6 days. Now this
good Dr. that does say he saw him here in the latter end of March, or the
middle of April, whereas he himself says he came over with Hilsley the 24th. of
April.


L. C. J. He was Landed here the 17th. of April, and the Witnesses say it was
the latter end of April, or beginning of May.


Whitebread, mr. Oats expressly said he stayed here but 6 days when he came
over to the Consult.


L. C. J. Why does not all this stand together?


Whitebread, No, my Lord, how could this stand together? His coming over the
17th. and his being here a great part in May, whereas he says, he was but 6
days.


L. C. J. Perchance Dr. Oats may be precise enough, but look you here, these
Witnesses, do not so exactly to a day or two, or 3, or 4 or 5, but to the
latter end of April. now why might they not see him the latter end of April,
and the beginning of May, and yet stand very well with mr. Oats testimony, who
says he was landed here about the 17th. of April, and stayed here about 6 or 7
days? How nice would you have them be in that case, which because they are
honest, they will not be.


L. C. J. Nor. You make your defenses to depend upon an uncertainty of time,
which no mortal man can ever remember; besides, pray observe this, That Mr.
Oats stands a good witness till you impeach him by a fry out of your own
Schools, and they go to the whole months of June and April, and May, now these
all speak in contradiction to them, and so mr. Oats is still set an upright
and good witness.


Whitebread, They say they did see him there every day, or every other day.


L. C. J. But sure I can as well tell who see him but once in such a month and
dined with him, then as any that saw him never so often; but here are five
Witnesses upon you in this point.


Whitebread, The one was told by his man, the other by his boy.


L. C. J. The Coachman, and the boy, and the maid, and mr. Smith did see him.


Mr. Just Pemberton. The Divine did see him, and went and told the woman that
he had seen him, pray remember that.


L. C. J. Nor. Now the Evidence is concluded, say what you will for your
selves, and then we will observe what you object upon our direction to the
Jury, according to our Consciences.


Gaven, My Lord, then I say this for my self, we commit our selves to God
Almighty. We must compare the number, tho ours were not sworn, yet there were
16 of them, boys, young men, that conversed with him every day, and these
witnesses speak but of one or two particular days: One says he dined with him,
and another saw him in a disguise; but my Lord in these very Witnesses there is
an apparent contradiction, because out of his own mouth ( ex ore tuo te judico)
they are contradicted. He says he came over upon Sunday with Hilsley which was
the 20th. of April as I think, and stayed here only a matter of 6 days. One of
the witnesses says he saw him the first Monday in May, What signify the
witnesses, though upon Oath, that say they him in May? How can he come over the
20th. of April, and stay but 6 days; and be seen here in May? Before these can
be reconciled, one of them must be false; and then my Lord, besides, that which
I first said, there is the number of witnesses, they are nothing in comparison
with the number of ours. And then my Lord, 2 dly, if we should grant that a
lesser number should serve the turn, because they are sworn for the King,
because they swear for the safety of the King (whom God preserve, whatsoever
becomes of me) and the other speak not upon their Oaths, yet my Lord, this does
not destroy nor touch at all that evidence that is brought against him about
the Rector of Liege, Sir John Warner, and Sir Thomas Preston. And tho it be
granted that all the others that spoke about mr. Oats being at St. Omers be
mistaken, and must not be believed, yet we have him still by those 6 others who
have proved that he has sworn false, and I hope we shall have fair play in the
Law, to make the best defense we can for our lives; and I humbly conceive, no
body must be convicted of High Treason by the Law, but upon the Evidence of two
sufficient witnesses. Now I leave it to the Conscience and Honor of the Court,
whether he shall be believed, and counted a sufficient witness, when there are
so many that have proved him false in that one point. And then besides all this
my Lord, we have here 16 at least Staffordshire Witnesses who give you an
account of mr. Irelands being out of London from the 2 d. of August till 14
September. so that in these two things he has been contradicted without any
Answer, for he says, the 12. of August he was with him, when they say he was in
Staffordshire,


L.C. J. You have forgot the maid that saw him in London the 12 or 13.


Gaven. No, my Lord, I have not. And this is it I answer to it, She is a
witness that only says she just saw him, but did not speak to him.


L. C. J. She made a Courtesy to him.


Gaven, We are talking now of seeing Ireland in August, and we prove by Sir
John Souththcott and all his Family, who say they began their journey with him
the 5th. of August, and stayed with him till the 19 th. after the particular
day that she speaks of, you find 7 or 8 of them swear that they saw him all the
time. And therefore I would feign know whether poor men's lives shall be cast
away upon such Evidence as this. And then my Lord; for the other thing, I hope
I have made a very good Plea for my self concerning the matter of July, my
witnesses could be positive, as to the last week, but for the other weeks tho,
they could not be positive, they rather believed I was there then not, but when
it is urged, why might not they give as good a testimony for the former weeks
as for that. To this I answer fully, that there is a great and predominant
reason why they should have particular reason to swear why I should be there
the last week rather than the other weeks, because I was then shut up in the
spiritual exercise, and they had a particular reason to take notice of that.
Then my Lord, I hope you will be pleased to mind this by which I have made my
Plea good, that is, my Lord, that mr. Oats testimony against me is this, mr.
Ashby came to town about the middle of July, and that he stayed there about a
fortnight, and that in the time of that fortnight I came to Town, and said I
would go see Father Ashby, and had that discourse be speaks of, and so much for
that. And then my Lord, I beseech you still to bear it in your mind that I have
been proved not to be in Town at the time of the great Consult about the Plot,
and indeed I was not capable of it, for I was not then Professed, and there
could None be of that congregation about the Plot, but those that were
professed, I could not be there in the Congregation by reason of my Age, mr.
Harcourt here and the rest, if you will ask them, will tell you it, they were
there, but upon the word of a dying man I was not there.


L. C. J. It Is not positively said by Mr. Oats that you were.


Gaven, But then my Lord, he says, my Name was to it, which he saw in July, now
I prove that I was in Staffordshire the last week of July, and seeing I have
witnesses to prove that I was there till the 14 th, and the last week and it
was after the 14 th. that he saw me, I hope my Plea is good. Then my Lord, I
ground my Plea upon this, I have studied Philosophy^ and other things, but I
never studied the Law, and so am very ignorant of it; but this is my Case, I am
accused by one Witness concerning one Fact, and by another concerning another,
the one committed here at London, the other in Staffordshire; I desire
therefore to know whether the Witness that swears the thing done in
Staffordshire in another County being joined to the other Witness that swears
what was done in London, can be esteemed two witnesses according to the Law, to
convict me of Treason.


L. C.J. North, Yes, I Will tell you if it were a matter of doubt, it might be
found specially, and be argued, but it is a matter that has been already
resolved in the Case of Sir Henry Vane at the Kings Bench Bar, who was
Indicted for levying War against the King, and there one Witness proved the
levying of War in one County, and the other proved the levying of War in
another County, and so though they were but single witnesses of single Facts,
yet being both came up to the Indictment, they were adjudged sufficient to
maintain it. So it is in your Case, here is one witness for the proving your
hand to the Paper, which was for the Murder of the King, and there is another
witness of your discourse to the same purpose, the Fact is your joining and
conspiring to destroy the King, and to levy War against him, and both these are
proved, to the full of the Indictment by these witnesses; and though they are
to several particular Facts, yet they are all Overt acts of the same Treason.


Gaven. My Lord, I have a contrary opinion to that in Sergeant Rolls.


L. C. J. North, But this is a known Case, and the Law is settled therein.


L. C. J. I Will tell you what you mistake in what you say, for there are two
witnesses, Oats and Dugdale, who swear to the same Fact, which is killing the
King, altering the Government, and bringing in Popery. Oats says, He saw your
hand to the Consult, for the Murder of the King, for the raising the Army, and
for the introducing of Popery, which is a necessary consequence of change of
Government; Dugdale says he was with you in the Parlor at my Lord Aston's,
where the discourse was between him and you, and others, about killing the
King, and altering Religion. Are not these two witnesses to one and the same
Treason.


Gaven, No my Lord, I conceive not.


L. C. J. If I consult a way to kill the King here, and then I go into the
Country and there I consult of it with* another person, are not these two
Witnesses to the same Treason, sure they are?


Gaven. Then my Lord, my second Plea is this, (...) there be two witnesses, you
will grant me this ground, that no man must be convicted but upon the Evidence
of two Legal and credible witnesses, and upon clear Evidence, as the Statute
since His Majesty's happy Restoration does declare. Now two things are
required certainly to make a credible Witness, and a clear Evidence; as the
Witness must be credible* so it is as agreeable to reason that the Evidence
must be plain and clear, yea as clear as the light of the Sun at Midday. Now
therefore if I prove, that neither the Witness is credible, such as the Law
requires, nor the Evidence clear, such as the Law looks upon as such, then I
ought not to be convicted by this Witness upon this Evidence.


L. C, J. The Jury are Judges of that, and therefore there I leave it.


L. C J. North. You argue mighty subtly, but I Will give you this answer, there
must be two lawful Witnesses; that is the law; a man cannot be Impeached of
Treason but by two lawful Witnesses; now if they be not convicted of perjury,
and their Testimony be not taken away, but they may be heard in a Court of
Justice, they are lawful Witnesses; now for the being credible Witnesses, that
is a matter that is left to the Jury, but we must receive them as lawful
Witnesses till they be convict of a crime that takes away their Testimony.


Gavan. Therefore because they are left to the Jury, I am satisfied, and I turn
my self to you Gentlemen. You are to sit upon my Life and my Death, as for my
own part I can truly profess I am as innocent as the Child unborn, and this
Gentleman Mr. Whitebread knows I was not capable of being at the Consult, being
not of age. Now I must leave my self to the Jury, and will leave it to their
judgments whether these two Witnesses can be esteemed credible Witnesses; for
to make credible Witnesses there is required honesty of life, and truth in
their Testimony, for no man can be a good Witness that is not an honest man,
nor that has carried himself so that he is not to be believed, As to the
honesty of Mr. Oats his life, you have heard that he was disgusted by the
Jesuits, esteemed not a person of that diligence or fidelity to be entrusted
by them; He was turned out of St. Omers,


Lord Chief Just. Does that prove any dishonesty in Mr. Oats?


Gavan. No, but I speak to his Credibility.


Lord Chief Just. Speak plain, how does it impeach Mr. Oats his Evidence, that
the Jesuits did not like him.


Gaven. It might be a ground of hatred amnd alice in him against them, and then
Gentlemen, I desire you to consider that other thing, That we have proved him
to speak false in his Testimony about Sir John Warner and Sir Tho. Preston; and
all the business of the 12th of August concerning Mr. Irelands being here the
12th of August, who by sixteen Witnesses, is proved to have been all the while
in Staffordshire. And though he was not convicted of Perjury before, which
might have easily been done, as I have shown to the whole world now, I appeal
to the Honor and Conscience of the Jury, whether all these proofs ought not to
make this Witness to be deemed an incredible Witness. And pray Gentlemen hear
me this, and carry this away with you, as to the business of Ireland, between
the eighth and twelfth of August, how many do swear that he was in
Staffordshire, I desire you but to compare that one Woman that only saw him,
and made a Courtesy to him, as she says, with those sixteen Witnesses that
conversed with him daily. Then as for the second Testimony of the St. Omers
Witnesses, which you see is thwarted by some that do swear in the Kings name to
the contrary, Still I desire you to compare number with number, the others
though they do not swear, are ready to swear, and there are only 3 or 4 against
16 of them, and there is an evident contradiction in what they say, and that
proved out of his own mouth; for he says he came over the twentieth of April
with Mr. Hilsley, and stayed only six days; they say he was here in May, and I
desire these may be compared: for how could it be that he should be here in
May, if he staid but six days. And then to make your Verdict, and take their
Credit away, I would desire you to consider those Witnesses that I have brought
for my self, not being here; but in Wolverhampton; for being in Staffordshire
as long as till the last week of July, it must fall within the time of his
Testimony. I have brought Witnesses to prove upon Oath, that from the twenty
second upward, they saw me in Wolverhampton; and they do remember the
particular instance, that I was then at my spiritual exercise; and this is that
I have to say as to Mr. Oats. As for Mr. Dugdale, I would desire you to
reflect upon the whole story of his coming to discover this Plot, and his being
an Informer about it. The truth is, I confess I have known him five or six
years whilst he lived at my Lord Astons, and I have diverse times discoursed
with him there in Mr. Ewers Chamber, but as I hope to be saved never any thing
of Treason in all my life. Now it is well known, and there are those that can
testify it, that in truth Dugdale run away from my Lord Astons after he had
lost three hundred pound of my Lords money.


Lord Chief Just. If you can say any thing against Mr. Dugdale by Witnesses
that you can prove it, then you say well, but if you will tell a story out of
one Lords mouth and another Lords mouth, that is never to be endured; you shall
never take away a man's Testimony by hearsay, you must prove it.


Gaven. It Is well known, if I prove Dugdale no credible Witness, I play my own
game. You know I have been a Prisoner 20 weeks and could not seek out
Witnesses, I asked it as soon as I knew of my Trial, but it was denied me to
send for Witness to prove that Dugdale was in Goal for Debt. If I had the
Recorders Warrant, or the Authority of this Bench I could send for them.


L. C. J. You must not fall upon Persons without Evidence, if you have
Witnesses to prove any thing, whom the Jury will believe, call them.


Gav. I do assure your Lordship, as I hope to see the face of God, I am
innocent of what is charged upon me. And God bless the King and this Honorable
Court.


Lord Chief Just. Though you do a hundred times bless the King and Court and
all, you must prove things if you will be believed. What say you Master
Whitebread?


Whitebread. My Lord, I have but one thing to say, and it is but a word: your
Lordship was pleased to make an Observation, and a good one it was, a Letter
which Mr. Dugdale says was written by me to Mr. Ewers, which he says he
intercepted, he was in the mean time a trusty correspondent for his Friend. In
that Letter he swears there was expressly contained positive words, of
entertaining persons to kill the King, that only such as were hardy, desperate
and stout, but as your Lordship well observed, that it was an improbable thing
that a man who had his Wits about him should write such plain expressions about
such a matter, and upon that improbability. I leave it to the Jury.


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Have you any thing to say Mr. Fenwick?


Fenwick, I desire, my Lord, your Lordship and the Jury to consider and observe
the nature both of our Witnesses, and of them that are brought against us. The
one speak for the whole time that they saw him every day or every other day;
they daily conversed with him and eat and drank with him in the same house, the
others they say only they saw him one particular day, another, another; and one
of them says he saw him but in a disguise. Now my Lord, whether it be likely
that so many innocent Children brought up in a good virtuous life should come
here to forswear themselves to contradict people that we know not what they
are, and then besides, we know that these people are of a poor mean beggarly
condition, that intend to mend that condition by such a pretense of discovery,
and hope thereby to advance themselves. It is probable, such people might be
drawn in, Then also we shall prove that Sir John Warner did not come over with
him, nor Mr. Williams, nor Sir Thomas Preston. Then all his Witness as to them
is false, and he does not say he went back with these people, and this for the
Witnesses. Now suppose the Witnesses were all equal, what does he prove against
us Three? Or what reason does he give of his Evidence. He says, he saw such and
such Letters from Mr. Whitebread. Now is it possible that a man that had no
credit at all with us, that we should be such fools to trust him with such
Letters as those, then your Lordships must hang us twice, once for Fools and
then for Knaves. Or is it possible that we should be such egregious Fools that
we should trust a man that was never esteemed of, was expelled the College.
And for all his talk of Commissions and Letters, there is not one of those
found, let him show any one Commission, any money paid, or any Order brought
in, or any Arms that were found, there are three quarters of a year now passed
since the first discovery, certainly all this time could produce something.
Thousands of Letters have been taken from us, some of those Letters would have
discovered this thing: certainly therefore we have better Evidence than he
has, supposing them to be equal as to Credibility in their Original. Is it
credible we should be so great Rogues to contrive the Kings Death, though he
speaks of the Writing being carried from Chamber to Chamber concerning this
matter, he can never produce one Paper signed by any one man's hand, nor can he
produce any thing to attest his Testimony. I leave this to your Lordships
judgment whether this Evidence be good, there is nothing appears in so much
time of any effect that is produced: Where were the Armies? Where were the
moneys paid? Where the Commissions? Is it possible such a thing should be, and
no sign of it for a whole year almost? there is no reason brought amongst them
all, but saying and swearing, and that I will stand by.


Whitebread. I thank God I don't look like a fighting-man, nor I never did; but
who can think that I should be so mad, when I had committed such a secret to
him, to beat him, as he says, It Is strange that such a Plot should be
discovered wherein so many Persons of Quality, Honor and Reputation are said
to be concerned, and yet no footsteps of it appear, and none of them, as my
Lord Arundel, my Lord Bellasis, should never divulge such a Plot; I would feign
know whether such a thing be probable, but I commend my self to God Almighty
and the Jury.


Harcourt, My Lord, I have only this to say, I have lived to this age, which is
70 years, and I never knew any man that could say I was accused of the thing in
the world, for which I should be brought before any Magistrate, and it is
strange that after so many years I should come to be arraigned, and condemned
for a Crime of the highest Nature, and there is no reason brought against me
nor any of the rest, for the proof of what is alleged, nor do they who are the
Witnesses against us deserve at all any Credit: They only affirm such and such
things without any reason, to persuade you to believe them, and it is easy to
say, and so it is to swear it. So that all I have to say is this, since a
Negative cannot be proved, I hope innocence will find some that shall defend
it. I leave my self to the Bench, for the Law is the defense of innocence. If
they did bring any Evidence besides that, which is down right positive
swearing, without any reason or concurrent reason to confirm it, it were
something.


Fenwick, And besides all this, to think how these men have lived before time
is worth reflection and considering. As for Bedloe, he has been a very ill
man, the world knows it.


Lord Chief Just. Have you proved it? Can you show any Record of it?


Mr. Just. Pemberton. Turner, Have you any thing to say? You have had your time.


Fenwick. You will find that Nemo repent sit nequissimus, No man arrives at
the highest degrees of impiety at first: men grow extremely wicked by degrees.
But let us see if they can blame our lives, or any thing that we have done at
any time before; we prove, and all the world knows what they have been, and how
scandalously they have lived.


Gaven. Our Witnesses are to be regarded for their number and for their
innocence, especially since they give no reason nor convincing arguments for
what they do affirm.


Lord Chief Just. We would hear you, and we have heard you very long, but it
must not be permitted you to go over the same things again and again.


Lord Chief Baron. Has Turner any thing to say?


Turner. All that I have to say my Lord is this, To ask whether it be
reasonable that Bedloe and Oats should be looked upon as good Witnesses, that
these Persons who have been such scandalous people should be admitted to an
Oath, who are debarred from the Sacrament; for according to the Church of
England, no man that is publicly scandalous can be admitted to the Sacrament.


Lord Chief Just. But you prove nothing.


Turner. I can prove it first by Evidence of one Hastings.


Lord Chief Just. Call him.


But he appeared not.

The Lord Chief Justice, Directions to the Jury, against Whitebread, etc.

L. C. J. Gentlemen of the Jury! Here has been a very long Evidence, and a
very confused one; and you cannot expect, that it should be wholly Repeated to
you; For it is almost impossible, for any one to remember it; neither would I
if I could, because a great deal of it is impertinent, and vainly to be
repeated: And besides, many things have been said over, and over again, to no
purpose. But I will observe to you, as well as I can, what Testimonies there
are against each particular Man of them; and that I do look upon, to be very
material. And I leave it to you, to judge and consider, how far the Evidence is
Credible, and how far it is Substantial.

Against Mr. Whitebread* you have the Testimony of three, Oats, Dugdale, and
Bedlow: Against Mr. Fenwick, you have the Testimony of Oats, Bedlow, and
Praunce: Against Harcourt, you have Oats, Dugdale, Bedlow, and Praunce. You
have against Gaven, Dugdale and Oats, and against Turner, Dugdale and Oats:
So that, to the two last you have two, three to the two first, and four to
Harcourt.

Now, the matter that they have sworn, has been all tending to one thing: the
Murder of the King, the Advancing of Popery, and the Suppression of the
Protestant Religion: That is the Thing, that all the Evidence does drive at.

For Dugdale, for ought we can perceive, he has been upon the matter a
Stranger to Oats and Bedlow; and I do not find, that he had any correspondence
with, or knowledge of them, at the time he charges Mr Harcourt, and Mr. Gaven.
And he charges* them with the very self same things, viz. the consulting the
death of the King, and Advancement of Popery. And they have several instances
of the Facts, as their several consultations; how they met together, and where,
or at what place: And Dugdale tells you of a letter, that he found; wherein
Whitebread gave charge, for the entertainment of good stout Fellows; No matter
for Gentlemen, so they were Resolute. And so they have several Mediums, to
prove one and the same Thing.

Mr. Fenwick says to all this, Here is nothing against us, but Talking and
Swearing. But for that, he has been told, (if it were possible for him to
learn) that all Testimony is but Talking and Swearing: For all Things, all
Men's lives and fortunes, are determined by an Oath; and an Oath is by talking,
by kissing the Book, and calling God to Witness to the Truth of what is said.
That is the Essence of an Oath, and those are the Ceremonies: The kissing the
Book, and Speaking, is the accidental Form; the substance, is Calling God to
Witness. Therefore, What a vain thing is it in Mr. Fenwick, to seem to Triumph,
by saying, There is nothing against us, but Talking and Swearing. There is
nothing against them, but Evidence and proof of Men upon Oath: And their
Reasons, the Truth is, are very Trifles. They defend their Lives as they do
their Religion, weak Arguments; and fallacious Reasons.

For that long Business, that Mr. Gaven has undertaken to say against Mr.
Oats, and what they all insist upon, viz. the Number of their Witnesses, which
were sixteen, amounts to this, to disprove mr. Oats, that it could not be true
what he says, That he should be present here at a Consult, the Twenty-Fourth
of April, because they have brought sixteen from St. Omers to prove, That he
was there all April and May.

It Is very true now, if that be so, it is impossible, Oats can swear an Truth:
But whether that is to be believed or no, is the Question? methinks, they did
not do well for themselves, when they bid you remember the Nature of the
Evidence. They did well enough, to bid you remember the Number: for the Number
is more than what Oats is backed with on the other side; but the Nature is of
much less weight: Not only because they are not upon their Oaths, for by Law
they may not be upon their Oaths (and that must not be charged on them as a
Defect, seeing they would swear, I doubt not, if they might) but because their
Testimony is really to be believed much alike without an Oath; as with one;
because they are of a Religion that can dispense with Oaths, tho false, for the
sake of a Good Cause.

But, seeing they desire the Nature of the men may be considered, you are to
observe, that they are Proselytes, and Young Striplings of their Church; which
does indeed, in one respect or other, abuse all Her Disciples, and keeps them
in a blind Obedience, to pursue and effect all Her Commands.

If the Doctrins of that Church were better; If such which are allowed by their
Chief Authors, were but less Bloody and inhumane; If they had ever put those
that are so* into an Index Expurgatorius, that they might have been publicly
di^owned, and declared as the particular Opinions of some ill men, which they
did disavow; These men might have been then more worthy to be regarded. But
when none of their Popes have done this (who must have very strange foreheads,
if they say, they have) and such Doctrines are still owned: there is much
indeed to be observed from the Nature of the Evidence, the Nature of the men,
and their Profession.

I must confess, I believe, that they would deny their principles to be bloody,
or to be defended and allowed by any of their best authors, if at this time,
the fear of apparent Falsehood did not deter them. But if to Murder Kings, or
to depose them, and Absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance for the
advancement of Religion, be a Thing most impious, and void of Religion, and
makes Religion worse than none; which Doctrine yet they have owned, and their
Counsels have owned, and we have proved it upon them, and out of them: I
cannot tell what to say to these men, or their Testimony, the Nature of whom
they desire to be considered.

But they were Young Boys, sent for hither on purpose to give this Testimony;
and it was not indeed, a Fault in the Prisoners at the Bar, to send for what
Evidence they could for themselves: But it is very doubtful and suspicious, to
have such green, and flexible minds, thus employed, and I must leave it to you,
to consider how far these Young men trained in such principles, may be
prevailed on, to speak what is not True.

And now if the Kings Evidence after this, stood alone, it were yet something:
but when you have Mr. Oats Testimony as to this great matter of his appearing
in April, confirmed by 7 or 8 Witnesses, that speak so expressly to it, how will
they answer it; Do they make Sir Ric: Barker, a person of no value; do they so
little esteem the Minister that says, I knew him though he was in disguise; And
went and said it presently to a Woman, that he knew was acquainted with Oats.
And asking her, when she saw Mr. Oats and she saying, not a great while: he
said, I saw him later then you; and says he did know him: And this is confirmed
still by Sir Rich: Barker, who tells you, that his men told him, that he had
been there. What should make them to acquaint their master so, if it were not
so? Or do you think it is a thing maliciously prepared or invented to take away
the lives of these men, that his men should tell him a story so long ago? If it
be not true, to what purpose should they tell him so; and if it be true, it
Confirms the matter sworn against them.

There is he, that was his companion, the Schoolmaster, that says, in the
beginning of May was twelveth month, Mr. Oats dined with him at his house,
sat with him Four hours, discoursed of his Travels into Spain and St. Omers:
And there is the man that is a Papist, if not a Priest, that swears he saw him
twice, about the middle of April, at Mr. Charles Howards lodgings in Arundels
house; so that here are seven Witnesses direct or circumstantial, to prove Mr.
Oats to have been in London, in April and May 78.

But said they This is but Talking and Swearing. Very fine! and the St. Omers
Youths is Talking, but not Swearing. Ay, but then their Numbers are not so
many. That Gentlemen, I leave to you, for both cannot be true. The Testimony of
Mr. Oats, and the witnesses that he had to back himself withal, and to prove
himself to be here is inconsistent with what the young men say, that he was at
St. Omers.

Now if you observe; All these men's Defense is in the Circumstantial part of
the evidence in watching and catching at what day, What hour, and what month,
how Mr. Oats reckoned false, so and so: If he came here about the 20th of
April, how could they see him the first of May. And they think then, they have
got such a mighty victory, but it is not so weighty an argument with
Protestants after all their conceit, that it is unanswerable; For here is the
point, the matter of time is a thing that no man can so precisely charge his
memory with, as that it should be too Strictly the measure of your Judgments
about truth or falsehood, by the mistake of 7 or 8 days. Examine your selves how
often every day you do mistake things that have been transacted half a year
ago, and err in point of time? taking one week for another, and one Month for
another, and though I must say, it is considerable, yet too great weight is not
to be laid upon that.

As for that they insist upon so much, the coming over of Sir Thomas Preston
and Sir John Warner with Mr. Oats; It is true, Three or Four Witnesses speak,
as to Sir John Warner, and some to Sir Thomas Preston; and they say, they were
both beyond Sea when Mr. Oats came over; but if the Sixteen be not to be
believed in the first matter, and if Mr. Oats does say true, notwithstanding
all their Evidence, that he was here such a time in April and May, Then I Will
tell you what Inference may naturally be; to wit, That they cannot want a
Witness to prove what they please: For I believe there is none of them all will
make any bones of it.

I say (Gentlemen) if you are satisfied in your Consciences, that the Evidence
on Mr. Oats his part to that point (that is to say, seven Witnesses) ought to
prevail with you, to believe he was here in those months notwithstanding the 16
Witnesses, who say they saw him every day beyond Sea in April and May), Their
other Evidence about his coming over with Preston and Warner, will have no
great weight; because the other is the great matter, by which they make the
substance of their defense.

I am glad indeed to see a Gentleman here whose Face I never saw before, and
that is Mr. Dugdale* Upon my word he has escaped well, for I find little said
against him, very little either as to the matter or the manner of his Evidence.
They would have made reflection on him for his Poverty, but I hope that they
whose Religion is to vow Poverty, will never insist on that for any great
Objection against any.


L. C. J. North, Your Lordship has forgot that he said he gave away Three or
four Hundred Pounds to them,


L. C. J. But I will Challenge all the Papists in England, to satisfy any Man
that hears me this day of one piece of Evidence, which will turn every
Protestants heart against the Papists. If so be, they murdered Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, the Plot even by that is in a great measure proved upon them, by that
base murder. And what can be a plainer proof of it, than the Evidence of this
day, which Mr. Dugdale produces? We had notice (says he) on Monday night, that
on the Saturday before it* Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was killed (which falls out
to be that very Saturday he was first missing;) which notice was given in a
Letter writ by Harcourt to Evers, another Priest, that same Saturday night,
wherein were these words, This night Sir Edmundbury Godfrey is dispatched; and
I am sure if this be true, then no man can say but they murdered him.


Whitebread. It is not alleged against any of Us.


Lord Chief Just. It is an Evidence of the Plot in general, and to Harcourt in
parcular.


Harcourt, He never shows the Letter that he says I writ.


L. C. J. He says, that he used to peruse the letters, and that Evers had this
again, after he had perused it; He says also, he has received at times a
hundred letters from you, and this among the rest. Now the Question is, whether
it be true or no? To make it out, he produces Mr. Chetwnyd, whom I hope you wll
not deny to be a Gentleman of one of the best Family of his Country, and of
honest Reputation, who says, that on the Tuesday following that Saturday Sir
Edmund-bury-Godfrey was mist, he and another were talking together in
Staffordshir, and that the other person asked him if he knew of the death of
any Justice of the Peace at Westminster, and when he told him, he had heard of
no such thing; No said he, that is strange, you living sometimes about
Westminster, for said he, the Wench at the Alehouse say, That this morning
Mr. Dugdale said, to two other Gentlemen, there was a Justice of Peace of
Westminster, Killed; and Mr. Dugdale swears, that was Sir Edmundbury Godfry.
Now, if Dugdale be fi^ to be believed, that he saw such a Letter, as he must be
it, he be not a very great Prophet to be able to foretell this: Or if the Maid
that said this, did not invent it (A thing then impossible to be done) Or Mr:
Chetwynd feigned, that he heard the man make his Report from the maid; This
thing could not come to pass, but by these men. Nay, if Mr. Dugdale could not
do as great a Miracle as any are in the Popish Legends, how could he tell, that
it was done on the same Night when it was done at London? Or speak of i^, on
the Munday-night after when it was not known in London till the Thursday
following? This will stick, I assure you (Sirs) upon all your party.

For my own part, this Evidence of Mr. Dugdales gives me the greatest
satisfaction of any thing in the world in this matter; and whilst we rest
satisfied in the murder of that Man, and are morally certain you must do it,
knowing of what Principles you are, you cannot blame us, if upon such manifest
Reasons we lay it upon you.

And this is Occasional Evidence, which I for my part never heard before this
day; nor can I ever be more, or better satisfied, than I am upon this point,
viz. The Testimony that I have received this Afternoon concerning the Murder of
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. As to the Defense they have made, they are Exceptions
in point of time, but do not affect Mr. Dugdale; for they have hardly the
confidence to deny the Things he says to be true against them.

They fall foul indeed upon Mr. Oats. he appears to have been their Agent; and
whilst so, bad enough: But if he had not had a mind to have become a good man,
he would not likely have done us that Good that he has done, in discovering
the design you had engaged him in. Let any man Judge, by your Principles and
Practices, what you would not do, for the promoting of the same.

For while this Gentleman's Blood lies upon you (and some have been Executed for
it), it must be yet farther told you, that in what you Did do, you have given
us a specimen of what you Would do. We have a Testimony, that for promoting
your Cause, you would not stick at the Protestants Blood. You began with Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, but who knows where you would have made an End! It was this
one Man you Killed in his Person, but in Effigy the Whole Nation. It was in
one man's Blood your Hand; are Embrewed; but your Souls were Dipped in the Blood
of us all. This was a Handsel only of what was to follow; and so long as we are
convinced you Killed him, we cannot but believe, you would also Kill the King.
We cannot but believe you would make all of Us away, that stand in the way of
your Religion: A Religion, which ac^ (...) you would bring in upon us; by a
Conversion of us with Blood; and by a Baptism with Fire. God keep our Land from
the one, and our City from the other!

To return, The Letter that is found in Harcourts Papers, does further confirm
Mr. Oats in all the great and considerable Matters that he says; That there
was a Plot, That that Plot was called by the name of a Design, which was to be
kept Close and Secret. And this is an Evidence that cannot Lie. For that Letter
will never be got off, no more than the other Letter, that Mr. Dugdale speaks
of about Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

And thus I leave it to you, Gentlemen: You have heard how many VVitnesses they
have had for them, about Twenty-Four or Twenty-Five of one sort or another. You
have heard what they apply their Testimony unto, to Convict Mr. Oats of
Falsehood in matter of Time, which was their principal Defense; That he was not
here in April and May, and that he came not over with Sir Thomas Preston, and
Sir John Warner, and that Ireland was not here all August. You have heard what
VVitnesses Oats, is backed withal, as to the time of his being here: and the
Maid says, she saw Ireland here in August.

However, though their Defense depends but upon a point of Time: I must tell
you, it ought to be well considered, for it is indeed very considerable toward
their Defense; and God forbid but we should be equal to all men.

And so I have Remembered, as well as I can, in this long and perplexed
Evidence, that which seems to me most material as to their Charge or Discharge;
and that which they have made their greatest Defense by the Youths from St.
Omers to disprove Mr. Oats his being here, and Mr. Irelands not being in
London in August, which in Truth is not the proper business of this Day, but
has received a former Verdict before: for if so be the Jury before had not
been satisfied of the Truth of that, they could never have found Ireland
Guilty. So I leave it to you upon the whole matter. I can remember nothing
besides. Go together, and consider of your Verdict, according to your Evidence.


L. C. J. North. Gentlemen! My Lord has repeated it so fully to you, that I
shall not need to add any thing to it.


Then an Officer was sworn to keep the Jury, who withdrew, and the Judges also
went off from the Bench leaving Mr. Recorder, and a competent number of
Commissioners there to take the Verdict; and about the space of a quarter of an
Hour, the Jury returned, and Answered to their Names, and gave in their Verdict
thus.

Clerk of Crown. Gentlem^n, Are you all Agreed of your Verdict?


Omnes, Yes.


Cl. of Crown. Who shall say for you?


Omnes. Foreman.


Cl: of the Cr. Thomas White, alias, Whitebread, hold up thy hand. You of the
Jury, look upon the prisoner: How say you? Is he Guilty of the High Treason
whereof he stands Indicted, or not Guilty?


Foreman Guilty.


Cl: of Cr. What Goods or Chattels?


Foreman. None to our Knowledge. ( And so severally of the Rest.)


Which Verdict being Recorded in usual form, Mr. Recorder spoke to the Jury thus

Mr. Recorder, Gentlemen, You of the Jury; There has been along Evidence given
against the Prisoners at the Bar. They were all Indicted, Arrainged, fairly
Tried, and fully Heard, for High Treason depending upon several Circumstances.
They can none of them pretend to say, (and I take the liberty to take notice of
it, for the satisfaction of them, and all that are here present, and all the
world) That not a Person among the Prisoners at the Bar, were either wanting to
themselves to Offer, or the Court to them to hear any thing that they could say
for themselves. But, upon a long Evidence, a full Discussing the Objections
made against it, and a Patient Hearing of the Defense they made, they are found
Guilty: And I do think, that every honest Man will say, That they are
unexceptionably found so; and that it is a Just Verdict you have given.


And then the Prisoners were carried back to Newgate, and the Court Adjourned
till Eight next Morning. And then Mr. Langhorne was Tried, and found Guilty:
After which, they were all Six brought to the Bar together, and received
Judgment to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered: Which accordingly was done upon
the Five Jesuits and Priests, on Friday the Twentieth of June, at the Usual
Place of Execution.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
Mr. Recorder's Speech before judgment, will be published at the End of Mr.
Langhorn's Trial; which is now in the Press, and will speedily come forth.


