THE TRIALS OF Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas Budd, and William Bradford,
QUAKERS, For several Great Misdemeanors (As was pretended by their Adversaries)
before A Court of Quakers: At the Sessions held at Philadelphia in Pensylvania,
the Ninth, Tenth, and Twelfth Days of December, 1692.

Giving also an Account of the most Arbitrary Procedure of that Court.

LICENSED,

October. 19th. 1693.

Dan. Poplar.

Printed first Beyond Sea, and now Reprinted in London, for Richard Baldwin in
Warwick Lane. 1693.

The Introduction.
TO the end that all Impartial People may have a right understanding in the
present Prosecution, I intend to give a short Relation of the first rise, and
cause, and ground of this present Difference, and Persecution.

In the Year 1689. by the good Providence of God George Keith was earnestly
invited to remove from his Plantation in East-Jersey, to keep a School in
Philadelphia, which he did; but kept an Usher, and spent a great part of his
time in Reading, Meditation, Visiting Meetings, and answering the Conscientious
Doubts and Questions of many People; and there was a more than ordinary seeming
Satisfaction in general among the People called Quakers, that they were so
favored with the assistance of George Keith. But alas! this great love was but
short-lived; and as in other Cases one Extreme begets the contrary, so in this;
for their love and respects to him were never so great, but now the Envy and
Hatred of many exceeds; and that upon the account of his Christian Testimony.
For it was but a little time that he had been amongst us, and preached the true
Faith of Christ, both without and within, but some began to be dissatisfied,
and whispered it about in private, which, when he came to understand, he
labored in much love and tenderness to undeceive and satisfy those that he
came to know were dissatisfied; and some did receive good Satisfaction; but
others cast his Labors of Love behind their backs; and much whispering and
backbiting there were in private against the Doctrine held forth by G. K. and
some began to contradict his Testimony in public Meetings; but yet this were
born with, and no open Difference until one William Stockdale accused Geo.
Keith of Preaching Two Christ's, because he held forth (as necessary to our
Salvation) The Faith of Christ as he died for our Sins, rose again for our
Justification, and ascended into Heaven, and is in Heaven in the true and
entire glorified Nature of Man, our Mediator with the Father; and also, That
Christ was spiritually present by his Light and Life, in all his Children.
Whereupon he dealt with him, and endeavored much to convince him, but not
prevailing, G. K. laid it before a Meeting of (...) the Ministry, but they did
nothing in the matter, but (...) and contradict G. K. in his Doctrine.
Whereupon G. K. did again renew his complaint to them of the Ministry at the
Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia the 7th Month, 1691. desiring to know their
sense and judgment, viz. Whether to preach Faith in Christ within us, and Faith
in Christ without us, was to preach Two Christ's, or One? and six Meeting were
held in debate about this matter, and yet nothing done in it: So this past on,
and some Months after Tho. Fitzwater openly in a Monthly Meeting accused G.
Keith, That he denied the sufficiency of the Light; which G. K. denied, but T.
F. said, he would prove it at the next Monthly Meeting; which being come, G. K.
called on T. Fitzwater to prove his Charge, which he endeavored to do, and
brought W. Stockdale for his Evidence, but to no purpose, only W. Stockdale
again renewed his Charge against G. K. in the open Meeting, to the admiration
of many, to see his great Ignorance and Impudence; but seeing that T. F. was
not like to prove his Charge against G. K. Thomas Lloyd, and some few others
withdrew, yet the generality of the Meeting stayed, and after some time it
growing dark, John Jennet, (a great stickler against G. K.) desired that the
Meeting might be adjourned till the next day, which was unanimously agreed
unto, and also by Tho. Fitzwater; the next day all Parties appeared, and great
and long Contention there was most part of that day betwixt George Keith and
Tho. Lloyd, Arthur Cook, etc. G. K. affirming and arguing for the Necessity of
the Faith of Christ crucified, etc. the others denying, and arguing, That the
Light within was sufficient without the Man Christ Jesus, etc. but finding that
the stream went against them, T. Lloyd, A. Cook, and some others withdrew, and
the Meeting (consisting of at least Sixty Monthly Meeting Members) proceeded
and gave Judgment against T. Fitzwater and W. Stockdale, the substance of which
was, That they should forbear preaching and praying in Meetings till they had
condemned their Ignorance and Unbelief, etc. but at the next Quarterly Meeting,
a Party withstood the said Judgments, and said, That the Persons being
Ministers, none but them of the Ministry were fit to judge; which many thought
relisht too much of Popery; yet notwithstanding many showed their dislike
thereto, Tho, Lloyd, Arthur Cook, Sam. Jenings, etc. denied the said Meeting
and Judgment; and then it was that T. Lloyd's Party changed their time and
place of meeting against and contrary to the declared mind of their then
Brethren, who gave their Reasons why they consented not to the changing the
Time and Place of Meeting; but prevailed nothing with them, for the next first
Day George Keith and Party met at the usual time and place, and Tho. Lloyd and
Party went to the Meeting House at the Center, which made the first Separation.
Now the Difference being thus far advanced, caused much discourse and enquiry
into the matter by all sorts of People, and great flocking to Meetings there
was, both in Town and Country, where G. K. came, and his Testimony had much
reception in the Hearts of many; which being perceived by Tho. Lloyd and Party,
the only Expedient they could devise, was to condemn G. K. Whereupon the 20th
of the 4th Mon. 1692. Twenty Eight of them called Ministers, met together at
Philadelphia and without ever so much as acquainting G. K. published a Paper of
Judgment against him, condemning him as a Person without the fear of God before
his Eyes, etc. which done, Thomas Lloyd, Samuel Jenings, Arthur Cook, John
Delavall, and others, made it their business to follow G. K. from Meeting to
Meeting, violently opposing his Testimony, and sometimes making use of their
Magistratical Power to effect their Designs, which caused great Contests and
Confusions; and G. K. from time to time complaining of their Injustice, for
condemning of him without all Hearing or Trial, upon a time in Chester-County
Tho. Lloyd said, George, if thou think thy self aggrieved by that Judgment,
there is relief for thee; thou may appeal to the Yearly Meeting, which is now
approaching; which Advice G. K. followed, and made an Appeal to the said Yearly
Meeting, and proposed twelve particular Heads to be considered, discoursed of,
and resolved by the People called Quakers at the said Yearly Meeting, and that
they might have timely notice of the said Appeal, and be the better prepared to
answer it, G. K. procured the said Appeal to be printed. Which was no sooner
done, but they issued forth a Warrant, and apprehended William Bradford the
Printer, and John Mcomb, who (as they were informed) had disposed of two of the
said Papers, and committed the said W. B. and J. M. to Goal; and also seized
all the said Papers they could meet with, and took away a good quantity of W.
Bradford's Letters, tending to the disabling of him to work for his Wife and
Children; and upon pretense of another Warrant granted without any Conviction,
Signed by Samuel Jenings and Robert Ewer Justices, John White the Sheriff took
Goods out of the Shop of Will. Bradford, half as much more as the said Warrant
was for. Whether these Actions are most like to the poor despised and
persecuted Quakers, or their Persecutors, is left to all impartial People to
judge.

Here follows a Copy of the Mittimus.

WHereas William Bradford Printer, and John MComb Tailor, being brought before
us, upon an Information of Publishing, Uttering and Spreading a Malicious and
Seditious Paper, Entitled, An Appeal from the twenty eight Judges to the
Spirit of Truth, etc. Tending to the Disturbance of the Peace, and Subversion
of the present Government; and the said Persons being required to give Security
to answer it at the next Court, but they refusing so to do,

These are therefore by the King and Queen's Authority, and in our
Proprietary's Name, to require You to take into your Custody the Bodies of
William Bradford and John MComb, and them safely keep till they shall be
discharged by due Course of Law. Whereof fail not at your Peril; and for your
so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under our Hands and
Seals this 24th of August, 1692.

These to John White Sheriff of Philadelphia, or his Deputy.

Arthur Cook, Samuel Jennings, Samuel Richardson, Humphry Murrey, Robert Ewer.

Now though they had got these two poor Men into Goal, and though all sober
People did resent their Proceedings very ill, and as proceeding from a cruel
Spirit of Persecution; yet the next day they met again, in order to proceed
against G. K. and several other Persons in the like manner, and sent for two
other Justices that were not called Quakers, to assist them in this work of
prosecuting several seditious and dangerous Persons, that were like to subvert
the Government, as they pretended; but contrary to their Expectation, the said
two Justices that were not called Quakers, viz. Lacy Cook a Lutheran, and John
Holme a Baptist, declared their dissent from them in these Proceedings,
signifying, That the matter was a Religious Difference among themselves, (viz.
the Quakers) and did not relate to the Government; John Holme particularly
advising them to send for Geo. Keith, and let him interpret his own words; and
upon a hearing of him, if it any way appears that he strikes at the Government,
I will (said Justice Holme) join with you against him with Heart and Hand. But
this Advice had no weight with them; whereupon the said two Justices left them,
and our New modelled Persecuting Quakers being warmly bent to root out Sedition
forsooth! proceeded in their Work, and as they had judged G. K. in their
Spiritual Court without all Hearing or Trial, so in like manner they prosecuted
him in their Temporal Court without all hearing. Why? to have done otherwise
would have given the Lie and Contradiction to their Spirit of Discerning, which
Justice Cook declared to be such, That they could judge of matters of Fact
without Evidence; and therefore it would have been ridiculous for them to have
sent for G. K. and asked him, Whether he was the Author of such a Paper that
his Name was to? Or to have enquired of him, Whether it was against the
Government that he intended by such and such words therein? No, for their
Spirit of Discerning told them all that, and therefore without more to do,
proclaimed G. K. by the common Crier in the Marketplace, To be a Seditious
Person, and an Enemy to the King and Queens Government: But these Magistrates
would do well to consider the Actions and End of Empson and Dudly, and whether
they have not violated the Fundamental Laws of English Subjects as well as
they, and that in convicting Men without Trial as shall be made appear anon,
1st. in the Case of George Keith and Tho. Budd. 2ly, In the Case of William
Bradford. And, 3ly, in the Case of John MComb.

1st. Here follows a Copy of the Public Writing that was proclaimed by the
Common Crier in the Marketplace against G. K.

At a Private Sessions held for the Country of Philadelphia the 25th of the 6th
Month, 1692. before Arthur Cook, Samuel Jenings, Samuel Richardson, Humphry
Murry, Anthony Morris, Robert Ewer, Justices of the County.
WHereas the Government of this Province, being by the late King of England' s
peculiar Favor vested, and sithence continued in Governor Penn, who thought
fit to make his and our worthy Friend Thomas Lloyd his Deputy Governor, by and
under whom the Magistrates do act in this Government. And whereas it has been
proved before us, that George Keith being a Resident here, did, contrary to his
Duty, publicly revile the said Deputy Governor, calling him an impudent Man,
telling him he was not fit to be Governor, and that his Name would stink, with
many other slighting and abusive Expressions, both to him and the Magistrates;
and he that uses such Exorbitancy of Speech toward the said Governor, may be
supposed will easily dare to call the Members of Council and Magistrates
Impudent Rascals, as he has lately called one in an open Assembly, that was
constituted by the Proprietary to be a Magistrate. And he also charges the
Magistrates, who are Ministers here, with engrossing the Magistratical Power
into their Hands, that they might usurp Authority over him, saying also, He
hoped in God he should shortly see their Power taken from them; which he acted
in a most indecent manner. And further, the said G. K. with several of his
Adherents, having some few days since, with an unusual Insolency, by a printed
Sheet, called an Appeal, etc. Traduced, and vilely misrepresented the Industry,
Care, Readiness and Vigilance of some Magistrates, and others here, in their
late Proceedings against some Privateers, viz. Babit and his Crew, in order to
bring them to Condign Punishment, whereby to discourage such Attempts for the
future; and has thereby also defamed and arraigned the Determinations of
Provincial Judicatory against Murderers; and not only so, but by a wrong
Insinuation have labored to possess the Readers of their Pamphlet, That it is
inconsistent for those who are Ministers of the Gospel to act as Magistrates.
--

Now forasmuch as we, as well as others, have born, and still do patiently
endure the said George Keith and his Adherents many personal Reflections
against us, and their gross Revilings of our Religious Society, yet we cannot
without the Violation of our Trust to the King and Governor, as also to the
Inhabitants of this Government, pass by or connive at such part of the said
Pamphlet and Speeches, that have a tendency to Sedition and Disturbance of the
Peace, as also to the Subversion of the present Government, or to the aspersing
the Magistracy thereof. Therefore for the undeceiving of all People, we have
thought fit by this Public Writing, not only to signify that our Procedure
against the Persons now in the Sheriffs Custody, as well as what we intend
against others concerned, in its proper place, respects only that part of the
said printed Sheet, which appears to have the tendency aforesaid, and not any
part relating to Differences in Religion. But also, these are to Caution such
who are well affected to the Security, Peace and Legal Administration of
Justice in this place, that they give no Countenance to any Revilers and
Contemners of Authority, Magistrates or Magistracy; as also, to warn all other
persons, that they forbear the future publishing and spreading of the said
Pamphlet, as they will answer the contrary at their Peril. Given under our
Hands and County Seal, the Day, Year and Place aforesaid.

Arthur Cook, Samuel Jenings, Samuel Richardson, Humphrey Murrey, Robert Ewer,
Anthony Morris.

Note, There being an Answer to this Proclamation published in Print by O. R.
and T. B. I shall only in this place make the following Observations.

First, They say, At a private Sessions, etc. and then relate a Preamble of the
Government being vested in W. Penn, who had made T. Lloyd his Deputy, etc. Did
they think to tell us News in this? Or did they think we had forgot Thomas
Lloyd was Deputy Governor? Surely methinks not the latter, since we have been
so smartly remembered thereof by his Agent White, who (when they could not
effect their late great Tax) [Here the Copy being blotted, it could not be
read.] so that one would think that Passage might have been spared: Oh, but
it is plain their end therein is to insinuate, That Geo. Keith being legally and
judicially brought before the Governor to answer to some heinous Crime and
Misdemeanour, and that a multitude of People were present to hear how he could
answer for himself; (for they say, publicly reviled, etc.) yet this G. K. like
a rude man, though he pretends to be a Minister, was so far from behaving himself
before the Governor like a Christian, that he fell a reviling him, and amongst
other scandalous Expressions, said to him, Thou impudent Man, thou art not fit
to be Governor, thy Name will stink. Certainly their drift was to possess
their Readers with this Belief, as is clear and evident from their following
supposition, or rather suggestion, where they say, He that uses such
Exorbitancy of Speech to the Governor, will easily dare to call the Members of
Council and Magistrates Impudent Rascals, as he has lately called one in an
open Assembly, who was constituted by the Governor to be a Magistrate. Which
also is a base and wicked Insinuation; for George Keith never spoke those words
to any of them as Magistrates or Officers in the Government, neither did he
ever speak to the present Governor all those words together, as is insinuated
by the said Paper, but on the contrary, what he spoke to Tho. Lloyd was in
Monthly Meetings and Religious Controversies; and T. Lloyd has said several
times, That he would take no advantage by words spoke at such times; but we
find them practice the contrary; for on a certain time T. L. stood up, and
affirmed, That G. K. was guilty of Contradiction; and being put to prove it,
said, That fifteen years ago in his printed Books he owned the Seed to be
Christ. Whereupon G. K. said, Thou impudent man, I do not deny it now, but own
it as much as ever. But by all the diligent enquiry that I have made, I cannot
find that G. K. said, he was not fit to be Governor, [Here the Copy being
blotted, it could not be read.] second Chapter of the Laws of this Province,
That all Officers and Persons commissioned and employed in the Government,
shall be such as profess and declare, They believe in Jesus Christ to be the
Son of God the Savior of the World, etc. [Here agian the Copy was blotted.]

And as to G. K. saying, That his Name would stink, T. L. knows in his
Conscience, that it was spoke to him only as he was one of the 28 unjust Judges
for giving of false Judgment against him, and that without all hearing or
trial. And as touching the Person whom they say he called Impudent Rascal, it
was one whom he knew not to be constituted, as they say he was; but his Brother
being so constituted, and refusing to serve, the People of the Town chose him
in his Brothers stead to serve as a Magistrate within that Town Bounds, which
was altogether unknown to G. K. and therefore Paul's Excuse, Acts 23. 4. I wist
not Brethren that it was the High Priest, might be an Apology for him. But let
us consider the word Rascal; according to Goldman's Dictionary, a Rascal is a
Brawler and Empty Talker, and one that deceives his Neighbor by false and
weak Arguments; and Cole in his Latin and English Dictionary says, the Latin
word Nebulo comet of the Hebrew word (...) Nabal, and any ordinary Schoolboy
that has but learned his Accidence, knows that Nebulo signifies Rascal,
Villain, Knave or Rogue; and in Scripture we find the same word, see Isa. 32.
6. (...) For the Rascal will speak Villainy; and Jer. 29. 23. (...) They commit
Villainy; and as Gouldman in his Dictionary says, a Villain and a Rascal is of
the same Signification. But this Person whom they mention went about to deceive
his Neighbors by false and weak Arguments, viz. That he did not expect to be
saved by that which died at Jerusalem; And that God was not present in all his
Creatures; which Unchristian and Atheistical Principles G. K. being about to
refute in a Monthly Meeting, and holding forth, That God was present in all his
Creatures, this Person stood up, and with much opposition questioning, as
Paul's Fool did about the Resurrection, said in a rude and boisterous manner,
What, George, does the Spirit of God speak in Trees? Whereupon G. K. said
(being greatly provoked by his interrupting of him, and Unchristian Behavior
and Discourse) Thou Impudent Rascal, who says the Spirit of God speaks in
Trees, as it does in Men? But to make the thing seem odious, the Publishers of
this Public Writing say, It was in a Public Assembly; as if it had been in
some Court, or as if he had been brought before this Magistrate, (as they call
him) upon some Examination, and there, instead of behaving himself soberly, he
presently calls him Impudent Rascal; this they would falsely insinuate, as also,
That before long he will go into the Council-Room, and into the Courts, and there
Revile the Counselors and Magistrates, and call them impudent Rascals. Oh,
the horrid Impudency of those Men! Let Shame cover their Faces, if they have
any in them!

And whereas they further say, That G. K. with several of his Adherents with an
unusual Insolency having Traduced the Industry, Care and Vigilance of some
Magistrates here, in their late Proceedings against some Privateers, etc. and
has thereby also defamed and arraigned the Determinations of the Provincial
Judicatory, etc. As if G. K. and several others had printed a Book, and defamed
and arraigned them, and denied their Power of Magistracy; whereas all that
impartially read the said printed Appeal, will find that G. K. did not defame
nor arraign them, but they having given a Commission, and hired Men to fight
(which was diametrically opposite and contrary to the often declared and known
Principle of the People called Quakers, against all use of the Carnal Sword) it
was proposed, amongst other things, to be considered by all faithful Friends at
the Yearly Meeting, whether these Men ought not to be condemned and disowned as
Quakers, but it was never intended to deny them to be Magistrates; for as
Magistrates they were obliged to do what they did and it was commendable in
them who did so commissionate and hire Men to fight, and also search the Town
for Arms, etc. But the great Question is, Whether they did not transgress as
they professed to be Ministers and Quakers? If nay, but that the Care and
Vigilance of these Magistrates here at Philadelphia, called Quakers, is worthy
of Commendation, as they intimate, for saving of a Sloop by Force of Arms, how
much more shall their Care and Vigilance be worthy of Commendation, to raise a
Militia to save and defend the whole Country, if any occasion should offer? But
how steadfast this does manifest them to be the Quakers Principle of Refusing
in all cases to fight, and that for Conscience sake, I shall leave all to
judge. I always thought that which was a matter of Conscience to the Quakers in
Old England, Barbados, and other places, had been a matter of Conscience to
them under a Government of their own; but I find the contrary in these
Magistrates and many others joined with them here. But that which seems the
most strange to several observing Persons in this place, is, that several
called Quakers in Maryland, Barbados, and other places, that pretend its a
matter of Conscience to them not to bear Arms, yet now will own these here in
that Practice, unless they now think to leave that Article out of their Creed.

In the next place, whereas Peter Boss being offended with the Judgment of the
28. writ a Letter to Samuel Jenings, (being then in Church Fellowship with him)
showing his Dislike thereof, and telling S. J. of some of the Scandals he lay
under; for this they issued forth a Warrant against him, and put him into
Prison, without ever dealing with him in a Church Method, and at the next Court
presented him for the same, to which Court he was bound to answer, where he
gave his Attendance, with his Witnesses ready, but not brought to Trial,
although much desired by him and his Wife, who urged the Injuries of the delay
thereof.

At the same Court William Bradford and John M"Comb appeared, and desired they
might come to a Trial, it being greatly to their Prejudice to be kept
Prisoners; and saying, it is provided by Magna Charta, That Justice shall not
be delayed to any, and we being free born English Subjects claim this as our
Privilege, and hope this Court will not deny it us, because not only our
Persons are restrained, but William Bradford's Working Tools are detained from
him, with which he should work to maintain his Family.

Justice Cook said, What Bold, Impudent and Confident Fellows are these to
stand thus confidently before the Court?

J. M"Comb. You may cause our Hats to be taken off, if you please.


W. Bradford. We are here only to desire that which is the right of every
freeborn English Subject which is speedy Justice; and its strange that that
should be accounted Impudence, and we Impudent Fellows therefore, when we have
spoke nothing but words of Truth and Soberness, in requesting that which is our
Right, and which we want, it being greatly to our prejudice to be detained
Prisoners.


J. Cook, (speaking to W. Bradford) said, If thou had been in England, thou
would have had thy Back slasht before now.


W. B. I do not know wherein I have broke any Law, so as to incur any such
Punishment.


Justice Jenings. Thou art very ignorant in the Law surely; does not thou know
that there is a Law, that every Printer shall put his Name to the Book he
prints, or the Press is forfeited.


W. B. I know there was such a Law, and I know when it expired.


J. Cook. But it is revived again, and is in force, and without any regard to
the matter of the Book, provides, That the Printer shall put his Name to all
that he prints, which thou have not done.


But waving from that, the Prisoners still pressed for a Trial. To which
Justice Cook said, A Trial you shall have, and that to your Cost too, it may
be. And Justice Jenings said, A Trial you shall have, but for some Reason known
to us, the Court defers it to the next Sessions; and that is the Answer we
give, and no other you shall have.

All this time John White Sheriff, pleaded vehemently against the Prisoners,
greatly aggravating their (pretended) Crimes; and when complained of, that the
Sheriff, (through whose hands goes all Fines and Forfeitures) should be so
bitter an Attorney against the Prisoners, he cloaked it under the Visor of a
Prothonitor.

So this Court passed over, and the said Persons not brought to Trial, but yet
not wholly barren of Action, nor void of Injustice; for though they had not only
got W. Bradford into Prison, and taken his Letters from him, (with which he
should work) and his Paper and Books out of his Shop, but also they had got the
Body of John MComb, with which one would think they might have been satisfied,
had any thing of tenderness remained in them, the time they committed him being
when his Wife was newly brought to Bed, and who lay very weak in a strong
Fever, and several thought she would not live; and though he acquainted them of
her Condition, and how destitute his Family was, requesting them to let him go
home, and he would promise to be ready at any time they should call for him;
This they would not grant, but to Prison he was sent; (though to give every one
their due, White the Jailer was so kind as to let him go home an hour or two
sometimes in an Evening after it was dark) yet our hot-spur'd Justices being
not satisfied with having his Body, would do what in them lay, to ruin him and
his Family; for whereas he kept an Ordinary, and for his License so to do had
paid Governor Lloyd Twelve Pieces of Eight, which is Three Pound Twelve
Shillings for the last twelve Months before, [No inconsiderable Price for a
License] yet they now proceeded to suppress his keeping of an Ordinary, though
he had fulfilled, and in no respect transgressed the Conditions of his License,
as will appear by a Copy of the said License, which here follows verbatim, viz.

By the Lieutenant Governor,
Philadelphia Ss.
JOhn MComb requesting License from me to keep an Ordinary in Philadelphia, and
he being recommended to me as a fit and qualified Person for such an Employ; I
do hereby admit and License the said John MComb to keep an Ordinary, or a House
of Public Entertainment in the House he now lives in, he taking care,
according to Law, to keep good Orders and sufficient Conveniences for Man and
Horse. This License to continue for a Twelve Month ensuing the date hereof.
Given at Philadelphia the Tenth day of the 4th Month, 1692.

Thomas Lloyd.

Now let us hear what great and heinous Crimes are alleged for the suppressing
John MComb in his Employ: If he had trangrest any Law, or broke any Conditions
in his License, they ought to have called him before them, and convicted him
thereof, but without ever so doing, they suppress his so-dear-bought-License,
as follows.

At a Court held at Philadelphia the 4th of October, 1692.
THE Court taking notice of John MComb 's Contemptuous Behavior, as also his
spreading a Seditious Paper in his House, to the Disturbance of the Peace, do
therefore suppress his License, and do Command him not to presume to keep an
Ordinary after the Tenth Day of the next Month, being November, on pain of
incurring the Penalty of the Forfeiture of Five Pound for keeping an Ordinary
without a License: And that notice be given him of this Order.

A true Copy by John White, Deputy-Clerk.



Note, That the Contemptuous Behavior they mention, was his and W. B's
requesting of the Court to come to a Trial, as before is related; and the
Seditious Paper they mention, was the printed Appeal, which he having bought
two of them, and some Persons happening to see them, got them from him again,
because it suited not with their convenience to go so far as the Printer's; and
J. M. did not buy or receive them to sell again, but his disposing of those two
Papers was accidental, and for which he was imprisoned, and to come to Trial
for it, but this satisfied not these cruel Men, for they make that a main
matter whereby to suppress his License [No less than Two Punishments for One
Offence] and yet though they were so zealously warm to prosecute and punish
these Offenders, and which (they said) they could not avoid, without violating
their Trust to the King and Governor; yet without any Violation of their said
Trust they could pass by several others that were much more concerned in
spreading those Papers than J. M. Oh! the Partiality, Deceit and Cruelty of
these Men!

This Sessions passes over, and the said Persons continued under Duress till
the next Sessions, which being come, let us hear the Proceedings, which here
follows, viz.

At a Court of Quarter Sessions held by the King and Queens Authority, and in
the Proprietary's Name at Philadelphia the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 12 days of the
10th Month, 1692.
There being present on the Bench, as Justices, Samuel Jenings, Arthur Cook,
Samuel Richardson, Robert Ewer, Henry Waddy, Griffith Owen, Quakers.

John Holmes,

Robert Turner, 10th and 12th days.

Lacy Cock, and Anthony Morris on the 12th day.

The Names of the Persons, that presented Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas
Budd, William Bradford, etc.

Alexander Beardsly, William Carter, John Jennit, Will. Oxly, Emanuel Dauson,
William Allaway, Lewis Thomas, Reece Peter's, John Comes, Christopher Pennock,
Mouns Jones, Thomas Griffith, William Harwood, William Hearn, William Finley,
Will. Lawrance.

Observe. That most, if not all of these Men are known to be highly prejudiced
against G. K. T. B. and those that ioyn with them, because of their zealous
Testimony to Christ without, as well as Christ within. And John White, Sheriff,
is known to be greatly prejudiced against them, who packt this Jury on purpose
to present and defame G. K. and the rest, as was in some degree well observed
by Justice Holme, when he saw they brought in new Presentiments against G. K. in
matters concerning their Religious Differences, for which he was sharply
reproved and menaced on the Bench by Samuel Jenings and Arthur Cook, the last
saying, They were the Fathers of the Country, and they had done well, and like
honest men, in bringing in those Presentiments and they gave them Thanks for
their care and pains; but (said Justice Cook) if they must be found fault with,
who will serve upon a Grand Jury? and so went on highly resenting those few
words Justice Holme had spoke; Arthur Cook not minding that himself had said
some little time before, to a Grand Jury of more substantial Men than these
(upon their bringing in a Presentment that did not please him) you are a
Company of Infamous Men: and for which he was presented by the next Grand Jury,
but it is supposed that Presentment was buried in the Clerks Study of Oblivion,
for we have never heard more of it.

The 9th day of the 10th Month, Peter Boss called into Court, and set to the
Bar.

Crier, O yes, Silence is commanded, upon pain of Imprisonment.

The Indictment read,

Philadelphia, the 5th of the 8th Month, 1692. We of the Grand Jury for the
Body of this County, do present Peter Boss, for that he has accused Samuel
Jenings, being a i. e. Master-like, as says the English Expositor.
Magisterial Officer, with being an unjust Judge, and of his being Drunk, and
of laying a Wager with John Slocum, and for many other scandalous, reproachful
and malicious Expressions, to the Defaming of him, and tending to the
Disturbance of the Peace, contrary to the Law in that case made and provided.


Clerk, Peter Boss, What say thou, art thou guilty or not guilty?


Peter Boss, Not guilty in manner and form as there presented.


Clerk, By whom will thou be tried?


Peter Boss, By God and the Country.


Clerk, Call over the Jury.

Humphery Waterman, Joseph Kirle, Thomas Wharton, Tho. Marle, Richard Sutton,
Samuel Hoult, James Fox, Abraham Hardiman, Nicholas Rideout, Thomas Morris,
Richard Walter, John Whitpane.


Clerk, Do thou object any thing against any of these Persons?


Prisoner, Yes, I object against all of them that are called Quakers, because
they are such as I know to be deeply prejudiced against G. K. and all that
favor him, but am willing to be tried by any that are not called Quakers, or
such of them as are not manifestly prejudiced.


But they would not allow of his Exception. Whereupon the Jury were attested.
The form of the Attestation, as follows, viz. In the Presence of Almighty God
and this Court, you shall promise, well and truly to Try and true Deliverance
make betwixt the Honorable William Penn, Proprietor and Governor of this
Province, and the Prisoner at the Bar, according to Evidence.



After which, David Lloyd first, and John White next pleaded very hard against
him, that that Letter did defame Sam. Jenings as a Magistrate, confirming it,
as they pretended, by reading some Passages out of some Law Books, and some
Laws of this Province against defaming Magistrates.

To which the Attorneys of Peter Boss pleaded, That he acknowledged the writing
that Letter, but what was said therein concerning S. Jenings, was not against
him as he was a Magistrate, nor could it be reckoned a Defamation, because
'twas only a private Letter sent to himself, showing his dislike in some
things, and desiring him to clear himself of other gross and scandalous things
that were reported of him, as is usual for one Church member to do to another;
and they brought a Case out of Shepherd's Faithful Counselor, that what is
said must be Falso and Maliciose, i. e. falsely and maliciously, otherwise not
actionable. And that if a Man speak slightly of a Magistrate, if it be when he
is not in the exercise of his Office, it is no defaming of him as a Magistrate,
and so no trespass against the Law alleged.

To which David Lloyd replied, That what was spoke against Samuel Jenings, must
needs relate to him as a Magistrate, for take away Samuel Jenings, and where
will the Magistrate be?

And Sam. Jenings said, Take away Sam. Jenings the Magistrate, and where will
Sam. Jenings the Quaker be?

Note, By this it seems to S. Jenings that it is as inherent in him to be a
Magistrate as to be a Quaker, and therefore when his Magistracy cease, his
Quakerism (according to him) must cease, and like Hypocrates Twins live and die
together; but yet he may remain to be Sam. Jenings, when he is neither
Magistrate nor Quaker.

And when his Attorneys were about further to open the matter, how he writ to
him only as a Churchmember, and offered to produce some Presidents in the
Case, Arthur Cook interrupted, saying, They would not have matters of Religion
discoursed there, saying, What must Religion be made a cover to revile and
defame men, by saying, he did not write to him as a Magistrate, but as a
Churchmember?

To which G. K. (as his Friend) desired Liberty to speak, as the Law in that
case allows, but they were very unwilling to suffer him to say any thing in
behalf of Peter Boss, John White saying, G. K. was not Rectus in Curia; but
through much and long importunity, he was permitted, who then told them, That a
distinction must needs be allowed of words spoke to a Man as he is only in a
private Capacity, and as he is a Magistrate; for when Magistrates, as Arthur
Cook and Sam. Jenings, give us hard words, calling us Ranters, Apostates,
Liars, Wicked and Ungodly Men, etc. ye will not say ye give us these Names as
Magistrates; and then if ye can speak to us, not as ye are Magistrates, we may
also speak to you not as ye are Magistrates.

Thomas Harris his Attorney, and G. Keith his Friend, proffered to speak
further to several things that had been alleged by D. Lloyd and J. White, but
were much menaced by Arthur Cook, and so was Peter Boss himself, which was much
resented in the minds of many, that a man has not liberty boldly to speak in
his own defense, nor his Attorneys nor Friends for him, but often when they
were pleading, Commanded Silence upon pain of Imprisonment: Whereupon some
complained, that it was hard that he had not liberty fairly to plead his own
Cause. To which Arthur Cook said, That as a Christian he could bear any thing,
but not as a Magistrate. Which was noticed by many how A. Cook set the
Christian and Magistrate in opposition the one to the other, as if we were not
to expect that when they act as Magistrates they are endued with Christian
Patience, Meekness and Longsuffering, as if when they act the Magistrate, they
put off the Christian.

[Note, That a little before Sam. Jenings and David Lloyd would not allow of
any distinction betwixt the Magistrate and Quaker, and yet now to serve his
turn their Brother Cook grants it: Oh! the Confusion. Deceit and Hypocrisy of
these men!]

G. Keith pleaded further, though with much difficulty, That Peter Boss being a
Member of the Quakers Church, they ought not to go to Law with him until they
had proceeded orderly with him in their men's Meetings, and given him Gospel
Order; for the things of difference betwixt him and Sam. Jenings relate wholly
to Church Discipline, and belong to a Spiritual Court, and not to this.

Da. Lloyd, This is a spiritual Court; for in England they can try Atheism in
this Court.


G. K. But Peter Boss is not accused of Atheism; and if a man profess one
Almighty God, this Court has nothing to do with him for his Opinions or
Persuasions in Religious matters.


Then D. Lloyd read a passage out of a Law-book, That certain words spoke
against a Bishop or Minister, were actionable, though not actionable when spoke
against a private person; which (said he) is the present case.

A Person standing by, said, May not sin be reproved in a Bishop or Magistrate?
At which they were greatly offended, and caused an Officer to take the said
Person, viz. Ralph Ward, out of the Court.

But for the further satisfaction of the Jury, and all others present, that he
did not defame Sam. Jenings as a Magistrate, Peter Boss greatly pressed to have
his said Letter read, which after some time was done, though with great
Impatience. The which Letter here follows, viz.

THE Paper lately published at Philadelphia by 28. against G. K. and those
joined with him, etc. has and is like to occasion much Trouble and Difference
among us, not only because of the false Things compact in it, as is well known
to many Witnesses, and now to impose it on all the Meetings, is plain downright
Popery, and gives just occasion to all, not only to judge it as it is, for the
abuse, but also inspect further into things, and them these ministering Imposers
upon other men's Consciences, like unto the Roman Clergy. And to show how ill
the People do resent these things, one who was not a Quaker, so soon as the
Paper was made public, says, What D... lish work is here like to be! a Pack of
Fools have sent their Bull out: what a piece of work you will see in a short
time, and how they will expose themselves, and force others to send it home in
Print, says he, with worse words of some, unfit to mention here, etc. By
exposing this your Edict, you have made all People your Judges, into whose
hands it shall come (the Papists themselves) for your Unrighteous Judgment, and
drawing in those with you that have subscribed to they know not what, who were
not present at either of the Meetings, so consequently did not hear the words
charged on G. K. to be spoke by him, etc. but have taken all upon Trust, and
signed as a Man that would be a false Witness to a Bill or Bond for Money,
where none is due. It Is hoped, that some will see their over-haste, and repent
it, as well as others have done: How can you expect this Act of yours will be
accounted Righteous Judgment, to condemn a Man for Words, and cover one
another Deeds, as well as worse words in and among our selves. Has J. S. ever
been dealt with for his many Enormous, palpable, gross Miscarriages chargeable
upon him, his Greatness and Pride so Insolent and Lofty, none dared to touch
him? and for his abuses to a poor Worm, who writ to him for Justice and
Satisfaction, could have no answer of said Letter; and being discontented to
hear him preach to an Auditory, knowing his Life to be unsavory, and an Unjust
Judge, I write the second Letter to him of dislike to his Preaching, which
after he had read, flung it in the Fire: Why did he not answer it, and get
satisfaction from the Author, but that he knew himself Tardy, resolved to
exercise Bonner 's Cruelty on my poor Paper: And its matter of Sorrow there is
diverse among you know enough of S. J. but you cover him and one another, and
whom you please to abase, down with him amain; do you think people are blind,
and without sense? Be it known, they see, they hear, etc.

1. Pray let it be queried into, whether it was not true that S. J. did wage
his Horse with John Slocum, to ride a Race with their Horses? and whether J.
Slocum did not refuse to take the Advantage of him, because S. J. was Drunk,
etc?

2. And pray let it be inquired into, whether S. J. at another time was not so
drunk, could scarce get over the Ship side of Joseph Bryar, when at Burlington?

3. And pray let it be inquired, whether the said S. J. did not wickedly in
surveying a Tract of Land which Joh. Antrum had actually begun to do?

4. And pray let it be enquired into, whether S. J. did not take away the
Meadow of Richard Matthews, who being in England, took the Advantage? What the
Effect will be, Time must manifest, how Odious he will render others for S. J
's sake, he being a pretty eminent man in London.

5. And pray let it be enquired into the Actions and Abuses of S. J. to John
Skeen, deceased, which should have been answered at Burlington Meeting,

6. And pray let it be enquired into, whether it was S. J. or J. Simcock that
was by two Persons carried to Bed Drunk?

7. And pray let it be further enquired into, whether it was the said S. J. or
J. Simcock that was so drunk lost a Coat that was borrowed of another man, etc?
Seeing so many of you have condemned G. K. for words let these Actions be also
condemned, they being as great Pretenders to be Ministers as him. And pray take
special care this be not burnt, as the former, having a Copy of the same.

Peter Boss.


Which being read, Peter Boss produced the Testimonies of several credible
Persons, concerning the matters contained in the said Letter, and pressed hard to
have them read, because they proved some of the things queried, at least. But
they were very unwilling to have them read, saying, It was no evidence unless
the persons were present in Court; although it is well known, that Attestations
in writing have been often accepted in this Court; and it may be noted, that at
the former Sessions he had his Witnesses ready in Person waiting all the time
of the Court, which was great Charge to him, but by reason of the Extremity of
the Weather, could not be present now: However, at last, through much
importunity they admitted some of the Papers to be read, which here follow, viz.

Concerning a Report which has been about Sam. Jening 's riding a Wager with
John Slocum, I do here testify, That about three Years now past, Sarah Biddle,
Wife of W. Biddle, senior, she being at Burlington, did tell it me thus, as
follows, That she reproving her Son William, who had been riding hard, she
said, his answer was, Why Mother, may not I so well as Sam. Jenings, he could
ride a Race, or did ride one, with John Slocum, and John won his Horse, but he
would not take the advantage of Samuel, because Samuel was Cacuse (John Slocum
said) says William to his Mother: This I do here affirm, that I had it from
Sarah Biddle 's one mouth, and that we understand the word Cacuse to be drunk.

Mary Budd.
Burlington in West-New-Jersey, the 1st of October, 1692.
Attested before me, Edward Hemlock, Justice.

Whereas there is a report of S. Jenings riding a Race with J. Slocum, thus
much I William Bustill do hereby affirm to the truth of the said Report, Will.
Biddle, sen. did tell me, that S. Jenings and J. Slocum did ride a Race
together, and that John did win S. Jenings Horse, which was a white Gray, and
that which J. Slocum did ride on W. Biddle did buy of J. Slocum; and that it
was at or about the time when the Provinces were divided, and that the Race was
run in some place between Amboy and George Keith 's Land in East-Jersey, as
they came from Amboy.

Will. Bastill.
October the 21th, 1692.
As concerning a Report of S. Jenings riding a Race with J. Slocum about three
Years ago, W. Biddle, sen. at Dinner, and his Wife in company at his own House
did tell me that S. Jenings did ride a Wager with J. Slocum, and lost his
Horse, which I am ready to be attested to, if further need shall require, as
witness my hand hereunto set, this second of November. 1692.

Henry Beck.

Memorand. That my Sister Sarah Bainbridge told me, that William Biddle did say
in her hearing, that as he was riding from East Jersey toward his own House,
he heard a noise, whereupon he looked behind him, and did see Sam. Jenings and
J. Slocum rid after him very fast, and J. Slocum said to S. Jenings, I have won
thy Horse as fair as ever any man won any thing in this World.

John Bainbridge.

As concerning the Report that S. Jenings surveyed the Meadow of Rich.
Matthews, I have this to say, being then and there present, I being Assistant
at that time to Simon Charles in surveying Land for Samuel, I went with S.
Jenings to the said Meadow, and told him that was the Meadow that I had
formerly surveyed to Rich. Matthews: He bid me show him the Lines of the
survey: we went and searched, and found only one Tree or two marked by the
Meadow side, and no more; for there had been a Fire, that had not only burnt up
most of the Trees there by the Root, but also the surface of the Meadow it
self, so that we could find no marks in any order; then I produced a Copy of
the Records of the Survey, which was the same with this following, viz.
Surveyed also that piece of Meadow lying at the Northwest corner of the said
Land, extending to the Neck or narrowest place of the same as it is now marked,
all making up the number of 500 Acres, as aforesaid. But notwithstanding Samuel
bid Simon put it into the survey, which he accordingly did. Now Elias Far being
Attorney for Rich. Matthews, and hearing of what Samuel had done, he made
application to me, whereupon I wrote to Sam. Jenings about it, and signified to
him, that in my Judgment, he could not hold that Meadow, neither by Equity nor
by Law. Thus much is testified by me,

Daniel Leeds.

Attested before me Edward Hemlock, Justice,
October. 1. 1692.
Memorandum, That I James Silver, then Servant to Sam. Jenings, being troubled
at his Severity toward both Servants and Creatures, viz his knocking one down
and breaking his Cane upon him, and over-leading and beating both Servants and
Cattle, when not able to go forwards, and one time broke the Rib of an Ox by
his unmerciful beating, and taking Benj. Moore by the Throat as he was coming
off his Bed, bore my Testimony against it, as unsuitable to the Spirit of
Christ, he took occasion to deal very hardly with me, and let me go almost
naked; and when Winter grew on, and I complained under the sense of Cold, he
threatened to make me creep, or come on my Hands and Knees to him, like a Dog or
Spaniel, or break my Bones.

Burlington, the 5th Month, 1692. James Silver.

[Note, This James Silver was a Man in Years, and a Friend, and one that had
many Servants himself, whom he thus treated for witnessing against his Cruelty.]

John Smith says, That being at Philadelphia on or about the 28th of August,
1692. meeting with Sam. Jenings before his own Door, his first Salutation to me
was this, as follows, What! art thou a Keithian, Rascally Fellow, worse than
an Infidel, that neither knows Law nor Gospel; must thou prate, sorry Rascally
Fellow, I Will call for a Constable, and send thee to the Crew, thou art like
them, a Company of Rascally Fellows; I Will have thee to know, that we are able
to judge both George Keith and the Country. And thus he did revile and call me
Rascal, and worse than an Infidel many times over; and this was presently after
he was come from a Meeting, and for no other Cause than saying to one who
hanged up the Proclamation, (against G. K. which they posted up both in Town
and Country) Ye may as well hang the other side forward for it shows their
folly a little Haman -like: This Abuse to me was not unlike his former Actions
and Behavior to other his Servants; as instance on a time, James Silver, an
ancient Man, his poor Servant, for showing him his naked Thighs, and
complaining for want of Clothes, Sam. Jenings, told him he would make him to
creep on his Hands and Knees, like a Spaniel, and slap his back, if he would
(...) hold his prating, etc.

John Smith.

Note, That several (...) Testimonies might be here set down concerning
S(...)erly walking and behavior in his Family and among his (...) and
particularly his Inhumane Whipping of his Servant (...) naked in her Bed, the
manner and circumstances of which I shall here omit for modesties sake; but
these here produced are sufficient to show, that there was cause for Peter Boss
to write to him; and tho these Evidences do not prove every thing queried in
that Letter yet these things being commonly reported abroad, were cause enough
one would think, for the Quakers to call him to an Account, and search out the
bottom of these things, but that he is grown so Proud, so High and Imperious,
that none dares to touch him. Nay, lately one of his own Church Members, not
coming into Court at his Command, he bid fetch him Headlong, and fined him Ten
Pound for not coming, and committed him to Goal, to remain till paid, though the
man says, he had no business at Court, and it would have been to his prejudice
to have gone; but all People resenting these Actions of Sam. Jenings very ill,
Arthur Cook said, I Will go to my Lord Judge, and see if I can persuade him. Yet
the next day he can put on his Canonical Robe, and imitate a Disciple of the
Meek Jesus, and compare himself to poor Mordccai; and then again before he
leaves the Pulpit, and that on a Sunday, or first day of the Week, put on his
Magisterial Robes, and tell the People, That now he speaks to them as a
Magistrate; and because they did not break up their Religious Meeting at his
Command, he calls out, Is there ever an Officer there; let Proclamation be made
in the King and Queen's Name for all Persons to depart to their own
Habitations, and see if they will dare to sit here. They that cannot see this Man
swelled above the meekness of a true Minister of Christ, and transforming
himself, like Satan, into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. I must conclude
they are blind, and have lost their Senses.

But to leave this Digression, after the reading in Court of as many of the
above cited Testimonies as they would suffer, the Jury went out upon it, and
brought in Peter Boss only Guilty of Transgressing the 29th Chapter of the Laws
of this Province, viz. Against speaking slightingly of a Magistrate. Upon which
the Bench gave Judgment, That Peter Boss should pay Six Pound.

And to back the former Instances and Hints of the unjust Actions of this Man,
take the Breviate of a Letter from one of their present Church Members to him,
which is as follows, viz.

Samuel Jenings, I perceive thou art no Changeling, thou looks like a Man for
Bulk and Talk, like a Christian sometimes; but really Samuel, whatever thy self
or others think of thee, I do hereby tell thee, and that under my Hand, That I
have met with more truly Noble and Manlike Treatment, and the Exercise of
better Christianity among Turks, than has appeared hitherto in thee toward
me: Surely Samuel, had thou exercised but the common sense and capacity of a
rational man, thou could not think that the Governor would send a man three
thousand Miles with Instruction to take care and charge of his Servants, Goods
and Stock, should be in a meaner Capacity than his Negroes, and not have a
supply of Necessaries, etc. but this thou have very irrationally and unmanly
denied unto me, and both thy self and Wife have proved False and Deceitful unto
me: Thou requested me to write for thee, and promised Satisfaction for my
Labor, and I wrote about 149 Laws of the Province, and a Copy of the King's
Charter to the Governor, and a List of the Governors Tenants in the County of
Bucks, with the Quantity of Land they hold, and upon what Tenure; but like a
deceitful Man thou refusest to perform thy Promise: And know this, that beside
thy Promise, I have thy Letter under thy Hand to produce, as also the Evidence
of one of the most crediblest Persons in the Town, whom thou toldst, That I had
wrote a Copy of the Laws for thee, and thou wast to pay me 18 s. for it. Nay,
yet further, Samuel, when the Commissioners, which are thy Overseers, (to whom
thou art obliged to render an Account, so often as they require it of thee) had
ordered thee to let me have 50 s. for a Supply of Necessaries, thou refused to
let me have it, unless I would take it in thy Shop Goods, (which would have
proved little better than a Cheat) for thou would have charged 50 s. to the
Governors Account, when, its like, I should not have had really the value of
25 s. of thee. I once more consulted the Commissioners, who very freely and
willingly wrote to thee a few Lines, Signed with their own Hands, and gave it
to me to deliver to thee, wherein they ordered thee to pay me 50 s. in Silver
Money, according to their former Order; but thou returned them this Answer by
me, That thou would not answer their Bill, bidding me carry it back to them
again; which indeed is no other than an unchristian and unmanly slighting of
the Commissioners, and a base and sordid Contempt of, and trampling on that
Power which the Governor has invested them with over thee and his Affairs;
one might think by thy Deportment toward them, that thou do neither know thy
self, nor the Station in which thou art placed by the Governor; for Samuel,
thou art no other than a mercenary Servant, and that during the Will and
Pleasure of the Governor, and the Commissioners are thy Overseers and
Controulers, to whom thou art obliged to render an Account, etc.

Thy true Friend, John Philly.


Then next George Keith called into Court, and set to the Bar.

Crier. O Yes, Silence is commanded upon pain of Imprisonment.


The Presentment read. We of the Grand Jury do present George Keith and Thomas
Budd as Authors of a Book, entitled, The Plea of the Innocent, where in p. 13.
about the latter end of the same, they the said Geo. Keith and Tho. Budd
defamingly accuse Sam. Jenings, (he being a Judge and Magistrate of this
Province) of being too high and imperious in Worldly Courts, calling him an
Ignorant, Presumptuous and Insolent Man, greatly exposing his Reputation, and
of an ill President, and contrary to the Law in that made and provided.



Clark. What say you, George Keith? Are you Guilty or Not Guilty of this
Presentment?


G. Keith. Before I be demanded to plead to the Presentment, I desire to be
heard a few words: which the Court granting, he said, I would have you to
consider, that both ye and we are as a Beacon set on a Hill, and the Eye of
God, Angels and Men are upon us; and if ye do any thing against us that is not
fair and just, not only these parts hereaway will hear of it, but Europe also;
for if we be wronged (if God permit) we think to make it known to the World.


Here some were very impatient, telling him, he menaced the Court, but he would
do well to take heed what he did; for if he spoke or published any thing in
derogation of the Sentence of Court, it was against a Law in this Province, and
he would be punished for it.

G. K. An able Lawyer has said, When a Man is wronged and can have no other
Remedy printing is the last: Ye must give Losers leave to complain: Our Friends
have done it formerly in Old England when they have been unjustly dealt by, and
particularly William Penn and George Whitehead. I will not say any thing
against your Law, but I suppose the true sense of it is, that if any derogate
from the Sentence of a Court, if the Sentence be just, he is punishable, but
not otherwise. Are your Courts infallible? Is it not possible that at times
they may give an unjust Sentence?


David Lloyd. Yea, our Courts are infallible in Law,


George, I assure thee.


G. K. Then why do you admit of Appeals? If they be infallible, there is no
occasion to appeal to a higher Judicatory.


Then David Lloyd went about to mend the matter, saying, They were infallible
so far as the Law was infallible, and so far as they kept to the Law.

Note, This is as if he had said, they are infallible so far as they are
Infallible, which is not very good Sense, unless they mean, that they are not
absolutely Infallible, but conditionally; and if conditionally only, it is
possible they may give a wrong Sentence and he who they give it against may
complain, without just cause of Offense, otherwise their Court here is as
arbitrary as any in the World.

Next, G. K. desired to know in what Capacity D. Lloyd did plead there against
them, seeing he was not the Kings Attorney.

D. Lloyd. We have no King's Attorney.


G. K. I understand that Patrick Robinson is the Kings Attorney.


D. Lloyd. No, he is not.


G. K. But he is Attorney General.


D. L. He is neither King's Attorney, nor Attorney General.


G. K. What is he then?


D. Lloyd. He is the Proprietary's Attorney.


Now G. K. still pressing to know in what Capacity D. Lloyd did plead, it was
answered, That the Court allowed him to plead.

Note, That it was admired by the A^^^ory, that this David Lloyd should be so
confident and brazen-faced (...), in an open Court, that Patrick Robinson was
not the Kings Attorney, and thrust himself into that place, purposely to vent
sort (...) of his (...) are Hatred and Malice against G. Keith and the rest
which he did to purpose, by straining and perverting the places, (...) brought
from their true sense; and yet this man pretends to be a late Convert to the
Religion of the People called Quakers. If they were all such, it would make one
abhor them for Notorious Hypocrites.

G. K. I desire you to hear me a little further, and that is, That I think it
very unfair, that those who are deeply prejudiced against me, and my opposite
Parties and Accusers, should be my Judges, as particularly Sam. Jenings and
Arthur Cook, the last of which but a few days ago, (the 5th of the 10th Month)
told me at his own House, before diverse Witnesses, and John White Sheriff is
Witness, that when he warned me to the Court, I told him, I thought to come,
but did not think to plead, unless I had a fair Jury, Arthur Cook said, Truly
George, a foul one will serve thee. Now let the Court judge, whether this Man
is fit to sit upon the Bench to judge me, who says, That a Foul Jury will serve
me. Suppose I had been the greatest Malefactor, will any say, A Foul Jury will
serve to try me? Is not this to destroy all Fundamental Laws? I appeal to you
here, the Justices and Jury, such of you as are most manifestly prejudiced
against me, for my faithful Testimony to the Quakers ancient Principle against
all use of outward Weapons, whether ye do as you would be done by? Would ye be
willing that a Company of Men wholly of our side, (though honest) should be on a
Jury to judge you?


Sam. Jenings. We shall take care that ye shall not be our Judges. Which was an
Evasion from the Question, and seemed to be a Jest or Scoff that he pleased
himself with, and which are more frequent with him than Expressions of Mercy
and Justice.


G. K. I have yet something further to say, before I plead to the Presentment;
but being unacquainted with your Formalities in Law, desire that no advantage
may be taken against me on that account.


Court. No advantage shall be taken against thee on that account.


Clerk. What say you, George Keith, to your Presentment? Are you Guilty or Not
Guilty?


G. K. Not Guilty in manner and form. And now that I have answered to the
Presentment, Not Guilty, my chief and only Plea that I think to make use of,
unless ye will say that so to do is a Contempt of the Court, and of your
Authority, which by no means I would be guilty of, my chief Plea is, That I am
not presentable by the Grand Jury for any thing alleged against me, they being
no Offenses against the King, Governor nor Country; what I have said was only
against particular Persons, who if they think themselves wronged by me, may Sue
me in their own Names, and I am ready to answer them.


Court and Clerk. It is no Contempt of Court, but the season of your so
pleading is over, you should have said so before you pleaded Not Guilty; now
you must submit to be tried by the Country.


G. K. I knew not this Formality in Law; ye told me, ye would take no advantage
against me in that respect. But the Clerk still pressing him to come to a
Trial, G. K. further said, I think not to make any other Plea; for the things
for which I am presented are not against the King, Governor, nor any Nuisance
to the Country; nor against particular Persons, as Magistrates, and therefore
not presentable.


Clerk. If ye refuse to be tried by the Jury, the Bench has Power to fine you.


G. K. I shall take my hazard of that; I have able Council that the things
whereof I am accused are not presentable by the Grand Jury.


D. Lloyd. If able Council has so advised thee, their Counsel has failed in
this.


G. K. To call a Man Proud and Imperious is not Actionable.


D. Lloyd. Though not Actionable, yet Presentable.


G. K. If not Actionable, not presentable.


D. Lloyd. That is not a good Consequenee.


But let all Impartial Readers judge, whether it be not a good Consequence,
that if Words spoken concerning particular Persons, not as Magistrates, be not
actionable, that therefore they are not presentable; because, for what are they
presentable, seeing they are neither against the King, nor Governor, nor
Country, nor particular Men as Magistrates?

D. Lloyd. There is a Law of this Province, that no words of Defamation must be
spoken against a Magistrate; nor shall any speak slightingly or abusively of
them, which thou have done.


G. K. They were not spoke to him as a Magistrate, nor when he was in the
exercise of his Office; and to call him High and Imperious, does not reflect on
him as a Magistrate: If I had called him Ignorant in the Laws, and Unjust in
the Execution of them, this would have reflected on him as a Magistrate, but
not to call him High and Imperious; for Piety, whereof Humility is a Branch, is
no essential Qualification of a Magistrate though it be of a Christian and
Minister of Christ; the only essential Qualifications of a Magistrate, are to
be knowing the Laws, and just in the execution of them.


[Note, That it is no Reflection on a Tailor, Shoe maker, or the like
Tradesman, to be called Proud, for he may be a good Artificer, although he be
proud: but to be proud reflecteth on him as he professes to be a Christian or
Minister of Christ. And this distinction. S. Jenings must needs allow, unless
he will say, that when he exercises his Magisterial Office he is no Christian,
but wholly puts off his Qualifications of a Christian, as a man puts off
one Garment and puts on another. But if he will say he is still a Christian,
as well as a Magistrate, then he ought to be humble, meek and forbearing,
especially to his Fellow Church Members, not high and imperious, and exacting
the severity of the Law of them; for even the Law says, Summum jus, Summa
Injuria, i. e. The Rigor of the Law is high Injustice; for if the Law of
England be Lex Misercordiae, as it is called, then well may the Law of
Christianity be called Lex Misercordiae, i e. The Law of Mercy, that is,
forbearing, and exacteth not the utmost Farthing.

Note further, That one Reason of these words being mentioned in the Plea of
the Innocent, viz. That S. Jenings had shown himself too high and imperious in
worldly Courts, was, that a little time before he had commanded to bring one of
his Fellow Members, (viz. Samuel Buckley) Headlong to the Court, and fined him
Ten Pound for refusing to come at his Command, and sent him to Prison, to
remain without Bail till paid. Now admit he did not illegally in this, or
becoming a severe austere Magisterial Officer, yet was it not unbecoming a
tender Christian, who should be meek and merciful?

G. K. Having refused to plead otherwise then as abovementioned, Dav. Lloyd
bid the Clerk record him Nihil dicit, i. e. he says nothing. To which G. K.
replied, Why should he Record me nihil dicit? I think I have said a great deal.
And after some further Discourse G. K. was set aside, and Thomas Budd set to
the Bar. The most material Discourse that passed here follows, viz.

The Presentment being read, the Clerk said, Thomas Budd, What say you? Are you
Guilty, as you stand here presented, or Not Guilty?

T. Budd. Not Guilty, as there presented, but own my self to be one of the
Authors of that Book, called, The Plea of the Innocent.


Clerk. By whom will you be tried?


T. Budd. By God and the Country.

D. Lloyd, as Attorney against him, pleaded, That to call a man Proud and
Ignorant, was to reflect on the Governor that constituted him, etc.

G. Keith in behalf of Tho. Budd, answered, That what was there said of Sam.
Jenings, as to calling him Ignorant and Presumptuous, was not said of him as he
was a Magistrate, but as he professed himself to be a Christian and Minister of
Christ; I penned those words in the Plea of the Innocent, concerning S.
Jenings, and know they were not intended against him as a Magistrate, as the
foregoing words in that Book do manifest; but that he is ignorant in Divinity,
that Book gives an Instance, and we now here affirm, else he would never have
said, That to do Gods Business, we need God's Power; but to do our own
Business, as men, we needed not a Supernatural Power, nor have joined with them
that say, The Light within is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else,
thereby excluding the Man Christ Jesus from having any part in our Salvation.
And our calling him Presumptuous and Insolent did relate to his severe pressing
me to an absolute Submission to their Judgment, in a matter of Conscience, when
as S. J. refused to submit to the Judgment of Friends, both here and at London,
in worldly matters; also, his calling me Apostate and worse than Profane, in a
Public Meeting, as well as in private, and saying, We shall let thee know,
George, that we shall judge thee: And his Signing that Paper of the 28. against
me, wherein they so boldly assert, That they have tenderly and orderly dealt
with me; when as they never dealt with me.

After some further pleading, the Jury were called, and Tho. Budd was asked, If
he had any Exceptions to make against any of them?


Tho. Budd. Yes, I except against all of them that are called Quakers, because
I perceive they are them that are Parties against me.


D. Lloyd. That is too general, and is no Exception in Law.


Tho. Budd. I except particularly against Rich. Walter, because he Signed the
Paper of the 28. against us (which this Book was an Answer to) and against
James Fox, because he signed a Paper in the Quarterly against us; and I except
against Joseph Kirle and John Whitpane, because they have spoke against G. K.
and me, and justified these Presentiments against us.


But these Exceptions would not be allowed of, and therefore the abovenamed
Jurors went forth, and next Morning brought in their Verdict, That Thomas Budd
was guilty of saying, Samuel Jenings had behaved himself too high and
imperiously in Worldly Courts.

To which Tho. Budd and Geo. Keith pleaded, That it was no Verdict, not being
found to be a Breach of any Law, any more than the Verdict of the Jury at Old
Bailey, which was, That they found W. Penn guilty of speaking in Grace
Church-street, which the Court took to be a clearing of him. But this was
nothing regarded by our Justices, for they proceeded and gave Judgment against
Thomas Budd and George Keith, viz. That they should each of them pay Five Pound
a piece, as a Fine. And though in this case S. Jenings was the Person only
concerned as the Adversary Party, yet he sat on the Bench when they gave
Judgment against G. K. and T. B. which was judged most unreasonable and
illegal, that Sam. Jenings, (who is the Governor's Receiver of all Fines and
Forfeitures) should be so actively concerned in fining these Men, having so
manifestly before showed his Prejudice against them. Beside, it being expressly
contrary to a Vote of an Assembly of this Province, the 3d Month, 1689. (where
Arthur Cook was Speaker) viz.

Resolved, Nemine contradicente, That it is an Agrievance that any Person who
is commissionated or appointed by the Governor to receive the Governor's
Fines, Forfeitures and Revenues whatsoever, shall sit in Judgment in any Court
of Judicature within this Government, in any matter or cause whatsoever, where
a fine or forfeiture shall or may accrue to the Governor.

But Arthur Cook could not wink at this Agrievance, and let Samuel Jenings sit
on the Bench when these Persons were Fined.

But for a further proof that Sam. Jenings has shown himself too High and
Imperious, observe what follows, viz.

1st, That when G. K. was pleading in Court, and showing how S. J. had behaved
himself too high and imperious, he said, If this be High and Imperious, I will
be yet more High and Imperious.

2dly, Upon the Jury's bringing in their Verdict against Tho. Ashly, S. J. thus
menaces him, viz. Thou told me formerly that I had done my worst, but now thou
art fallen into my hands, thou shall know that I have not done my Worst yet.

3dly, He said to another Person, Thou shall have as little Justice as I can.

4thly, He said to John Skeen, who had been Governor, and was then Judge, Thou
pitiful Whip-jack, I despise thee; and yet we find not that John Skeen had him
presented or prosecuted at Court for this more than ordinary abusive and
scurrilous Expression, short of common Humanity; and yet this is he who now can
say, He will bear no affront, thereby showing how unlike he is to a true
Christian, and even to many as well Heathen as Christian Magistrates, who have
born with Patience great Affronts and Reflections from Persons far inferior to
them.

5thly, Another instance of S. J's Pride and Insolency is, that on the 10th on
the 10th Month, coming out of Court, said to Ralph Ward and John MComb, in the
open Street, before many Witnesses, If I draw forth my hand against you,
(stretching forth his Arm and shaking it) I will not pull it in until I have
quelled you all. This presumptuous Expression savoureth too much of Lucifer's
Pride, who said I will be like the most High, I will exalt my Throne above the
Stars of God, Isa. 14. 13, 14. It is too high an Expression, and too peremptory
for any mortal Man to say, If I draw forth my hand, I will not pull it in until
I have quelled you all. What is this in a manner, but to equal himself to God
Almighty, Deuteronomy. 32. 40, 41. For I lift up my Hand to Heaven, and say, I live
for ever, If I whet my glittering Sword, and mine Hand take hold on Judgment, I
will render vengeance to mine Enemies, etc. Oh! is it not above the Power of
mortal Man, to say, If I draw out my Hand, I will not pull it in until I have
quelled you all? Is not this to talk as if he were the Almighty? But know, O
vain weak Man! thy Breath is in thy Nostrils, and that Infinite Power that made
thee, (if thou draw forth thy Hand against the Innocent, glorying in thy Power
that is but small) may cause thy Hand to Wither or turn Leprous, and lay thy
Body and Power in the Dust, and cast both Soul and Body into Hellfire. And
therefore repent of this thy abominable Pride and Insolency before it be too
late.

And though Sam. Jenings is now so zealous for the prosecuting them that say any
thing against Magistrates, yet it is not long ago that he spoke much against
Tho. Lloyd, Deputy Governor, and carried about (out of one County into
another) a parcel of Lampooning Rhimes, made against T. L. called Taffy's Fair,
which he repeated over his Pots of Beer to make sport for the Company.

But to return, although the Jury brought in a special Verdict, which was only,
That Thomas Budd was guilty of saying, Sam. Jenings had shown himself too high
and imperious in Wordly Courts, which is no Transgression of any particular
Law, yet the Bench gave Judgment against them as though they had broke some Law,
which was, That G. K. and T. B. should pay 51. a piece. Whereupon they finding
themselves aggrieved by this Judgment, craved an Appeal to the Provincial Court
in Law, which was denied them. Then by Advice of able Council, they requested
an Appeal to the King and Queen, and their Council in England, the King having
reserved all Final Appeals to himself, in the Charter to W. P. But this also
was denied them, (though Robert Turner declared his dissent in this matter, as in
several other their Proceedings) so that the said Persons are left without all
help or remedy, but must undergo the Arbitrary Sentence of this Court.

And as a further Mark of the miserable declension of these men, and of their
cold zeal for the honor of God, take a view of two Laws which they now
execute; the first is the 5th Chapter of their Laws, where it is enacted, That
whosoever shall speak loosely and profanely of Almighty God, Jesus Christ, the
holy Scriptures or Spirit of Truth, shall for every such Offense pay 5 s. The
other place is Chap. 29. where it is enacted, That whosoever shall speak
slightingly, or carry himself abusively against a Magistrate, shall for every
such Offense suffer according to the Quality of the Magistrate, provided it be
not less than 20 s. according to which Law they have Fined Peter Boss Six
Pound, and G. K. and T. B. each Five Pound, for speaking slightingly of Sam.
Jenings, as they pretend. Whereas if they had spoke Profanely of Almighty God,
Jesus Christ, the Spirit of Truth, or holy Scriptures, the Law inflicts but 5
s. Were not these Men far more zealous for their own Honor than the Honor of
God, they would never let this disproportion of Punishment for Offenses against
Almighty God and poor Mortal Man, stand upon Record thus, to their Shame and
Infamy.

The 10th of the 10th Month, 1692. William Bradford was called into Court, and
set to the Bar.

The Presentment read, the substance of which was, That they presented the 9,
10, 11, and 12. Articles of the Paper, called, An Appeal, etc. as being of a
tendency to weaken the hands of the Magistrates. And we present William
Bradford for printing of the said Seditious Paper, etc.

Clerk, What say you, William Bradford, are you guilty as you stand presented,
or not guilty?


W. Bradford, In the first place, I desire to know, whether I am clear of the
Mittimus, which differs from the Presentment.


The Clerk and Attorney read and perused the Mittimus and Presentment, and
finding them to differ, said, That when W. B. was cleared according to Law, he
was cleared of the Mittimus.

But W. B. insisted to know, Whether on the issue of the Presentment, he was
clear of the Mittimus? And after a long debate thereon, answer was made, That
W. B. was clear of the Mittimus on the Issue of the Presentment.

Next W. B. desired to know what Law that Presentment was grounded on.

D. Lloyd, It is grounded both on Statute and Common Law.


W. B. Pray let me see that Statute and Common Law, else how shall I make my
Plea? Justice Cook told us last Court, That one reason why ye deferred our
Trial then, was, that we might have time to prepare our selves to answer it;
but ye never let me have a Copy of my Presentment, nor will ye now let me know
what Law ye prosecute me upon.


D. Lloyd and J. White, It Is not usual to insert in Indictments against what
Statute the Offense is, when it is against several Statutes and Laws made, and
if thou will not plead Guilty or not Guilty, thou will lose thy Opportunity of
being Tried by thy Country. And they ordered the Clerk to write down that W.
Bradford refused to plead; which he did; but as he was writing it down, W. B.
desired they would not take that advantage against him, for he refused not to
plead, but only requested that which was greatly necessary, in order to his
making his own Defense; and several in the Court requesting on the Prisoners
behalf, that the Court would not take advantage against him, they admitted him
to plead, and he pleaded, Not Guilty.


Then the Jury were called over, and attested, viz. Humphry Waterman, Joseph
Kirle, James Fox, Samuel Hoult, Thomas Wharton, Tho. Marle, Nicholas Rideout,
John Whitpane, Richard Sutton, Richard Walter, Thomas Morris, Abraham Hardiman.
But before they were attested, they asked W. B. if he had any Exceptions to
make against any of them that were returned for the Jury?

W. Bradford, Yes, I have, and particularly against two of them, (and which
Exceptions I think are rational,) and that is against Jos. Kirle and James Fox;
for at the time when I was committed to Prison Arthur Cook told me, That Joseph
Kirle had said, That if the proceedings of the Magistrates was thus found fault
with, that they must not defend themselves against Thieves and Robbers,
Merchants would be discouraged of coming here with their Vessels, etc. And I
except also against James Fox, because on the first day after Babit and his
Company were taken, I being at Sam. Carpenter's, there was Governor Lloyd,
James Fox, and several others, and in discourse concerning taking of the said
Privateers, James Fox greatly blamed W. Walker, because he found fault with
some Justices that were Quakers, for commanding men, and as it were pressing
them to go against the said Privateers; and also James Fox joined with Tho.
Lloyd in saying, He would mark them as Enemies to the Government and well-being
of the Province, who were neutral in the case of going against Babit, etc. By
which Instances I think it appears that these two Persons have prejudged the
Cause that is now to come before them; Joseph Kirle acknowledged he had spoke
such words, and desired to be discharged; but they would not allow of those
Exceptions, although it is frequent in these Courts to change Jurors on barely
saying they do except against such a one.


D. Lloyd and Clerk, These are no Exceptions in Law; have thou at any time
heard them say that thou printed that Paper? for that is only what they are to
find.


W. B. That is not only what they are to find, they are to find also, whether
this be a Seditious Paper, or not, and whether it does not tend to the
weakening of the Hands of the Magistrate.


D. Lloyd, Yea, that is matter of Law, which the Jury is not to meddle with,
but find whether W. B. printed it or no, and the Bench is to judge whether it
be a Seditious Paper, or not; for the Law has determined what is a Breach of
the Peace, and the Penalty, which the Bench only is to give judgment on.


Sam. Jenings, You are only to try whether W. B. printed it, or not.


W. Bradford, This is wrong; for the Jury are Judges in Law, as well as in
matter of Fact. Which D. Lloyd again denied. Whereupon some of the Jury desired
to know what they were to be attested to try, for they did believe in their
Consciences, they were obliged to try and find whether that Paper was
Seditious, as well as whether Will. Bradford Printed; and some of them desired
to be discharged.


-- A great Noise and Confusion among the People.

Some on the Bench showing their willingness to allow of W. B's Exceptions
against the two Jurors, Justice Cook said, I will not allow of it; is there
four of us of a mind?

Then D. Lloyd began to read the 9, 10, 11, and 12. Articles of the said
Appeal, and commented thereupon, denying, 1st, That any man were hired to
fight, but only to fetch back the Sloop; 2dly, That there was no Commission
given, but only a Hue-and-Cry or Warrant, as might be in any other ordinary
case, and what was done was in case of great necessity, when a Company of
Rogues had Pyratically stolen away a Sloop to the great terror of the People of
this place; and if the Magistrates must be blamed for their proceedings herein,
what do you think will be the consequence thereof, but to encourage all manner
of wickedness? And Will. Bradford is presented for printing and publishing this
Seditious Paper, whereof you of the Jury are to find him guilty, if it appear
to you that he has printed it.

W. Bradford, I desire you of the Jury, and all here present, to take notice,
that what is here contained in this Paper is not Seditious, but wholly relating
to a Religious Difference, and asserting the Quakers Ancient Principles, and is
not laid down positive, that they ought not to have proceeded against the
Privateers, but laid down by way of Query, for the People called Quakers to
consider and resolve at their Yearly Meeting, Whether it was not a
Transgression of the Quakers Principles to hire and commissionate men to fight?


Justice Cook, If it was intended for the Yearly Meeting at Burlington, why was
it published and spread abroad before the Meeting?


W. B. Because it might be perused and considered of by Friends before the
Meeting, even as the Bills that are prepared to be passed into Laws, they are
promulgated a certain number of days, before the Assembly meets, that all may
have opportunity to consider them.


Then D. Lloyd read the Act against Printing, 14 Car 2. cap. 33. against Books
being Printed without the Printers Name to them, and he said, That was one Act
which they prosecuted W. Bradford upon.

To which G. K. answered, and it may be observed, the singular and
extraordinary Severity of these Justices, called Quakers, who will pick out a
Statute made in Old England, and prosecute a man upon it here, which might Ruin
him and his Family, though it is not certain whether that Act be in force; when as
most of W. Penn's and the Quakers Books were printed without the Printers Name
to them, when that Act was in force; and yet we never heard that any Printer in
England was prosecuted for that; and therefore these here have exceeded them in
England; which manifests their Malice and revengeful Spirit, that because they
cannot fix the matter to be any Breach of the Peace, (though they pretend it is)
they will prosecute the Printer for not putting his Name to what they suppose he
Printed.

Note, That all the time these Persons were upon Trial, the Grand Jury sat by
them, over-awing and threatening them when they spoke boldly in their own
defense, and one of the Jury had Pen, Ink and Paper to write down such words as
they disliked, signifying that they would present them, and Justice Cook other
times bid them take notice of such and such words, thereby over-awing the
Prisoners that they had not liberty to plead freely. And when Tho. Harris, at
the Request of the Prisoner began to say something to the matter, they stopped
him, and bid an Officer take him away, and Arthur Cook said, That he should
plead no more there.

After a long time of pleading, D. Lloyd began to summons up the matter to the
Jury, How that the printed Appeal was a Seditious Paper, and tended to weaken
the Hands of the Magistrates, and encourage all manner of Wickedness; and that
it was evident W. Bradford printed it, he being the Printer in this place, and
the frame on which it was printed, was found in his House.

W. B. I desire the Jury, and all here present to take notice, that there ought
to be two Evidences, to prove the matter of Fact, but not one Evidence has been
brought in this case.


Sam. Jening, The Frame on which it was printed is Evidence enough.


W. B. But where is the Frame, there has no Frame been produced here; and if
there had, it is no Evidence, unless ye saw me print on it.


Sam. Jenings, The Jury shall have the Frame with them, it cannot well be
brought here; and beside the Season is cold, and we are not to sit here to
endanger our Health; you are minded to put Tricks upon us.


W. B. You of the Jury, and all here present, I desire you to take notice, that
here has not one Evidence been brought to prove that I printed the Sheet,
called, An Appeal. And whereas they say, the Frame is Evidence, which the Jury
shall have; I say, the Jury ought not to hear or have any Evidence whatsoever,
but in the presence of the Judge and Prisoner.


Yet this was nothing minded, but Sam. Jenings summoned up to the Jury what
they were to do, viz. To find, 1st, whether or not that Paper, called, The
Appeal, had not a tendency to the weakening the hands of the Magistrates, and
encouragement of Wickedness? 2dly, Whether it did not tend to the Disturbance
of the Peace? And, 3dly, Whether William Bradford did not print it, without
putting his Name to it, as the Law requires?

The Jury had a Room provided them, and by that time they had been a quarter of
an hour together, the Sheriff caused the Frame to be carried in to them, for an
Evidence that W. B. printed the Appeal.

The Jury continued about forty eight hours together, and could not agree, then
they came into Court to ask a Question, viz. Whether the Law did require two
Evidences to find a man guilty? To answer which D. Lloyd read a passage out of
a Law-Book, That they were to find it by Evidences, or on their own knowledge,
or otherwise: Now (says D. Lloyd) this otherwise is the Frame which you have,
which is Evidence sufficient.

W. Bradford, The Frame which they have is no Evidence, for I have not seen it,
and how do I or the Jury know that that which was carried in to them, is mine,
-- Interrupted -- The Jury sent forth again, and an Officer commanded to keep
them without Meat, Drink, Fire or Tobacco.


In the Afternoon the Jury came into Court again, and told, they were not like
to agree. Whereupon the Court discharged them.

Then W. Bradford told the Court, That seeing he had been so long detained
Prisoner, and his Utensils with which he should work having been so long
detained, he hoped now to have his Utensils returned, and to be discharged from
his Imprisonment.

S. Jenings. No, thou shall not have thy things again, nor be discharged, but I
now let thee know, thou stand in the same Capacity to answer next Court, as
before.


Next Court being come, Will. Bradford attended, and desired to know whether he
should have his Utensils, and be discharged. Arthur Cook answered, Thou shall
not have thy Goods until released by Law.

W. Bradford. The Law will not release them, unless executed.


Arthur Cook. If thou will request a Trial, thou may have it.


Whereupon I query, 1st. Whether it be practicable, or according to Law, to
seize Men's Goods and imprison their Persons, and so detain them under the
Terror of a Goal, one six Months after another, and not bring them to Trial,
unless requested by the Imprisoned?

2ly. When a Jury is Sworn, Well and truly to Try, and true Deliverance make
between the Proprietor and Prisoner, whether it be not very illegal to absolve
them from their Oath, dismiss them, and put it to another Jury to try?

Now it may be observed, that nine of these Jurors were Persons prejudiced
against G. K. and the rest, and the other three happened to be moderate Persons
that were not called Quakers; and the reason they could not agree, was (as some
of the said Jurors, called Quakers, have told) that these three Persons stood
upon the Nicety (as they called it) of Evidence that W. B. printed that Paper;
whereas the other Jurors, called Quakers, said, they believed that W. B.
printed it, and that it was a seditious Paper, etc. and they would not acquit
him.

Does not this show the great Declension of these People from their ancient
Principle against the use of Carnal Weapons, that for only proposing it to be
enquired into, Whether it be not a Transgression of the Quakers Principle, for
any of that People to hire and commissionate men to fight, that they will cast
men into Goal, and prosecute them as Seditious Persons for so doing.

Here follows a Breviate of a Paper that was presented to the Court, to show,
that it was agreeable to the Quakers ancient Testimony, not to fight, which
they took little or no notice of.

A Declaration from the People of God, called Quakers, against all Plotters and
Fighters, etc. Presented to the King, 1660.
ALL Bloody Principles and Practices, we, as to our own particulars, do utterly
deny, with all outward Wars and Strife, and Fightings with outward Weapons, for
any end (mark) or under any pretense whatsoever. And this is our Testimony to
the whole World. -- And we do certainly know, and so testify to the World,
that the Spirit of Christ, which leads us into all Truth, will never move us to
fight and war against any man with outward Weapons, either for the Kingdom of
Christ, nor for the Kingdoms of this World. -- We have used no Force nor
Violence against any man, etc. when we have been wronged, we have not sought to
revenge our selves. -- So that if we suffer as suspected to take up Arms, or
make War against any, its without any ground from us; for it neither is, nor
ever was in our Hearts since we owned the Truth of God, neither shall we ever
do it, because it is contrary to the Spirit of Christ, his Doctrine, and the
Practice of the Apostles. Given forth by George Fox, John Stubs, Leonard Fell,
Rich. Hubberthorn, Francis Howgill, Samuel Fisher, John Boulton, Gerrard
Roberts, Henry Fell, John Furley, jun. Thomas Moore, John Hind.

See also Rob. Apology, These. 15. 13. p. 399. And 15. p. 407. he says, As to
what relates to the present Magistrates of the Christian World, albeit we deny
them not altogether the Name of Christians, because of the public Profession
they make of Christ's Name, yet we may boldly affirm, that they are far from the
Perfection of the Christian Religion, because of the state in which they are,
they have not come to the pure Dispensation of the Gospel; but for such whom
Christ has brought hither, it is not lawful to defend themselves by Arms, but
ought over all to trust in the Lord.

Object. The Scriptures and old Fathers, so called, did only prohibit private
Revenge, not the use of Arms for the Defense of our Country, Bodies, Wives,
Children, Goods, when the Magistrate commands it.

Answ. If the Magistrate be truly a Christian, or desires to be so, he ought in
the first place to obey the Command of his Master, saying, Love your Enemies,
etc.

R. B's Answer to Brown, 16. p. 181. Brown mentions the necessity of Defensive
War, to defend from those that unjustly assault, and Thieves, Robbers and
Cutthroats, etc. R. Barclay says, Herein he speaks more like an Atheist than
a Christian, and like one who believes nothing of a Divine Providence in
restraining Evil Men.

FINIS.

