The TRIUMPH of TRUTH: IN An Exact and Impartial RELATION OF THE LIFE and
CONVERSATION OF C James Turner Which he Imparted to an Intimate Friend a little
before His EXECUTION. TO WHICH IS ADDED, His Deportment and Discourses in
Prison: The manner of his Execution and Burial. WITH Other Occurrences never
yet made public, AND Now published as a seasonable Warning for others to
avoid such stange Miscarriages.

London, Printed by W. G. for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, and Hen.
Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1663.

The TRIUMPH of TRUTH: in an Exact and Impartial Relation of the Life and
Conversation of Colonel JAMES TURNER; which be imparted to an Intimate Friend,
a little before his Execution.
CHAPTER I. The Birth and Breeding of Col. James Turner, his Marriage, and
first taking up of Arms.
AS the Memory of Good men ought not to be buried in Silence, but that men by
reading their Heroic Actions may be stirred up to an Emulation of Virtue; so
the Remembrance of the Wicked should not be forgotten, that men by reading the
punishments of vicious livers, might be deterred from the committing of lewd
actions: And herein examples work more with the People than Precepts;
especially when men eminently known come to be examples of Justice: For the
terrors of Punishment works more with many to deter them from vice, than the
promises of reward does excite others to the persuit of virtue. To this end is
the life of this person set forth, that others by his Extravagancies, and the
evil effects attending thereon, may learn Sobriety, and to live a regular and
well ordered life. In the persuit of our intended design, we shall avoid all
unnecessary impertinencies, and with as much brevity as may be, declare to the
World, what are known to be verities concerning the whole progress of his Life
and Conversation; and herein we are resolved to steer an even course, neither
swerving to the one hand nor the other, for favor or envy; that so avoiding
this Scylla and Charyblis, our Relation of him may find free acceptance with
all people.

JAmes Turner (commonly called or known by the name of Capt. or Col. Turner)
was born about the year of our Redemption 1608. He was the Son of a Reverend
Divine, Minister of Hadley in Middlesex, not far from Barnet, of which he was
Parson above 40. years, being a Divine of the Primitive stamp and temper, that
expressed his Faith by his Works; a friend to the Poor, a Mediator in any
differences among the rich, eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame; in short
(according to his ability) none more forward in good works then he. This his
Son, James Turner, he brought up to School for the attainment of some
sufficiency in Learning, where he first began to show his pranks, which were so
unhandsome, that his very Schoolfellowes took such a dislike of him, that as
much as in them lay they shunned his Company.

Afterward for his future fortune, he bound him an Apprentice to a Sempster
(or one that sells Linen Clothes ready made) at the lower end of Cheaspside,
near the Mitre-Tavern; which time he served, though with much regret to his
Neighbors, who likewise by reason of his unlucky actions had ever an evil
opinion of him.

For, to relate to the mad Figgaries he had during his Apprentiship, would of
themselves make up a sufficient Volume; no unhappy action done, wherein he had
not a hand, if he were not a principal; yet was he always so cunning to carry
on his business, that his extravagancies were by his Master rather deemed
youthful excursions, or harmless Figgaries, then any innate mischief, or
wilful acting of what was bad, though others of his Neighbors had a contary
opinion, and by a bloody morning did foretell a dismal afternoon.

His Time being out, he married a Gentleman's Daughter of Shaston in
Dorset-shire, one of the Foyles, a Family of good account in that Country;
Afterward he set up for himself in the Round Court in St. Martins le Grand
near the Shoo-makers, which Trade he continued for some short time: but the
small profit redounding from a private shop, was not correspondently agreeing
with those high Chymera's his vast imaginations had prompted unto him; and his
ambition soaring a higher pitch, he resolved to throw his Chance in Fortunes
Lottery. The Times then suited well to his purpose, being those fatal days
wherein the Nation was engaged in an uncivil Civil War; and first (as nearest)
he sought to ingratiate himself into the Parliaments side, endeavoring an
advancement under them, and was very active to promote his own interest,
thinking by taking up Arms to have brought him to have wound himself out of
many troubles, which his litigious nature, and vexatious spirit had brought him
to: But a turbulent person has many enemies, who prevailed so far that he was
in danger to have been taken by the Officers and Sergeants at Arms, so that he
was forced to make a Virtue of Necessity, and abandoning London, for the
amendment of his fortunes, to turn Royalist.

CHAP. II. His Actions in the Army, with some mad frolicks which he committed.
HIs first appearance in the Kings Army was very low accompanied only with
three or four Companions. But being a Londoner, he was the more welcome; and
having gotten a Commission, he made use of his wits to raise a Troop,
Commanding many of the Countrymen who lived in the Villages, to ride with him
to New Castle, which they were persuaded unto, upon promise they should not
stay above three or four days; where getting Ammunition for a whole Troop, he
became a Captain under the Marquess of New Castle. In which Military condition
he continued four years, during which space of time we cannot greatly applaud
his Manhood, for we hear of no wonders performed by him, nor was his courage so
great, but that (I conceive) the Iliads of his valor might be comprised in a
Nutshel. His chiefest valor consisting in plundering, for which he was called
The Plunderer of the North. In which action being very busy, one day in a Town
in the North, a Party of the Parliament Soldiers came in, who was so busy at
his work, that had not one cried to him, Col. Turner, Col. Turner; he had been
taken: So that for his refuge, he was forced to run, and that with all the
speed he could; yet did he receive one shot in the Neck, which was all the
wounds he could ever boast of.

One thing very remarkable is commonly reported of him; namely, that during his
command, he sent a Warrant to a Constable to provide Quarters for him and his
men, and over and above for himself in particular a handsome Less: the
Constable was willing to obey him in the one, but having not such a command as
Mr. Turner, could not tell how to satisfy him in the other; whereupon he was
threatened to be hanged, and being of a foolish temerity, to avoid what was
afterward the destiny of the Captain, he permitted him the enjoyment of his
own Wife, whom he kept three or four days; but afterward (as being contrary
to the Rules of War) he was called to an account for it, when to justify
himself, he sent for the Constables Wife (whom he belike, had so pleased) that
she cleared him of any incivility to her, before the Council of War. Thus Women
(if they list) can hide men's crime,
And none shall er'e be hanged before their time.


But one exploit he used much to boast of, which we will relate, leaving the
Reader to believe as he pleases; namely, That he being with Paarty of men
gathering of Contribution near to Newberry, he was set upon by a party of the
enemies Horse, of far greater number then they were: but according to his
order, making fast their Bags to the Bows of their Saddles, (which proved a
defense to their Belly and Groyns) he gave them a desperate Charge, and very
manfully hacked their way out quite thorough the Enemy, both men and money
coming safely off to Wallingford-Castle. Thus some can boast, although they
make a Lie on it:
For evermore the Knight must beat the Giant.


It is likewise reported that in a Skirmish betwixt some small Parties near
Stevenage in Bedfordshire, he was beaten and taken Prisoner; when for his
Ransom he gave a ring with a Stone in it, which he said was worth 100 l. but
the Victor afterward found it worth no more then 5 s. But this Rhodomontade
humor was not so much to be blamed in him, it being for his liberty.

During this War he had plundered and laid up much money for his future
occasions, whereas the other Royalists in stead of getting, lost almost all
they had; here we may commend his providence, though we must condemn his
Conscience, in plundering for his private gain his own Country people.

The War now being expired, he with several other Gentlemen for some facts they
had committed, were kept Prisoners at York, their crimes were some Misdemeanors
during the War, all the Gentlemen saving only Turner pleaded Not guily, but he
(whose Indictments were said to be no less then 65. he himself telling the
Judge, That if he staid one hour longer there would be no less then 99. pleaded
Guilty, and the day of his Trial had as many dishes of meat as there were
Indictments against him, all carried up in sight of the Court, and at withal
laid a wager of five pounds he should be hanged that Assizes: Being demanded
his Reason therefore; he said, If he lived he did not value the five pound, and
if he dyed it would serve to buy Gloves and Ribbons for his friends; which
frolic together with his Plea to the Jury, viz, Whether they would not have
done the same if they had been under the like command? brought him off clear
without the least Fine or Damage: Whereas, the other Gentlemen, who pleaded,
Not Guilty, and stood to the defense of their Cause by Disproof of Witnesses,
etc. Were by the Jury found guilty, and lost their lives.

CHAP. III. Turner's returning to London, his ways to enrich himself, and of
the great port he lived in.
SOon after this, he returned again to London, and knowing it in vain to strive
against the stream, he resolved for his profit, to have a seeming Compliance
with the adverse party, sitting amongst the Committees of Goldsmiths and
Haberdashers-Hall, upon Compositions for Delinquents Estates; but those Foxes
were too cunning to be deceived, and the place of such great profit, as it was
coveted after by some of their own Gang, and he being known to have been one of
the other side, he was forced to abandon that employment quite.

Thus did he run divisions like a dog in a halter, for his active spirit would
never be at rest, well knowing that Idleness is the Mother of Poverty, and
having gotten some small store of money formerly in the Army, he spared for no
cost either of Clothes or otherwise, to bear a port equal to the best; and
having thereby screwed himself into the Acquaintance of some men of good
account, he pretended to a great perfection of Skill in all Affairs: And first
he began to manage poor men's Causes, whose charges he disbursed out of his own
pocket, which won him very high Commendations, and was very acceptable to
injured people, who very much applauded him for it.

This brought him into more employment amongst the great ones, so that what
hetwixt Broaking and Soliciting he grew very famous, and withal got store of
money, for the condition of some people is so given to contention, that they
will do no right, nor suffer any wrong; and where such Seeds of Division are
sown, there the Lawyers reap golden Harvests. So that now he flaunts it with
the bravest, Taverns and Ordinaries are daily frequented, rich and costly
garments provided, high prized Jewels daily worn, not a dinner could be made
under seven or eight several dishes of meat, nor the least journey gone without
a Coach: Yea, nothing wanted which might conduce to an outward happiness. And
that he might be the more taken notice of, he kept a high prized Gelding, with
which he ambled up and down the City, and was so bold, that upon the Kings most
happy Restoration, when the Lords and Gentry went to meet him, he thrust
himself into the company of the Barons, riding most sumptuously in his Foot
Cloth, attended by his Footboy; but being known by the Marshal, that it was
only the Ass that marched in the Lions Skin, he was by him sufficiently Cane'd
for his audacious boldness. Yet notwithstanding this Check, he always
afterward kept up a stately port, so that none was more notice taken of then
he, for had he come by in his Coach (as he often did) in the night, upon Col.
Turners name, the very Watchmen would tremble, whom yet he would often reward
with money: but his terrible Oaths, being so habitu(...) Swearing, would make a
good Christian quake to hear him. But though his Vices were very great, yet had
he many things in him worthy of commendation, being very charitable to poor
distressed Cavaliers, whom he would entertain at his own Table, and if it were
his Chance to be in their Company with him at Taverns, he would pay their share
out of his own pocket, and lend them money besides. High active spirits
commonly excel
Either in doing ill, or doing well.


Hitherto no great blemishes were laid on his practice, which now began to be
very great, being acquainted with most of the monyed men in London: His
frequent dealings were in the sales of Lands decreed in Chancery, and the
recovery of Right and Title to Lands unjustly holden from the true heirs: In
which he had such a multitude of business, that he kept two Clerks constantly
a writing, or running about his business. He also dealt very much in Jewels,
by the sale and bartering of which to persons of quality he gained exceedingly,
so that his incomes were valued at seven or eight hundred pound a year; yet by
reason of his extravagancies we cannot conceive he laid up much for his
posterity.

But in prosecution of his Designs he met with many opponents, particularly one
Bachelor, who lived near Fenchurchstreet, who having (as he thought) received
some wrong from Colonel Turner, got a friend of his to Write a Pamphlet
against him, wherein amongst other base passages this was one, viz. This same
Turner was Knighted in the Field for slaying, killing, and undoing the good and
well affected People of this Nation; a most dangerous and active fellow, and
for his Services so rewarded, etc. This he did out of revenge to render him
obnoxious to the Usurper, though it proved rather to his Reputation, he himself
taking great delight in the repetition of it; nor would ever contradict it, but
would say, If he had an Estate of Lands and value, he would soon be a Knight;
but his Condition as a Broker, and Solicitor, (...) not comport thereunto.

CHAP. IV. Some conjectural Misdemeanors of Mr. Turner, with some other mad
frolicks performed by him.
SEveral other matters are by common report laid to his charge, viz. that one
Mr. Clench of Cambridge, having occasions for money, borrowed 400 l. upon a
Farm called Bendish in that County, and made use of Mr. Turner for the
procuring of it; who pretended that because his Lands lay so far distant, he
must give Bond, together with personal security, for the payment thereof at the
appointed day. But Mr. Clench upon the payment of the money, only took up his
Mortgage, but forgot the Bond, which was afterward sued and recovered against
him. Another story is reported of him, that he should deceive a young Gentleman
of 60 l. upon promise of procuring him a Mandamus from the King, for a
Fellowship in Cambridge. Also another rumor is commonly spread abroad, namely,
that by his procurement he should supply the Tyrant Oliver, with Twenty
thousand pounds to pay his Soldiers, who were then in a condition of Mutyning.
But for the truth of these, I shall desire the Reader to suspend his belief,
being cautious in our Relation, to cast any just aspersion upon the dead.

But another thing real we shall impart unto you, wherein he received a foul
Check, namely, in his dealing with one Mr. Galilee in Finch-lane, who pretended
a right to an Estate of an Hundred pounds per annum, in Norfolk; and hearing of
Col. Turner's abilities, bargained with him for the sum of 50 l. paid ready
down, to prosecute his Title, and did afterward pay him several sums of money
incident to the charges that belonged thereunto: Which Suit being commenced in
the Exchequer (according to the customary proceedings of that Court) a Lessee
was named, which was one Sampson, and he by the appointment of Galilee, as
Turner affirmed. But before it came to a Trial, Galilee sold his right, so that
Sampson was overthrown, and an Execution for Costs taken out against him; who
thereupon made his application to Galilee, that now disowned the matter, and
said he never named him upon that account. Hereupon high differences rose
betwixt Turner and Galilee, who brought an Indictment of Barratry against
Turner, and swore it himself, with an attestation of several other Witnesses
which put Turner to great trouble, and notwithstanding he produced several
persons for testification of his honesty; yet the Jury found him guilty; but
the Court was not so well satisfied therewith, whereupon the business was
referred to Sir William Wild, who awarded Turner that he should pay to Galilee
either 40. or 50. pounds; the whole Charges amounting to no less than three
hundred pounds.

To allay these, and some other troubles which he had, he had many Commical
Frolicks, of which to relate one or two may not be unpleasant to the Reader. He
having one time made one of his Company dead drunk, caused the Bell to be
tolled, and sent for a Chimney-sweeper to be his Doctor, and the Searchers to
view his Corpse, giving them 12 d. a piece for their pains.

At another time, having occasion to go to Colchester, upon the Arrest of a
certain man, he took for his assistance some Officers from the Compter, as
special Bailiffs (which he many times before had done) having done his
business, he bought a Pipe of Canary of his Landlord of the House, and gave
it freely to all Comers; and from thence carried his Company to
Bishops-Starford in Hartford-shire, where in the like frolicks he spent 40 l.
more.

Another of his frolicks was at Colchester aforesaid, where he hired a Wagon
to carry away all the Dead he should kill; and to affright the People, caused
all the Swords that belonged to his Company, to be hanged drawn, out of the
Window; which so amazed the Man of the House, that he commanded his Hostler to
stop up the Well in the yard with Hay, that none of the slain might be put in
there.

This his ungoverned Prodigality, brought him of late out of money, which (as I
conceive) was the occasion to make him undertake this dishonest shift, to piece
out his Ruins by base Attempts, rather than to sink obscurely into a Goal, and
there lie an object of misery. The manner whereof we shall declare unto you.

CHAP. V. An exact relation of the manner of the Robbery of Mr. Tryon.
ABout Christmas last, he consulted with some persons about this Grand Robbery,
and had gotten for his turn three men fit for the purpose, viz. one William
Turner a Butcher, James White a Soliciter, and another person, White's friend.
The main of their Design was to be carried on by Colonel Turner himself, which
was for the Robbery of Mr. Francis Tryon a Merchant in Lime-street, with whom
Turner was very intimate, and knew all passages belonging to the house; upon
their first meeting for the undertaking of the business, one of their Company
being drunk, it was laid aside for that time; White (one of the actors)
protesting he would not venture his life with one in his Condition. But not
long after, viz. the 7. of January, they met again at the Red-Lyon in
Bishopsgate-street, where they Dined together, and then resolved upon the
Robbery that night, appointing to meet there again by Six of the Clock in the
Afternoon; but coming thither, the room was taken up by other Guests, wherefore
they went over to the Four Swans or Green Dragon, and there staid till Eight a
Clock; from thence they removed to the New Market in Leaden Hall, where three
of them sat upon the Stalls, till the Colonel went out for Inteligence, who
after half an hours space returned, bringing them word that the Man and Maid
were both gone out, and that now was their time; whereupon away they went, and
coming to the place, Col. Turner unlocked the door (having before got the
impression of the Key in soft wax, and had one made answerable unto it) then
went they up the Stairs, Turner leading the way, and in the Kitchen light a
Candle, and so went immediately up to Mr. Tryon's Chamber, where two of them
put a Cloth into his mouth, and bound his hands and feet, whilst Turner at the
Beds feet took the Keys of his Warehouse, and Counting House out of his pocket;
and whilst they were busy in gaging him, he in the mean time searches the
Closet, where he finds the Jewels, and pockets them privately, not acquainting
his Companions therewith. But there was store of Money beside, with which they
severally loaded themselves, to the value of 1023 l. This was done all in the
space of an hours time; which money they carried to one Nicholas Higginson's
house, at Lowsie-lane in Dukes Place, which they hired some days before,
pretending it for the use of a Master of a Ship, his Mate, Purser, and
Boat-Swain. The next morning Turner fetched away the money to his own house,
giving to White and his Friend only Twenty pound a piece for their pains, and
promised William Turner a hundred pound.

Soon after they were gone, Mr. Tryon got the gag out of his mouth, and though
bound tumbled out of his Bed; in doing which he sell upon an earthen
Chamber Pot, and hurt himself sorely; but recovering his legs and getting to
the Window, called out Murder and Theives, which being next the Street his
Neighbors heard him, and with a Crow of Iron broke open the door (for Turner
had locked it after him,) and unbound him; then did they see how he was robbed,
but the Man and Maid being missing caused some suspicion of them, who presently
after came, pretending they had been at Supper at Col. Turner's, which was not
so; whereupon a Constable went to examine the business, who found Col. Turner
and his Family in bed, who likewise (upon the request of the Constable) went
along with him to Mr. Tryon's, where he kept such a bustle about the business,
that his too overmuch diligence gave him cause to be suspected; which suspicion
was afterward aggravated, by his listening to hear when others were examined,
the Man and Maid being at that time thoroughly sifted by Sir Thomas Aleyn, who
took a great deal of pains in the business; however Turner was let go that
night, and in the morning betimes removed the money from his own house, to the
house of one Mrs. Fry a Sempstresse at the lower end of the Minories,
pretending it to be the money of a Merchant newly broke, who having a Wife and
seven or eight Children, desired to have it secured. This business Mrs. Fry
reveals to a Kinswoman of hers in the house, who having been formerly a Servant
to Alderman Love, and hearing of Mr. Tryon's Robbery, suspected the money was
not well gotten, and thereupon acquainted her Master Alderman Love of it; who
as speedily informed Sir Thomas Aleyn thereof; Sir Thomas therefore taking a
Footboy with him, speedeth down, and in the way meeting with Major Tasker
desired his Company to go along with him, which he accordingly did; and
entering the house of Mrs. Fry, found Col. Turner with his hands in a Chest,
wherein was two Wallets of money, one of a 100 l. the other 200 l. Sir Thomas
took the Keys from him, and going into another Room, found two Wallets of money
more. Then was a Constable called for, and Turner being examined whose money it
was, he said he had received it of a Goldsmith, but could not tell his name;
being further asked why he should remove his own money, he answered he only
did it for two or three days, till this Foolery was over.

Whilst thus they were arguing the matter, John Turner the Son (who had helped
to bring the money thither) hearing how the business went, got out by a back
door, and leaping over a pale behind the house, made an escape; but the
Colonel, though he pretended he were in persuit of the Theives, and therefore
desired freedom to go about it, yer would not Sir Thomas grant it, but
calling for a Coach, (in company with Major Tasker and the Constable) brought
him to Mr. Tryon's house, telling him he had brought him 500 l. of his money,
and did not doubt but also a person that could help him with the rest he had
lost; but Turner having spoken with Mr. Tryon in private, upon promise of
helping him to all the next day about four or five a clock in the afternoon, he
was permitted to go at Liberty.

The next day he went to the Exchange, as he formerly used to do, where about
two a Clock he was arrested in the Streets by the two Coals, (at the suit of
four Officers of the Poultrey Compter, who had bailed him to a Writ of one Mr.
Van de Burgh a Dutch Merchant) who carried him to the Hoop Tavern, where they
stayed him, in the mean time his Wife brought the Jewels to Mr. Tryon's, so
that he had all his again. But the matter was so apparent against Mr. Turner,
that Sir Thomas Aleyn by Warrant committed him to Newgate, whether he was
carried about one or two a Clock the same night, and January the 15. and 16. he
was Arraigned for the same at Justice Hall in the Old Bailey, where he was by
the Jury found Guilty, and on the 19 day of the same month had Sentence of
death pronounced upon him. Thus though that Felons to escape may hope,
At last they are rewarded with a Rope.


The same day Col. and William Turner were by Sir Thomas Aleyn examined apart;
who finding their Design fully discovered, declared the manner of it as we
have mentioned it unto you.

CHAP. VI. The Passages betwixt Col. Turner and Mr. Ordinary of Newgate; with
the manner of his Going to Execution.
SOon after his Condemnation, Mr. Welden the Ordinary of Newgate went unto him,
telling him he was a Dying man (being dead in Law) and very earnestly pressed
four things unto him.

First, That as he was an open Sinner, so that he would make open Confession of
his sins, urging to that purpose the saying of the Wiseman in his Book of
Proverbs; He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and
forsakes them shall find mercy.

Secondly, A hearty Contrition for his enormous Offenses which had brought that
just judgment of God upon him.

Thirdly, A Restitution; for words without deeds was but a feigned and
hypocritical Repentance. And,

Fourthly, Charity, to forgive others, as he would that God for Christ's sake
should forgive him.

He pressed much to him the Message which the Prophet Is^^^^ brought to
Hezekiah; viz. Set thy house in order, for thou shall die and not live. He told
him that by house was meant not only his temporal but his spiritual body; that
the Body in respect of the Soul was but as the shell to the kernel, or as the
Jewel to the Case which enclosed it; what a small minute of time he had left
him betwixt that and the infinite space of Eternity; therefore what great need
he had to make the best improvement of that short time; with many other such
like speeches, which wrought very much upon him, declaring by many outward
signs a real sorrow for his heinous crimes; not only weeping bitterly, but by
many expressions declared his hearty unfeigned Contrition.

Afterward on Tuesday he desired to receive the Sacrament, the Ordinary asked
him (because he would have no more Wine then needed) how many would Communicate
with him? he replied, his Wife and two Sons; but they being asked, did refuse;
Mrs. Turner alleging she was not in Charity with some persons whom she
imagined too eager in prosecution of Justice against her Husband; but Mr.
Ordinary pressed so much a necessity of her reconciliation, and gave her such
sound advice, that she willingly embraced to be pertaker in that Holy
Ordinance; but their two Sons did not receive it.

Whilst thus he prepared himself for Death, he was not negligent in using all
endeavors for the prolongation of his Life. To this end he desired Mr. Tryon to
accompany his Wife with a Petition to his Majesty for a Reprive, which they
accordingly delivered upon their knees in the Long Gallery; but the King told
them he could not do it, having received such an account of him from the Judges
and Magistrates of the City of London; and being humbly requested for a respite
for some few weeks, he would not consent for so few days.

This not prevailing, he desired Mr. Ordinary to move the Lord Chancellor in
the business, propounding two reasons to persuade him thereto; the first was,
the shortness of the time, which he alleged was very quick, considering that
load of sin that lay heavy upon his Conscience; and the other was, that he had
the Estates of two or three Widows in his hands, which by reason of his sudden
cutting off, might be much injured thereby. But notwithstanding these plausible
pretenses, it would not hinder the Execution of Justice.

But one thing we had almost omitted; namely, That when Mr. Ordinary preached
on the Sunday, treating of a thorough and sound Repentance, by which they might
obtain Pardon for their sins; the Colonel in terpreting that to be meant of
his Corporal Body, which Mr. Ordinary spoke in reference to his Spiritual
condition; when the Sermon was ended he seriously asked him if there were a
Pardon for him or no.

But no doubt the man was thoroughly convinced of his crime, and the
heynousnesse of it, and spent the whole day in sorrow and mourning for his
offenses; and therefore those are much too blame who reported him to be drunk
that day, that he ranted and swore Dam him, and sink him, he would have a
Pardon though it cost him five thousand pound: but such is the Nature of some
base lying spirits, to insult over men in misery, and when they cannot touch
their bodies, brand them as much as in them lies, in their very memory.

To confirm the Truth of these passages concerning Mr. Ordinary with the
Colonel, we shall give you a Letter from his own hand, which he wrote to a
person of quality here in London, who desired of him the Relation of the whole
business.

Here follows the Letter.

SIR,
MY Occasions have been extraordinary, so as I have wanted a convenient
Opportunity of recalling the several Passages that were between Me and Mr.
Turner. I shall begin, after he was cast I attended Him to the Press-Yard, and
told Him that shortly the Sentence of Death would be denounced against him; He
answered I dread not Death, I have looked Death often in the face; I pray Sir
pray for me, that I may not faint when the day of Death comes: I told him Death
was the King of Terror; and a man had need of a strong Faith to shield him
against the fiery Darts of Death from hurting the Soul. He replied Sir we shall
have time to talk of these Things Monday or Tuesday; I pray said he call upon
me as often as you can: Tuesday night I waited on him, and told him, Colonel I am
come to repeat the Sentence justly denounced against you by the Judge, and I
assure you, you shall die and not live, therefore my advice is to set your
House in order; what do you mean by that said he? my Meaning is your outward
Affairs relating to your Family, and in satisfiing those that have entrusted
you: but principally the Closet of your Soul, to see that it be furnished with
the Grace of Almighty God, as faith, repentance, etc. I pray Sir said he direct
me, for I believe I am not a man for this World. Sir I should have told you
that Sunday in the afternoon he came to Chapel, carried himself very soberly;
heard my Sermon attentively, which was out of the Book of Numbers, Balams wish
who I told him had lived a curser, a ranter: He desires O that I might die the
Death of the Righteous, and that my later end were like his. He gave me thanks
for my Sermon, and told me he hoped it would do his Soul good.

I told him Meditation was the way to make the word fruitful. I desired him to
dismiss the Company that frequented him; and to do as Hezekiah, when sentance
was passed, he prayed and wept sore. Pray to God for pardon of sin, and bath
the feet of your Savior with your penitential Tears, and your Savior will
bath your Soul in the fountain of his most precious Blood. Sir said he, I shall
take your advice: Notwithstanding, Company pressed on him. Wednesday* I visited
him with the rest of the Prisoners in Chapel; prayed and adviced them, where I
met with a true Penitent Jane Cradock who had spent all her time after sentence
in mourning and lamenting: I returned to Colonel Turner, he gave me ten
shillings for my Sermon, and some other moneys to hire a Coach to speak to the
Lord Chief Justice to allow him a longer time for his repentance and
preparation to die, and to satisfy four Widows who had entrusted him with
large sums 4000 l. as I remember; I went to the Lord Chancellor where I found
the Judges, moved in his behalf but his request could not be granted, die he
must the morrow by eight of the Clock or time usually appointed; I gave him
notice thereof, his reply Lord God I have been a great sinner and shall I have
so small a time of repentance: God is more merciful then man, or I have no
hope. I told him it was not the length of time, but the truth of repentance God
looked at; a moments true repentance the Theif's case was accepted; be as
Penitent as he, and you shall not fail of remission, the proof whereof will be
by the Concomitants confessed restitution, forgiving others; I shall do all and
observe said he your Method* I prayed God to assist him in this his conflict.
Thursday I came to him, I found him very pensive, he desired the Communion, we
made a pause at last, having pressed him to restitution, he promised he, would to
his power. I found by him his power was small, he had lived high upon the
Estate of others, as I perceived by some passages that dropped from his Lips;
therefore I told him where you wanted a power, the will was accepted. I
demanded who would receive the Communion? he answers, Himself, his Wife, his
Sons and Daughters; I demanded whether his Sons and Daughters had received the
Communion before? they answered no, some of 'um, others they were not prepared;
his Wife also refused to receive with him, but we persuaded Her to join in
that Sacred Performance with her Husband, otherwise it would be adjudged she
had no charity for him; he importuned her and saluted her, so she came after
conscecration: I administered, when the Cup was delivered to him I found a heart
of stone become a heart of Flesh, and the Blood of Christ melt the Adamant; for
before he received, he brake forth into this speech, Lord Jesus dear God I pray
that this Blood may not seal up my Damnation who have been a great Offender.
Lord thy Blood is able to save me O God, thou never did cast away penitent
sinners: Let thy Blood seal up my Salvation dear Lord. So he drank it, and
after said, I have comfort in my Soul. He was very attentive to the Admonitious
of my Self and Lord Bartlet's Chaplain, who went with me in Cart. That is all I
can say who am.

Your Loving Friend JOHN WELDON, Ord. of Newgate, and Dept. to Clerks, etc.


Thursday Morning being come (the fatal Day appointed for his Execution,) he
was very intent upon his preparation for another World; and spent the Morning
wholly with the Ministers, and in taking leave of his Wife and Children, to
whom he gave many good and wholesome admonitions. About 10 a clock both the
Sheriffs came in Person to conduct him to the place of Execution. Coming out of
the Presse-Yard, and seeing a Cart there prepared to carry him; he was somewhat
abashed, and desired of Sir Richard Ford (one of the Sheriffs) he might have a
Coach, which was denied, Sir Richard telling him the King had ordered it
otherwise; Then did he desire he might walk on foot, but that neither would be
granted, whereupon he went up into the Cart, and being by the Officer ordered
to sit in the Body of the Cart, the usual Place for Offenders; he desired to be
permitted to ride on the Copps, but that also was denied, and so he was tied
according to the custom of Fellons. There rode with him in the same Cart, Mr.
Ordinary of Newgate, and another Minister; great was the Confluence of People
all the way he passed along the streets, the Windows being so thronged as has
not been known in the memory of Man upon the like occasion.

Being come to the Place of Execution, (which was in Leaden-Hall-Street, at
Lime-Street end, where a Gibbet was Erected,) He called the Executioner unto
him, and told him, that his Friends desired his Clothes, and therefore in
Consideration of them, he gave hime fifty shillings, and half a Crown besides
to Drink. He also gave 15s. to the Sergeants and Yeomen there present to see
his Body and Clothes delivered to one Mrs. Smith, a Neighbor that lived hard
by, then looking round about upon the People, addressing himself to the
Sheriffs, he made a long Speech, the substance whereof is this.

CHAP. VII. The Speech of Colonel James Turner at his Execution, with his
Character, as also an example of his horrible Swearing.
HE confessed that it was the greatness of his sins that brought him thither;
the greatest of which was profaneness, blaspheming God, and taking his name in
vain; that he was much addicted to Company, yet never accompanied with
Theives, or such base inferior people, but by hearing others Swear got a habit
of it, though inwardly he detested it. That for the fact which brought him
thither it was of his own contriving, and that his two Sons John and Ely were
ignorant of it, and therefore desired they might be released. That his Father
was a Reverend Divine, a Gentleman of good Life and Conversation. That his Wife
was descended from a Family of repute in Dorset Shire, one of her Uncles having
lent the late King 8000l. That his Wife now being brought to this dist^ess, his
two Children might be releast for her comfort, and not to add affliction to her
affliction. That he was afraid the crying sins of this Nation, (without Gods
wonderful mercy,) would bring some heavy punishment upon it. That the dislike
of the disorders in the World, has made him many times wish himself in his
grave. That being a Boy, men were more friendly and given to Hospitality; but
that now the World was full of malice and difference. Then did he free himself
of some Calumnies cast upon him, and gave account of his service under the old
King. Next did he fall upon the occasion of his coming thither, imputing it to
the just hand of God for his sins, desiring all people to take warning by
him; that had he not been Arrested at that sad juncture of time Mr. Tryan had
had every penny worth of his Goods and Money again, desiring God to forgive
them that was the hinderance thereof. Then did he vindicate himself of some
other Caumnies cast upon him, namely concerning that sad fire in Loathbury; of
which he protested his innocence therein, As likewise some Money that was lost
in Coleman-Street, which heaverred he never knew of. He also purged himself of
an imputation laid upon him, concerning a Gentleman of his own Name that lay in
his House, as if something should be put into his Drink to dispatch him out of
this World, (the Gentleman dying suddenly) of which he likewise declared his
innocence. Next did he give some brief account of his Faith and Profession, how
he had been bred up in the Protestant Profession, and was a zealous practiser
of the Rites and Ceremonies belonging thereunto: That he was truly and
heartily sorrowful for his sins; desiring of God the forgiveness of them.
That he had made a true and faithful confession, and restitution so far as in
him lay, and that his repentance was not feigned, desiring to be with Christ in
Glory, and that he was in perfect Charity with the whole World.

Next did he free himself of some imputations that he was drunk the Sunday
before in Prison. Desiring some order might be taken concerning the Hole in
Newgate, that poor Prisoners might have some Boards to lie downupon them in
ease, that they might not be so tormented, when they should be preparing for
their ends. Afterward he desired them about him to join with him in prayer,
in which he earnestly begged for the forgiveness of his sins; Praying
heartily for the Kings Majesty, and all the Royal Family; as also for the
Majestrates and Ministers of the Land. That God would provide and take care for
his Wife and Children. Thanking him for that space of time for Repentance, and
that he was not cut off by sudden death: desiring God thorough Jesus Christ, to
wash away his sins, and receive his Soul.

Then did Mr. Ordinary of Newgate pray with him, afterward he had some private
Ejaculations, wherein he expressed much sorrow for his times, and earnestly
begged pardon for them. Then taking his leave of the Sheriffs, desring to be
remembered to the L. Mayor, and the rest of the Aldermen, he addressed himself
for his last minute, still earnestly beging of God for mercy, and desiring for
his comfort the Doctor to read to him those Verses in the second of the
Hebrews, being the 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18 Verses.

Next did he give 40. s. to a Minister, to be given to the poor of that Parish;
and 18. s. 6. d. more for his Wife, to be delivered to his young Sons
Schoolmaster.

Afterward he directed the Executioner to take off the Halter from his
shoulders; which being done, he took it in his hands, kissed it, and put it
about his neck himself; and having fitted his Cap, went out of the Cart
(wherein he made his Speech) upon the Ladder: where the Executioner tying the
Rope, and pulling it something too much, he very smartly said to him, What,
do thou mean to choke me? pray fellow, give me more rope: How long have thou
been Executioner, that thou know not how to place the Halter. Then bidding
the Executioner not to turn him off till he gave him a sign, he again fell to
Prayers; and desiring the Lord to receive his soul, upon the sign given he was
turned off the Ladder.

After some short time he was cut down, and his body conveyed to the House of
Mistress Smith a neighbor near by, where it continued till -- when it was
buried very decently, at the Parish Church of St. Andrews Undershaft.

And this was the end of Mr. James Turner, a man who by the course of Nature
might have lived many years longer. He was a person of a middle stature,
something corpulent, but active: of a cheerful countenance, which he kept up
even to the very period of his life, not much changing to the very last. He was
one very loving to his Wife, and indulgent to his Children; of a high spirit,
which having not an Estate answerable thereto, caused him to fall into many
errors. His vices were great and many; yet were they not without a mixture of
Virtues and other good qualities. He was much addicted to the sin of Swearing:
a vice which has in it neither profit nor pleasure; and unless a man be wholly
given up to wickedness, cannot but strike the Conscience with much regret in
the committing of it. He was very charitable to the poor, especially to such
who had formerly been able to give themselves: But his thoughts were vaster
then his estate; and therefore (as I formerly hinted) I am persuaded the
occasion of this his last wicked act was to have wherewithal to keep up that
state and grandeur he had formerly lived in, fearing nothing so much as to
strike sail, and stoop to the privacie of an ordinary way of life. Many were
the troubles he had passed through, which we may think he rather desired then
studied to avoid; as some men delight to fish in troubled waters, so did he
take pleasure in diverse and intricate troubles; though I conceive the profit
arising by them was the greatest motive to make him undertake them. For his
valor, we find not much commendation of him; yet do not I think he was a
Coward, as some have aspersed him. Indeed (as I said before) his vices were
many and great, especially that horrid sin of Cursing and Swearing: whereof we
shall give you an example, as a Warning to all those who are addicted to those
horrid crimes; which we received from the hands of one who knew all the
passages for truth.

ABout September. 1662. Col. James Turner sent to a Citizen of London to come to
him to the Castle Tavern in Cornhil, who found a Gentleman with the said
Turner, to whom two Captains also came; Turner entreated the Citizen he sent
for to move a Company, of which the Citizen was a member, to give out of their
bounty ten pounds to release a prisoner out of the Fleet, which was by him
promised, and some few days after granted by the said Company, and the prisoner
set at liberty. Turner swore very much without any provocation; the Citizen
told him if he continued to swear, he would not stay in his company. Whiles
they were drinking a Blackamoor-boy of some 14 years of age brought pipes and
small beer. Turner swore and cursed the Boy, and said he was like the Devil, for
which the company did much reprove him, the Drawer standing by said, the
Blackamoor was to be baptized the next Lords day with his Masters child, his
wife then lying in. The Citizen to try the Blackamoors fitness for baptism,
asked him Who made him? who answered, God. Turner very furiously replied and
swore desperately the Devil made him, earnestly saying and swearing, You rogue,
the Devil made you, God never made you. The Citizen desired Turner to forbear
his swearing, and had much ado to get him to be quiet; whilst he asked him
further interrogatories, the Blackmoor replied Christian like answers to the
questions of Who redeemed him, Who sanctified and preserved him, wherefore God
made him, and several other Christian-like answers the Boy gave, till he came
to answer to the Priestly, Prophetical and Kingly Office of Christ. Turner
still continued vehemently cursing and swearing against the Boy. It being now
near ten a clock at night, the four Gentlemen present, and also the Drawer and
the Blackamoor, Turner sitting with his face against the casement, therein came
a mighty great flap or stroke upon the window as if two great wings would have
drove the window into the room upon the company, which made them all in a great
amazement, whereupon the Citizen ran to the window, opened the casement, but
could not see any thing as the cause, not a quarrel broke, nor any dirt upon
the window. Turner gave over cursing and swearing, and sat as a man ready to
sink into the ground, that one of the Captains told Turner this is because of
your swearing and cursing. The window was near a story from the yard which
belonged to the Tavern, and a Shed of boards from it downward, that in no
probability any man did it.

CHAP. VIII. Col. Turner vindicated in several asperssons cast upon him.
HItherto have we given you a Narative of his life and conversation, which as
it was bad, so have some men endeavored to make it worse then it was, rendering
him rather a Monster then a man, and upon flight conjectural grounds have added
stuff of their own brain to make it pass with the more likelyhod, so that what
at first was but a molehill, soon becomes a mountain, according to Ovid. The
thing at first invented, great does grow,
And every one does something add thereto.


As may be instanced in their Calumniation of him, that he should take two
hundred pounds of the Lady Hewyt to procure a pardon for her Husband, and that
he never did any thing in the business; which when he heard of (being when he
was in Newgate) he sent one Mr. Gray of Black Friars to the Lady Hewyts, being
thirty two mile off, with all the speed he could, for a Certificate under her
hand, to quit him of that aspersion, which she accordingly did in a Message to
the King, the Copy of which Letter (as I received it from Mistress Turner,) I
shall give you Verbatim, viz. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
Whereas I have received intimation that your Majesty is informed that James
Turner Gent. Prisoner in Newgate did receive 200 l. in order to the saving the
life of my late dear murdered Husband Dr. John Hewyt, and did nothing therein
but kept the money.

These are humbly to certify your Majesty, that I never knew or heard that the
said James Turner was employed thereabouts, nor did he ever receive any such
sum of money of me, or any other to my knowledge, nor do I know him. And this I
do upon the request of the said Mr. Turner make bold to attest under my hand
this 18 day of January, 1663.

MARY HEWYT.
George Gray makes Oath that he did see the above written Certificate Signed
and acknowledged by the Lady Mary Hewyt.

Io. Bramston. George Gray.







But that the saddle might be laid on the right Horse, the truth is; it was one
Col. Whetton, a person very intimate with the Usurper, who by fair promises got
235. l. of the Lady, she so dearly affected her Husband, that she would have
parted with her whole estate to have saved his life. This Whetton pretended
that a hundred pound of it was for Secretary Thurlow, who he said was likewise
to be instrumental toward it; but Thurlow cleared himself of it by a Letter,
so that the whole blame lies upon Whetton.

Another Calumny is commonly reported of him, that being beyond Sea with our
now Gracious Sovereign, he should deceive him of some sums of Money wherewith
he had been entrusted: but this is easy to be refuted, it being well known he
was never out of England, and so by consequence could not be culpable of that
offense. I should therefore advise people not to be too credulous of every
report they hear of him: as that which some have confidently reported, That
because he always kept two or three brave Geldings; that He was the head of
all the high-way-men in England; and that under pretense of soliciting men's
businesses, which occasioned him to stay out late some nights, that it was
only a cloak to blind the eyes of the world, when he was abroad upon worse
matters: insomuch that the Tanners of Rumfard, and other Market-folks, since
his death have been bold to say, That they hoped now they should ride safe
home, since that great Robber Turner was dead. But for these and sch like
conjectural stories, I shall desire the Reader to suspend his judgment til Time
(the father of Truth) shall bring things to light.

For that of one Marshal, concerning some Money that was lost in
Coleman-street, as also that he should cheat a woman by a false Deed; there is
so little of likelihood in it, that were it not only to stop the mouths of
some who are apt to believe every false report, I should not so much as once
mention them.

Therefore though his Vices were great, yet we ought not to lay other men's
faults upon him, only upon supposition, which is no evidence in Law; and of
the two ought rather to judge the best, or at least to weigh and consider
thoroughly the contrary Reasons, lest we come under the lash of the Poet, He
that does judge, and will but one side hear,
Though he judge right, he is no good Iusticer.


But it is a known observation, That in such calamitous cases more is commonly
charged then proved: and it may be his adversaries observed Machiavels Rule, To
throw dirt enough upon him, for that some would stick. For I have observed,
That let a lie be invented, though never so ridiculous, it shall meet with some
fools that will believe it: Witness that story about ten years ago of the great
Giants coming into England. No doubt his crimes were very great, for which we
may judge his excesses were the greatest occasions of them. In the mean time,
Humanity commands us to think the best of him, and to pity his Wife and six
Children whom he left behind him, the only remains of seven and twenty by one
woman; whereof two he left behind him in prison, upon account of the same fact.

But one thing is known to many for a truth, which indeed comes near to
inhumanitie and barbarousness; namely, his preserving some of the Fat or other
parts of the Corpse of diverse persons ^ately executed for Treason, (as those who
have seen it with him have informed me,) which though pretended to be used for
the making an excellent Medicine he had for the Gout, yet it is a most unmanly
thing to have no reverence to Humane Blood, though in persons justly punished.

Nor could this person, who had been so litigious in his life, rest free from
suspicion after his death; a common rumor being bruited, That he was not
hanged till quite dead, but that afterward by means used to him, recovered
again to life: But this story being most of all ridiculous, I leave to be
believed by those that are more credulous then my self.

I shall conclude with a merry Epitaph which was made by an ingenious person
upon him, leaving it to the Reader to judge of it as he pleases. HEre lies the
Carcass of a wretched Wight,
Who at Noonday did bid the world Goodnight.
Of what Sect he was of, there is few can tell,
He (like Erasmus) hung 'twixt Heaven and Hell.
Valiant by consequence he must be sed,
He scorned to die (like Cowards) in his bed:
And whereas others run from Death's embrace,
He boldly went to meet him in the face.
Lastly, his Courage was so mighty too,
He did what all that saw him feared to do.


FINIS.
Postscript.
LEt the Reader take notice we hear there is a Rumor of a false Copy which is
likely to come forth, let him beware of it, lest it abuse the Memory of the
Dead.


