I Do appoint Richard Sare to Print the two Trials of Titus Otes for Perjury:
And Order, That no other Person do presume to Print the same.

Jeffreys.

THE TRIALS, Convictions and Sentence OF TITUS OTES, UPON TWO INDICTMENTS For
Willful, Malicious, and Corrupt PERJURY: AT THE KINGS-BENCH-BARR at
Westminster, Before the Right Honorable George Lord Jeffreys, Baron of Wem,
Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of King's Bench, and the rest of the
Judges of that Court.

Upon Friday the 8th. and Saturday the 9th. days of May, Anno Domini, 1685.

And in the First Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King JAMES the II.
etc.

LONDON, Printed for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn, and are to be sold
by Randal Tailor, 1685.

Die veneris oct Maii 1685. in Banco Regis. De Term. Pasch. Anni Regni Regis
Jacobi primi.
Dominus Rex versus Titus Oats.
THis day being appointed for the Trial of one of the Causes between our
Sovereign Lord the King, and Titus Oats for Perjury; the same began between
eight and nine in the Morning, and proceeded in the manner following.

First Proclamation was made for Silence, then the Defendant was called, who
appeared in Person, being brought up by Rule from the King's Bench Prison,
where we was in Custody, and was advised to look to his Challenges to the Jury
that were Impanel'd to try the Cause.

Oats. My Lord, I am to manage my own Defense, and have a great many Papers
and things which I have brought in order to it, I pray I may have some
Convenience for the Managing my own Trial.


Lord C. Justice. Ay, Ay, let him sit down there, within the Bar, and let him
have Convenience for his Papers.


Clerk Crown. Crier, swear Sir William Dodson.


Oats. My Lord, I except against Sir William Dodson.


Mr. At. Genesis What is the Cause of Exception, Mr. Oats?


L. C. J. Why do you challenge him?


Oats. My Lord, I humbly conceive in these cases of Criminal Matters, the
Defendant has Liberty of excepting against any of the Jurors, without showing
Cause, provided there be a full Jury besides.


L. C. J. No, no, that is not so, you are mistaken in that Mr. Oats.


Oats. My Lord, I am advised so, I do not understand the Law my self.


L. C. J. But we tell you then, it cannot be allowed; if Mr. Attorney will
consent to wave him, well and good.


Mr. At. Genesis No, my Lord, I know no reason for it, I cannot consent to any
such thing.


L. C. J. Then, if you will not have him sworn, you must show your Cause
presently.


Oats. My Lord, I cannot assign any Cause.


L. C. J. Then he must be sworn.


Cl. Cr. Swear him.


Crier. Sir William Dodson take the Book, you shall well and truly try this
Issue between our Sovereign Lord the King, and Titus Oats, and a true Verdict
give according to the Evidence; so help you God.


Cl. Cr. Swear Sir Edmund Wiseman, (which was done.)


Richard Aley Esquire (who was sworn.)


Benjamin Scutt.

Oats. My Lord, I challenge him.


L. C. J. For what Cause.


Oats. My Lord, he was one of the Grand Jury that found the Bill.


L. C. J. Was he so, that is an exception indeed; what say you Mr. Attorney.


At. Genesis My Lord, I believe he was upon one of the Indictments, but I think,
it was not this.


L. C. J. But if he were in either of them, he cannot be so impartial.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we will not stand upon it, we'll wave him.


Cl. Cl. Thomas Fowlis.


Oats. Pray let me see that Gentleman (who was shown to him.) Are you not a
Goldsmith in Fleetstreet, between the two Temples?


Fowlis. Yes, I am.


Oats. Very well, Sir I do not except against you, only I desire to know,
whether it were you or not.


Cl. Cr. Swear him, (which was done.)


Thomas Blackmore, Sworn. Peter Pickering, Sworn. Robert Beddingfield, Sworn.
Thomas Rawlinson, Sworn. Roger Reeves, Sworn.
Edward Kempe, sworn.

Oats. My Lord, I challenge him.


L. C. J. You speak too late, he is sworn already.


Oats. My Lord, they are so quick, I could not speak, but he was one of the
Grand Jury too.


L. C. J. We cannot help it now.


Mr. At. Genesis I did know that he was so, but to show that we mean nothing but
fair, we are content to wave him.


L. C. J. You do very well Mr. Attorney General; let him be withdrawn.


Cl. Cr. Mr. Kempe, you may take your case; swear Ambrose Isted, (which was
done.)


Henry Collier, Sworn.

Richard Howard, Sworn.

Cl. Cr. Crier, count these.


Crier, One, etc. Sir William Dodson.


Cl. Cr. Richard Howard.


Crier. Twelve good men and true, hearken to the Record, and stand together,
and hear the Evidence.

The Names of the Twelve, sworn, were these. Jury.
Sir William Dodson, Sir Edmund Wiseman, Richard Aley, Thomas Fowlis, Thomas
Blackmore, Peter Pickering. Robert Beddingfield, Thomas Rawlinson, Roger
Reeves, Ambrose Isted, Henry Collier and Richard Howard,



Oats. Before the Council opens the Cause, I desire to move one thing to your
Lordship


L. C. J. What is it you would have?


Oats. My Lord, I have three Witnesses that are very material one's to my
Defense, who are now Prisoners in the King's Bench, for whom I moved yesterday,
that I might have a Rule of Court to bring them up to day, but it was objected,
that they were in Execution, and so not to be brought; I humbly move your
Lordship now, that I may have a Habeas Corpus for them, to bring them
immediately hither.


L. C. J. We cannot do it.


Oats. Pray, Good my Lord, they are very material Witnesses for me, and I
moved yesterday for them.


L. C. J. You did so, but we told your Council then, and so we tell you now, we
cannot do it by Law, it will be an escape.


Oats. My Lord, I shall want their Testimony.


L. C. J. Truly we cannot help it, the Law will not allow it, and you must be
satisfied.


Cl. Cr. Gentlemen, you that are sworn of this Jury, hearken to the Record, by
Virtue of an Inquisition taken at Justice Hall in the Old Bailey, in the Parish
of St. Sepulcher, in the Ward of Faringdon without, London, upon Wednesday the
10th. of December, in the 36th. of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord Charles
the II. by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. Before Sir James Smith Knight, Mayor of the City of
London; Sir George Jefferies Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice of this
Honorable Court; Sir Thomas Jones Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas; William Montague Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer; Sir James
Edwards Knight; Sir John More Knight, Aldermen of the said City; Sir Thomas
Jenner Knight, one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Law, and Recorder of the same
City, and others, their Companions, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, by the Oaths
of twelve Jurors, Honest and Lawful Men of the City of London aforesaid, who
then and there being sworn and charged to enquire for our said Lord the King,
and the Body of the City aforesaid, upon their Oaths present, that at the
Session of our Sovereign Lord the King, holden for the County of Middlesex, at
Hick's Hall, in St. John's Street, in the County aforesaid, on Monday, to wit,
16 Deaem. in the year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord, Charles the
Second, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith,
etc. the thirtieth before Sir Reginald Forster Baronet, Sir Philip Matthews
Baronet, Sir William Bowls Knight, Sir Charles Pitfield Knight, Thomas
Robinson, Humphrey Wyrley, Thomas Hariott, and William Hempson Esquires,
Justices of the said Sovereign Lord the King, to enquire by the Oath of Honest
and Lawful Men of the County of Middlesex aforesaid, and by other Ways,
manners, means, by which they might better know, as well within Liberties as
without, by whom the Truth of the matter may be better known and enquired, of
whatsoever Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Insurrections, Rebellions,
Counterfeitings, Clippings, washings and false makings of the Money of this
Kingdom of England, and of other Kingdoms and Dominions whatsoever; and of
whatsoever Murders, Felonies, Man-slaughters, Killings, Burglaries, and other
Articles and Offenses in the Letters Pattents of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, to them, or any four, or more of them therefore directed, specified, as
also the Accessaries of the same within the County aforesaid, as well within
Liberties as without, by whomsoever, howsoever had, made, done or committed;
and the said Treasons, and other the Premises to hear and determine, according
to the Law and Custom of this Kingdom of England, being assigned by the Oath of
Ralph Wain, John Vaughan, Richard Foster, Thomas Paget, Robert Newington, Henry
Tompkins, Robert Hays, John Greenwood, Peter Stimpson, Josias Crosley, Richard
Richman, Augustine Bear, John King, Nathaniel Brett, Francis Fisher, and Samuel
Linn, Honest and Lawful Men of the County aforesaid, sworn, and charged to
enquire for our said Sovereign Lord the King, and the Body of the County
aforesaid, upon their Oaths. It was presented, that Thomas White, otherwise
Whitebread, late of the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of
Middlesex Clerk, William Ireland late of the Parish aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid Clerk, John Fenwick, late of the Parish aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, Clerk, Thomas Pickering of the Parish aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, Clerk, John Grove of the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid,
Gent. as false Traitors against the most Illustrious, Serene, and most
excellent Prince, our said late Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace
of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith,
etc. Their Supreme and Natural Lord, not having the Fear of God in their
Hearts, nor weighing the Duty of their Allegiance, but being moved and seduced
by the Instigation of the Devil: The Cordial Love, and True and Natural
Obedience, which faithful Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King toward
him, should, and of right ought to bear, utterly withdrawing, and contriving,
and with all their Might intending the Peace and Tranquillity of this Kingdom of
England to disturb, and the true Worship of God within this Kingdom of England
used, and by Law established, to subvert, and Rebellion within this Kingdom of
England to move, stir up, and procure, and the Cordial Love, and true and due
Obedience, which Faithful Subjects of our said Lord the King, toward him, the
said Sovereign Lord the King, should, and of right ought to bear, utterly to
withdraw, put out, and extinguish, and our said Sovereign Lord the King, to
Death and final Destruction to bring and put, the four and twentieth day of
April, in the year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord Charles the Second,
by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of
the Faith, etc. the thirtieth, at the Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in the
County aforesaid, falsely, maliciously, subtilely, advisedly, and traitorously
did purpose, compass, Imagine and Intend, Sedition and Rebellion within this
Kingdom of England to move, stir up and procure, and a miserable Slaughter
among the Subjects of our said Lord the King to procure and cause, and our said
late Lord the King from the Regal State, Title, Power and Government of his
Kingdom of Enggland utterly to deprive, depose, cast down, and dis-inherit, and
him our said late Sovereign Lord the King to Death, and final Destruction to
bring and put, and the Government of the said Kingdom, and the sincere Religion
of God, rightly by the Laws of the said Kingdom established, at their Will and
Pleasure to change and alter, and the State of this whole Kingom of England,
throughout all its parts, well instituted and ordained, wholly to subvert and
destroy, and war against our said late Sovereign Lord the King, within this
Kingdom of England to levy, and those their most wicked Treasons, and
Traitorous Imaginations and Purposes aforesaid to fulfill and perfect, They the
aforesaid Thomas White, alias Whitebread, William Ireland, John Fenwick, Thomas
Pickering, and John Grove, other false Traitors to the Jurors not known, the
said four and twentieth day of April, in the year of the Reign of our said late
Sovereign Lord the King, the Thirtieth, with Force and Arms etc. at the Parish
of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, falsely,
maliciously, subtilely, advisedly, Devilishly, and Traitorously did assemble
themselves, unite and meet together, and then and there falsely, maliciously,
subtilely, advisedly, devilishly, and Traitorously, did consult and agree our
said late Sovereign Lord the King to Death, and final Destruction to bring and
put, and the Religion within this Kingdom of England, rightly, and by the Laws
of the same Kingdom established, to the Superstition of the Romish Church, to
change and alter, and the sooner to fulfill and perfect their said most wicked
Treasons, and Traitorous Imaginations, and purposes, they, the said Thomas
White, alias Whitebread, William Ireland, John Fenwick, Thomas Pickering: and
John Grove, and other false Traitors of our said late Sovereign Lord the King,
to the Jurors unknown, afterward, to wit, the same 24th, day of April, in the
said 30th. year of our said late Soverain Lord the King, at the said aforesaid
Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County aforesaid, falsely, subtilely,
advisedly, devilishly, and Traitorously among themselves, did conclude and
agree, that they the aforesaid Thomas Pickering, John Grove, him, the said late
Sovereign Lord the King should kill and murder, and that they the said Thomas
White, alias Whitebread, William Ireland, John Fenwick and other false Traitors
to the Jurors unknown: A certain number of Masses between them, then and there,
agreed for the Health of the Soul of him the said Thomas Pickering, therefore
should say, Celebrate and perform, and therefore should pay unto the said John
Grove a certain Sum of Money between them, then and there agreed; and the
Jurors aforesaid, upon their Oath aforesaid, did further present, that the said
Thomas Pickering and John Grove, upon the agreement aforesaid, then and there,
falsely, subtilely, advisedly, Maliciously, devilishy and Traitorously did take
upon them, and did promise to the said Thomas White, alias Whitebread, William
Ireland, John Fenwick, and other false Traitors of our late said Sovereign Lord
the King to the Jurors aforesaid unknown, then and there, falsely, subtilely,
advisedly, maliciously, devilishy and Traitorously, did promise that they the
said Thomas Pickering and John Grove would kill and murder our said late
Sovereign Lord the King, and they, the said Thomas White, alias Whitebread,
William, Ireland, John Fenwick, Thomas Pickering, John Grove, and other false
Traitors of oursaid late Sovereign Lord the King afterward, to wit, the said
four and twentieth day of April; in the thirtieth year aforesaid, at the said
aforesaid Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex
aforesaid, subtilely, advisedly, maliciously, devilishly, and Traitorously, did
severally every one of them give their Faith each to the other, and upon the
Sacrament then and there traitorously did swear and promise, to conceal, and
not to divulge their said most wicked Treasons, and Traiterous Compassings,
Consultations and Purposes so between them had, him, our said late Sovereign
Lord the King, Traitorously to kill and murder, and the Romish Religion in this
Kingdom of England to be used, to introduce, and the true Reformed Religion in
this Kingdom of England rightly, and by the Laws of the same Kingdom
established, to alter and change; and that the said aforesaid Thomas Pickering,
and John Grove, in Execution of their Traitorous Agreement aforesaid
afterward, to wit, the same Four and Twentieth day of April, in the Thirtieth
year aforesaid; and diverse other days and times after, at the said aforesaid
Parish of St. Giles in the Fields, in the County aforesaid, Muskets, Pistols,
Swords, Daggers, and other offensive and cruel Weapons, him, the our said late
Sovereign Lord the King to kill and murder, falsely, subtilely, advisedly,
maliciously, and Traitorously did prepare, and obtain for themselves, had and
kept, and that they the aforesaid Thomas Pickering and John Grove afterward,
to wit, the said Four and Twentieth Day of April, in the Thirtieth year
aforesaid, and diverse days and times afterward, with Force and Arms etc. at
the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, and in other places within the
County of Middlesex aforesaid, falsely, subtilely, advisedly, maliciously,
devilishly and Traitorously did lie in wait, and endeavor our said late
Sovereign Lord the King to murder, and that the said Thomas White, alias
Whitebread, William Ireland, John Fenwick, and other false Traitors to the
Jurors unknown, afterward, to wit, the same Four and Twentieth day of April,
in the Thirtieth year aforesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County of
Middlesex aforesaid, falsely, subtilely, advisedly, maliciously, devilishly and
Traitorously did prepare, persuade, excite, abett, comfort and counsel Four
other Persons, Men to the Jurors unknown, and Subjects of our said late
Sovereign Lord the King, him our said late Sovereign Lord the King Traitorously
to kill and murder against the Duty of their Allegiance, against the Peace of
our said late Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, and against the
Form of the Statute in that Case made and provided, and thereupon it was so far
proceeded, that afterward, to wit, at the Court of Jail-delivery of our
Sovereign Lord the King, of Newgate, at Justice Hall in the Old Baily, in the
Suburbs of the City of London, in the Parish of St. Sepulcher, in the Ward of
Farington without, London aforesaid, the seventeenth day of December, in the
Thirtieth year aforesaid, before the Justices of our said Lord the King, then
and there being present, held by adjourment for the County of Middlesex
aforesaid, before whom the Indictment aforesaid was then depending, came the
aforesaid William Ireland, Thomas Pickering, and John Grove under the Custody
of Sir Richard How Knight, Sir John Chapman Knight, Sheriffs of the County of
Middlesex aforesaid, into whose Custody, for the Cause aforesaid before that
were committed, being there brought to the Bar in their proper Persons, and
immediately being severally spoken unto concerning the Premises above charged
upon them, how they would acquit themselves thereof; the aforesaid William
Ireland, Thomas Pickering, and John Grove did say that they were not thereof
guilty, and for the same, for good and bad, they severally put themselves upon
the Country, and by a certain Jury of the Country on that behalf, in due manner
Impaneld, sworn and charged, then and there, in the same Court before the
Justices of Goal delivery aforesaid were tried, and that upon that Trial
between our said late Sovereign Lord the King, and the aforesaid William
Ireland, Thomas Pickering, and John Grove at London aforesaid, to wit, at
Justice Hall in the Old Baily aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, the
Defendant Titus Oats, by the name of Titus Oats, late of the Parish of St.
Sepulcher aforesaid, in the Ward aforesaid, Clerk, was a Witness produced on
the Behalf of our late Sovereign Lord the King upon the Trial aforesaid, and
before the aforesaid Justices of Jail-delivery in the Court aforesaid, then and
there held, upon the Holy Evangelists of God, to speak and testify the Truth,
the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, of, and in the Premises between
our said late Sovereign Lord the King, and the aforesaid William Ireland,
Thomas Pickering, and John Grove, put in Issue, was duly sworn, and that he,
the aforesaid Titus Oats, then and there, in the Court of Goal delivery
aforesaid, upon his Oath aforesaid, upon the Indictment aforesaid, at the
Parish and Ward aforesaid, by his own proper act and consent, of his most
wicked Mind, falsely, voluntarily, and corruptly did say, depose, swear, and to
the Jurors of the Jury aforesaid, then and there sworn, and Impanel'd to try
the Issue aforesaid, between our said late Sovereign Lord the King, and the
aforesaid William Ireland, Thomas Pickering, and John Grove, did give in
Evidence, that there was a Traiterous Consult of Jesuits that were assembled at
a certain Tavern, called the White Horse Tavern in the Strand, (in the White
Horse-Tavern in the Strand, in the County of Midd. aforesaid, meaning) upon the
Four and Twentieth day of April, in the Year of our Lord 1678. At which
Consult, Whitebread, Fenwick, Ireland, (the aforesaid Thomas White, alias
Whitebread, John Fenwick, and William Ireland, meaning) and he the said Titus
Oats, were present, and that the Jesuits aforesaid did separate themselves
into several lesser Companies, and that the Jesuits aforesaid came to a
resolution to murder the said our late Lord the King, and that he, the said
Titus Oats did carry the Resolution aforesaid from Chamber to Chamber, and did
see that Resolution signed by them (the aforesaid Jesuits meaning) whereas in
truth and in deed; the aforesaid Titus Oats was not present at any Consult of
the Jesuits at the White Horse-Tavern aforesaid, in the Strand, in the County
of Middlesex aforesaid, upon the 24th of April, in the Year of our Lord 1678.
nor did carry any Resolution to murder our said late Lord the King, from
Chamber to Chamber by any Persons to be signed; and so he the aforesaid Titus
Oats, on the 17th. day of December. in the Thirtieth Year aforesaid, at the
Justice Hall aforesaid, in the Court aforesaid, upon the Trial aforesaid, upon
the Indictment aforesaid, between our said late Lord the King, and the
aforesaid William Ireland, Thomas Pickering, and John Grove, so as aforesaid,
had by his own proper act and Consent, and of his most wicked Mind, falsely,
voluntarily, and corruptly in manner and form aforesaid, did commit voluntary
and corrupt Perjury, to the great Displeasure of Almighty God, in manifest
contempt of the Laws of this Kingdom of England, to the Evil and Pernicious
Example of all others in like case offending, and against the Peace of our said
late Sovereign Lord the Knig, his Crown and Dignity. Upon this Indictment he
has been Arraigned, and thereunto has pleaded not Guilty, and for his Trial
has put himself upon the Country, and His Majesty's Attorney General
likewise, which Country are you, your Charge is to enquire whether the
Defendant be guilty of this Perjury and Offense whereof he is now indicted, or
whether not guilty: If you find him Guilty, you are to say to, if you find him
not guilty you are to say so, and no more, and hear your Evidence. Crier, make
Proclamation.


Oats. Hold Sir, I beg one Favor of your Lordship, to give me leave to have
that part of the Record, wherein I am said to have sworn such and such things,
read distinctly in Latin.


L. C. J. Let it be read in Latin.


Cl. Cr. Juravit and jur' jurat' predict' ad tunc et ibidem jurat' et
impanelat' ad triena exitum predict inter dict' Dn'um nostrum Regem et prefat'
Will'm Ireland, Thomam Pickering, et Iohannem Grove in Evidentiis dedit, quod
fuit proditoria Consultatio, Anglicae; Consult' Jesuit' qui Assemblat' fuer'
apud quandam Tabernam, vocat' the White Horse Tavern in le Strand. ( Le White
Horse Tavern in le Strand in Com' Mid' predict' innuendo) super vicesimum
quartum diem April' Ann. Dom. milesimo sexcentesimo, septuagesimo Octavo, ad
quam quidere Consultationem, Whitebread, Fenwick, Ireland predict' Thomam
White, alias Whitebread, Johannem Fenwick, et William Ireland innuendo) et
prefat' Titus Oats fuer' present' et quod Jesuitae predict' sese separaver' in
seperales minores Conventus quodque Jesuitae predict' venerunt ad Resolutionem
ad murdrand dictum Dn'um Regem, et quod ipse idem Titus Oats portavit
Resolutionem predict' a Camera ad Cameram, et videbat Resolutionem, illam
signat' per ipsos (praefat. Jesuitas innuendo.) That is the Perjury that you
are said to have sworn.


Oats. Pray go on Sir, Ubi revera --


Cl. Cr. Ubi revera et in predict' Titus Oats non presens fuit ad aliquam
Consultationem Jesuit' apud le White Horse Tavern predict' in le Strand, in
Com' Mid' predict' super vicesimum quartum diem Aprilis Anno Domini milesimo
sexcentesimo septuagesimo octavo, necportavit aliquam Resolutionem ad d'tum
d'num Regem murdrand a Camera ad Cameram per aliquas Perfunas fignand'.


Mr. Just. Withens. Now, you have read it, go on Sir to make your Proclamation.


Cl. Cr. Crier, make an Ho-yes.


Cryen. Ho-yes, If any one can inform our Sovereign Lord the King, the Kings
Sergeant, the Kings Attorney General, or this inquest now taken concerning the
Perjury and Offense, whereof the Defendant Titus Oats stands Indicted; let
them come forth, and they shall be heard, for now he stands upon his Discharge.


Mr. Phipps. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury --


Oats. My Lord, I desire your Lordship and the Court would be of Council for
me in one thing, which I take to be a Fault and Error in my Indictment.


L. C. J. Look you Mr. Oats, whatever you have to say of that nature, you must
not speak to it now, you will have your time as to that hereafter, in case you
be Convicted.


Oats. My Lord, I have but one small exception to open to you.


L. C. J. We are now upon the Fact only.


Oats. My Lord, I beg you would give me leave only to tell you of a mistake in
the Indictment, which I hope, when I have opened, will satisfy your Lordship,
that it ought not to be put upon me or the Court to try this Cause; or to be
sure, if there should be a Conviction, I hope I may move an Arrest of the
Judgment.


L. C. J. So I tell you you may, but not now.


Oats. Good my Lord, hear me but a few Words, the Indictment charges me to
have given such and such Evidence, that there was such a Consult of the
Jesuits at the White-Horse Tavern in the Strand, the 24th. of April 1678. that
the Jesuits did afterward divide themselves in several lesser Companies, that
they came there to a resolution to murder the late King, and that I swore that
I carried that Resolution from Chamber to Chamber, and saw the Resolution
signed by them, so the Word is, Signat', now the Perjury assigned is, that I
was not present at that Consult, nor did carry the Resolution from Chamber to
Chamber to be signed, and there the word is, Signand'; now I conceive if
Signat' be the word, that is used in setting forth the Oath that I made, The
Assignment of the Perjury ought to follow that form, and the Word there ought
to be Signat' too, being Signand', I take that to be an Error.


L. C. J. Look, that is not proper at this time, as I told you at first, but
withal I do not think there is any great matter in what you say.


Mr. At. Genesis Either I do not understand Mr. Oats, what he means by the
Objection, or he will find himself much mistaken in it.


L. C. J. Well, well, we have nothing to do with that now, go on with the Cause.


Mr. Phipps, May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, this
is an Indictment against Titus Oats for Perjury, which Indictment sets forth,
that Thomas White, alias Whitebread, William Ireland, John Fenwick, Thomas
Pickering and John Grove, the Sixteenth of Dec. in the Thirtieth year of the
late King, at the Old Baily, were indicted of High Treason for conspiring the
Death of the King, and that Ireland, Pickering, and Grove were tried the 17th.
of December. in that year, and upon that Indictment Titus Oats was produced as a
Witness on the behalf of the King against the said Ireland, Pickering and
Grove, being sworn to give Evidence to the Jury that were Impanelled and sworn
to try that Cause; he did swear and give in evidence, that there was a
Treasonable Consult of the Jesuits at the White Horse Tavern in the Strand,
meaning the White Horse Tavern in the Strand, in the County of Middlesex, the
24th. of April 1678, at which Consult, Whitebread, Fenwick and Ireland, and the
said Titus Oats were present, and that they separated themselves into several
lesser Clubs, and came to a resolution to murder the King, and that he, the
said Titus Oats carried the said Resolution from Chamber to Chamber, to be
signed by them, meaning the Jesuits; whereas in Truth and in Fact, he, the
said Titus Oats was not present at any such Consult, the Four and Twentieth of
April 1678. nor carried any such Resolution from Chamber to Chamber to be
signed, and he the said Titus Oats, the Seventeenth day of December, in the
Thirtieth year aforesaid, at the Old Baily aforesaid, upon the Trial aforesaid,
on the Indictment abovesaid, between the King, and the said Ireland, Pickering
and Grove; so as aforesaid had by his own proper Act and Consent of his most
wicked Mind falsely, voluntarily and corruptly in manner and form aforesaid, did
commit Wilful and Corrupt Perjury, and this is laid to be to the Dishonor of
God, in contempt of the Law, to the Evil Example of others in the like case
offending against the Kings Peace, Crown and Dignity; to this he has pleaded
not Guilty, and that is the Issue that you are to try; if we prove him Guilty,
we question not but you will find him so.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen that are sworn, I
am of Council in this Cause for the King, and our Case stands thus; the
Defendant stands indicted for corrupt and wilful Perjury, for what he swore at
the Trial of Ireland; and that which he swore was this, in order to convict the
Prisoner then at the Bar of the High Treason they were accused of; Oats did
swear, that upon the 24th. of April 1678. there was a consult of Jesuits held
at the White Horse Tavern in the Strand, where Ireland and several other
Jesuits were present, and their business was to consult how they might murder
and destroy the King, and subvert the Government; and there they came to a
Resolution that Pickering and Groves should kill the King; and he was present
at the debate, and he carried the Resolution from Chamber to Chamber, where
they had separated themselves in lesser Numbers; and there he saw the
Resolution signed; and this is the matter that he swore, upon which this
Indictment is founded. And Gentlemen, we do charge that this was a false Oath,
and in a point expressly to the matter then in controversy before that Court;
for we shall prove he was beyond Sea at that time, and on that day, and in
order to his Conviction we shall make out by clear Evidence to you as full and
plain as ever was given, that from Christmas before, which was in December
1677. till Midsummer after, which was the latter end of June 1678. Oats that
swears this Consult in April, was at St. Omers, and in all that time was not
absent from the College there above 24 Hours, and that but once only, which
was in January when he played Truant, and went to Watton, which is about two
Miles from St. Omers, but otherwise he was all along in the College. And my
Lord, that we may give such a satisfactary Evidence as may make it undeniably
plain to the Jury, I desire your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury would
please to observe some particular Periods of time, that I shall open for the
better clearing our Evidence Methodically; and the first Period of time is from
Mr. Hilsley's leaving St. Omers; now he left St. Omers the fourteenth of April
Old style, which is the 24th. of April New style, and then when he came away,
he left Oats there at St. Omers; Mr. Hilsley, when he came into England, in
Kent in his Journey to London, meets one Mr. Burnaby; this was I say in Mr.
Hilsleys Return to England from St. Omers, which he left ten days before the
time assignned by Oats for this Consult, at the White Horse Tavern in the
Strand, and the next Period is, Mr. Burnaby wa going to St. Omers, and there he
arrives in time the 21. of April, old style, and there he sfinds Mr. Oats, who
swore he was then in London; and by the evidence you will hear that Mr. Oats,
according to his usual custom, and according to that Virtue he is endowed
with, very boldly insinuates himself into this Gentleman's Company, as he uses
to do with all new Comers; and you will hear from Mr. Burnaby himself, and many
others, that from the time of his coming to St. Omers, which was the 21. of
April, he conversed with Mr. Oats several days, every day till after the 24th.
of April old style at St. Omers. Then my Lord, another Period of time that I
would desire you to observe is, from Mr. Pool's coming from St. Omers, which
was in time the 25th. of April old style, the very day after the day that this
Consult was sworn to be on, and when he came from St. Omers, you will hear from
many Witnesses that he left Oats there, and there he stayed. For my Lord, we
shall, besides these particular times of these Gentlemen's coming over, who left
him there, prove the very day when he left St. Omers, and that was the end of
Midsummer day following, which was the 23d. of June; then was the time when
Oats came first from St. Omers to England, and we shall prove he took his
leave of them then. My Lord, we have many other Circumstances that will
unanswerably strengthen this Evidence, and show that our Witnesses testify
nothing but the Truth; one particularly is this; this Gentleman being a Novice
of the House, was Reader in the Sodality, as they call it, we shall prove that
for every Sunday and Holy Day throughout all April and May, he did officiate in
that place, and did read to the Society according as the Custom there is; and
we shall prove another particular thing, that upon this 24th. of April, he was
in the College, by a particular circumstance, and that by several Witnesses;
so that Gentlemen, not to detain you with any long opening of the matter, if we
prove this that I have opened, as we shall with a Cloud of Witnesses, it will
make an end of the Question. We shall first, call our Witnesses to prove that
he swore at that Trial, that such a Consult was, and he was at it, and then if
we prove that he was at another place beyond Sea, at such distance that it is
impossible for him to be here; I do not doubt but the Court and the Jury will
conclude he has wilfully and corruptly forswore himself; the said effects of
which we are all witnesses of; it was to take away the Lives of his fellow
Subjects wrongfully; and it will appear to the World he has been one of the
greatest Impostors that ever did appear upon the Stage, either in this Kingdom,
or in any other Nation.


Mr. Sollic Genesis We will now go on with our Evidence, and prove all the parts
of the Indictment, and first produce the Record of the Trial of Ireland, and
then by Witnesses Viva voce that were present at that Trial, we shall prove
what he swore, and then prove that Oath of his to be false; swear Mr. Swift
(which was done) where is the Record of Ireland's Trial?


Mr. Swift. Here it is my Lord.


Mr. Recorder. Is that a true Copy Sir.


Mr. Swift. Yes, I examined this from the Record, it is a true Copy.


L. C. J. Read it.


Mr. At. Genesis If Dr. Oats does desire, the whole may be read; let it be so,
otherwise a Word of it may serve, it being only an Inducement.


Oats. Yes, I desire it may be all read.


L. C. J. It must be read, if he will have it.


Mr. At. Genesis Well I submit it, I did only offer it, to save the time of the
Court.


Oats. I would save the time of the Court too, all that I can; but I think it
may be material for me to have the whole read.


L. C. J. In God's name let it be read, we will not hinder you in any thing
that may be for your defense.


Cl. Cr. Memorandum quod --


Mr. At. Genesis Now this long Record in Latin is read, I would fain know
whether it be to any great purpose, but only to spend time.


L. C. J. Nay, I think it has not been very edifying to a great many, do you
think Mr. Oats, that the Jury, who are Judges of this Fact, do understand it.


Oats. I cannot tell, may be they may, my Lord.


Mr. Jus. Withens. Do you understand it your self Mr. Oats.


Oats. That Is not any Question here; but to oblige the Court and the Jury, I
desire it may be read in English too.


L. C. J. No, the Court understands it well enough, and they can tell the Jury
what it is, it is only the Copy of a Record to prove that Ireland was tried for
High Treason at the Old Baily, the 17th. of Dec. 1678,


Mr. Soll. Genesis Now my Lord, we will call our Witnesses to swear what Oats did
at that Trial swear: Pray swear Mr. Foster, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Mr. Foster, will you acquaint the Court and the Jury,
whether Dr. Oats was produced as a Witness at Ireland's Trial, and what he did
there depose about a Consult in April 78.


Mr. Foster. My Lord, I was so unhappy as to be one of that Jury, by whom Mr.
Ireland, Mr. Pickering and Mr. Groves was tried.


Jury Men. My Lord, we desire that Mr. Foster would lift up his Voice, for we
cannot hear him.


Mr. Foster. Truly my Lord, I have been very sick of late, and am not now very
well, and therefore cannot speak louder than I do.


L. C. J. Go nearer the Jury, and speak as loud as you can.


Mr. Foster. My Lord, I say, I did see Mr. Oats produced as an Evidence at the
Sessions in the Old Bailey, where I was so unhappy as to be a Jury Man, when Mr.
Pickering, Mr. Ireland, Mr. Grove and Mr. Whitebread were tried.


Mr. At. Genesis When was that.


Mr. Foster. It was in December 78.


Mr. At. Genesis And what did Oats then swear.


Mr. Foster. I did see Mr. Oats sworn as an Evidence there, in behalf of the
King, against the Prisoners; and he did then swear, that there was a meeting of
several Jesuits at the White Horse Tavern in the Strand, upon the 24th. of
April 78. and that Mr. Whitebroad, Mr. Ireland and Mr. Fenwick were present at
the Meeting, and there they did consult the Death of the King, and the altering
of the Religion; and some went away and others came; at last they reduced
themselves into several smaller Companies or Clubs, and they came to a
resolution, that Pickering and Grove should go on to assassinate the King, for
which the one was to have 1500 Pound, and the other 30000 Masses, and that this
Resolution was drawn up by one Mico, (if I am not mistaken in his name) I have
it in my Notes I then took of the Evidence; and he swore further, that he
himself went with this Resolution to several of their Chambers, he went to
Whitebread's Chamber, and saw Whitebread sign it, he went to Fenwicks Chamber,
and saw Fenwick sign it, and went to Irelands Chamber, and saw Ireland sign it,
and this was upon the 24th of April 78. My Lord I am positive in this, for I
had the good hap to take the Notes at the Trial, for my own help, being a
Jury-Man, and I never looked upon those Notes afterward, till the printed
Trial came out, and then I compared my Notes with the Print, and found them to
agree, and I have kept them ever since by me, and this is all under my own hand
as I have testified.


Oats. My Lord, may I ask this Gentleman a Question.


L. C. J. Ay, if the Kings Council have done with him.


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, my Lord, we have done with him.


Mr. Foster. Pray my Lord, give me leave to sit down, for I am not able to
stand.


Oats. My Lord, I desire you to ask that Gentleman, whether in the Oath that I
took, I called it a Consult, or I called it a Traitorous Consult.


Mr. Foster. Truly I think you called it both, if I am not mistaken, but if
your Lordship please, I will look upon my Notes.


L. C. J. You may look upon your Notes to refresh your Memory, if you will.


Mr. Just. Withens. Truly I think if it were a Consult to murder the King, it
must be a traitorous one without doubt.


Oats. Sir, that is not to the Purpose, my Question is, what I swore it was.


L. C. J. He tells you, he beleives you did swear both ways.


Mr. Foster. At that Consult he said such a Resolution was taken, and I think
he called it a Traitorous Consult.


Oats. If you please, I Will tell your Lordship the Reason, why I asked that
Question.


L. C. J. No, you may save your self the trouble of that, you best know the
reason of your own Questions; he has given you a satisfactory answer.


Oats. Then if your Lordship please, ask him this Question, whether I swore
that all these 3 Jesuits were present at one time, or how many of them.


L. C. J. You hear the Question, what say you to it.


Mr. Foster. Sir, you swore that Ireland, Fenwick and Whitebread were at that
Consult, but whether they were all three of them there at one time, I cannot
tell, or which of them, were together; but this you did swear, that they were
there, and came to such a resolution, and you carried it to all their Chambers,
and did see them sign it.


Mr. Just. Withens. He gives you a plain account, what you did swear, I think
Mr. Oats.


Oats. Very well, my Lord, I would ask him a third Question if you please.


L. C. J. Ay, in God's Name, ask him as many Questions as you will.


Oats. Whether did I swear that it was resolved to kill the King, at the White
Horse Tavern, or whether that Resolution was made after they separated
themselves into lesser Clubs.


L. C. J. Mr. Foster, this is his Question, whether you did apprehend by what
he swore, that he affirmed, the Resolution to kill the King was made at the
White Horse Tavern, or afterward when they were divided.


Mr. Foster. They came to a Resolution, you said, at the White Horse Tavern,
and the Resolution was there drawn up by one Mico, I think, and it was carried
by you for every one to sign it from Chamber to Chamber; for I remember you
were asked the Question, whether you saw them sign it, and you answered that
you did carry it, and saw them sign it.


Mr. Just. Withens. He speaks very plain Mr. Oats.


L. C. J. He answers your Question very fully.


Oats. Ay my Lord, so he does, I am glad of it.


L. C. J. Have you any more Questions to ask him?


Oats. I would ask him another Question; whether I did swear, that I did carry
this Resolution from Chamber to Chamber to be signed, or that I carried it from
Chamber to Chamber and saw them sign it.


Mr. Foster. You did swear, that you carried the Resolution from Chamber to
Chamber, and saw them sign it.


Oats. But did you remember it so particularly, as to say which you swore,
whether I did carry it to be signed, or carried it, and saw them sign it.


Mr. Foster. You said, you carried it to be signed, and you saw it signed.


L. C. J. He tells you for a satisfaction in that point, that he does remember
you did swear it both ways.


Oats. He does say so indeed, but whether it was so or no is a doubt.


L. C. J. That will be a Question by and by it may be, if he be in the wrong, I
suppose you can rectify him.


Oats. We are now my Lord upon my Oath, and therefore it concerns me to
enquire whether I swore as is laid in the Indictment.


L. C. J. You say right, it does so.


Oats. And I the rather ask these Questions my Lord, because it is six years
ago since that Trial.


L. C. J, I hope you have not forgot what you swore, have you?


Oats. My Lord, I think it is fair for me to ask the Witnesses what they
remember after so long a time.


L. C. J. It Is very fair, no body says any thing to the contrary.


Oats. Then my Lord, I hope I may ask this Gentleman how he comes to remembe
all this after so long a time.


L. C. J. He has told you already, but tell it him again Mr. Foster.


Mr. Foster. Truly it is so long ago, that had I not taken all these Notes at
the Trial I had not been able to have given so good an account.


L. C. J. It Is a very good reason.


Oats. It Is so my Lord, I have subpoena'd others of the Jury, and they will, I
suppose, give you as good an account.


L. C. J. Have you done with him then.


Oats. I have one Question more to ask Mr. Foster, and that is, whether I
swore they met all in one Room, at the White Horse Tavern, or in more than one.


Mr. Foster. You swore they were in several Rooms.


Oats. Then I would ask him this Question my Lord, whether he were then
satisfied that Ireland was guilty of the High Treason he was then indicted.


L. C. J. The meaning of the Question is, I suppose, whether you did believe
Mr. Oats at that time.


Mr. Foster. Yes, my Lord I had no reason to the contrary.


L. C. J. But I would ask you a Question then Mr. Foster. Do you believe him
now? Do you think Mr. Oats he would have found him guilty, if he had not
believed the Evidence against him.


Oats. We know how Juries have gone alate.


L. C. J. Ay, very strangely indeed Mr. Oats, and I hope so as we shall never
see them go again.


Mr. Foster. My Lord, I have lived so long in the City of London without any
Blemish, that I hope it will not be thought I would give corruptly a Verdict
against my Conscience.


Oats. My Lord, I speak of later times than Irelands Trial.


L. C. J. He is an Honest Man, I know him.


Oats. Good my Lord be pleased to hear me.


L. C. J. Nay, you shall hear me, as well as I shall hear you; I Will assure you
that, Mr. Oats in plain English, ask as many Questions of the Witnesses as you
will, that are proper to be asked; but I Will have no Descants, nor Reflections,
I know him, and he is very well known in the City of London, he is a Man of
very considerable Quality, and very good Repute.


Oats. I beseech your Lordship to forgive me, if I mistake in my Questions, I
do assure you I design no Reflections on Mr. Foster.


L. C. J. Ask what Questions you will, but do not reflect.


Oats. I desire to ask Mr. Foster one Question more, and that is, that he
would be pleased to tell the reason why at the beginning of his Evidence he
said, it was his unhappiness to be a Jury Man at that time.


Mr. Foster. Really Sir, I think it not a happiness for any Man to be of a
Jury, where the Life of a Man is in Question. I assure you for my self, I never
accounted it so, and if I could have avoided it, I should have been very glad
to have been excused.


Oats. I have done with Mr. Foster.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, thus we prove what Mr. Oats swore at the Trial, which
Mr. Oats himself will not deny, for the Fact, Mr. Oats has printed in his
Narrative, as we have now proved it.


Oats. I intend to produce some others of the Jury Men by and by.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Now we shall call our Witnesses to prove that what he then swore
was false.


Mr. At. Genesis We call no more to the point, what he did swear; but go on to
disprove what he did then swear.


Oats. My Lord, I would put this Question to the Court, whether this be a
Proof sufficient for this point.


L. C. J. I leave that to the Jury, it is a point of Fact that they are to to
try.


Oats. I beseech your Lordship that the Court would be pleased to give me an
Answer.


L. C. J. If you ask impertinent Questions, the Court is not obliged to answer
them. Go on Mr. Attorney.


Mr. At. Genesis Call Martin Hilsley Esquire and Henry Thornton Esquire Swear Mr.
Hilsley, (which was done.) Come Mr. Hilsley, pray acquaint my Lord and the Jury
what time you came from St. Omers, in the year 78.


Mr. Hilsley. My Lord, I came from St. Omers the 24th of April New style, where
I left the Prisoner Mr. Oats.


L. C. J. From whence did you come, say you.


Mr. Hilsley. From St. Omers the 24th of April New style.


L. C. J. What year?


Hilsley. In the year 78, that is the fourteenth of April here, and the three
and twentieth of April New Style; I saw the Prisoner at St. Omers, and went to
School with him, and on the four and twentieth I came from St. Omers, and went
to Callis, and from thence into England; but he was never in my Company all the
while I was coming for England, though he swore he came over with me.


L. C. J. The three and twentieth of April you say you saw him.


Mr. Hilsley. Yes I was with him, that was the day before I came from St. Omers.


L. C. J. You left him there the day before you came away, you say.


Mr. Hilsley. I did not see him that morning that I came away, but here are
others that did.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he a Scholar there.


Mr. Hilsley. Yes, my Lord he was.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you know him very well?


Mr. Hilsley. Yes my Lord, I did.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he come over into England with you?


Mr. Hilsley. My Lord, I came from St. Omers to Callis and never saw him, from
Callis to Dover. I never saw him, from Dover to London, I never saw him all the
way, and I am confident, he was not in the same Ship I came over in, for I
should have seen him if he had.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he for some time before that constantly at St. Omers.


Mr. Hilsley. Yes, we went perpetually to School together.


L. C. J. What time did you take shipping after you went from St. Omers.


Mr. Hilsley. The very next day; the day I went from St. Omers was on the
Sunday morning? on Monday I took shipping from Callis to Dover, and I arrived
at England at ten of the Clock the same Night.


Oats. When does he say he arrived in England.


L. C. J. He says he went from St. Omers on the Sunday, he came that Night to
Callis, and the next day went on Board from Callis, and came that Night to
Dover, that was Monday night.


Mr. Hilsley. Yes, I came that Night to Dover, and I lay there that Monday
Night, the next day was the 26th of April New Style.


Mr. At. Genesis Where come you then from thence?


Mr. Hilsley. I came as far as Bockton Street, and there I lay 4 or 5 days, and
then I came to Cittenbourn, and by long Sea from thence to London.


Mr. At. Genesis Where did you meet Mr. Burnaby.


Mr. Hilsley. I met him hard by there, at a Relations of mine.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember what day you met him.


Mr. Hilsley. I think it was a day or two before I came away from thence to
London.


Mr. Just. Withens. Had you any Discourse with Mr. Oats about your coming into
England.


Mr. Hilsley. Nothing at all, Sir Francis, that I remember.


L. C. J. What time did you come to London.


Mr. Hilsley. I came within a few days to London, I stayed 4 or 5 days there by
the way; and I saw Mr. Burnaby within 4 days, I think, after I came into
England. It was about Monday seven-night after I came from St. Omers, that I
came to London.


Mr. At. Genesis That was May New Style.


Mr. Hilsley. That is their Style. It was so.


Mr. Soll. Genesis In our Style it was the 21. of April.


Mr. Hanseys. Pray did you give an account to any Body, after you came to
London, that you left Oats at St. Omers, when you came away.


Mr. Hilsley. What say you Mr. Hanseys, I did not well understand your Question.


L. C. J. Then mind me Sir, It was asked of you whether you had any discourse
with any Body, after you came hither, that you had left Mr. Oats behind you at
St. Omers.


Mr. Hilsley. I did tell some Persons, I left an English Parson there, at the
same time I came away.


L. C. J. Did you not name him, who it was.


Mr. Hilsley. Yes, I named him by the Name he went by there, and that was
Sampson Lucy.


Mr. At. Genesis To whom did you tell it.


Mr. Hilsley. To one Mr. Osbourn.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Did he go by that Name of Sampson Lucy in the College.


Mr. Hilsley. Yes he did sometimes, he had three or four Names, he was called
sometimes Titus Ambrosius.


Oats. Now my Lord, I desire I may ask that Gentleman a Question or two.


L. C. J. Ay, if they have done with him.


Mr. At. Genesis We have my Lord.


L. C. J. Then ask him what you will.


Oats. I desire my Lord, that you would be pleased to ask that Gentleman what
Religion he is of: for it is a fair Question, and an equitable one: And that
which very nearly concerns me; and I desire to know where he lives.


L. C. J. What Religion are you of Sir?


Mr. Hilsley. I am a Roman Catholic.


L. C. J. Where do you live?


Mr. Hilsley. I live in London, I am of the Inner Temple.


L. C. J. He says that he is a Roman Catholic, and lives in London.


Oats. Pray be pleased my Lord, to ask him when he went to St. Omers first,
and how long he stayed there.


Mr. Hilsley. My Lord, I was there about six years, I presume it was about the
year 1672. when I went there first.


Oats. Pray ask him what he did there, what was his business.


Mr. At. Genesis That is not a pertinent Question at all, with submission, my
Lord.


Oats. I beseech you Mr. Attorney, give me leave to ask my own Questions.


L. C. J. Ay, but you must ask fair and pertinent Questions.


Oats. My Lord, I would know what was his employment there at St. Omers.


Mr. Hilsley. I know not my self of any particular employment I had, any more
than any of the rest that were there.


L. C. J. But Mr. Oats, you must not ask any such Questions, what know I, but
by asking him the Question; you may make him obnoxious to some Penalty, you
must not ask him any Questions to ensnare him.


Oats. My Lord, it tends very much to my Defense to have that Question truly
answered.


L. C. J. But if it tends to your Defense never so much, you must not subject
him to a Penalty by your Questions.


Oats. The nature of my Defense requires an answer to that Question.


L. C. J. But shall you make a man liable to punishment, by ensnaring
Questions, if a man should ask you what Religion you are of, --


Oats. My Lord, I will tell you by and by my reason, and I hope a good one,
why I ask it.


L. C. J. I do not believe you can have any Reason, but to be sure, we must not
suffer any such entangling Questions to be asked.


Oats. Pray ask him my Lord, when I came to St. Omers.


L. C. J. When did Oats come to St. Omers.


Mr. Hilsley. As well as I remember, he came to St. Omers either the latter end
of November, or the beginning of December, in the year 1677. I think it was
that year.


Oats. I defire you would ask him, whether they were not Priests and Jesuits
that governed that House.


L. C. J. What a Question is that, I tell you it is not fit to be asked.


Oats. I demand an answer to it, upon the Oath he has taken.


L. C. J. And I tell you, upon the Oath you have taken, you are not bound to
answer any such Question.


Oats. Good my Lord, let my Questions be answered.


L. C. J. No Sir, they shall not: How now, do not think to put Irregularities
upon us, if you will behave your self as you ought to do, and keep to that
which is proper, well and good.


Oats. If your Lordship please, I think this very proper for me.


L. C. J. What, to ask such improper Questions as these are.


Oats. Truly my Lord, I think they are fit Questions to be asked.


L. C. J. But we are all of another opinion.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know, whether they are not set on by their
Superiors to do this.


L. C. J. That is not a fair Question neither.


Oats. Give me leave to make my defense, my Lord, I beseech you.


L. C. J. Ay, in Gods name; but I pray you then make it in a regular and
becoming way; for I know of no Privilege you have more than other People, to
use Witnesses as you do.


Oats. My Lord, I look upon my self as hardly used in the case.


L. C. J. I care not what you look upon your self to be, if you will ask
Questions, ask none but fair Questions, and while you keep within Bounds, you
shall be heard as well as any of the Kings Subjects; but if you will break out
into Questions that are impertinent, extravagant, or ensnaring, we must correct
you, and keep you within proper Limits.


Oats. Then my Lord, I ask whether he was not a Witness at the Trial of the
Five Jesuits, and at Langhorn's Trial.


L. C J. Ay, that is a proper Question, what say you to it Sir.


Mr. Hilsley. I was so Sir.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him what Credit he received at those Trials.


L. C. J. What a Question is that to ask any man.


Oats. My Lord, I think it is a fair Question.


L. C. J. No indeed, it is not a fair one at all.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know what induces him to come here as a Witness
now, since it appears that now he comes to give an Evidence that he gave six
years ago, and was not believed.


Mr. Hilsley. My Lord, I am subpoena'd.


L. C. J. He has given you an answer to the Question, though I think it was an
idle Question, and not at all to the purpose.


Oats. It may be he may have some particular reason to induce him to it now.


L. C. J. Well, he tells you he came, because he was subpoena'd, and that is
sufficient: He is not compellable to be a Witness, unless he be subpoena'd; but
if a man will come without a Subpoena, and give Evidence in a Cause; that is no
objection to his testimony.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know of him, whether he is to have any Reward for
swearing in this Cause.


L. C. J. What say you Sir, are you to have any Reward for your Evidence.


Mr. Hilsley. None at all as I know of, my Lord, I assure you.


Mr. Just. Withens. He is not paid for his Evidence, Mr. Oats.


Oats. If he be, or be not, I cannot tell, nor do I know who ever was paid for
it.


L. C. J. Have you any more Questions to ask him?


Oats. Pray my Lord, I desire to know what was the occasion of his coming away
from St. Omers.


Mr. Hilsley. I had finished my Studies.


Oats. Pray my Lord, be pleased to ask him, if he never heard of any Consult
of the Jesuits here in England, in the Month of April 78. and from whom he did
hear of it.


Mr. Hilsley. I did hear of it among the rest of the Students of the College.


L. C. J. What did you hear of.


Mr. Hilsley. I did hear of a Consult of ahe Fathers in April 1678.


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, there was, but not such an one as Mr. Oats speaks of, nor
was he at it.


Mr. J. Holloway. For what was that Consult, I pray you.


Mr. Hilsley. It was nothing but a Triennial Congregation about the Affairs of
the Society.


L. C. J. What were they to do there?


Mr. Hilsley. My Lord, I was informed among them there, that it was only what
they used to have once in 3 years for ordinary Affairs,


Oats. My Lord, he pretends to tell when I came thither, I desire to know of
him, from what time it was he saw me there, and how often.


Mr. Hilsley. Generally every day, as near as I can remember, I think Mr.
Oats; you and I, Mr. Oats, went to School in the same place.


Oats. Pray how many days was I absent from thence in that time you were there.


Mr. Hilsley. You were there generally as often as I, I do not know whether
ever you mist a day or no.


Oats. Pray my Lord, will you ask this Gentleman one question more, whether he
can particularly tell that he did see me every day at St. Omers. For it is not
enough for him to swear that he saw me there; but he ought to give an account
how he comes to know it by some particular Circumstances.


L. C. J. He has given you several Circumstances of his Knowledge, for he says
he was there all the while from your coming, till 23d. of April New Style, that
he came for England; he says he was a Scholar in the same Form and Class with
you, and because he does not remember himself to have been absent, he does not
remember you to be absent neither.


Mr. At. Genesis And he swears particularly to the very time he came over, which
was April 14th. Old Style.


Oats. Well, I have no more Questions to ask this Gentleman.


L. C. J. Then call another.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Crier, call Mr. John Dorrel, (who was sworn.)


L. C. J. Look ye Mr. Attorney, you did open things at the first for Methods
sake by Periods of time; the first was Hilsleys coming over, the next was the
meeting with Bournaby, now pray observe that Method, and call that Bournaby
next.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we shall call him by and by; but we have not done with
this business about Hilsley, we have some Witnesses that will give an Evidence
to strengthen and back his Testimony. Come Mr. Dorrel, what have you to say to
this matter.


Mr. Dorrel. My Lord, in April 1678. I came from Brussels to England, where
presently after I came, I was with one Mr. Osbourn and my Mother, and there was
a Discourse between my Mother and him about Religion.


L. C. J. Where was that.


Mr. Dorrel. It was here in England.


Mr. At. Genesis Now tell the time when that was.


Mr. Dorrel. As near as I can guess, it was 15 or 16 of April Old Style, in the
year 1678.


Mr. At. Genesis Well Sir, go on with your Story.


Mr. Dorrel. My Mother was laughing at his Religion, and telling him some
ridiculous Stories, and he replied, there are a great many that are so
ignorant, that are bred up in the Religion of the Church of England, that they
are forced to be sent to the Colleges abroad to be taught, even some of the
Clergy of that Church, and particularized in one Sampson Lucy alias Oats, that
was a Scholar at that time at St. Omers, as he was assured by a Gentleman that
was newly come from thence: My Mother is now sick, or else she would have been
here, and would have testified the same I now do.


Mr. Soll. Genesis This Gentleman is a Protestant Mr. Oats.


Oats. What is your Name Sir, I pray.


Mr. Dorrel. My Name is John Dorrel Sir.


Oats. Were you never at St. Omers a Student there.


Mr. Dorrel. I was there, but before your time Doctor; I had not the happiness
to be there, while you were there.


Oats. I pray Sir what Religion are you of.


Mr. Dorrel. I am a Papist now.


Oats. I desire my Lord, the court would be pleased to take notice of it, he
owns he was reconciled to the Church of Rome.


Mr. Dorrel. Mr. Oats, to satisfy you, I went over when I was Child of 12. or
13. years old, and so was bread in that persuasion.


L. C. J. Well, well, we all observe what he says.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray swear Mr. Osbourn, (which was done)


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we called this Person only to this matter. Pray Sir
will you give the Court and the Jury an account what Discourse you had with Mr.
Hilsley about Oats, and pray Sir tell the time when it was.


Mr. Osbourn. My Lord, I went out of Town the 30th. of April, the year before
the pretended Plot was discovered by Mr. Oats, and I met with Mr. Hilsley two
or three days before, and enquiring of him about the Affairs of St. Omers, he
told me of a Minister of the Church of England that was come thither to be a
Student there, who went under the name of Sampson Lucy, but his right Name was
Oats; I asked him what he pretended to; did he intend to be of that order; he
told me, he did believe that he would not be admitted, for his Irregular and
Childish Behavior, and that he had left him in the College; and this I
afterward in Discourse told to Madam Dorrel, who is a Protestant, and to my
Mother, who is since dead.


Mr. At. Genesis Will Mr. Oats ask this Gentleman any Questions.


Oats. I only ask him what Religion he is of.


L. C. J. What Religion are you of, Sir?


Mr. Osbourn. I am a Roman Catholic my Lord.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Now my Lord, we come to call Mr. Bournaby. Pray swear him
(which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Bournaby, pray will you acquaint my Lord and the Jury, of
the time when you came from St. Omers to England; and when you met with Mr.
Hilsley.


Mr. Bournaby. I met with Hilsley on the 18th of April Old Style, in the year
78. then I pursued my Journey the following day to St. Omers.


L. C. J. Where did you meet him.


Mr. Bournaby. Between Cittenbourn and Canterbury, and afterward I pursued my
Journey from Canterbury to Dover, from thence to Callis, and from thence to St.
Omers I arrived at St. Omers the 21. of April Old Style, which was the first of
May New Style, upon the Second of May Mr. Oats was in my Company, I was
walking in the Garden, and he came into my Company.


L. C. J. When was it.


Mr. Bournaby. The Second of May New Style, and the Third of May again I went
into the Garden, and there he was with me again, and the Fifth of May I saw him
again.


L. C. J. Where?


Mr. Bournaby. In the Rhetoric Form.


L. C. J. But where, in what place?


Mr. Bournaby. At St. Omers.


L. C. J. You speak of your own Knowledge, you are sure you saw him there at
those Times?


Mr. Bournaby. Yes, in the Rhetoric School and in the Garden.


Mr. At. Genesis What more do you know of him?


Mr. Bournaby. I saw him again the 8th of May New Style, that is the 28th of
April Old Style; I mean by New Style, that Style which was used in the Place
where I was then.


Mr. At. Genesis How long was he there before he went away.


Mr. Bournaby. I know he was there from the Second of May, the day after I came
thither to the 20th of June, and then I went away, or thereabouts.


L. C. J. Did you see him daily all that time?


Mr. Bournaby. Yes, from day to day he was not out of the House.


L. C. J. Were you a Scholar there with him?


Mr. Bournaby. Yes I was.


L. C. J. What year was that.


Mr. Bournaby. In the year 78.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Oats may ask him what Questions he will.


Oats. My Lord, he says he went awaw; I desire to know whither he did go.


Mr. Bournaby. I went away the 20th of June from St. Omers, it is no matter
whither I went.


Oats. I desire he may give an account what Religion he is of.


Mr. Bournaby. I am a Roman Catholic.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know whether he be not of that order.


L. C. J. That I will not ask him, I Will assure you.


Oats. Truly my Lord, I think it is a very hard matter for me to have Jesuits
admitted as Witnesses in such a cause against me.


L. C. J. I have told you already, you are not to ask any Questions of any
Witnesses that may subject them to any Penalty, or make them accuse themselves
of any Crime.


Oats. My Lord, I humbly desire he would give an account, whether he were not
admitted into the Society.


L. C. J. I tell you, he is not to be ask't that question.


Oats. He has owned before.


L. C. J. Do you take your advantage of it, if you can prove it.


Oats. Then my Lord, I desire to ask him, whether or no he did appear as a
Witness at the Trial of the 5 Jesuits.


Mr. Bournaby. No my Lord, I did not.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him whether he was not summoned to appear then.


Mr. Bournaby. No, I was not.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him what Reward he is to have for coming, and giving
this Evidence.


L. C. J. Are you to have any Reward for being a Witness in this Cause?


Mr. Bournaby. None my Lord, that I know of.


L. C. J. That was a proper Question to be asked, and you have a fair Answer to
it.


Oats. Pray Mr. Bournaby, by what name did you go at St. Omers.


Mr. Bournaby. By the Name of Blunt.


Mr. At. Genesis And what name did he go by there.


Mr. Bournaby. Who Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Oats.


Mr. Bournaby By the Name of Sampson Lucy.


Oats. My Lord, I desire you to ask him whether he did know of any consult
that was to be held here in London in April 78. and by whom he knew it.


L. C. J. What say you Sir, did you know of any Consult.


Mr. Bournaby. No, I neither heard of it, nor knew any thing of it.


Mr. At. Genesis Now my Lord, we shall go on to another Period of time, and that
is concerning Pool. Swear Mr. Pool, (which was done.)


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray will you acquaint my Lord and the Jury, whether you knew
Mr. Bournaby at St. Omers.


Mr. Pool. Yes, I did Sir.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Do you know the time when he came to St. Omers.


Mr. Pool. No, I do not remember it.


Mr. At. Genesis When did you come over from St. Omers.


Mr. Pool. The 25th of April.


Mr. At. Genesis What Style?


Mr. Pool. Old Style.


Mr. At. Genesis In what year?


Mr. Pool. In the year 78.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you know Mr. Oats at St. Omers.


Mr. Pool. Yes, I did know that Gentleman there.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he at St. Omers that time you were there?


Mr. Pool. Yes he was.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you leave him there when you came away?


Mr. Pool. Yes, I did leave him there when I came away.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray tell the Court some particular thing why you remember it,
and upon what account you came away.


Mr. Pool. Upon the occasion of my Brothers Death I came over, and I can tell
several particulars of my Journey, I came away upon the Thursday, and I came to
London upon the Sunday following.


Mr. At. Genesis You are sure you left Mr. Oats there then?


Mr. Pool. Yes, I am sure I did leave Mr. Oats there when I came away, and I
came away thence the Fifth of May New Style, the Twenty Fifth of April Old
Style.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray how long did you know Mr. Oats there.


Mr. Pool. I knew him there from Christmas before that.


L. C. J. You were of the College, were you not.


Mr. Pool. Yes, I was a Student there.


L. C. J. You are sure he was there all the while.


Mr. Pool. I do not remember he was a day absent, and if he had gone away,
particular notice would have been taken of it.


L. C. J. Did you see him there two or three days before you came away.


Mr. Pool. I saw him that morning I came away.


L. C. J. And what time before.


Mr. Pool. I saw him two or three days before that.


L. C. J. Can you name any particular days?


Mr. Pool. I saw him the first of May, and the Second of May, and the fifth of
May, which was the 25th of April Old Style; and then I came away.


L. C. J. Are you sure you left him there then?


Mr. Pool. I am sure I left him there, I can swear it without any difficulty at
all.


L. C. J. What do you ask him Mr. Oats.


Oats. I desire to know what Religion he is of.


L. C. J. What Religion are you of?


Mr. Pool. I am a Roman Catholic.


Oats. I desire your Lordship would ask him whether he was a Witness at the
Trial of the 5 Jesuits, or at Langhorn's Trial.


Mr. Pool. No, I was never an Evidence before in my Life.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, whether he was not admitted into the Sodality of
the Virgin Mary.


L. C. J. No indeed I shall ask him no such Question.


Oats. Pray my Lord, let him answer it.


L. C. J. Prove what you can when it comes to your turn, but ask him no
entangling Questions.


Oats. He has made himself liable to a Penalty by being in that Seminary.


L. C. J. I hope a Man may be at St. Omers, and yet not be punished for it, Mr.
Oats.


Oats. It is my defense to disable the Witnesses against me.


L. C. J. But they must not be asked what may make them accuse themselves.


Oats. My Lord, it is hard that the Witnesses shall not be made to answer my
Questions.


L. C. J. Pray Sir be quiet, we have told you often enough already, you must
not think to govern us, it must not be allowed.


Oats. My Lord, I desire he may be asked then what Reward he has to come, and
swear in this Cause.


Mr. Pool. My Lord, I do not know that I am so much as to have my Charges born.


L. C. J. Are you to have any Reward.


Mr. Pool. No, my Lord, that I know of.


Oats. Pray my Lord, I desire he may ask't, what was the occasion of Mr.
Hilsleys coming away from St. Omers.


Mr. Pool. Indeed I did not examine into the occasion at all, for I was never a
man that meddled or made on any side, but lived quietly in the College, and
minded my Studies.


Oats. My Lord, I desire your Lordship to ask him whether he did know of any
Consult of the Jesuits in April 78. and from whom he knew it.


Mr. Pool. I know not of any particular Consult, I heard something in general
of a Triennial Congregation, but I cannot speak any thing of my own Knowledge.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know of him, if he can tell when I came to St.
Omers.


L. C. J. Do you know when Oats came to St. Omers?


Mr. Pool. About Christmas, as near as I can remember, it was the latter end of
November.


Oats. How much before or after Christmas was it?


Mr. Pool. I cannot tell exactly.


Oats. What year was it in?


Mr. Pool. In the year 77.


Oats. I desire to know of him my Lord, whether he saw me every day at St.
Omers at dinner.


Mr. Pool. I cannot say, that ever I knew he was absent any one day, never 3
days I think I may affirm; but only when he was in the Infirmary.


Mr. At. Genesis That Is the place where they go when they are Sick.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him by what name he went, when he was there in the
College.


Mr. Pool. By the name of Killingbeck.


Mr. Sol. Genesis By what name did he go by, I pray you.


Mr. Pool. By the name of Sampson Lucy.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Swear Mr. Henry Thornton, (which was done.)


Mr. Ait. Genesis Mr. Thornton, pray where were you in the year 78.


Mr. Thornton. At St. Omers my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember Mr. Oats there, do you know him?


Mr. Thornton. Yes, I know him very well.


Mr. At. Genesis When did he come thither.


Mr. Thornton. He came there about Christmas 77.


Mr. At. Genesis How long did he continue there?


Mr. Thornton. He staid there till St. John Baptist's Eve in June 78.


Mr. At. Genesis Midsummer you mean.


Mr. Thornton. Yes, the Eve of St. John Baptist.


Mr. At. Genesis What Style?


Mr. Thornton. New Style.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Did you see him there all the while?


Mr. Thornton. Yes, I did see him every day, I believe, in the Refectory at
Dinner time, and at Night in the Dormitory, where all the Collegians have their
Beds, I lay over against him every Night, I saw him particularly upon the day
of Hilsley's departure, which was the 24th of April New Style, and I saw him
the first of May New Style, upon the coming of Mr. Bournaby to the College;
and particularly again I remember him there the 2d of May, when my
Schoolfellows exhibited an Action or Play.


Mr. At. Genesis Was Mr. Oats there then?


Mr. Thornton. Yes, I saw him present at it, and I know it by this particular
Circumstance, there was a scufflle between him and another about a place to see
the Play.


Mr. Jenes. Did you see him the 23d of April Old Style, that is, the third of
May New Style, which was the day after your Play, that you remember?


Mr. Thornton. I do not remember that I did see him that day, by any particular
circumstance, though I believe I did.


Mr. Jones. Do you remember when Mr. Poole came away from St. Omers?


Mr. Thornton. Yes, I do.


Mr. Jones. When was that?


Mr. Thornton. The 5th of May New Style.


Mr. Jones. Was Oats at St. Omers at that time?


Mr. Thornton. Yes, he was there then, I am sure.


Mr. At. Genesis Was not he Reader there in the College?


Mr. Thornton. He was Reader in the Sodality, and to my knowledge, he did not
miss once from the 24th of April New Style, to the 24th of May New Style, from
being there, and reading in the Sodality.


L. C. J. What did he use to read?


Mr. Thornton. Some Spiritual Book or piece of Divinity, or the like, as it was
usual to have read every Sunday and Holidy.


L. C. J. And that is one reason why you conclude he was there all that while,
because every Sunday and Holiday he was to read, and did read.


Mr. Thornton. Yes, my Lord.


Oats. Pray my Lord, be pleased to ask this Gentleman what Religion he is of.


Mr. Thornton. A Roman Catholic.


Oats. Where does he live?


L. C. J. Where do you live Mr. Thornton?


Mr. Thornton. I am a Northumberland man, that is my Country.


Oats. Mr. Lord, I desire to know of him, when he did come from St. Omers?


Mr. Thornton. I came from St. Omers, my Lord, about two years after that Oats
went away from thence.


Oats. Pray my Lord, be pleased to ask him, who it was that was Rector or
Governor of that House or College.


Mr. Thornton. It was one Mr. Richard Ashby.


Oats. Pray my Lord, be pleased to ask him, what School he was in there.


Mr. Thornton. I was in Sintaxe, my Lord.


Oats. Then my Lord, I would ask him another question, and that is this,
whether he was not a Witness in behalf of the five Jesuits and Mr. Langhorn.


Mr. Thornton. No, I was not, my Lord.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know, if he can tell the occasion of Mr. Hilsley
coming away from St. Omers.


Mr. Thornton. It never concerned me at all, and I never enquired into it.


Oats. Then my Lord, I would ask him this question, why he is so precise as to
his Remembrance of what was done in April and May, when he does not give any
account of any other time, nor did the other Witnesses.


L. C. J. Yes, but they do; they give you a particular account from the time of
your coming thither, which was about Christmas, some say the latter end of
November, or the beginning of December, they are not positive to any particular
time, but thereabouts, and so from that time all along till June.


Oats. I beg your Lordships pardon, I did not hear that he said any such thing.


L. C. J. If you will, I Will ask him that question again for your satisfaction.


Oats. If you please, my Lord.


L. C. J. Then mind what is said; Do you remember that Oats was there in March
before, and in February before?


Mr. Thornton. Yes, I particularly remember in March before, he did read a
Ridiculous Book in the Sodality, and he was remarkable in the House by twenty
Ridiculous passages.


Oats. I do acknowledge I did in March read a pleasant Book, called The
Contempt of the Clergy.


L. C. J. By whose Order did he read that Book in the Sodality?


Mr. Thornton. I do not know, whether it was by his own election that he was
Reader there, or by the Command of the Prefect of the Studies, that has the
Care of the Students, and appoints them their Business.


Oats. Pray my Lord, be pleased to ask him how long he was Resident at St.
Omers.


Mr. Thornton. I was there seven years.


L. C. J. You said he was there in June till Midsummer Eve.


Mr. Thornton. Yes, he was so.


Oats. I own that I was there in June, but that was after I returned from
England.


L. C. J. When do you say he left the College first?


Mr. Thornton. He never left the College from the time of his coming thither
first till Midsummer Eve, only one time that he was at Watton, and that was but
a day or two at most, which is not a League out of Town.


L. C. J. Do you remember him there about Christmas time.


Mr. Thornton. Yes, my Lord, very well.


L. C. J. When was it he went to Watton?


Mr. Thornton. About the latter end of January (as I do remember) and in
February above Shrovetide I remember him particularly to be there.


L. C. J. Now Mr. Oats, you see he speaks to other times besides April and
May, and he brings, upon my word, very notable circumstances.


Oats. He says he went to School with me there, I think, my Lord.


Mr. Thornton. No, I say he was in the same College.


L. C. J. But not in the same Classis, for it seems you were in the Rhetoric
Form, and he in the Syntax.


Mr. Thornton. My Lord, he went there by reason of his Age, and upon no other
account; he might have gone elsewhere with us who were of a lower Form, for any
great store of Learning he had.


L. C. J. You hear him, I suppose, Mr. Oats, he gives no great commendation of
your Scholarship.


Oats. That is nothing to this question; but pray my Lord, be pleased to ask
him, whether he did not hear of a Consult of the Jesuits held here in England
in April 78.


L. C. J. What say you Sir, Did you hear of any such Consult?


Mr. Thornton. Yes, my Lord, I did hear of a Triennial Congregation, such as
used to be held by them, but that did not belong to me to enquire into it.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know of whom he did hear it.


L. C. J. How do you know there was such a Consult, who told you of it?


Mr. Thornton. I heard of it in the House, and I had read that it was the
Custom of that Society of People to have such a meeting once in three years.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray for what purpose did they so meet?


Mr. Thornton. As I have been told, It was to send a Procurator to Rome, and
for their managing their other Affairs, which concerned their Society.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Have the Jesuits usually such a Consult once in three years Sir?


Mr. Thornton. I was never present at any such Congregation, I was not capable
of it.


L. C. J. But was it used to be said so?


Mr. Thornton. Yes, my Lord, I have heard it said so, and read of it.


L. C. J. Mr. Oats, Will you ask him any more questions?


Oats. No, my Lord.


L. C. J. Well then, go on Mr. Attorney, and call another Witness.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Mr. William Conway (which was done.)


Mr. Sol. Genesis Mr. Conway, pray will you give my Lord and the Jury an account
where you were in the year 1677. and in the year 1678.


Mr. Conway. I was then at St. Omers, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember Mr. Oats there at any time?


Mr. Conway. Yes, my Lord, I do.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray at what time was he there as you remember?


Mr. Conway. He came in December before Christmas 1677. and did not go away
till June 1678.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What time in June did he go away?


Mr. Conway. About the twentieth of June, I think.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Were you there all that year?


Mr. Conway. Yes, I was there a Scholar in the College.


Mr. Jones. Was he all the time you speak of in the College?


Mr. Conway. He lay out one night.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What time was that?


Mr. Conway. In January, to the best of my remembrance.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Could he be out of the College any time and not be mist?


Mr. Conway. No, my Lord, he could not.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you miss him at any time?


Mr. Conway. No, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was he there in April 1678?


Mr. Conway. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Can you tell any particular passages that can make you remember
it?


Mr. Conway. Yes my Lord, I can.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Tell my Lord and the Jury how you can remember it?


Mr. Conway. I remember Mr. Hilsley's departure, which was the 24th of April
New Style, and soon after Mr. Bournaby came, but I do not know the time
exactly, I was desirous to know of Mr. Bournaby whether he met Mr. Hilsley upon
the way, and he told me he did meet him, and the next day I saw Mr. Oats and
Mr. Bournaby walking together very familiarly, and I took particular notice of
it at that time, Mr. Bournaby being but newly come, so that I took him to have
known Mr. Bournaby before, or else I concluded him to be a little impudent by
his intruding into his company.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember him in March before?


Mr. Conway. Yes Sir.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What particulars do you remember of his being there then?


Mr. Conway. I remember him to be there on the Thursday in Mid-Lent, the
Scholars in the College had a particular Recreation, which they call, Sawing
of the Witch, and Mr. Oats was among them, and I was one of them that broke a
Pan about his head for Recreation.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember the first of May, that there was in your
College a Play acted?


Mr. Conway. As for the Play, I remember what part Esquire Pool acted in it,
but I remember not any particulars that can make me so sure as to swear that
Oats were there.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember any scuffling for a place there?


Mr. Conway. I do not remember it of my own knowledge, I heard of it afterward.


Mr. Sol. Genesis You say that you saw Mr. Bournaby and him walking together the
next day after he came.


Mr. Conway. Yes, I did so Sir.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did Oats use to read in the Sodality?


Mr. Conway. My Lord, there was another chosen according to the Custom to read,
but Mr. Oats took the Book, and did read.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did he read constantly?


Mr. Conway. I did never miss him any Sunday or Holyday all the time.


L. C. J. From what time to what time did he read?


Mr. Conway. From a little after Easter till he went away.


Mr. At. Genesis Is it usually taken notice of in the College when any person
who is a Student goes away from the College?


Mr. Conway. There is nothing more discoursed of among Scholars, than that when
it happens any one goes out of the College.


L. C. J. And pray when did he go away?


Mr. Conway. In June, about the twentieth, as near as I can remember.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you observe him at Dinner there constantly?


Mr. Conway. Yes, he sat by himself.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How came that to pass?


Mr. Conway. He sat at a little Table in the Hall by himself, for he
pretended, being a man in years, he could not Diet as the rest of the young
Students did, and therefore obtained leave to sit alone at a little Table by
himself, and he sat next to the Table of the Fathers, to which all the
Students were to make their Reverence before they sat down.


L. C. J. He was a very Remarkable man by his sitting by himself; Did he sit
there always?


Mr. Conway. He changed his Table once, and I took notice that he sat on the
other side of the Refectory.


Mr. Sol. Genesis When was that I pray, can you remember?


Mr. Conway. That was a little after Easter.


Mr. At. Genesis Will Mr. Oats ask him any Questions?


Oats. Pray my Lord will you ask this Gentleman what Religion he is of?


Mr. Conway. I am a Roman Catholic.


Oats. Pray ask him where he lives.


L. C. J. Where do you live Sir?


Mr. Conway. Where now at present my Lord?


L. C. J. Where do you usually live?


Mr. Conway. I am a Flintshire man, my Lord.


Oats. Pray ask him what Name he did go by at St. Omers.


Mr. Conway. By the name of William Parry.


Oats. Pray ask him by what name he gave his Evidence in at the five Jesuits
Trial.


L. C. J. Were you a Witness at the Trial of the five Jesuits?


Mr. Conway. Yes, I was.


L. C. J. By what name did you give your Evidence there?


Mr. Conway. By the name of Parry.


Oats. Then I desire the Court to take notice he represented himself by a
feigned name in a Court of Record.


Mr. Conway. I went by both names, my Lord.


L. C. J. Well, make what advantage you can of it by and by.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, if ever he heard of any Consult of the Jesuits
held here in England in April 1678?


Mr. Conway. Yes, I did.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, who informed him of that Consult.


Mr. Conway. I heard it among the rest of the Scholars, and seeing some of the
Fathers go over to it, I was told so.


Mr. At. Genesis Is it an usual thing for them to have such meetings?


Mr. Conway. They have a Congregation ordinarily once in three years.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Does it go by the name of a Consult, or what name has it?


Mr. Conway. Some call it a Congregation, and some a Consult.


M. Sol. Genesis What is the end of such meeting, as you have heard?


Mr. Conway. They say it was to choose a Procurator to send to Rome, and give an
account of the Province.


Oats. My Lord, I would ask him another question, whether he is to have any
Reward for giving this Evidence here.


Mr. Conway. No, not that I know of, but what I expect from Almighty God.


Oats. Pray ask him how long he lived at St. Omers.


Mr. Conway. Five years.


Oats. My Lord, I have done with him.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then call Mr. Haggerstone, and swear him, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Haggerstone, pray will you acquaint my Lord and the Jury,
were you at St. Omers in the year 1678. with Mr. Oats?


Mr. Haggerstone. Yes, I was my Lord, I had the honor to be of the same Bench
with the Doctor of Salamanca.


L. C. J. You mean you were of the same Class with him.


Mr. Haggerstone. Yes my Lord, of the same Class.


L. C. J. In what year was it?


Mr. Haggerstone. In the year 1678.


Mr. At. Genesis In what Form were you?


Mr. Haggerstone. In the same Bench with Doctor Oats in the Rhetoric Form.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember Mr. Oats in April 1678?


Mr. Haggerstone. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis What time?


Mr. Haggerstone. He spoke unto me on the 25th of April.


Mr. At. Genesis What Style do you mean?


Mr. Haggerstone. New Style Sir, to avoid confusion, I speak of the Style of
the place where I was; he asked me concerning our School-fellow Mr. Hilsley,
who was then gone from the College, whether I had heard any thing from him
since he went away, and he spoke of an indisposition he had, for which he
prescribed him a Medicine of Poppy, and he thought it would do his business
effectually.


L. C. J. Who said so?


Mr. Haggerstone. The Doctor of Salamanca, he was called Sampson Lucy in the
College, and likewise he forbid him to chew Tobacco, which he used to do very
much; he was called Titus Ambrosius, he had twenty Names.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he there all April Sir?


Mr. Haggerstone. Yes, he was Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you know him in March before?


Mr. Haggerstone. Yes, he was there all March before.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he there in February?


Mr. Haggerstone. Yes, as near as I can remember, he was absent but one day,
and then he went to Watton in February, or else in January.


L. C. J. Do you remember when he came thither first?


Mr. Hagggerstone. Yes my Lord, he came in December near Christmas as I
remember.


L. C. J. Was it about that time, upon your Oath?


Mr. Haggerstone. I speak it upon my Oath, it was.


L. C. J. When did he go away?


Mr. Haggerstone. About the latter end of June.


L. C. J. Was he absent any time between December and June?


Mr. Haggerstone. I do not remember that he was absent, save only in January or
February, and that was not for above a night, when he went to Watton.


L. C. J. Might not he be absent, and you not mind it, or know it?


Mr. Haggerstone. Sure if he had been absent, we could not but have known it.


L. C. J. How so, pray you?


Mr. Haggerstone. If any goes away, it is so public, that it cannot be without
notice being taken of it.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you remember by any particular token he was there in April
or May?


Mr. Haggerstone. He spoke to me on the 29th of April New Style, and told me,
that there was a Craving Englishman had been there to beg an Alms, and there
was a Collection made for him among the Scholars, but he said he would give him
nothing, for he told me he had been cheated by such an one of some Pieces of
Eight in Spain; this I remember was the 28th or 29th of April New Style, I saw
him there the first of May, upon the second of May there was an Action of the
Scholars, and he was present at it; the fifth of May I was at School with him,
when Mr. Pool went away for England, and I heard him about that time preach a
pleasant Sermon, for he would undertake sometimes to preach, and he said in it,
That the late King Charles the Second halted betwixt two Opinions, and a stream
of Popery went between his Legs


L. C. J. Was this in May?


Mr. Haggerstone. Yes, just after Mr. Pool went away for England, and he had
some pretty Reflections in his Sermon about Toby's Dog wagging his Tail.


L. C. J. Well, do you ask this Witness any question, Mr. Oats?


Oats. Pray be pleased to ask him, my Lord, what Religion he is of.


Mr. Haggerstone. I am a Papist, my Lord, I am not ashamed of it.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask where he lives.


Mr. Haggerstone. At London.


Oats. Pray ask him what Countryman he is.


Mr. Haggerstone. I am a Northumberland man, my Father is Sir Thomas
Haggerstone, a man better known than your Father, Doctor Oats.


L. C. J. Nay, nay, do not be in a passion man.


Oats. Pray ask him how long I was with him at St. Omers.


Mr. Haggerstone. For half a year at least.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know how long he stayed there himself.


Mr. Haggerstone. I studied my whole Course of Humanity there.


L. C. J. How long were you there in all?


Mr. Haggerstone. Seven years.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, whether he knows of any Consult held, or to be
held here in England in April 1678.


Mr. Haggerstone. Yes, my Lord, I saw two of the Fathers go from St. Omers to
the Congregation, and was there at their return, but all that time I frequented
Doctor Oates's company, and he remained in the College.


Oats. Pray who were these two Fathers?


Mr. Haggerstone. Mr. Williams and Mr. Marsh; and when they returned, Oats
asked me about it, whether they had been at the Consult, and I told him there
was such a thing, but he never knew it till afterward; but this I am sure of,
he was never missing all the while, I sat on the same Bench with him.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, what name he went by at St. Omers.


Mr. Haggerstone. I went by the name of Harry Howard, my Mother was a Howard,
Doctor.


Oats. Pray ask him whether he came into England when he went away from thence.


Mr. Haggerstone. No, I went and studied my Philosophy at Doway.


Oats. I desire to ask him one question more.


Mr. Haggerstone. Twenty, if you please, Doctor.


Oats. I desire to know of him the occasion of Mr. Hilsley's coming away.


Mr. Haggerstone. I do know it, but truly I cannot tell whether it be fit for
me to speak of it, it was upon some unhandsome account, but I must not blemish
any Gentleman, I think.


Oats. My Lord, I will ask him one question more, whether ever he was admitted
into the Society.


L. C. J. I will not ask him that question, how often have I told you no such
questions are to be asked? must I make him liable to Penalty? No, ask questions
that are fair, and you shall have a fair answer.


Oats. My Lord, I have done then with him.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then swear Mr. Robert Beeston, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir, were you at St. Omers in the year 77. and 78?


Mr. Beeston. Yes, my Lord, I was.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see Mr. Oats there then? do you know him?


Mr. Beeston. Yes, I know him very well, I did see him there.


Mr. At. Genesis What months did you see him there?


Mr. Beeston. He came there in December, the beginning as I remember, and he
stayed there to June the latter end.


Mr. At. Genesis What years was that in?


Mr. Beeston. He came in 77. and went away in 78.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe him to be there in April and May 78?


Mr. Beeston. The latter end of April, and the beginning of May I did.


Mr. At. Genesis Tell the Court particularly how you remember it.


Mr. Beeston. My Lord, I saw him the first of May at St Omers, where he played
at Nine-pins, and I laid a wager upon the same side that he did, and lost my
money as well as he.


L. C. J. Do you remember any other time?


Mr. Beeston. I saw him the second of May, by the same token that I met him in
the College that day, when our School exhibited an Action in the Hall, and I
met him after Supper; now in this Action I had both acted and sung, and they
came and congratulated me for my singing; Mr. Oats said, if I had paid for
learning to sing, I had been basely cheated; and then in the morning I was
chosen Reader in the Sodality, the 25th of April, or thereabouts, for a
fortnight, and Mr. Oats by his own submission was admitted to Read, only with
this condition, that if ever he were wanting, I was to Read again; but this I
say, I never supplied the place; theref^re I am sure he did continue there all
the while, and if he had been out, I must have been called upon to Read.


L. C. J. Were you in the College all the time he was there?


Mr. Beeston. Yes, my Lord, I was.


L. C. J. Did you miss him at any time?


Mr. Beestone. No, I never missed him.


L. C. J. Are you sure he was not away all that time?


Mr. Beeston. I am sure, as much as a man can be certain of one that is of the
same family with himself; nay, I am as sure of it, as that I was there my self.


L. C. J. Can you speak any thing particularly of his Reading?


Mr. Beeston. My Lord, I was to have Read, if he was absent, but I was never
called upon to Read, and therefore I may well conclude he was there all the
while.


L. C. J. He gives a material Evidence.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was Mr. Oats such a remarkable man that he must be missed?


Mr. Beeston. He was very particular both for Age, and that he had a particular
Table to Eat at.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Can you remember any thing else?


Mr. Beeston. I remember too, that when Mr. Bournaby came first, he was often
with him the second, third, and fourth of May, I saw him there with Mr.
Bournaby, and I took particular notice of the friendship between them, which I
thought strange between persons that I supposed never saw one another before.


L. C. J. Have you any Questions to ask this man, Mr. Oats?


Oats. My Lord, I desire to ask this Gentleman what Religion he is of.


Mr. Beeston. I am a Roman Catholic.


Oats. Pray my Lord be pleased to ask him, when he went to St. Omers, and when
he came away thence, and how long he was Resident there.


Mr. Beeston. I know not exactly what year it was I came, but I stayed the
greatest part of seven years there.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, what Jesuits went from St. Omers to the Consult
of April 78.


Mr. Beeston. There was some that past by, I did not take much notice of them.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, who it was that informed him of that Consult.


Mr. Beeston. I do not know who particularly, I only heard of such a Rumor.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it an extraordinary thing?


Mr. Beeston. No, It was but an ordinary thing as they used to have once in
three years.


Oats. You say you saw me every day there.


L. C. J. He says he believes he might, because you were Reader in his stead,
and if you had been absent, he must have been called upon to Read, which he was
not, he says.


Oats. Very well my Lord, I desire you would ask him, whether he does not
remember such a thing as an eight days Exercise, wherein those that perform the
Exercise, are separated from all company during that time.


Mr. Beeston. Yes, my Lord, I do remember that he was once in that eight days
Exercise, and during the eight days I saw him walk in the Garden several times.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him if he were an Evidence at the Trial of the Five
Jesuits, or Langhorn, and whether he gave this Evidence long ago.


Mr. Beeston. No, I did not, I was not there.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him what Rewards he is to have.


L. C. J. Are you to have any Reward for your Testimony, Mr. Beeston?


Mr. Beeston. No, my Lord.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know of him, how he comes to be picked out among
the rest of the Students there, to come here, and be an Evidence in this Cause.


Mr. Beeston. My Lord, I was subpoena'd by His Majesty, if I knew any thing of
this matter, that I should come here and testify my knowledge.


Oats. Pray by what name did he go by at St. Omers?


Mr. Beeston. By the name of Beeston, as I do now.


Oats. And is that his own name?


Mr. Beeston. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Pray go on Mr. Attorney.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Clement Smith, (which was done.)


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray Sir, were you at St. Omers in the year 77 and 78?


Mr. Smith. Yes, I was.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember Mr. Oats there at that time?


Mr. Smith. Yes, I was in the same Class with him.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray when came he thither, and how long did he stay there?


Mr. Smith. He came a little before Christmas, and stayed till June.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he not absent at any time all that while?


Mr. Smith. No, he was not, except one day.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember Watton's business, his going thither in January?


Mr. Smith. He told me of it, and that he designed to ask the Rector leave to
go.


L. C. J. Was he absent any other time till June?


Mr. Smith. No, my Lord, for I will tell you, I every day Dined with him, eat a
Collation with him in the Afternoon, and Breakfast and Supped in the same
Refectory, during all that time, except when he or I was in the Infirmary.


L. C. J. When ever he was absent, he was in the Infirmary, was he?


Mr. Smith. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Did not he miss his Breakfast at any time all that while?


Mr. Smith. If he did, we used to enquire after him.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray when were you in the Infirmary?


Mr. Smith. The 21th of April New Style, I fell sick, and I remained sick till
May the 7th, and was in the Infirmary, and then he visited me almost daily, or
every other day in the Infirmary; and on the 2d of May I saw him and one Mr.
Bournaby together, and on the day Mr. Poole departed, which I take to be the
fifth of May; Mr. Oats came to me as soon as he was gone out of the House, and
told me of it; and he did the same too that day that Mr. Hilsley went away,
which was the 24th of April New Style.


Mr. At. Genesis Was not he in the Infirmary himself?


Mr. Smith. Yes, during this time he came into the Infirmary, and was sick
there.


Mr. At. Genesis When was that?


Mr. Smith. A day or two after Mr. Hilsley went away, and continued there two
or three days, and I remember it particularly by this circumstance, that he
proposed a question to the Physician about himself in Latin, and spoke a
Sollecism, which was this, he said, Si placet Dominatio vestra.


Oats. Who did say so?


L. C. J. You did, he says, speak that false Latin to the Doctor.


Oats. That Is false Latin indeed.


L. C. J. We know that, but it seems it was your Latin.


Mr. At. Genesis When came he away from St. Omers?


Mr. Smith. About the 20th of June, something after the 20th of June, as I
remember.


L. C. J. Are you sure he was not out of the College so long as to make a
Journey to London, and back again?


Mr. Smith. No, I am sure he could not without being missed; and going to
School with him, and eating Dinner and Supper with him constantly always at
the same place, I must needs know if he had gone.


Oats. When went I away from St. Omers does he say?


Mr. Smith. After the 20th of June 78.


L. C. J. He is your old Acquaintance and Schoolfellow, Mr. Oats; you visited
him when he was sick.


Oats. What Religion is this Gentleman of, my Lord, I would know?


Mr. Smith. I am a Roman Catholic.


Oats. I desire your Lordship to ask him how long he lived at St. Omers?


Mr. Smith. Above six years.


Oats. Pray ask him, when he came away.


Mr. Smith. A little after Dr. Oats came away.


Oats. Did he come directly for England?


Mr. Smith. No, I did not.


Oats. Whither did he go then?


Mr. Smith. I went about a little. --


Oats. Where, my Lord?


Mr. Smith. I went about to take some Turns in the Low-Countrys; I went to
Watton, and up and down.


Oats. He is a Jesuit my Lord, and that the World knows, and must know.


L. C. J. I know nothing of it, I do assure you.


Oats Pray my Lord be pleased to ask him, whether he did not hear of a Consult
of Jesuits in April 78. and what Jesuits went from St. Omers to it.


Mr. Smith. I heard it as a Rumor in the College, that there was to be a
Congregation at that time, but I know not where particularly it was to be kept;
but I know that then there passed by St. Omers two Fathers, Mr. Marsh, and Mr.
Williams.


Oats. What were they?


Mr. Smith. Jesuits.


L. C. J. He told you they were Fathers.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray was it an extraordinary, or an ordinary Meeting that?


Mr. Smith. They used to say in the College, that it was an ordinary thing to
have such a Congregation every three years.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray swear Mr. Edward Price, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Mr. Price will you give my Lord and the Gentlemen of the
Jury an account whether you were at St. Omers in the year 77, and 78.


Mr. Price. I was there both these years.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember Mr. Oats there?


Mr. Price. Yes my Lord, I do.


Mr. At. Genesis When did he come? and when did he go away?


Mr. Price. He came there about December 77. and he continued there till June
78.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he absent from St. Omers at any time all that while?


Mr. Price. Never, that I know of, but one night at Watton, when he came back
the following day, and that was in January.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember particularly that he was there in April and May
78?


Mr. Price. I remember Mr. Hilsley according to the foreign Style left St.
Omers upon the 24th of April 78. I was told the following day that Mr. Oats
went into the Infirmary, which was Monday the 25th, and stayed there a day or
two, and upon Wednesday the 27th I saw him going to Mass; then upon the Sunday
following, which was the first of May New Style, came Mr. Bournaby to St.
Omers, and I saw him in Oates's company that day, and I saw him on Monday again
the second of May in his company; I saw him the third of May at the Table,
which I particularly remember, because it was the Feast of the Invention of the
Holy Cross; the fourth of May I have no Circumstance to remember him by; but
the fifth of May I saw him take his leave of Mr. Poole, and I likewise saw him
the 10th or 11th of May at another of our Actions, wherein Mr. Watson had a
quarrel with him, and beat him; I should have missed him above any other man,
because he was so noted a man.


Mr. At. Genesis What was he noted for, for any thing else but his distinct place
in the Refectory?


Mr. Price. Yes, he was very absurd, and always quarrelling with the Students
there.


L. C. J. Do you remember him Read in the Sodality?


Mr. Price. I was not of that Bench that he was of.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know what this Gentleman's Religion is.


L. C. J. What Religion are you of Sir?


Mr. Price. If your Lordship please to know, I am a Roman Catholic.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to ask him when he went first to St. Omers, and when
he came away.


Mr. Price. I was six years at St. Omers; I was there a twelve month before Mr.
Oats came thither, and came from thence about three years ago.


Oats. Did you come directly to England when you came away?


Mr. Price. My Lord, I went to Liege to study Philosophy, and I live now with
my Father at home.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to ask him whether he did not hear of a Consult to be
held in April 78.


Mr. Price. I did hear there was a Congregation which was their usual Triennial
meeting, and particularly I remember about that time there came Mr. Williams,
and Mr. Marsh, and it was reported that they were going to the Congregation.


Oats. I desire to ask him if he was not a Witness at the Trial of the five
Jesuits, or at the Trial of Langhorne.


Mr. Price. No, I was not.


Oats. Pray what name did he go by at St. Omers?


Mr. Price. By my own name, which is Edward Price.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then swear the next, that is Mr. James Doddington.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir were you at St. Omers in the year 77 and 78?


Mr. Doddington. Yes Sir, I was.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you know that Gentleman Mr. Oats there?


Mr. Doddington. I know him very well.


Mr. At. Genesis What time did he come to St. Omers, and how long did he stay
there?


Mr. Doddington. He came about Christmas, and stayed about the latter end of
June.


Mr. At. Genesis How do you remember he stayed there so long, what Circumstances
have you to make you remember it?


Mr. Doddington. In general his Conversation and Canting Stories after Dinner
and Supper, and times of Recreation, made him so remarkable, that no body could
miss him all the time he was there.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe him to be in the Hall, or at the Exercises?


Mr. Doddington. Yes, I saw him several times.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember the time Mr. Hilsley went away?


Mr. Doddington. Yes, it was a little after Easter, and I do remember that two
or three days after I went into the Infirmary, and saw Mr. Oats there, and had
discourses with him.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember Mr. Bournaby's coming to St. Omers, and when was
it?


Mr. Doddington. Yes, the first of May Mr. Bournaby came to St. Omers, and the
next day I saw Oats with him, and for ten or twelve days successively they
were in one another company, and then of a sudden the Correspondence broke
off, but I know not upon what account.


L. C. J. Was he Reader there as you remember?


Mr. Doddington. I do remember he did Read in the Sodality.


L. C. J. When was that?


Mr. Doddington. I remember he Read at Shrovetide.


Oats. Did you hear me Read there?


Mr. Doddington. Yes that I did Sir.


Oats. Were you of the Sodality?


Mr. Doddington. Yes, I was Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember the time when he came away from St. Omers?


Mr. Doddington. It was about Midsummer, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you out of the College your self at any time when he was
there?


Mr. Doddington. No, I was not.


L C. J. Come, I will ask you a plain Question; Was he so long at any time out
of the College as to come to London and stay here two or three days, and come
back again?


Mr. Doddington. My Lord, he was so Remarkable by his Stories and Ridiculous
Actions, and falling out with every one of the College, that if he had been
absent, we must needs have missed him.


L. C. J. Did you miss him at any time?


Mr. Doddington. My Lord, I never missed him but one day.


L. C. J. When was that?


Mr. Doddington. They said he was gone to Watton.


L. C. J. What time was that?


Mr. Doddington. In January, about six weeks after he came first.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him what Religion he is of.


Mr. Doddington. I am a Roman Catholic.


Oats. And a Scholar of St. Omers.


L. C. J. Make your Remarks by and by.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him what Name he went by at St. Omers.


Mr. Doddington. By the Name of Hollis, my Lord.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, how long he was Resident there.


Mr. Doddington. Near upon five years.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him the occasion of his coming over at first.


Mr. Doddington. I had business in England, and I had a mind to see my Friends.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him whether he did not pretend at the five Jesuits
Trial, that he came over upon the King's Proclamation, to call home those that
were in the Seminaries.


L. C. J. Were you at the Trial of the five Jesuits?


Mr. Doddington. Yes, I was; but if I came over upon the King's Proclamation,
what hurt is there in that?


L. C. J. None at all, as I know of.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him whether he did return again to St. Omers or no.


Mr. Doddington. My Lord, I passed by St. Omers once, but I never stayed a day
in the College since.


Oats. Pray my Lord be pleased to ask him, whether he ever heard of a Consult
of the Jesuits in April 78.


Mr. Doddington. I did hear of a Congregation.


Oats. Call it a Consult or a Congregation, it is all one.


L. C. J. He says he did hear of it.


Oats. Ask him by whom he did hear of it.


Mr. Doddington. I saw the Provincial when he came back from England.


Oats. Who was that Provincial, what was his Name?


Mr. Doddington. Mr. Whitebread.


Oats. Was not Mr. Whitebread a Resident sometimes at St. Omers?


Mr. Doddington, Yes a while he was.


Oats. Pray was not that House under his Government?


Mr. Doddington. My Lord, I can give no account of that, but it is generally
under the Government of the Rector of St. Omers.


Mr. Hanseys. Pray Sir, give me leave to ask you one Question Mr. Oats speaks
of Mr. Whitebread; Pray how did Mr. Whitebread use Oats, when he came back
from England?


Mr. Doddington. I heard say, he did check him very severely for his many
miscarriages.


L. C. J. He heard it, he says, but he does not know it of his own knowledge;
that is no Evidence.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray swear Mr. William Gerrard, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Were you at St. Omers, Mr. Gerrard, in the years 77. and 78?


Mr. Gerrard. Yes, I was.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you know Mr. Oats there?


Mr. Gerrard. Where is he Sir?


Mr. At. Genesis There he is in that corner, do you know him?


Mr. Gerrard. Yes.


Mr. At. Genesis When came he to St. Omers?


Mr. Gerrard. He came to St. Omers in the year of our Lord 77. and he went away
in June 78.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he there all the time?


Mr. Gerrard. I never remembered to have missed him, but only once when he went
to Watton for a night.


Mr. At. Genesis By what Tokens do you remember him at any time there in April or
May?


Mr. Gerrard. The second of May we had a Play, and he was there then, and I
remember the 26th of May he was confirmed, and so was I, it being St.
Augustin's day, and in the Refectory he had a Table by himself, and I used
always at mealtimes to pass by that Table and make a Bow to the Fathers above
before I sat down at Table; and I do not remember that ever he was absent, and
if he had, I should surely have missed him.


L. C. J. When was St. Augustin's day, that you say you and he were confirmed?


Mr. Gerrard. It was the 26th of May.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember him in April there?


Mr. Gerrard. I cannot tell any particular circumstance in April, but I do not
remember to have missed him at all in April.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But you saw him there the second of May, you say.


Mr. Gerrard. Yes, I did so, and the 26th of May.


Oats. The 26th of May Old Style, I was there my Lord.


L. C. J. Ay, but he says the 26th of May New Style.


Oats. I was not there then, my Lord.


L. C. J. He swears you were.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray between the second and 27th of May New Style was he absent
from St. Omers at any time?


Mr. Gerrard. I never remember to have missed him at all in that time.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember Mr. Pool's and Mr. Hilsley's going away?


Mr. Gerrard. I do remember Mr. Hilsley's and Mr. Pool's going away, but I
cannot speak particularly and exactly what time that was.


L. C. J. Is it usual to have Scholars go away without being missed?


Mr. Gerrard. No, my Lord, and he had a particular place by himself.


Oats. Pray ask him, my Lord, how he came to know that I went away in June?


Mr. Gerrard. We missed him in his place then, and 'twas discoursed of all over
the Town, that when the Provincial came, he was to be dismissed.


Oats. I desire to know what Religion this Gentleman is of.


Mr. Gerrard. My Lord, I am a Roman Catholic.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him what Name he went by at St. Omers.


Mr. Gerrard. By the Name of William Clovell.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, when he went to St. Omers, and how long he was
Resident there.


Mr. Gerrard. I came there about two years before he came, and was there about
two years after he went away.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, whether he came directly for England when he left
St. Omers.


Mr. Gerrard. No, my Lord, I was four years in Low Germany and France, and came
into England the last year.


Oats. Pray Sir, were you a Witness at the five Jesuits Trial, or at Langhorns
Trial?


Mr. Gerrard. No, I was not; I came but last year to England, I tell you.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask this Gentleman, whether he did not know or hear of a
Consult of Jesuits that was to be in April 78. and from whom he heard it.


Mr. Gerrard. My Lord, I know it is the Custom of the Fathers of that Order to
have a Congregation once in three years, about the Affairs of their Society,
but then no Person is admitted to be one of that Congregation, but them that
have been eighteen years Jesuits, and he not having been so much as a Novice, I
know not how, if he had been here, he could have been present at it.


L. C. J. He says, that there used to be a Triennial Congregation for the
Business of the Society, but you could not be present at it, because you had
not been eighteen years a Jesuit.


Mr. Gerrard. An. decimo octavo Currente, is the word of the Rule.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him this Question, how he knows that to be the Rule.


Mr. Gerrard. You or any man may Read them in their Books.


L. C. J. It seems he has Read them, and he says, you must pass through
eighteen years before you be admitted of the Congregation, and he believes you
were not there, for you were not capable of so much as a Noviceship.


Oats. I desire your Lordship to ask him, whether or no he heard me Read in
the Sodality.


Mr. Gerrard. Yes, I did.


Oats. Were you of the Sodality?


Mr. Gerrard. Yes, I was.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, what Oaths are there taken before they be
admitted into the Sodality.


L. C. J. No, by no means, I will not do it.


Oats. Why my Lord, may not I ask it, to show what kind of men these are?


L. C. J. No indeed, it is but the same Question again, that I told you before
is not to be asked, for it may make him liable to a Penalty; if you come to be
a Witness, no man should ask you a Question that might make you obnoxious to a
Penalty, no more must you ask them any such Questions.


Oats. I have done with him my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Where is my Lord Gerrard of Bromeley?


Lord Gerrard. Here I am Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray my Lord, do you remember Mr. Oats at St. Omers in the year
77. and 78?


Lord Gerrard. He was disguised in another Habit, and another colored
Perriwig, the Hair was blacker than that he has on now, but I remember his Face
very well, and know him again by the Tone of his Voice, which was very
remarkable, but I never remember that he was absent from St. Omers after he
came thither. I remember his coming exactly, which was about Christmas; nor did
I ever hear that he was absent till June 78. New Style, when he went away.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember, my Lord, when Mr. Bournaby came?


Lord Gerrard. I do remember Mr. Bournaby's coming, but what time it was I
cannot exactly tell.


L. C. J. Is my Lord Gerrard sworn?


Mr. Sol. Genesis I think so.


Lord Gerrard. No, my Lord, I am not sworn.


L. C. J. You must be sworn my Lord (which was done) now if you be pleased to
ask my Lord any Questions, do.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we desire to know of my Lord Gerrard of Bromeley,
whether he knew Mr. Oats at St. Omers.


Lord Gerrard. My Lord, I remember he came in 77. as I take it, it was the
beginning of December, and never heard he was absent or missed till June 78. I
remember particularly upon the 25th of March, there was a new Lector to be
Reader of the Sodality, and Mr. Oats desiring it, he was appointed to Read; I
was there my self, and I never missed him; I heard him Read, that I do remember
several Sundays and Holidays, and never knew him absent any one; however, for
five or six weeks he was constant at Reading, and I can the better remember it,
because he had a particular Cant in his Tone, which all men may know, which
ever conversed with him.


Mr. Sol. Genesis If Oats please to ask my Lord Gerrard any Questions, he may.


Lord Gerrard. Pray my Lord let me speak a word or two more.


L. C. J. Ay my Lord, pray go on.


Lord Gerrard. I remember I heard Mr. Oats was at the Confirmation which was
upon St. Austins day, there was a Confirmation by a Catholic Bishop about the
26 of May New Style, I Remember I heard Mr. Oats was there, and the Bishop did
particularly note him as a person of elder years than the rest of the Students.


L. C. J. Do you know this my Lord, of your own knowledge?


Lord Gerrard. I do my Lord.


L. C. J. Because you say you heard it.


Lord Gerrard. My Lord further I remember this, when the News of the Plot being
discovered by Oats, came to St. Omers, where he went by the name of Sampson
Lucy, and sometimes Titus Ambrosius, it was wondered by all the Scholars that
knew him there, how he came to be so impudent to pretend that he was at such a
Consult the 24th of April. 78. when all the College saw him every day in April
and May at St. Omers, as much as a man can be seen in a Family, and was never
known to be absent so much as one day; besides my Lord, it is a thing as
generally noted as a thing can be, that no Scholar goes away from, or comes to
the College of St. Omers, but it is particularly known to the whole house; It
is the Common News and Discourse as much as any new occurrences is here about
the Town.


Mr. Sol. Genesis If Oats be pleased to ask him any questions, he may.


Oats. My Lord, I desire this Noble Lord may be asked a question or two; I do
not Remember his Lordship there.


Lord Gerrard. I do very well remember the man by particular Remarques.


Oats. Yes my Lord, you have occasion to remember me, and so have your whole
Party. Pray my Lord let my Lord Gerrard be asked what name his Lordship went by
at St. Omers.


Lord Gerrard. Mr. Oats. I am not difficult in telling the name I went by
there. It was Clovel.


Oats. Pray my Lord I desire to know what Religion his Lordship is of.


Lord Gerrard. Neither am I ashamed to own my Religion. Mr. Oats. I am a
Catholic.


Oats. Pray my Lord, If you please, because this Noble Lord pretends he heard
me Read, I desire to know of him whether he was of the Sodality.


Lord Gerrard. I remember you particularly by your voice, and that is one thing
that particularly brings you to my Remembrance now.


Oats. Pray ask this Noble Lord if he was a witness at the Jesuits Trial.


Lord. Gerrard. No, I was never a witness in my Life before; By the oath that I
have taken.


L. C. J. It Is very well my Lord.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask this Nobleman, whether he did not know of a Consult in
April 78. and from whom he knew it.


Lord Gerrard. No, I know of none, nor heard of any but by Rumor after that
you pretended to discover such a thing.


Oats. Did his Lordship see me every day, does he say.


Lord Gerrard. I cannot say every day, but I saw him at the Refectory
generally, and I remember it particularly, because he sat at a Table by
himself; I believe he could not be absent without being missed, because we knew
every person that came in and went out.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then Swear Mr. Samuel Morgan (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Morgan were you at St. Omers in 77 and 78?


Mr. Morgan. I was my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe Mr. Oats to be there at that time?


Mr. Morgan. Yes I did.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray give an account when he came, and when he went away.


Mr. Morgan. He came 14 or 15 days before Christmas as I Remember, and went
away in June.


Mr. At. Genesis What Christmas do you mean, Mr. Morgan?


Mr. Morgan. Christmas 77.


Mr. At. Genesis And when did he go away?


Mr. Morgan. In June 78. he went away.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he absent any time during that space?


Mr. Morgan. My Lord, I know not that he was ever absent above one night in all
that time.


Mr. At. Genesis What time was that one night?


Mr. Morgan. Truly my Lord I cannot tell what month it was very exactly.


Mr. At. Genesis Whither was he gone that night?


Mr. Morgan. He went to Watton, three miles off from St. Omers.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember the time when Mr. Hilsley came away, and when
Mr. Bournaby came to St. Omers?


Mr. Morgan. Yes, I do my Lord, very well.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was Mr. Oats there when Hilsley went away?


Mr. Morgan. He was there then.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was he there when Mr. Bournaby came?


Mr. Morgan. He was there when Mr. Bournaby came thither.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was he there when Mr. Poole came away?


Mr. Morgan. Yes my Lord he was so.


Mr. Sol. Genesis I will ask you this short question, do you believe in your
Conscience that he was absent any particular time all that while?


Mr. Morgan. No my Lord, I have no reason to believe so.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him what Religion he is of.


Mr. Morgan. I am of the Church of England.


Oats. When were you reconciled to the Church of England?


Mr. Morgan. Five years since.


Oats. I desire to know of him, what induced him to be reconciled to the
Church of England.


L. C. J. That is not a pertinent question, nor fit to be asked. Is he to give
an account of his faith here?


Mr. Justice Withens. It seems Mr. Oats is angry when the witnesses are
Papists, and when they are Protestants too.


Oats. When was it that I came to St Omers do you say?


Mr. Morgan. You came thither in December 77.


L. C. J. So he told you before, why do you repeat things over and over again?


Oats. When was it I went away from thence say you?


Mr. Morgan. In June 78.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember 24th of April Old Style that year?


Mr. Morgan. Yes my Lord, I do remember it very well.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember him to be at St. Omers that day?


Mr. Morgan. Yes, I do, by this circumstance.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Ay, pray tell my Lord and the Jury that circumstance, how you
come to remember it.


Mr. Morgan. We had the Trial of Ireland brought over to us soon after it was
Printed, and there we found mentioned that Mr. Oats had deposed that the 24th
of April 78. there was a Consult of the Jesuits, and they met at the White
Horse Tavern, where they resolved to kill the King, and he carried that
Resolution from Chamber to Chamber, and he did nominate the day, and having it
then fresh in my memory, though he swore that he was the 24th of April Old
Style in London at that Consult, yet I found him to be at St. Omers by a very
particular circumstance: My Lord, I was playing at Ball that day, and struck it
over into a Court, into which I could not get over my self, but I saw Mr. Oats
then walking in the Court, and I came and borrowed his Key, and so went in, and
there passed between us words of friendship.


L. C. J. When was this, do you say?


Mr. Morgan. The 24th of April 78. Old Style.


Oats. I desire to let his Orders be seen.


L. C. J. No, he shall not be put to show any such thing.


Oats. He is a Minister of the Church of England, my Lord.


L. C. J. Sir, we tell you we will not do it, what ado is here with your
impertinent Questions, have not I told you you shall not ensnare the Witnesses?


Oats. He was a going to pull out his Orders himself.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, Mr. Oats may see them if he will, he is a Beneficed
Minister of the Church of England.


L. C. J. Does he mean those Orders?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, he does, and here they are.


L. C. J. Let him see them, (which was done.)


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know of this Gentleman, what Name he went by at
St. Omers.


Mr. Morgan. By the name of Morgan.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Swear Mr. Arundel, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir, will you give an account in short whether you were at
St. Omers in 77. and 78. and the time when Oats came thither, and when he went
away.


Mr. Arundel. I was there when Dr. Oats came, and when he went away.


Mr. At. Genesis When was that?


Mr. Arundel. Sir, I cannot be positive to the time exactly, but I think it was
about January 77. that he came there, and he went away about June 78. I cannot
be positive to the time exactly.


L. C. J. He does not particularly remember the time, but he thinks it was
about January 77. he came thither.


Mr. Arundel. I beg your Lordship pardon, he came there about December.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember any particular circumstances that you saw him
there at any particular time?


Mr. Arundel. Upon St. Augustines day I saw him Confirmed.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What day is that?


Mr. Arundel. The 26th of May according to the Foreign Account.


L. C. J. Did you know him there then?


Mr. Arundel. Yes my Lord, I say I saw him Confirmed.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember Mr. Hilsley's going away?


Mr. Arundel. I do not remember the time particularly, but I do remember Mr.
Oats was actually there then.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember when Mr. Bournaby came to St. Omers?


Mr. Arundel. No, I do not remember the time, but he was there then too.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Do you remember when Mr. Poole went away?


Mr. Arundel. No, I cannot tell what day it was, but he was there at the time
of his going away, upon my Oath.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Can you tell any other particular time?


Mr. Arundel. The 11th of May New Style there was an Action exhibited in the
College.


L. C. J. Was Oats there then?


Mr. Arundel. To the best of my remembrance he was.


L. C. J. He does not affirm any particular, but only speaks in general.


Oats. Are you a Protestant too Sir?


Mr. Arundel. No, Doctor, I am not.


Oats. Pray my Lord, I desire to know what Religion he is of.


Mr. Arundel. I am a Papist my Lord.


Oats. Pray ask him by what Name he went at St. Omers.


Mr. Arundel. I believe you know that as well as I Doctor Oats.


L. C. J. You must answer his Question.


Mr. Arundel. I went by the Name of Spencer my Lord.


Oats. I do remember him my Lord, to have been there.


Mr. Arundel. Sir, your humble Servant.


Oats. It is almost seven years ago, my Lord, and I may not so well remember
them as they do me, but I desire to know when he went to St. Omers first, and
how long he was there.


Mr. Arundel. I was there seven years.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him whether he was of the Sodality.


Mr. Arundel. Yes my Lord, I was.


L. C. J. Was he Reader of the Sodality?


Mr. Arundel. Yes my Lord, in my time he was Reader.


Oats. Then my Lord I desire to ask him, whether ever he heard of a Consult of
the Jesuits, that was to be held in England in April 78. and from whom he heard
it.


Mr. Arundel. Yes my Lord, I did hear in the College of a Congregation.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was that an extraordinary one, or of course?


Mr. Arundel. It was only of course, as they told us, once in three years they
have one.


Oats. Pray my Lord be pleased to ask this Gentleman what Studies he followed
at St. Omers.


L. C. J He was of the Sodality, he says.


Mr. Arundel. My Lord, I studied to the end of Rhetoric.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know whether when he came from St. Omers, he did
come directly for England.


Mr. Arundel. No, I went from thence to Paris, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Swear Mr Christopher Turbervile, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Mr. Turbervile, will you acquaint my Lord and the Jury
whether you were with Mr. Oats at St. Omers, and when.


Mr. Turbervile. Yes my Lord; he went by the Name of Sampson Lucy there, and
there I saw him, and there I was with him all the time; I was there before him,
and I remained there after he went away.


Mr. At. Genesis What time did he come to St. Omers, I pray you?


Mr. Turbervile. Before Christmas.


L. C. J. In what year?


Mr. Turbervile. In the year 77.


Mr. At. Gen What time was it he went away?


Mr. Turbervile. In June 78.


L. C. J. Were you there all that while at St. Omers?


Mr. Turbervile. Yes, I was.


L. C. J. And to the best of your apprehension, you think he was there all that
while.


Mr Turbervile Yes, I do so my Lord


Mr. Sol. Genesis Can you speak of any particular days you can remember?


Mr. Turbervile. Yes, I do remember him upon the 4th, 5th, and 6th of May, for
two or three days together; for my Lord, I do remember this circumstance, Mr.
Poole about that time went away, and that very day Mr. Poole went from the
College, I changed my Lodging, and went into his Lodging, and that day I saw
Doctor Oats in the Chamber, and by the Chamber door.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he continue in the College from the time he came about
Christmas, to the time he went away in June?


Mr Turbervile. Yes he did, all the while except it were one night in January
when he went to Watton.


L. C. J What time in June did he go away?


Mr. Turbervile. I am not positive, but I am morally sure he went away the 23th
of June, as near as I can remember.


Oats. I was there in June, that is very well known.


L. C. J. What do you remember of his Reading in the College?


Mr. Turbervile. I do remember he was Reader there on Sundays and Holidays for
a great while; I cannot swear upon what Sunday he began, but he left off the
Sunday before he went away.


L. C. J. As near as you can remember, when did he begin to Read?


Mr. Turbervile. It was the beginning of April, or latter end of March, I
cannot justly swear which it was


Mr. Molloy. Did he Read on Holidays as well as Sundays?


Mr. Turbervile. Yes he did


Oats. I must ask this Gentleman one Question, if your Lordship please, and
that is this, what Name he went by at St. Omers.


Mr. Turbervile. I went there by the name of Farmer.


Oats. Pray you my Lord, ask him what Religion he is of.


Mr. Turbervile. It is a hard Question to answer that.


Oats. Nay my Lord, I desire to know what is his Religion.


Mr. Turbervile. I am my Lord, a Roman Catholic.


Oats. Ask him when he went to St Omers first, and how long he stayed there.


Mr. Turbervile. I was there seven years very near.


Oats. I desire to know whether he did come away directly to England when he
came from St. Omers.


Mr. Turbervile. No, my Lord, I went into Italy.


Oats. Pray you my Lord, I desire to know whether he did go to Rome.


L. C. J. What if he did, what then? that is not at all to the purpose, he went
into Italy.


Oats. Pray my Lord, be pleased to ask him this Question further, was he a
Witness on the behalf of the five Jesuits, or of Langhorne at their Trials.


Mr. Turbervile. No, my Lord, I was not.


Oats. Pray my Lord be pleased to ask him then what Reward he has been
promised, or is to have for giving this Evidence.


Mr. Turbervile. None at all, my Lord.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him, whether or no he heard of any Consult of the
Jesuits in April 78 and from whom.


Mr. Turbervile. There was a Congregation, as I heard, but I do not remember
that any of the Fathers went from the College to it; several came by there,
and lodged there as they went, and as they came back.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him how he came here to be a Witness in this Cause.


Mr. Turbervile. I was subpoena'd.


Oats. Who serv^d the Subpoena upon him?


Mr. Turbervile. The Managers; it was sent to me by the King's Council, I
suppose; a man brought it to me.


L. C. J. It Is no matter who brought it you, you were subpoena'd, that is enough.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Swear Mr. Anthony Turbervile, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Were you at St. Omers in 77, and 78?


Mr. A. Turbervile. Yes, my Lord, I was.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe the Defendant Mr. Oats there at that time?


Mr. A. Turbervile. Yes, I observed him all the while he was there.


Mr. At. Genesis When did he come to St. Omers?


Mr. A. Turbervile. In the year 77, about Christmas.


Mr. At. Genesis When went he away?


Mr. A. Turbervile. A Gentleman who was formerly sworn, (Mr. Thornton) and I
were at Breakfast with him the self-same time when he went away.


L. C. J. When was that?


Mr. A. Turbervile. I suppose about the latter-end of June 78.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you observe him to be there in April or May 78?


Mr. A. Turbervile. He was not absent above one night in January that I can
remember from his first coming thither, for it was impossible he should be
absent and not missed, he sitting at a distinct Table by himself, and his
Conversation being so remarkable for a great many ridiculous actions, and a
great many pretty jests that he used, so that he was like a silly person, as I
may call him, that used to make sport, and no body could be missed so soon as
he: And I saw a little Boy in the College beat him up and down with a Foxes
Tail. Indeed, my Lord, all his actions were very remarkable: I see him very
much abusive to persons that lived with him in the College; and Mr. Oats
could not be a person of this note, but all the world must take notice of him,
and all that knew him must miss him, if he were away.


L. C. J. You hear him, Mr. Oats; he gives you a particular Character; he says
you were a very notorious person in many instances.


Mr. A. Turbervile. My Lord, I was a person then the youngest in the whole
Company, and Mr. Oats being very abusive to me, I did what became me to right
my self upon him.


Oats. Pray, my Lord, be pleased to ask this Gentleman what the Name was he
went by at St. Omers?


Mr. A. Turbervile. By my Grandmothers Name, which was Farmer.


L. C. J. Do you remember the time when Mr. Hildesley went away from St. Omers?


Mr. A. Turbervile. He went away upon a Sunday. Mr. Oats remained afterward
there: I am positive I saw him several days after.


L. C. J. Do you remember when Mr. Burnaby came thither?


Mr. A. Turbervile. Yes, my Lord; and Mr. Oats was there then.


L. C. J. Will you ask him any questions? If you are not ready, I will ask him
some for you. Come, what Religion are you of?


Mr. A. Turbervile. I am a Roman Catholic, my Lord.


L C. J. Well, and how long were you at St. Omers?


Mr. A. Turbervile. Six years and upward, my Lord.


L. C. J. When you came away from thence, did you come directly for England?


Mr. A. Turbervile. I took a circumference round.


Oats. My Lord, I do find my Defense is under a very great prejudice.


L. C. J. Why so? because we will not let you ask impertinent questions, or such
as may render the Witnesses obnoxious to a Penalty.


Oats. No, my Lord, it is not fit they should, for there is a Turn to be
served.


L. C. J. What do you mean by that? Ay, and a good Turn too, if these Witnesses
swear true: It Is to bring Truth to light, and perjured Villains to condign
punishment.


Oats. Good my Lord be pleased to hear me.


L. C. J. If you behave not your self with that respect to the Court as you
ought, pray get you gone. Do you think you shall give such language as this in
a Court of Justice?


Oats. My Lord, I did not design --


L. C. J. If you behave your self as you should, you shall have all due regard;
but if you fly out into such abusive extravagancies, we'll calm you as you
ought to be calmed.


Oats. I would vindicate my self, I meant it not of the Court.


L. C. J. So you had need. Don't think we sit here to let you asperse the
Justice of the Court and of the Nation, as if the Judges sat here to serve a
Turn.


Oats. I say these men do come to serve a Turn; but I laid no aspersion upon
the Court, nor meant it of them.


L. C. J. Behave your self as you ought, and you shall be heard with all the
fairness can be desired.


Oats. I did perceive your Lordship and the Court made your selves pleasant
with my questions.


L. C. J. I did not make my self pleasant with your questions, but when you ask
impertinent ones you must be corrected: You see we do the same thing with them;
I find fault with nothing but what is not to the purpose.


Oats. My Lord, I desire it may be observed, that these men that come now, are
the same Witnesses that appeared at the Old-Bailey, and were not believed there.


L. C. J. Observe what you will by and by.


Mr. At. Genesis No, they are other Men, but they bear the same Testimony indeed.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Swear Mr. Clavering, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Come, Sir, I Will ask you a short question: Were you at St. Omers
with Mr. Oats, and when?


Mr. Clavering. Yes, I was: I came the 10th of December 77 to St. Omers, he
told me he came thither that day too, and I lived there all the time that he
was there, which was till toward the middle of Summer: I do not remember that
he ever was absent, but once at Watton.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember Mr. Burnaby's coming thither?


Mr. Clavering. Mr. Oats was there when Mr. Burnaby came there.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was he there when Pool came away?


Mr. Clavering. He was there when Mr. Pool went away, and likewise I remember
his being there at the time of the Congregation.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray tell the circumstance how you know he was there then.


Mr. Clavering. There came a Gentleman there that desired a Charity of the
Students, and I was the person that made the collection for him in the house;
and I remember he did ask if there was any one that was a Student there that
had been in Spain: We told him there was one, and described him, upon which he
knew the Gentleman in Spain; upon that I told Mr. Oats that there was one
there that knew him, but he denied to come and speak with him. Now I remember
that it was the time of the Congregation, for some enquiry made why he got so
little money at Watton, and it was said it was because the Fathers were gone to
the Congregation in England: And he asked me particularly, What was done at the
Congregation in England?


L. C. J. Did Oats ask that question?


Mr. Clavering. Yes, my Lord, he did.


L. C. J. Whom did he ask it of?


Mr. Clav. Of me.


L. C. J. When was that?


Mr. Clavering. I think it was about the time of the Congregation.


L. C. J. How came he to enquire after it?


Mr. Clavering. I was talking with him, and said he to me, Know you nothing
what the business is that they are to do at the Congregation? Said I, Mr. Lucy,
I know not what they do; I think not much: for I hear at those Meetings many
times they stay an hour or two, and have done when they have chosen their
Procurator.


Mr. Sol. Genesis And you believe he was there all the time?


Mr. Clavering. Yes, my Lord, I do believe it.


Oats. Pray my Lord let me ask him a question or two.


L. C. J. Ay, what you will.


Oats. What Religion is this Gentleman of?


Mr. Clavering. I am a Catholic.


Oats. A Roman Catholic you mean, I suppose.


Mr. Clavering. Yes, I always understood it so, Mr. Oats.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know how he came not to be produced at the Jesuits
Trial, to give this Evidence he gives now.


Mr. Clavering. I can give a very good reason perhaps: I was then, my Lord, in
Germany.


L. C. J. That Is reason good enough of all conscience.


Mr. Just. Withens. That was a new question, and you have a satisfactory
answer, I think.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Swear Mr. John Copley, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Were you at St. Omers in 77 and 78?


Mr. Copley. Yes, I was.


Mr. At. Genesis Was Oats there then?


Mr. Copley. I saw him all the time he was there.


Mr. Sol. Genesis When did he come thither?


Mr. Copley. He came a little before Christmas, to the best of my remembrance.


Mr. Sol. Genesis When went he away?


Mr. Copley. In 78.


Mr. Sol. Genesis In what month in 78?


Mr. Copley. In June 78.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was he absent any part of that time?


Mr. Copley. I was there, and he was there too.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was he absent any part of the time from Christmas to June?


Mr. Copley. Nay, I am sure he was there all the time, except that night that
he was absent at Watton, and that was in January.


Oats. Pray my Lord ask him what Religion he is of.


Mr. Copley. Does your Lordship ask me that question?


L. C. J. Yes, I do ask you, Mr. Oats would know it.


Mr. Copley. I am a Roman Catholic, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Swear Mr. Cook, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Did you know Mr. Oats at St. Omers, and when?


Mr. Cook. He came there a little before Christmas 77.


Mr. At. Genesis How came you to know him there?


Mr. Cook. I lived in the House then.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he there all April and May?


Mr. Cook. Yes, he was till the latter-end of June.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see him every day?


Mr. Cook. Yes, I did.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you tell any particular time?


Mr. Cook. I am positive he was the 30th. of April.


Mr. At. Genesis What style?


Mr. Cook. New style.


L. C. J. How do you know he was there then?


Mr. Cook. It is a remarkable time; there is a Procession that they keep there
on that day from the Sodality to the Church, and I saw him go among the rest at
the latter-end among the Rhetoricians.


L. C. J. What say you, was he there on that day Mr. Hildesley went away?


Mr. Cook. I do not remember that.


L. C. J. Do you remember Burnaby?


Mr. Cook. I was there when Mr. Burnaby went away.


L. C. J. But when he came was Oats there?


Mr. Cook. I cannot speak particularly to that.


Mr. At. Genesis What was your place in the College?


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, he is a Layman be sure.


Mr. Cook. I was a Servant in the House.


Oats. In what place do you serve?


Mr. Cook. I was a Tailor.


Oats. I do not remember him.


Mr. Cook. But I remember you.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Swear Jo. Wright Esquire (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember Oats at St. Omers?


Mr. Wright. Yes, I do.


Mr. At. Genesis When was it?


Mr. Wright. The Winter before the notice of the Plot was.


Mr. At. Genesis What year was it in?


Mr. Wright. In the year 77.


Mr. At. Genesis What month in that year did he come thither?


Mr. Wright. I cannot tell, it was Wintertime.


Mr. At. Genesis When did he go away?


Mr. Wright. He went away in Summer, I cannot tell just the time.


Mr. At. Genesis Was he absent at any time, from his coming in Winter, to his
going away in Summer.


Mr. Wright. The Scholars said he was once at a place called Watton.


L. C. J. Come, this says nothing to the purpose.


Mr. Sol. Genesis My Lord, we leave it here.


L. C. J. What say you to it then Mr. Oats?


Oats. Has Mr. Attorney done?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, we have done for the present.


L. C. J. Then are you to make your defense.


Oats. My Lord, Here is an Indictment brought against me for Perjury; and this
Indictment sets forth, That I should upon the 17th. of December appear at the
Old-Bailey, and there swear, That there was a Treasonable Consult of the
Jesuits met at the White-horse-Tavern in the Strand, and that this Treasonable
Consult did divide it self into lesser Companies and Meetings, and that I
carried about a certain Resolution, which the Jesuits came to, concerning
killing the King, from Chamber to Chamber to be signed. My Lord, I have a great
exception to make to this Indictment, and that is, my Lord, as to the form*
For, by your Lordships favor, I think the Perjury is not well assigned, and
according as I am advised I offer this to your Lordships consideration. It says
in the assignment of the Perjury, Ubi revera and in facto praedictus Titus Otes
non praesens fuit ad aliquam Consultationem Jesuitarum apud le
White-horse-Tavern praedict in le Strand in Com Midd' praedict' super vicesimum
quartum diem April' anno Dom' Millicesimo.


L. C. J. How Millicesimo!


Oats. My Lord, it is Law- Latin, I suppose it may serve in a Court.


L. C. J. No, it is true Latin there:


Oats. I cannot tell how to read it better.


L. C. J. I do believe that.


Oats. It is written in such a hand, I cannot read it; but the substance of it
is, it says here, That I did not carry any Resolution from Chamber to Chamber
signand'. Now, the Evidence charged upon me to be given, is, That I did not see
it signat': So that the assignment of the Perjury does not pursue the Oath as
it is set forth; for if it be signat' in the Evidence that was given, it ought
to be signat' in the Perjury that is assigned; and I humbly crave the Opinion
of your Lordship and the Court upon this point.


L. C. J. Look you, Mr. Oats, That you offered before, and I gave this Answer,
which I must now repeat, That now we are upon the Fact, and this exception will
be saved to you for its proper time, if you be convicted. It is not proper now;
but suppose there were that thing which you say is an Objection, yet you must
know that there are Two Perjuries that are assigned; the One is upon the first
part of your Oath, which was, That you were present at a Consult of the Jesuits
the 24th. of April 78. at the White-horse-Tavern in the Strand, Ubi revera you
were not there. Now, Do you admit in the first place, that you were forsworn in
that particular.


Oats. No, my Lord, I do not.


L. C. J. If the Jury find that you were forsworn in that first point, that you
were not there, it will be easily believed you swore false in the other point,
that you did not carry the Resolution from Chamber to Chamber.


Oats. But, my Lord, it is not well assigned, I think.


L. C. J. That will be saved to you after the Verdict, I tell you, if there be
occasion for it.


Oats. My Lord, I suppose the Proof ought to be according to the Record, and
the Record makes the Perjury differ from the Oath.


L. C. J. I tell you that is to the form, and that will be saved to you after
the Verdict one way or the other.


Oats. Then will your Lordship be pleased to consider there was a Record
brought in, which is almost the same with that I am to offer to be read on my
behalf, and which is the first Proof that I have to offer of the Consult that
was held in London in April 78. And I desire Mr. Percivile may be called, I
forget his Christian-name, and Mr. Vaughan who is my Solicitor: But pray, my
Lord, let me first have the Opinion of the Court, whether they did prove the
words that I am said to swear as they are laid in the Indictment.


L. C. J. Yes, very fully, we think so; but the Jury are to try that, that is a
point of Fact: but if you will, you shall have our thoughts about it; We think
they are fully proved.


Crier. Here is Mr. Percivile.


Oats. Pray swear him, (which was done)


L. C. J. What do you ask him?


Oats. Mr. Percivile, you examined the Conviction of Mr. Ireland, pray put it
in: Is it a true Copy?


Percivile. Yes, it is.


Oats. My Lord, I desire that the Conviction and Attainder of Mr. Ireland may
be read.


Mr. At. Genesis It has been read already.


Oats. My Lord, I will not take up the Courts time any more than is necessary
for my Defense.


L. C. J. Nay; do as you will, as long as you offer things pertinent and
decent, the Court will hear you with all patience, and you may take what time
is necessary for you.


Oats. I thank your Lordship: I designed nothing at all of reflection upon the
Court, but a reflection on the Witnesses that came in against me.


C. of the Crown. This is a Copy of the same Record that was before read.


Oats. Well, if that be allowed for Evidence for me, I am contented to spare
the time of the Court, not to read it again: but, my Lord, I offer this, and
desire to have Council assigned me to argue this point in Law; that is, Whether
or no the Convictions and Attainders of Ireland, Whitebread, and the rest of
them, of a Treasonable Consult of the 24th. of April 78. where it was resolved
to murder the late King, ought not to be taken as a sufficient Legal Proof of
the Fact, so long as those Attainders remain of force? and whether the averment
of that being false, is to be received against those Records.


L. C. J. There is no difficulty in that at all in the world, Mr. Oats.


Oats. My Lord, I do not know the Law, and therefore I pray I may have Council
assigned to argue that point.


L. C. J. There is no question in it. God forbid, if a Verdict be obtained by
Perjury, that that Verdict should protect the perjured party from being
prosecuted for his false Oath. There were no Justice in that; nor is it an
averment against a Record, for this is not a Writ of Error in fact that will
reverse it, but the Record remains a good Record and unimpeached still: But
though it be a good Record, yet it is lawful to say this Verdict was obtained
upon the Testimony of such an one, that forswore himself in that Testimony, and
for that particular Perjury he may surely be prosecuted.


Oats. Is not that Attainder an uncontrollable Evidence of the Fact, 'till it
be reversed?


L. C. J. Yes, it is against the party attainted; but if that Attainder was
founded upon a Verdict that was obtained by Perjury, God forbid, but he should
be told so that did perjure himself.


Oats. Well, my Lord, if your Lordship rules that for Law, then I will go on;
and I must now observe to the Jury in the opening the Evidence two things.
First, That the Indictment upon which Ireland was tried, was found the 16th. of
December 78, and on the 17th. of December, the next day, Ireland was tried at
the Old-Bailey; and then I find this Indictment brought against me for Perjury,
is found at the Old-Bailey six years after the Fact by special Commission. Now,
I submit it to your Lordships and the Juries consideration, why the Presentment
and the finding of this Bill for Perjury has been so long delayed, since it
appears by the Evidence, that the Witnesses that have been produced to prove
the Perjury, were either at the Trial of the Five Jesuits, or might have been
produced then; and though they are not all the same persons, yet they all bear
the same Testimony that was then offered, but were not credited; and I hope
when my Evidence is heard, they will have the same Reputation with this Jury
that they had with those others. My Lord, I must acquaint your Lordship and
this Court, That in this Indictment for which Mr. Ireland was convicted, Mr.
Whitebread and Mr. Fenwick did undergo part of the Trial, and did hear the
whole body of the Evidence that the Witnesses testified against them; but there
being but one Witness against them two at that time, which was my self, (Mr.
Bedloe being then upon an Intrigue, as your Lordship may remember) my Lord
Chief Justice Scroggs, who was then the mouth of the Court, did discharge the
Jury of Mr. Whitebread and Mr. Fenwick, and remanded them to Prison, which Mr.
Whitebread six months after did remark to the Court, and urged it as a Plea for
himself to be discharged: but that being overruled by the Court, he was tried.
Now, he had six months time to provide himself with new fresh Evidence to
asperse me, and to endeavor to falsify that Testimony I gave in against
Whitebread and Fenwick, when Ireland was tried, and so he knew what it was. I
must further observe to you, my Lord, and Gentlemen of the Jury, That my Case
is very hard, that since the substance of my Testimony was with credit
received, and the Jury upon convicting them were acquainted, That they had
found an unexceptionable Verdict; That all the Objections against the Evidence
were then fully answered; That there was nothing that the Prisoners had been
wanting in to object, which could be objected; and that the thing was as clear
as the Sun. And yet, after six years time, I must come to be called to an
account for Perjury in my Testimony of that part of the Popish Plot, with which
the King and Kingdom, four successive Parliaments, all the Judges of the Land,
and three Juries, were so well satisfied. I shall therefore offer to your
Lordship and the Juries consideration the unanimous Votes of three Houses of
Commons; I shall offer the Proceedings of the House of Lords, that is the
highest Judicature in the Kingdom; I shall prove what I have opened by the
Testimony of several Noblemen that are here, who will testify this for me. My
Lord, I shall prove, that several attempts have been made to baffle this
Testimony, as that of the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, who took my
Depositions, the Contrivance of Pain, Farewell, and Thompson, made in the year
81 or 82, I forget which; I shall then produce Evidence that I was actually
here in Town at the time in question; and then upon the whole I shall submit it
to your Lordship and the Jury. But to prepare your Lordship and the Jury the
better for my Evidence, I would again urge the strangeness of this Prosecution,
and the hardship that is put upon me, to be tried for Perjury in an Evidence
given six years ago, and formerly very industriously, though not succesfully,
endeavored to be falsified by sixteen St. Omers Youths that were produced and
examined before all the Judges in the Kingdom, and that not only once at
Whitebread's Trial, but a second time at Langhorn's Trial, in neither of which
would the Jury believe them, because of their Religion and Education, and the
persons under whom they were educated, who were men of known Artifice. Then, my
Lord, I would this argue: If that time my Evidence were true, it must be true
still; for Truth is always the same; and if it were then true, and I can prove
it to be true, 'twill be thought a hard thing without all doubt, that this
should be put upon me. Then, my Lord, I would fain know from my Prosecutors,
Why this Indictment of Perjury has been deferred so long? Why these Witnesses
that come now to testify this matter, and could then have been brought, did
not come before, to justify at the Trials of these persons what they now say,
which might have saved their Lives, if true, and had been credited. Then I
shall offer to your Lordship what I desire You and the Jury would please to
observe, That though the King's Council are now against me, yet they are also
against themselves, for they were of Council for the King in those Cases:
particularly Mr. Solicitor at Langhorn's Trial, Sir Robert Sawyer at Sir
George Wakeman's Trial: They were of Council before for the truth of my
Testimony; they are now against it: I only mention that, and pass it over. But
this is not the first attempt that has been made to discredit the Testimony of
the Popish Plot, as I told you before. Now, can it be supposed that the love
and desire of public Justice can be the cause of this attempt to falsify my
Evidence after so many Trials, in which it has been credited and confirmed? Can
any thing, my Lord, more plainly tend to destroy and subvert the methods of
Justice, to frighten all Witnesses from henceforth from ever appearing to
discover any Conspiracies? and does it not tend to expose and vilify the known
Understanding and Justice of the late King of ever Blessed Memory, to arraign
the Wisdom of His Privy Council, His Great and Noble Peers, His Loyal Commons
in three successive Parliaments, His Twelve Judges, and all those several
Juries that were upon those Trials? Had not those Juries sense? had they not
honesty? had they no consciences? And the Judges before whom those Conspirators
were tried, were they men of no Justice, nor Honor, nor Integrity, nor
Conscience, nor Understanding? Shall those Juries be said to have drawn the
innocent Blood of these men upon their own Heads and the Nation? as, if I were
perjured, it must be innocent Blood that was shed upon it.


L. C. J. No, no, that goes a great deal too far, Mr. Oats: The Jury have no
share, nor the Judges neither, in that Blood which was shed by your Oath.


Mr. Justice Withens. No, That is your own most certainly, and not theirs.


Oats. But this, I say, makes it most plain: The Evidence was then true, and I
hope I shall make it as evidently plain it is as true now; and I do not
question, but upon the Evidence I shall now give, both Positive and Collateral,
the Jury will believe me, and acquit me of this foul Accusation. Pray my Lord
be pleased to consider, that when the Jury brought in Ireland guilty of the
High Treason of which he was accused and convicted him, Pickering, and Grove;
says my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs (that then was) to them, Gentlemen, you have
done like very good Subjects, and very good Christians, that is, like very good
Protestants; and now much good may do them with their Thirty Thousand Masses;
as I shall prove he did say. Then I insist, in the second place, That
Whitebread's Conviction does reinforce the Conviction of Ireland, because of
the attempt by the St. Omers Witnesses to have overthrown my Evidence: But
since I am attaqu'd again in the same kind by the violence of the Popish
Interest, and by the malice of my Popish Adversaries, I am contented to stand
the Test with all my heart. And then, to conclude all, I shall show the Court,
That it is in vain for the Popish Party to expect and think to wipe their
mouths, with Solomon's Whore, and say they have done no wickedness: No, I
question not but thousands of Protestants in this Kingdom are fully satisfied
and convinced of the Truth of the Popish Plot, all and every part of it. Now,
my Lord, if you please to give me leave to proceed on in my Evidence, I shall
beg that these Records of Conviction may be read, which are my first Proof of
the Consult; and I shall then bring Witnesses, viva voce, and shall make it
appear, that what I did swear at those Trials was true.


L. C. J. Not to intetrupt you in your Defense, or the method you will take for
it, I would put you upon that which is proper for you to apply your self to,
because the question now is not, Whether there was a Consult or Congregation of
the Jesuits here upon the 24th. of April 78? but the question that touches you
is, Whether you were present at any such Consult here in London the 24th. of
April 78? These Gentlemen, some of them, do say, there was a Consult, and
others that they heard of it, and believe there was such an one, because it was
usual to have a Triennal Congregation for some particular purposes: But the
question, is, Whether you have sufficient proof to prove your self to be here
on the 24th. of April 78, at which time it is agreed of all hands there was a
Consult?


Oats. But will your Lordship be pleased to take notice of the drift of the
Evidence, how they are consistent one with another? These Gentlemen that have
now been sworn to prove that I was not at this Consult, do attempt to prove
that I was at St. Omers: Now, to answer this, I shall not go about to prove
that I was not then at St. Omers, but that I was actually then, and about that
time, here in London; and then all that proof that Mr. Attorney General has
brought must be laid aside.


L. C. J. You say well; prove that.


Oats. Now, my Lord, to introduce and prepare the Jury for this, it will be
necessary, I humbly conceive, to read the Records of the Conviction of
Whitebread and Ireland.


L. C. J. Well, go your own way. We are not to direct you: I only tell you
where the question lies.


Oats. Sir Samuel Astrey, pray be pleased to read them in English, that the
Jury may understand them. First read Ireland's Record, (which was done.)


Oats. Now read Whitebread's Record: Read but the Attainder, I will not
trouble the Court with the whole Record.


Cl. of the Crown. Thomas White, alias Whitebread, William Harcourt, alias
Harrison, John Fenwick, John Gaven, and Anthony Turner, were found guilty of
High Treason, and attainted, and Execution awarded against them upon that
Attainder.


Oats. Does not the Record say, The Jurors say upon their Oaths they are
guilty.


L. C. J. Yes, I Will warrant you.


Cl. of the Crown. It is Dicunt super sacramentum suum.


Oats, Very well. These, my Lord, I do produce as my first Evidence, to prove
that there was a Traiterous Consult held upon the 24th. of April 78, at the
White-horse-Tavern in the Strand, it having been believed and affirmed by two
Verdicts. Now give me leave to offer but this to the Court, That at the Trial
of Mr. Ireland I gave so full and ample a Testimony against Whitebread and
Fenwick, accompanied with all the circumstances of Time and Place, that my Lord
Chief Justice Scroggs said, The Evidence might be sufficient to have satisfied
a private conscience, though it was not a legal Proof then to convict him,
there being but one Witness against them: And for this I call Mr. Robert
Blayney.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray swear Mr. Blayney, (which was done.)


L. C. J. What do you ask Mr. Blayney?


Oats. Mr. Blayney, have you your Notes of Ireland's Trial here?


Mr. Blayney. Yes, Sir, I have.


Oats. Pray will you look into what my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs said when he
discharged the Jury of Whitebread and Fenwick.


Mr. Blayney. Whereabouts is it, Sir, in the Printed Trial?


Oats. It is page 55.


Mr. Blayney. I have found the place, what is it you would ask me about it?


Oats. Whether my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs did not use these words to the
Jury: I do acknowledge that Mr. Oats has given a very full and ample
Testimony, accompanied with all the circumstances of Time and Place, against
them all; That may go far with you, all things considered, to believe there is
a Plot: Yet I do not think they have proved it against Whitebread and Fenwick
by Two Witnesses, though the Testimony be so full as to satisfy a private
conscience, yet we must go according to Law too. It will be convenient from
what is already proved, to have them stay till more proof come in; It Is a great
Evidence that is against them, but it not being sufficient in point of Law. We
discharge you of them. It is not a legal Proof to convict them by, whatsoever
it may be to satisfy your consciences.


Mr. Blayney. I have looked upon my Notes, and I cannot find exactly those
words.


L. C. J. He says he cannot find that passage as it is there.


Mr. Blayney. There is something to that purpose, my Lord.


Oats. Pray, Sir, will you look into your Notes in the very same place, what
my Lord Chief Baron said: You must (speaking to the Jayler) understand they are
no way acquitted: the Evidence is so full against them by Mr. Oats 's
Testimony, that there is no reason to acquit them; it is as flat as by one
Witness can be.


Mr. Blayney. There is such a passage, I find, in my Notes.


L. C. J. He says there is such a passage.


Oats. Then I desire Mr. Blayney would look into his Notes, what my Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs said in his summing up the Evidence against Ireland: He
mentions the Evidence of Sir Dennis Ashburnham, who was produced to discredit
me, and then he adds, When the matter is so accompanied with so many other
circumstances, which are material things, and cannot be evaded or denied, it is
almost impossible for any man either to make such a story, or not to believe it
when it is told. -- It is Ireland's Trial, page 72.


Mr. Blayney. My Lord, I do find such a passage in my Notes.


L. C. J. He says there is such a passage in his Notes.


Oats. Then I would ask Mr. Blaney another question at the bringing in the
Verdict of the Jury against Ireland, Pickering, and Grove, my Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs (that then was) had this expression You have done, Gentlemen,
like very good Subjects, and very good Christians, that is to say, like very
good Protestants; and now much good may their 30000 Masses do them.


Blayney. Yes, my Lord, there is in my Notes such an expression of my L. C. J.
Scroggs.


Oats. Pray you, Mr. Blayney, have you Whitebread's Trial? the Trial of the
Five Jesuits I mean.


Mr. Blayney. My Lord, when I received a Subpoena from Mr. Oats to be here
this day, and to bring my Notes of Ireland, Whitebread and Langhorns Trials, I
did (as I did before upon another occasion) make a search for all my Notes, but
could not find any but those of the Trial of Ireland and Langhorn, and those I
have brought here, but have not Whitebread's.


L. C. J. He says he has not the Notes of Whitebread's Trial; he cannot find
them.


Oats. Then I must desire, my Lord, that the Printed Trials may be read.


L. C. J. No, they are no Evidence: If you can prove what was said at any of
them, you may by Witnesses, but not by the Printed Books.


Oats. Then will your Lordship be pleased to give me leave to mention what was
said by your Lordship at that time, when you were Recorder of London, about
your satisfaction with the Evidence?


L. C. J. Ay, with all my heart, and whatever I said I will own, if I can
remember it.


Oats. Will your Lordship be pleased to be sworn then?


L. C. J. No, there will be no need for that; I will acknowledge any thing I
said then.


Oats. Then, if your Lordship pleases, I will read those passages out of the
Books.


L. C. J. Ay, do so.


Oats. Says Mr. Recorder of London, (in particular to that part of the
Prisoners Defense, at the Trial of the Five Jesuits, and the full scope given
them of making Objections to the Evidence) when he gave Judgment of Death upon
these Five Jesuits and Langhorn, (for I now speak of your Lordship in the third
person) Your several Crimes have been proved against you: you have been fully
heard, and stand convicted of those Crimes you have been indicted for.


L. C. J. I believe I might say something to the same purpose as you have read
now.


Oats. I thank your Lordship for that acknowledgment.


L. C. J. Ay, I Will own any thing I did say.


Oats. My Lord, I have one passage more to urge, and that was my Lord, after
the Jesuits had been convicted, when the Jury brought in their Verdict, and
found Whitebread, Fenwick, Harcourt, Gaven, and Turner guilty, your Lordship
applying your self to the Jury, said thus to them; Gentlemen, you of the Jury,
there has been a long Evidence given against the Prisoners at the Bar; they
were all indicted, arraigned, and tried for High Treason depending upon several
circumstances? They can none of them say the Court refused to hear any thing
they could say for themselves, but upon a long Evidence, and a patient hearing
of the Defense they made, they are found guilty, and for any thing appears to
us it is a just Verdict you have given.


L. C. J. I believe I might say something to that purpose too at that time; and
no doubt the Jury did (as the Case then stood) find an unexceptionable Verdict.


Oats. There is another place, my Lord, that I would instance in, for your
Lordships Opinion of the Evidence of the Popish Plot, and that is this: Now, my
Lord, I bring your Lordship as you were of Council for the King at Mr.
Colledge's Trial at Oxford, the 17th. of August 81: There you, my now Lord
Chief Justice, directing your self to the Jury, had this expression; We come
not here to trip up the heels of the Popish Plot, by saying that any of them
who suffered for it did die contrary to Law; for if Mr. Dugdale was not a
person fit to be believed, or if the rest of the Judges who tried Gaven were
out in the Law, then that man died wrongfully; for he had as much right to be
tried according to Law as any other person whatsoever. This was your Lordships
Opinion of the matter then, and your Lordship as Council for the King did there
deliver the Law as well as Fact to the Jury. If then they went against Law that
would go to trip up the heels of the Popish Plot --


Mr. Justice Withens. We are got into an endless Wood of sayings of people, I
know not where and when; and when all is done, it is to no purpose.


Oats. My Lord, it is a part, and a great part of my Defense, to show what
credit has been given to the Evidence of the Popish Plot.


L. C. J. Ay, but what Council says at the Bar, or what Judges say in the Court
of their Opinion is no Evidence of a Fact, of which the Jury are Judges only.


Oats. My Lord, every Judge is upon his Oath, and delivers his Judgment
according to his Oath.


L. C. J. Not as to the Fact, but only in points of Law, so as to tell the Jury
what the Law is, if the Fact be so and so.


Oats. My Lord, it goes a great way with the Jury to have the Judges Opinion.


L. C. J. Mr. Oats, deceive not your self; all this you have insisted on
hitherto, has not been to the purpose, nor is any sort of Evidence in this
case; and therefore do not run away with an opinion of this as Evidence: a
Judges Opinion is of value in points of Law that arise upon Facts found by
Juries, but are no Evidence of the Fact, for Judges only do presume the Fact to
be true, as it is sound by the Jury; and therefore say they, Out of that Fact
so found, the point of Law arising is thus or thus. Then in Case, after a Jury
has given a Verdict of the Fact, a Judges Opinion of the Fact, (which may be
perhaps contrary to the Verdict) should be an Evidence as to that Fact, that
would be to overthrow and nullify the Juries Verdict: No, that is not the
Judges Province. Surely you would not have a Judges private Opinion, that
Twelve men have found a Verdict against the Fact, to be an Evidence as to that
Fact: No; but admit the Fact to be so or so, then the person convicted of the
Fact ought to suffer so or so. And by the same reason as this, a Jury of honest
Gentlemen here, when I tell them here is a plain Fact either to convict you or
to acquit you upon this Indictment, are not bound to go by what I say in point
of Fact, but they are to go according to their own Oaths, and according to the
Evidence and Testimony of the Witnesses: It is not my Opinion that is to weigh
at all with them, whether you are Guilty of this Perjury, or are Innocent, but
the Evidence that is given here in Court. Therefore what my Lord Chief Justice
Scroggs said at any of those Trials, or what I said, or any other person, that
either was of Council, or a Judge on the Bench, said as our Opinions, is but
our Opinions on the Fact as it occurred to our present apprehensions, but is no
Evidence nor binding to this Jury. I must tell you, there is no doubt but that
those Juries did every one of them believe the Evidence you gave, or they would
not have convicted the Prisoners. Do you think they would have found a Verdict
against their own belief, and being upon their Oaths to make true Deliverance
between the King and the Prisoners, have perjured Themselves to hang Others? If
they had so done, they had committed Wilful Murder, and the worst of Murders
too, being under color of the Process of Law; but yet all this is no Evidence.
I do not discommend you for insinuating these things as introductive and
preparative to what Evidence you have to offer; but it is no Evidence one way
or other. Alack-aday! how many times have we Causes here in Westminster Hall,
wherein we have Verdict against Verdict? and yet no imputation to either of the
Juries, which might give different Verdicts upon different Grounds. There was a
notable Case lately of my Lady. Ivies at this Bar: We all thought upon the
first Trial, that she had as good a Title to the Land as could be; all the
Judges and the Council went way (I believe) satisfied with the Juries Verdict
for her: But when the Cause came to be heard again, we found all the Witnesses
to prove her Title, were guilty of notorious Porjury, and the same persons
which did believe before that she was in the Right, and the Jury had done well,
when they heard the second Trial did believe she was in the wrong, and
accordingly the second Jury found it so; and we believe that last Verdict to be
good, without any reflection on the Credit of the First Jury, because the
Evidence was as strong on her side then, as it was afterward against her. In
these Cases we give our Opinions always according to the present Testimony that
is before us.


Oats. Then, my Lord, I offer this to your Consideration, That those men that
were thus charged by me with High Treason, were Priests and Jesuits most of
them, and particularly Mr. Ireland, in whose Trial I am said to have committed
this Perjury, and you shall find him to have been by others proved a Priest and
a Jesuit, and actually engaged in a Design against the Life of the King. If I
then do prove that Ireland was engaged in a Design against the late Kings Life,
and was a Priest and a Jesuit, I desire to know, Whether this be not a
Collateral Evidence to render me of credit sufficient, and support my Testimony.


L. C. J. By no means upon this Indictment. It Is true it may give some credit
to your Testimony, but is not of it self sufficient: Nay, I Will go a great way
further than that; I will suppose that there was a Consult of the Jesuits upon
the 24th. of April 78 at the White-horse-Tavern in the Strand, where those you
say were present, were all present, Ireland, and Whitebread, and Pickering,
Grove and Fenwick, were all there, and that they did there come to a Resolution
to destroy the late King: Suppose all this to be true, and yet you all this
time are not innocent of the Fact imputed to you, because you swore directly,
That You were there at that Consult too, which you were not, if these men swear
true, for then you were at St. Omers at that time; and therefore give us some
sort of Testimony to satisfy us that you were here, and then you will set all
right again. If the Jesuits and Priests did Plot, that is nothing to make your
Evidence true, if you swore that which you did not know of your own knowledge.


Oats. Shall it be allowed then that Ireland was a Jesuit and a Papist?


L. C. J. If it should that will be to very little purpose for your Turn.


Oats. There is the Evidence of a Record for it, my Lord; but if that be not
sufficient, I can call Witnesses to prove it. Pray call Mr. Miles Prance,
(which was done, but be did not appear.)


Crier He is not here.


Oats. He was subpoena'd, my Lord, to come hither.


L. C. J. I cannot help it, if he will not come; but I Will tell you, for methods
sake, not to prescribe to you, but to tell you what I think may be more for
your advantage than any of these Inferences that you are making: If you did
call two or three Witnesses to prove that you were in Town the 22d. 23d. or
24th. of April, it would be the best Defense you can make, and would give the
best answer to all that is objected against you.


Oats. I will do that (my Lord) then, and follow your directions.


L. C. J. Do so, that is the best way.


Oats. Crier, call Cicilia Mayo.


Crier. Here she is.


Oats Swear her, (which was done.)


L. C. J. Well, what do you ask this Witness?


Oats Pray Mrs. Mayo give my Lord and the Jury an account whether you did see
me in London the latter-part of April or the beginning of May 78; for that is
the question now before the Court.


L. C. J. Ay, what say you? when did you see him in 78?


Mrs. Mayo. My Lord, I saw him the latter-end of April: He came to Sir Richard
Barker's House, where I did then live, and afterward he came again thither
within a few days. By this circumstance I remember it; Sir Richard Barker my
Master was sick all the month of April, and in the Country, only he came now
and then home for a little while, and went again: Now Mr. Oats came there when
he was absent, and a young man that lived in the House came to me, and told me,
There was Mr. Oats in the strangest disguise that ever was. Says he, I think
he is turned Quaker: No, said I, he is no Quaker, for they wear no Perriwigs,
and I rebuked the young Man for saying so. As for Mr. Oats, I never saw his
face before that time that I know of.


L. C. J. How do you know that to be Mr. Oats then?


Mrs. Mayo. The Family knew him, and they told me it was he: That is the
Gentleman there. I speak now nothing but that which I testified seven years
ago, and it is all Truth, and nothing but the Truth.


L. C. J. Ay, no doubt of it, thou swear'st nothing but the Truth.


Mrs. Maro. My Lord, he came three or four days afterward again to the house,
and then the young man came to me, and told me, That Parson Oats was turned
Jesuit; and thereupon I said to him, Good Lord! why do thou concern thy self
with him? can not let him alone? I looked upon him, and saw him at that time:
And when he came that time, he went to Sir Richard's Ladies Sister, who is now
in Wales, and coming to her, said she, Mr. Oats, I hear you are turned Jesuit,
and we can have no Society with you now: At last, he stayed to Dinner with
them, and stayed most of the day there. Then he comes the latter-end of May;
Whitsuntide was in May that year, and I know he came before Whitsuntide by this
token; I speak of the second time of his coming: Our Custom in the house was to
Wash and Scowr before the time, and I was sending for a Woman to come and help
to Wash and Scowr, and then he was walking in the Garden, and the young man
came and told me Oats was there: he came into the Pantry to me, Look, said he,
he is come again, and he is turned Jesuit by his disguise: Why Benjamin, said
I, what have thou to do with the man? can not let him alone?


L. C. J. What was the Name of that young Man you speak of?


Mrs. Mayo: Truly, my Lord, he is dead, or he would have testified the same
thing.


L. C. J. But what was his Name?


Mrs. Mayo. Benjamin; I cannot tell his other Name.


L. C. J. Well, go on.


Mrs. Mayo. Said I to him, Why do thou scorn this man? Prithee get out of the
Room, I am not able to hear it: So he walked the space of an hour in the Garden.


L. C. J. Is Sir Richard Barker living?


Mrs. Mayo. Yes, my Lord, he is, but he is not well.


L. C. J. Was he at home when Oats was there?


Mrs. Mayo. No, my Lord, I think not.


L. C. J. Who dined with him, do you say, when he dined there?


Mrs. Mayo. My Ladies Sister.


Lord Chapter Justice. What is her Name?


Mrs. Mayo. Madam Thurrel.


Lord Chapter Justice. And who else?


Mrs. Mayo And her Sons.


Lord Chapter Justice. Where are they?


Mrs. Mayo. They are both dead.


Lord Chapter Justice. And who else was there?


Mrs. Mayo. One Doctor Cocket.


Lord Chapter Justice. Where is he?


Mrs. Mayo. He is in Wales too, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Justice. It Is a great misfortune to have so many dead, or so far
remote.


Oats. My Lord, six years time makes a great alteration in a Family.


Lord Chapter Justice. Was there any body else there?


Mrs. Mayo. There were two of the Daughters, and they could all come and
testify the same thing.


Lord Chapter Justice. Where are they, and what is become of them? why are they not
here?


Mrs. Mayo. They are living in Lincolnshire, my Lord, I think.


Lord Chapter Justice. What else have you more to say?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Mrs. Mayo let me ask you a question: What colored Clothes
had he on when you faw him first?


Mrs. Mayo. He had a whitish Hat, and colored Clothes.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What time of the day was it you saw him?


Mrs. Mayo. In the morning.


Lord Chapter Justice. Did he go publicly?


Mrs. Mayo. Yes, he went publicly.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did he come often to the house?


Mrs. Mayo. He was there frequently, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then it seems he was so disguised, that he could walk publicly
in the streets of London at Noonday, and was frequently in the Family.


Mrs. Mayo. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Justice. Now tell me who was in the Family.


Mr. At. Genesis Mrs. Mayo, --


Lord Chapter Justice. Pray give me leave to ask her the question: Who was there at
that time?


Mrs. Mayo. Sir Richard Barker's Ladies Sister, Madam Thurrel, and his two
Daughters, and two of his Kinsmen, and two of the Servants, one is here a
Witness now.


Lord Chapter Justice. Who is that that is a Witness now?


Mrs. Mayo. One that belongs to Sir Richard Barker, and the other is now dead,
and those two Kinsmen are dead.


Lord Chapter Justice. What is become of the two Daughters, say you?


Mrs. Mayo. They are in Lincolnshire, as I take it, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Justice. When did you hear from them?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, it is half a year ago almost since Mr. Oats had notice
of this Trial.


Lord Chapter Justice. Where is Sir Richard Barker himself?


Mrs. Mayo. I was with Sir Richard Barker, and he purposed to have come hither;
but being a crazy man, and ancient, it seems he could not, and desired to be
excused, for he had a bad night, and was not well; but he desired that the
Court should know, if he were well he would be there.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you sworn at a former Trial about this matter, Mrs. Mayo?


Mrs. Mayo. Yes, Sir, I was.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember what you swore then?


Mrs. Mayo. The same I do now.


Mr. At. Genesis Then I ask you this question, How long before Whitsuntide was it
that you saw Mr. Oats at Sir Richard Barker's?


Mrs. Mayo. A pretty while before, twice.


Oats. Mrs Mayo, I Will put you a fair question, Whether or no it might not be a
fortnight before Whitsuntide you think?


Mrs. Mayo. The last time I saw you was a week before Whitsuntide.


Lord Chapter Justice. How can you tell it was but a week?


Mrs. Mayo. 'Twas but a week, because at that time I had sent the Boy for the
Woman to scowr and wash there.


Lord Chapter Justice. Was that the last time you saw him?


Mrs. Mayo. Yes: I saw him several times before, and it was all before
Whitsuntide.


Lord Chapter Justice. How long before that was the first time that you saw him?


Mrs. Mayo. He would be away for three or four days, and come again.


Lord Chapter Justice. But how long before the last time was the first time you saw
him.


Mrs. Mayo. He came still to and again.


Lord Chapter Justice. When was the time that you saw him next before the week
before Whitsuntide, which, as you say, was the last time you saw him?


Mrs. Mayo. I am not able to say that.


Lord Chapter Justice. Did you believe it was within the compass of a week before?


Mrs. Mayo. To the best of my remembrance it was.


Lord Chapter Justice. When was the first time you saw him?


Mrs Mayo. 'Twas in the beginning of May.


Lord Chapter Justice. You said at first it was the latter-end of April.


Mrs. Mayo. Pray, my Lord, let me a little think; I am unwilling to be
mistaken, I would say nothing but the Truth.


Lord Chapter Justice. No, I would not have thee; but for Gods sake let us have the
Truth, that is that we look for.


Mrs. Mayo. I say the Coachman saw him there as well as I, and he can tell you
better than I.


Lord Chapter Justice. But I ask you this question positively, Was it in May or
April?


Mrs: Mayo: To the best of my remembrance it was the beginning of May:


Lord Chapter Justice. Was it within a week of May?


Mrs. Mayo. I believe it was, I cannot tell exactly to a day.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was it so or not?


Mrs: Mayo: I cannot be positive to a day; it is now six years time since I was
first examined about it.


Mr: At: Gen: But you can remember what you swore then, cannot you?


Mrs: Mayo: I declare it I speak not a syllable but I will aver to be true
before the great God:


Mr. Sol. Gen: Can you swear it was within the first seven days of May?


Lord Chief Justice. You see, Mr. Solicitor, she says she cannot,


Mr. At, Gen, Did not you say at that Trial, that you did never see his face
till a week before Whitsuntide, or a little after?


Mrs. Mayo, I did swear the same that I do now, to the best of my remembrance,
and that is the Truth,


Mr, At, Gen, But did you not swear so?


Mrs, Mayo, I never saw him before that first time he came to Sir Richard
Barker's, and after the last time that he came I saw him not till after the
Plot was discovered,


Mr. Sol. Genesis How long was that after he had been at your Masters horse?


Mrs. Mayo. It was a good while, I cannot tell how long.


Lord Chapter Justice. Was it within a month or two months?


Mrs. Mayo. It was more, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Justice. Where was Sir Richard Barker at that time?


Mrs. Mayo He was at Putney.


Lord Chapter Justice. Then he did not see him?


Mrs. Mayo Not then he did not


Lord Chapter Justice Did he afterward?


Mrs. Mayo. Yes, he did see him afterward.


Lord Chapter Justice. How long afterward was it?


Mrs. Mayo. I cannot tell how long afterward it was my Lord.


Lord Chapter Justice. About what time was it?


Mrs. Mayo. After the Plot was discovered he was up and down in the Family.


Lord Chapter Justice. You never knew Mr. Oats before that time he came in a
Disguise, and you did not know him then, but as they told you it was he?


Mrs. Mayo. No, I did not, but as they told me then; and this is the man, I Will
swear it.


Oats. Call John Butler.


Crier. Here is John Butler.


Oats. Swear him, (which was done.) My Lord, if you please I will propose my
questions to your Lordship; and my first question is this, I pray your Lordship
would ask him, Whether he gave in any Evidence at the Five Jesuits Trial, or
Langhorn's Trial, about my being in Town in April or May 78?


Lord Chapter Justice. Did you give any Evidence at the Five Jesuits Trial?


Butler. Yes, I did.


Lord Chapter Justice. Did you give any Evidence at Langhorn's Trial?


Butler. Yes, my Lord, I was a Witness there.


Oats. My Lord, it is so long ago, that ignorant people that come innocently
without design, may not be so ready in their remembrance, as those that conn'd
their Leston for so long time together.


Lord Chapter Justice. Well, well; what do you ask him next, Whether he will stand
by that Evidence he gave then?


Butler. That is all I have to say, my Lord: I did testify the Truth then, and
will abide by it.


Lord Chapter Justice. But he must give the same over again here, or it will
signify nothing.


Oats. My Lord, it is now six years since, and this question was not thought
to be stirred so long after: Therefore I beg so much favor, that the Evidence
he did give at Mr. Langhorn's Trial may be read to him.


Lord Chapter Justice. O by no means.


Oats. My Lord, it is such a distance of time --


Lord Chapter Justice. Look ye, if he has any Notes himself, he may look on them to
refresh him.


Oats. My Lord, he comes raw hither, without any instruction at all.


Lord Chapter Justice. So should every Witness: God forbid we should countenance
the instructing of Witnesses what they should swear.


Oats. I beg your pardon, my Lord, I did hope this favor might be granted: I
will then ask him some questions.


Lord Chapter Justice. Ay, ay, do, refresh his memory by questions as much as you
can. Come, I Will ask him some questions for you; Do you remember you saw Mr.
Oats at any time in the year 78?


Butler. If it please your Lordship, as near as I can remember I saw him in May
before the Plot was discovered.


Lord Chapter Justice. That was the year 78.


Butler. I am sure I did see him about that time.


Lord Chapter Justice. Where did you see him?


Butler. I was a Servant to Sir Richard Barker, and Mr. Oats I had been
acquainted with before he went to Sea; he used to come to my Masters house
frequently, and diverse times he dined at the Table, and I waited upon my Master
there.


Lord Chapter Justice. When was that he dined there at the Table?


Butler. A year before that time, in May that I spoke of before: It was before
he went to Sea.


Lord Chapter Justice. When did you see him again?


Butler. After he came from Sea, I saw him at my Masters house.


Lord Chapter Justice. When was it that he went to Sea?


Butler. It was a year or two before the May that I saw him disguised coming to
my Masters house.


Mr. At. Genesis Ay, what disguise did he come in?


Butler. His hair was cut off, close cropped to his ears, and an old white Hat
over his head, and a short gray Coat over like a Horse man's Coat.


Lord Chapter Justice. How came you to take such notice of him at that time, as to
be able to swear when this was?


Butler. I was called presently after for a Witness.


Lord Chapter Justice. How long after this was it, that you were called to be a
Witness?


Butler. It was when the Trials were at the Old Bailey.


Lord Chapter Justice. Was this the first time you had recollected these
circumstances?


Butler. Yes, my Lord, that was the first time.


Lord Chapter Justice. Then how came you a year and a halfs time afterward to
remember the precise month of May, when you did not know you should be called
to question about it, and yet you cannot remember the time particularly when
Oats went to Sea, but take the compass of a year or two?


Butler. I guess it was a year before, I cannot exactly tell.


Lord Chapter Justice. When you can but guess at the time of such a remarkable
passage within the compass of a year or two, how can you pitch upon the very
month for such a thing as this is a year and halfs time after?


Oats. No, my Lord, it was not so long as a year and a half.


Lord Chapter Justice. Pray Sir have patience.


Oats. My Lord, the Records show that Ireland's Trial was the 17th. of
December 78, and the Five Jesuits Trial was the 15th. of June 79.


Lord Chapter Justice. Then it is a full twelve months time and more from the May
that he says he saw you at Sir Richard Barker's, to Whitebread's Trial, in
which he was examined the first time. Now that which I desire of him is, to
give me a reason why he remembers it was in the May was twelvemonth before.


Butler. My Lord, The Lady whom I did serve, died in February before, that year:


Lord Chapter Justice. But give me some reason of your remembrance so long after.


Butler. My Lord, I do as well as I can.


Lord Chapter Justice. Well, what is it?


Butler. My Lady was buried in February, and he comes into the Yard where I was
cleaning my Coach, in May following that February, which was May before the
Discovery of the Plot. He asked me what alteration was in the Family? I told
him my Lady was dead, and the Escutcheon was over the door for her. He asked
for Doctor Tongue when he came first in the house.


Lord Chapter Justice. Why should he ask for Doctor Tongue?


Butler. My Lord, Doctor Tongue lodged there and he did ask for him: I come to
justify the Truth; upon my Salvation what I say is true.


Lord Chapter Justice. Well, when he asked whether Doctor Tongue was within, what
said you?


Butler. I told him no, but he went into the Room where Doctor Tongue used to
lie, but found him not there: So he went out again; that was the same time Mrs.
Mayo saw him.


Lord Chapter Justice. But, Friend, prithee mind what I ask thee, because thou must
give me satisfaction how thou come to remember this, so as to be able to
swear it; for his going to ask for Tongue, or the Escutcheon being over the
door, neither of those can be a reason for you to remember that this was in
May, for the Escutcheon may be up in June, or in July, or in August, or in any
other month after the time you speak of: But how came you to take notice of
this business that it was in May?


Butler. Sir Richard Barker my Master was then sick at Putney, which was in
May, though I cannot speak to a day or a week particularly.


Lord Chapter Justice. Then prithee let me ask thee this question, How long had
your Master been sick before that?


Butler. He had never been well since my Lady died.


Lord Chapter Justice. When was it that your Lady died?


Butler. In February before.


L. C. J. How long after that did your Master Sir Richard Barker continue sick?


Butler. Half a year, I believe.


L. C. J. Why then, suppose your Master fell sick immediately after your Lady
died, and he continued sick half a year after, yet all this while Oats might
come during his sickness even in the month of June or July, when it is
acknowledged he was in Town, and not be here in February, which is testified by
a great many Witnesses.


Butler. My Lord, I tell your Lordship the Truth, it was in May.


L. C. J. But how do thou come to take notice it was in the month of May, so
as to be able to swear it?


Butler. My Lord, I tell your Lordship my Lady was dead, and the Escutcheon was
over the door.


L. C. J. So it might be, though he came in June or July, I tell ye.


Butler. My Master was sick at Putney at that time.


L. C. J. How long did he lie sick at Putney?


Butler. He was sick there a fortnight, my Lord.


L. C. J. Then prithee when did thy Master go to Putney?


Butler. I cannot tell to a day.


L. C. J. In what month was it that he went?


Butler. It was the latter-end of April, my Lord, as I remember.


L. C. J. How long continued he sick at Putney?


Butler. The matter of a fortnight.


L. C. J. Was not your Master sick when your Lady died at Putney?


Butler. No, he was not there then.


L. C. J. When did he go to Putney, say ye?


Butler. He went not thither till the latter-end of April, my Lord.


L. C. J. And did he continue at Putney but a fortnight.


Butler. Not at a time, but he continued going and coming a quarter of a year.


L. C. J. But this was the first time of his going, was it:


Butler. Yes, as I do remember.


Oats. My Lord, he is my Witness, and I desire I may examine him.


L. C. J. Hold there, Mr. Oats; he is mine too: all the Witnesses are mine to
satisfy me in the truth of the Fact.


Oats. And to satisfy the Jury too, my Lord.


L. C. J. Yes, and to satisfy the Jury too; but I must and will sift out the
truth, for both our satisfactions.


Oats. My Lord, it is now, come the next month, six years ago since the
Evidence of this matter was first given by these Witnesses.


L. C. J. Then, Mr. Oats, I Will come a little rounder to you, and I Will put you
into a certain way of clearing this business. I Will tell you what you shall do;
You had a Lodging in Town, as well as Diet, and as well as you did eat at
Doctor Barker's sometimes, so you eat and lay sometimes elsewhere. You were
here in Town a great while together, if your own assertions be true; for you
were from April till June in Town. Now come and give us account by some
Witnesses, if you can, where did you lodge at that time, and where did you
diet? for it seems you had but one meal at Sir Richard Barker's.


Oats. Is that the question, Sir, here in hand.


L. C. J. Ay indeed is it, and the main one too.


Oats. I beg your Lordships pardon if I mistake, but I think that is not now
in question; for these St. Omers men do swear, That I was all April and May at
St. Omers: Then if I do prove that in April and May I was not at St. Omers, but
here in London, it is argument good enough against them that their Evidence is
false. And indeed, can your Lordship or the Jury expect that I being then
engaged among and for the Papists, and afterward an Evidence against them to
discover their Treasons, can bring any of them to testify for me now? No, they
will as certainly forswear themselves, as these young Fellows have all done.


L. C. J. Let me ask you a shorter question; Did you always lie in a Papist
house, all the two months you say you were here.


Oats. My Lord, I lay at several houses.


L. C. J. Tell me the names of those houses, or any of them.


Oats. It is not to the point in question here, my Lord.


L. C. Justice. Yes it is very much; But I perceive it is a Secret, and let any
body judge why.


Oats. My Lord, They that have by the principles of their Religion, Liberty,
to affirm or deny any thing, and can have dispensations for the violations of
Oaths and Sacraments, certainly are not to be admitted as witnesses in such a
case as this.


L. C. Justice. Talk not to me of Dispensations and I know not what; I speak
from a plain demonstrative Proof: can it be believed that you should be here in
England so long, and as they say, publicly, and no person living see you that
we can hear of, but an Old Woman that never saw you, nor knew you before, and a
Coachman that tells a wild story without reason: if you will not tell me where
you lay, can you tell me where you did eat all that time.


Oats. I can tell where I did lie that time.


L. C. J. Do so then. Let us hear it, that will be your best defense.


Oats. Is that the point My Lord, in question.


L. C. J. Ay upon my word is it the main point in this Case.


Oats. If it should go upon that foot my Lord, it is impossible for me now to
prove it; for it is well known I lay sometimes with Mr. Whitebread, and
sometimes with Mr. Mico, neither of which can I have to testify for me; and
besides, I must insist upon it, these things were in question at Whitebreads
Trial, nor do I believe that Mr. Whitebread, if asked at his death, would have
justified, and stood by it, that I was not here then.


L. C. J. Well, This I must certainly say, I cannot help it, but it will stick
with me till better answered. I can never be satisfied, that if you were here
so long, there should no better evidence be produced to prove you here.


Oats. My Lord, nor can I help your dissatisfaction, but I am to satisfy all
that hear me this day, that it is a very hard Case that is put upon me; I have
taken the most effectual course that I could, to provide for Evidence to make
my defense, and I think, by your Lordships good leave, those that I have
produced, do prove me here in Town in April and May 78. And if your Lordship
has done with this Witness, I Will call another.


L. C. J. Well, go on as you will. I tell you what sticks with me.


Oats. Pray call Mr. Philip Page.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Hold Sir a little, I would ask these Witnesses a few Questions
before they go away. You Butler, let me ask you, pray, the first time you saw
Mr. Oats at the time you speak of, was it in April or May?


L. C. J. He swore it was the beginning of May.


Butler. To the best of my knowledge, it was the beginning of May.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Who did you tell first, that there was Mr. Oats at that time?


Butler. I told it Mrs. Mayo.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Consider Friend, what you say now, you are upon your Oath, and
consider what you said at the former Trial, when you were upon your Oath too.


Oats. Pray, My Lord, I desire my Witnesses may be Examined without
Threatenings.


L. C. Justice. It is not a Threatening, it is an Admonition not to go beyond
the Truth.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Be sure you be in the Right in what you say, and now I ask you
upon your Oath, when was the first time you saw Mr. Oats when he came in that
disguise you speak of?


Butler. I told you it was in May Sir.


Mr. Soll. Genesis How far in May, consider well what you say.


Butler. To the best of my remembrance, it was the beginning of May.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Do you think it was within a Week, or the First Ten days of May?


Butler. I cannot tell that, as well as I remember, it was the beginning of May.


Mr. Soll. Genesis When you saw him first in May, who else, as you remember, was
by?


Butler. Mrs. Mayo.


Mr. Soll. Genesis And no body else?


Butler. Yes, One Benjamin Turbet, who is since dead.


Mr. Soll. Genesis But consider your Oath Friend, once more, and recollect your
self, do you swear positively Mrs. Mayo was by, and did see him at the same
time?


Butler. I see her look out of the Window into the Yard, and I believe she did
see him.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Well then, let us examine her Evidence and yours together, and
see how they agree.


Oats. My Lord, these are not questions tending to satisfy the Jury at all, as
to the point in question.


L. C. J. Are they not, methinks they are, whatsoever you think.


Oats. After Six years time, to ask such poor ignorant people such trifling
questions!


L. C. J. Pray Sir be contented, and let the Kings Council examine the
Witnesses.


Oats. My Lord, he says I was here in May, that is enough.


L. C. J. Well Sir, I know what he says.


Mr. Soll. Genesis And you shall hear Mr. Oats, how your Witnesses agree.


L. C. J. Go on Mr. Solicitor, and do you sit still and be quiet.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Then my Lord, I would ask him this question more, the first
time you saw Oats come to Sir Richard Barkers, what habit pray you was he in?


Butler. He was in a disguise.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Ay, what disguise?


Butler. He had a White Hat flapping over his Ears, his Hair cut short, close
to his Ears, and a gray short Coat.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Had he never a Periwig on?


Butler. No, his Hair was cut short to his Ears.


Mr. Hauses. Was he in such a disguise, that a Man might not ordinarily know
him, that had known him before?


Butler. Truly my Lord, I did not know him when he first came in, till he spoke
to me, and asked me, how do you John; and then I recollected who he was, that
it was Mr. Oats.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Was he always in the same Habit, when he came thither?


Butler. The next time he came, he had a Cinnamon colored Suit, and a long
black Periwig that was curled down thus far, and a black Hat with a green
Ribbon and green Cuff-strings about his Wrists.


L. C. J. Did you ever see Oats dine there?


Butler. Yes I did.


L. C. J. When was that?


Butler. After my Master came home from Putney.


L. C. J. Who was there besides?


Butler. One Sir William Thurrell and Madam Thurrell.


L. C. J. How often did he dine there?


Butler. Several times.


L. C. J. Who else was there?


Butler. My Master and his Daughter.


L. C. J. And who else.


Butler. Mrs. Mayo.


L. C. J. What is become of your Masters Daughter?


Butler. I beg your pardon for that my Lord.


L. C. J. Where is she Man?


Butler. She is at home I suppose.


L. C. J. What do thou beg my pardon for then?


Butler. My Lord, I call to mind she did not dine with them.


L. C. J. Did she dine at any time with him there?


Butler. Yes, I remember several times, but not then.


L. C. J. When did you see your Masters Daughter last?


Butler. I have not seen her this Quarter of this Year.


L. C. J. Where is she now?


Butler. At home at Putney my Lord, I believe.


L. C. J. And she was several times there when he dined there.


Butler. Yes, She was at home.


L. C. J. Did Mrs. Mayo see him at Dinner there?


Butler, Yes, I believe she did.


L. C. J. How often did he dine there about this time you speak of?


Butler. Several times.


L. C. J. Do you think seven times?


Butler. I do think he might have dined there seven times.


L. C. J. Did he more than seven times do you think?


Butler. I cannot number how many times it was.


L. C. J. Now come in Mrs. Mayo again.


Mrs. Mayo. Here I am my Lord.


L. C. J. Mrs. Mayo, give me leave to ask you a question or two.


Mrs. Mayo. Yes my Lord what you please.


L. C. J. You say (if I do not mis-remember; if I do, I beg your pardon, and
you will correct me) a week in May was the first time you saw Mr. Oats, and that
was at Sir Richard Barkers.


Mrs. Mayo. I think it might be about the beginning of May.


L. C. J. Had he been in the House before?


Mrs. Mayo. Not at that time that I know of, but as they told me.


L. C. J. Who told you?


Mrs. Mayo. That Coachman there John Butler, and one Benjamin who lived in the
House.


L. C. J. Then you did not see him the first time he came; what say you Butler?


Butler. She did see him out of the Window in the yard.


L. C. J. Well let that pass then, come I Will ask you another question upon your
Oath, how often have you seen him dine there?


Mrs. Mayo. I saw him dine that time that I spoke of.


L. C. J. Did not he dine there above once?


Mrs. Mayo. No he did not.


L. C. J. What say you Butler?


Butler. He did dine there several times with them.


L. C. J. Then one of you two must be mistaken I am sure.


Oats. My Lord, if your Lordship would please to give me leave to speak, I
would set it right.


L. C. J. Good Sir let them set themselves right if they can, we need none of
your Instructions.


Oats. My Lord, I desire --


L. C. J. Why, how now; pray Sir be at quiet. Mrs. Mayo, pray what Habit had
Oats when you saw him first?


Mrs. Mayo. He was in a gray Hat and a gray Coat.


L. C. J. Was his hair short or long?


Mrs. Mayo. He had on a kind of a short Wigg.


Mr. Soll. Genesis You are sure it was a Wigg.


Mrs. Mayo. Yes, a kind of a brown Perriwigg.


L. C. J. And he says his hair was cut short to his ears.


Oats. These things are very lean stuff to perjure a Witness upon.


Mr. Soll. Genesis When he came the second time what Clothes had he on?


Mrs. Mayo. Afterward he came in black Clothes and a long Perriwig.


Mr. Hauses. What colored Perriwig was that, a black or a white one?


Mrs. Mayo. Not a black but a brown.


Mr. Soll. Genesis You say it was long.


Mrs. Mayo. Longer than his other, yet not very long neither.


L. C. J. Here are I know not how many Contradictions in these Witnesses
Testimonies.


Oats. Truly my Lord, I do not find in the Examination of the St. Omers
Witnesses, you were so strict, or bore half so hard upon them, as you do upon
my Witnesses, what does it signify my Lord, whether the Wigg were long or
short, black or brown?


L. C. J. We have no other way to detect Perjuries, but by these Circumstances;
and it is the duty of a Judge to enquire into all Particulars: as in a
Controversy about words, were they spoken in Latin or in English, and so to
all places and postures of sitting, riding, or the like; as you know the
Perjury of the Elders in the case of Susanna, was by their different Testimony
in particular Circumstances discovered.


Oats. My Lord, I will ask her but one short question, by the Oath you have
taken Mrs. Mayo, to speak the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth, as you expect the face of God with comfort in another World; did you see
me at Sir Richard Barkers at any time in May 78. the May before the Plot was
discovered? for that is the main question.


Mrs. Mayo. Yes I did, and I speak nothing here, but what I speak as in the
presence of the Lord.


L. C. J. Prithee Woman do thou think we ask thee any thing that we think
thou do not speak in the presence of the Lord; we are all of us in the
presence of the Lord always.


Mrs. Mayo. And shall answer before him for all that we have done and said, all
of us, the proudest and the greatest here.


L. C. J. But I would not have so much to answer for as thou have in this
business for all the World.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Well we have done with her now, she may go away.


L. C. J. Where does she live now?


Crier. Mrs. Mayo where do you live now?


Mrs. Mayo. In Leaden-hall-street my Lord.


L. C. J. When did you see Sir Richard Barker's Daughter?


Mrs. Mayo. About a Fortnight ago.


L. C. J. Where?


Mrs. Mayo. In Barbican in London.


L. C. J. Do you live with Sir Richard Barker now?


Mrs. Mayo, I do not live with him now.


L. C. J. Did his Daughter use to be at the Table at dinner?


Mrs. Mayo. She was often in the Country my Lord.


L. C. J. Did she eat at his Table at that time when Oats was there?


Mrs. Mayo. I am not able to say whether she did or not; she used to be in
Wales at Sir Thomas Middleton's sometimes, and with Madam Thurrell her Aunt,
who was her Mothers Sister and her two Daughters.


L. C. J. In Wales do thou say, where?


Mrs. Mayo. My Lord in your own Country at one Doctor Cockets: I know your
Lordship, though your Lordship does not know me.


L. C. J. I am very glad of it good Woman; but prithee did ever Sir Richard
Barker dine with Mr. Oats?


Mrs. Mayo. I cannot say he did, he went to and fro.


L. C. J. Well, have you any more Witnesses?


Oats, Crier, call Philip Page.


Crier. Here he is Sir.


Oats. Pray swear him, (which was done) pray be pleased to give my Lord and
the Jury the best account you can of my being in Town. But Mr. Page, the
question that I first ask you, is whether I was here in April or May, and in
what year it was that you did see me at your Masters House?


L. C. J. When did you see Mr. Oats at your Master's House? you mean Sir
Richard Barker to be his Master I suppose?


Oats. Yes my Lord.


L. C. J. What do you say to it?


Page. Truly I cannot be positive to the year, but to the best of my
remembrance it was 78.


Oats. Pray tell my Lord and the Jury some Circumstances in that year that did
happen to you, that makes you believe it was 78.


Page. Sir, I Will give you the best satisfaction I can to the best of my
knowledge; he came to Sir Richard Barker's one evening, and there he enquired
for Doctor Tongue: he was in a disguise, in a light colored Coat, something
like to Frize, but it was not Frize; the term that they give it, I cannot so
readily tell: he had his hair cut short almost to his ears, and he had a
broad-brim'd Hat on, and a small stick in his hand, walking melancholy about
the Hall: I happening to be the first body he met with as I suppose, he asked
me if Doctor Tongue was within; I told him no, I had not seen him of a
considerable time: he then asked me where Sir Richard Barker was; I told him he
was ill now at Putney; says he, when will he be here; I told him I could not
tell.


L. C. J. Did he see any body there but you?


Page. That I cannot tell my Lord, not that I know of.


L. C. J. What time of the year was it?


Mr. At. Genesis And what Month?


Page. What year and what month it was I am not able to say my Lord.


L. C. J. What became of him after that?


Page. He went out of our Gates then: Sir, he was walking up and down
melancholy, and not finding any one, as I suppose, to answer him, he continued
walking in the Patients Hall, where they used to wait on Sir Richard Barker,
that came to discourse with him about Physic; and upon my answer to his
question he went away.


L. C. J. Did you ever see him any other time near to that time?


Page. No, I did not.


L. C. J. Did you use to wait on Table?


Page. No, I did not.


L. C. J. What Service were you then engaged in at Sir Richard Barker's?


Page. I made up the Physic my Lord.


L. C. J. Did you not acquaint the Coachman, nor Mrs. Mayo, nor Sir Richard
Barker with it?


Page. I think Sir Richard Barker was in Town soon after, and I did acquaint
him with it.


Oats. But cannot you tell what time this is Sir?


Page. I can say no other than I have said; I believe it was in 78.


L. C. J. Was this in June, July, or May, or when?


Page. I cannot say punctually what month it was my Lord; but to the best of my
knowledge and remembrance, it was in the beginning of May.


Oats. Had not your Master a Patient at Islington at that time, that was sick
of a Fever?


Page. Yes he had.


Mr. J. Withens. Why would Mr. Oats have given the Patient Physic?


Page. No my Lord, but 'twas about that time that the Patient was under my
Master's Cure.


Oats. Indeed the St. Omers men do swear thorough stitch, but my honest
Witnesses are cautious, it being so long ago; and he that is a Minister of the
Church of England, (as they say) speaks to a very day, upon a much slighter
Circumstance: pray call Mr. William Walker.


Crier. Here he is.


Oats. Swear him; (which was done) be pleased, Walker, to give my Lord to
understand, when 'twas you saw me here in London in disguise; and when it was
you swore six years agone at the Old-Bayly, that you saw me here in London:
Sir, the time in Controversy is this; I came here to discover a Plot of the
Papists against the Kings Life and the Religion, and I swore --


L. C. J. You must not ask questions in that manner. It is properest for you to
propose your questions to the Court, and they will ask the Witnesses.


Oats. Then I will not ask him, but propose it to your Lordship.


L. C. J. Ay, propose what questions you please, and if they are fair I Will ask
them.


Oats. Then my Lord I would ask Mr. Walker this question; when 'twas he met me
with a disguise, in what year and what month.


Mr. Walker. My Lord, I have been interrogated in former times upon this point,
six or seven years ago, and I do confess I did see the man, and met him between
St. Martins-lane and Leicester-fields; and truly my Lord I think I may say it
was my unhappiness to meet with him; for I have had a great deal of trouble by
it since, Subpoena upon Subpoena, trouble after trouble, that I am even weary
of it; for I am an old man: but I do say I did meet him at that end of the
Town, between St. Martins-lane and Leicester-fields in a strange disguise, he
was just like a Vagrant, a very Rascal, and that is true I believe, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you know him before?


Mr. Walker. Yes, or I had not known him then.


L. C. J. When was this?


Mr. Walker. My Lord I Will tell you, my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, when I was
at the Old-Bayly, asked me if I knew what time it was, I saw him thus; said I
my Lord, it is almost a year and a half since I saw him: and I being an old man,
little thought it worth the while to lay up the particular time in my Memory;
but I Will cast about in my thoughts to make the best conjecture I can; for now I
will not be upon my Oath, it being but conjecture.


L. C. J. But now you are upon your Oath, remember that, man.


Mr. Walker. My Lord, I am speaking what I said to the Court at that time.


L. C. J. Pray do not tell us an old tedious Story of the questions and answers
in the Old-Bayly; but mind what is said to you here: my question is now, what
time you saw Oats disguised between St. Martins-lane and Leicester-fields as
you say you did.


Mr. Walker. My Lord, I cannot prescribe the time, but I Will guess as near as I
can with the best probability, and that is, upon this circumstance; when I went
forward into Leicester-fields, in the Court before the House, I saw the
Elm-Trees budded forth as big as an Hazle-Nut: so that I did conjecture by that
Token, it might be between Lady Day, the latter end of April; that was the time
as near as I could guess.


L. C. J. In what year was that?


Mr. Walker. I cannot very well tell what year it was.


L. C. J. Was it in 77 or 78.


Mr. Walker. Truly my Lord, I never thought it worth so much taking notice of,
to fix the particular time in my memory.


Oats. Whether was it that year the Plot was discovered, or the Michaelmass
following.


Mr. Walker. I cannot tell when the Plot was discovered, or whether it be found
out yet or no?


Oats. But was it the year before you were Examined?


Mr. Walker. To aswer you Mr. Oats, when it was exactly, I cannot say; truly I
would give you the best satisfaction I could, and do you as much right as I
would do my self; I think if that time when I was Examined, were in 77 or 78,
it was near a year and a quarter before I did see you.


L. C. J. Well, what can you make of this?


Oats. It Is not to be supposed he is a very willing Witness, but yet he says,
'twas a year and a quarter, before the Trial in which he was Examined, which
must be in April 78.


L. C. J. I would know this question of you: were you present at the
Old-Bayley, when the Five Jesuits were Tried?


Mr. Walker. I was there my Lord.


L. C. J. Were you at any Trial but one?


Mr. Walker. I was not Examined at any time but one.


L. C. J. Have you any more questions to ask him?


Mr. Walker. My Lord Chief Justice that then was, did ask me if I knew any of
the Prisoners at the Bar, and I looked upon all of them, and I said I knew not
either of them.


Oats. Pray my Lord, ask him whether he was not produced, when the St. Omers
Men were produced, and gave his evidence as to my being in Town at that time.


L. C. J. He hears the Question, let him answer it?


Mr. Walker. I am not able to answer you, because you put several Questions
together; but this I say, I was never Examined but once, though I have been
Subpoena'd often, to my great torment and trouble.


Oats. Did you give Evidence at that Trial, that you saw me in April 78?


Mr. Walker. I testified that I saw you, and by such circumstances, it must be
about such a time as well as I could suggest; but I could not, nor cannot speak
positively.


Oats. Now my Lord, I shall go on to another part of my Evidence, and call
some other Witnesses, and first of all, I come to Mr. Sergeant Maynard, and I
desire he may be sworn.


(Which was done.)

L. C. J. What do you ask my Brother Maynard?


Oats. I call Mr. Sergeant Maynard to give an account of the Proceedings of
the House of Commons upon my Discovery of the Popish Plot.


L. C. J. We will not admit that to be any Evidence at all; nor can it be by
Law.


Oats. My Lord, Mr. Sergeant Maynard was one of the Committee of the House of
Commons that managed the Impeachment, and can give an account of the Evidence
and Records that were produced at the Trial of the late Viscount Stafford.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. I know nothing truly, nor can remember any thing of it now.


L. C. J. He says, he remembers nothing.


Mr. Serj. Maynard. If Mr. Oats had told me before hand, when he Subpoena'd
me, what time, and what particular things he would have Examined me to,
probably if I was there, I have Notes that I then took, but I can never swear
to my Memory, for any Cause so long ago.


Oats. My Lord, I am very sorry Mr. Sergeant Maynard's Age should so impair
his Memory.


L. C. J. I dare say, you are not more sorry than he is for his Age.


Oats. Well my Lord, I cannot help it: Then I desire Mr. Blayney may be ak'd
whether he has his Notes of my Lord Stafford's Trial.


Mr. Blayney. No, my Lord, I have them not here; Mr. Oats by his Ticket of his
Subpoena, desired only the Notes of Ireland, Whitebread and Langhorns Trial.


L. C. J. But I must tell you Mr. Oats, if those Notes were here, they could
be of no use to you without the Record of my Lord Stafford's Attainder; if you
ask any thing upon another Trial, you must produce first the Record of that
Trial, and then you may examine to what was given in Evidence at the Trial.


Oats. My Lord, it is of Record in the House of Lords.


L. C. J. But that we are not to take notice of, without the Record be brought
in Evidence before us: we must go according to the course of Law in all Cases.


Oats. Then my Lord, I must betake my self to another part of my defense, and
that is to prove the frequent attempts made to baffle the Discovery of this
Popish Plot, and to stifle the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and to fling
it upon a Protestant Peer.


L. C. J. But that is no Evidence neither.


Mr. Just. Holloway. Surely that is very Collateral Evidence.


L. C. J. Nay, it is no Evidence at all in this Case; we must not admit of any
such Evidence to be given.


Oats. Good my Lord, if this had not been true, which was sworn by Witnesses
that had discovered the Plot, why should these Men appear to suborn Witnesses
(and they have been Convicted of Subornation, and endeavoring) to baffle the
Discovery, particularly as to Justice Godfrey's Death?


L. C. J. Mr. Oats, I must keep you to Evidence that is proper; we are upon
our Oaths to go according to Law, and the Jury are upon their Oaths to Try this
Cause according to their Evidence; and we are bound to give them this advice in
point of Law, that nothing must weigh, or have any consideration with them,
that you offer if it be not legal and proper Evidence: if you can say and prove
that any of the Witnesses that have been produced this day against you, have
been tampered with; or that they have tampered with any of the former Evidence,
that is a good Evidence against them; but it must not be by any means admitted
that the time of the Court be taken up, or the Jury enveigled by that which has
not a natural tendency to the business before us.


Oats. But if your Lordship please, this Consult in April 78. was discovered
to the House of Commons among the other parts of the Discovery of the Treasons
of several Noble Men and Gentlemen: now upon the whole discovery of the Plot, I
would desire that I might give in proof the Proceedings of the House of Commons.


L. C. J. No, no, you cannot.


Oats. Pray my Lord, is not the Journal of the House of Commons Evidence?


L. C. J. No, we say it is not at all.


Oats. Is that the Opinion of the whole Court my Lord?


L. C. J. Yes, undoubtedly, there is no question of it.


Oats. Is any Record of the House of Lords Evidence?


L. C. J. Yes, I tell you it is, and that because it is a Record; but there is
a vast difference between the Records of the House of Lords, and the Journals
of the House of Commons.


Oats. The Journals have been delivered in as Evidence before now.


L. C. J. I cannot tell what they have been, but I am sure they ought not to
be, and whatever they have been elsewhere, they cannot be here; and I Will tell
you a plain reason for it, because they have not so much power in the House of
Commons as to give an Oath: but the House of Peers is a Court of Record, and
therefore their Proceedings are Evidence as the Proceedings of the Kings Bench
here; or any other Court of Record are.


Oats. Then my Lord if that part of my Evidence be overruled; before I come
to sum up my Evidence, I desire to offer this thing. My Lord, I can produce
several Members of the House of Commons in the several Parliaments, that can
remember how they proceeded against the Lords in the Tower, and the Popish
Traitors upon my Discovery, and what credit I had in the House of Commons; Will
that be Evidence pray my Lord?


L. C. J. No, it will not, if you will produce any one that you told this to
before the public Discovery, that may be Evidence such as it is, and is often
allowed; but what the House of Commons did upon the Discovery, that is not any
Evidence at all.


Oats. Then my Lord, suppose I can prove, that I gave an Early and Timely
account to any of the House of Lords of this Conspiracy, and did acquaint them
with the Consult in April as part of it; I desire to know whether in producing
any of those Lords, I shall give that which is Evidence.


L. C. J. Call whom you will that you told any thing to, that is a sort of
Evidence, I tell you?


Oats. Then I call my Lord of Devonshire.


L. C. J. Here is my Lord of Devonshire.


Oats. My Lord, I beg your pardon for the trouble I put your Lordship to; but
your Lordship sees the necessity of it it is for the justification of the
Truth, to which I will give my Blood for a Seal if I be called to it.


L. C. J. My Lord of Devonshire, your Lordship must be sworn (which was done.)


Oats. Will your Lordship be pleased to acquaint the Court and the Jury (your
Lordship being at that time a Member of the Commons House) what an account I
gave there of this particular Consult (to keep to that point that is here in
question) before the Court this day, and with what credit I was received in all
these Parliaments; for my Credit and the Credit of the Parliament is now in
question.


E. of Devonshire. My Lord, all I can say to it is this; you Mr. Oats gave a
long account of a Consult and Conspiracy among the Jesuits: but I cannot
remember any particular, it is so long ago.


L. C. J. Every Body knows this, you gave a long Narrative into the House of
Commons and House of Lords too.


Oats. Ay, and it was a true one; but my Lord of Devonshire, I desire your
Lordship would be pleased to give the Court and the Jury an account, with what
credit I was received in those Three Parliaments your Lordship sat as Member in.


E. of Devonshire. I remember that the two Westminster Parliaments after the
long Parliament, were so satisfied with the Discovery, that they passed a Vote
in the House of Commons --


L. C. J. The Votes of the House of Commons are no Evidence at all.


Oats. They show what opinion the Parliament was of.


L. C. J. Many Votes that have been made of late, I hope will neither be
Evidence for, nor put in practice again.


E. of Devonshire. My Lord, it is well known to all the World the Vote I speak
of.


L. C. J. Nay my Lord I speak not to your Lordship; for we all know those Votes
that I speak of were not according to your Lordships mind: But we only say thus
in General, that because the House of Commons cannot give an Oath, therefore
what is done there, is not an Evidence here, or in any Court of Record.


Oats. But my Lord, that I must urge, I do perceive that in the time of
Parliament, and during the Sitting of the House of Commons, Votes have been
brought in as Bars to the Proceedings of Inferior Courts; and this Court does
not look upon it self as Superior to the Great Court of Parliament, and then if
they may be brought --


L. C. J. Which they cannot be, nor never were, nor I am sure ought to be; nor
I hope never will be as long as there is any Justice in the Nation.


Oats. But my Lord you will allow the Records of the House of Lords to be
Evidence?


L. C. J. Yes, I tell you I will, and for that reason, because they are Records
out of a Court of Record: an Order of Court Baron is no Evidence, because it is
no Court of Record; but a Judgment of a Court Leet is Evidence, because it is a
Court of Record; and there is the difference.


Oats. My Lord, I call in the next place my Lord of Anglesey, if he be in
Court.


L. C. J. No, he is not here.


Oats. Pray will you give me leave to call my Lord Keeper then?


L. C. J. See in the Court of Chancery, whether my Lord Keeper be there.


Crier. No my Lord he is not; he is gone.


Oats. He was Subpoena'd my Lord, and I can have Affidavit made of it: he was
a material Witness for me.


L. C. J. I cannot help it; he is not here.


Oats. Pray call my Lord Chief Baron.


L. C. J. Go one of you into the Exchequer, and see if my Lord Chief Baron be
there, and tell him Mr. Oats calls for him as a Witness.


Oats. And Mr. Justice Levins.


Crier. The Courts are both up; and they are all gone.


Oats. They were subpoena'd I am sure to be here; well go and see whether they
are there or no.


L. C. J. In the mean time do you call some other Witnesses.


Oats. I call my Lord Chief Justice Jones.


L. C. J. The Crier is gone to look for the Judges.


Oats. Then I call my Lord of Clare.


L. C. J. Here is my Lord of Clare.


E. of Clare. My Lord I can remember nothing it is so long time ago.


L. C. J. My Lord of Clare says he can remember nothing.


Oats. I only call my Lord of Clare to ask him one question which I hope his
Lordship will remember.


L. C. J. Swear my Lord of Clare, (which was done;) well what is it you ask my
Lord?


Oats. My Lord of Clare, the question I would ask your Lordship is, with what
credit I was received in the House of Lords upon my Discovery; and that you
will to the best of your memory, give my Lord and the Jury an account, how the
House of Peers proceeded upon my Evidence.


E. of Clare. Truly my Lord I cannot give any account; it is of so long
standing.


Oats. It is a great while ago my Lord, and therefore it is hard measure that
I must be brought to this Trial so long after.


L. C. J. If it be a long time, we cannot help it: we cannot force People to
prosecute sooner than they will do.


Oats. I desire Mr. Baron Gregory may be called.


L. C. J. He is not here, but see and call my Brother Gregory; I hear they are
all together in the Treasury.


Oats. Then I call Mr. Williams that was Speaker in the House of Commons.


L. C. J. Here is Mr. Williams, (he was sworn.)


Oats. I desire, Mr. Williams, because you were then Speaker of the Commons
House of Parliament, you would be pleased to tell what you remember concerning
the credit I received in that Parliament in which you were Speaker, upon the
Discovery I made of the Popish Plot; and particularly as to the Consult of
Jesuits to kill the late King in the month of April. 78.


Mr. Williams. My Lord, my Memory is never very good; but especially in a case
that is at such a distance of time, and which consists of so many Particulars
as this, I mean Mr. Oats Discovery. But this my Lord I do remember; he was
examined at the Bar of the House of Commons and gave a long account: but it is
more than any man can do to tell every Particular that is said in that House.


L. C. J. Was he upon his Oath, Mr. Williams, at the Bar of the House of
Commons?


Mr. Williams. My Lord, he was as other men are that are examined in the House
of Commons.


L. C. J. We all know it could not be upon Oath, they have not Power to give an
Oath.


Mr. Williams. What Reputation he was of, I cannot say so well as what their
Proceedings did testify.


L. C. J. Nor in case they did believe him never so much, is it any thing to
this question, which is, whether he swore true or false at Ireland's Trial.


Mr. Wiliams. My Lord, when a Person is brought to the Bar, there to be a
Witness in any Cause, every body is silent, and the Witness is heard what he
has to say; and so was Mr. Oats: when he had done he withdrew; but what the
Opinion of the House was upon it, I must submit to their Votes and Resolutions.


L. C. J. Which you know Mr. Williams, are no Evidence.


Mr. Williams. That I must submit to the Court.


Oats. I desire my Lord of Clare would be pleased to tell, if he remembers,
what Credit the House of Lords gave me upon my Discovery.


E. of Clare. My Lord, I do not well hear Mr. Oats question.


Oats. My Lord, my question is this, when I was brought to the Bar of the
Lords House, whether I did not receive the thanks of the Lords House for my
Discovery?


E. of Clare. Truly Sir, at the beginning of the Discovery of the Popish Plot,
I was not in Town, nor in the House.


L. C. J. But now Mr. Oats I hope you are satisfied by the answer that is
given by your own Witness, that what is done in the House of Commons, is no
Evidence; and I would have you remember that is the Reason of it, because they
are no Court of Record, and because they cannot so much as give an Oath.


Oats. My Lord, I see my Lord of Huntingdon is here; and tho I did not
Subpoena his Lordship, nor designed to have troubled him; yet being here, I
desire his Lordship would give the Court an account what Credit I had in the
House of Lords upon my Discovery.


L. C. J. Swear my Lord of Huntingdon (which was done.)


E. of Huntingdon. I do believe my Lord, Mr. Oats Discovery found a good
reception in the House of Lords; but it was grounded upon the opinion, that
what he said was true, and that he was an honest man: for so the House then
accounted him to be; and upon this it was their Lordships gave credit to his
Testimony; and indeed had the matter been true, it was of high Importance to
have it thorougly examined: But since that time it being apparent there were so
many, and great Contradictions, Falsities, and Perjuries in his Evidence; upon
which so much innocent blood has been shed, I believe a great many Persons who
were concerned in the Trials of those unfortunate men, are heartily afflicted
and sorry for their share in it: And I do believe most of the House of Peers
have altered their opinion, as to this man's credit; and look upon his Evidence
as I do, to be very false.


L. C. J. Do you hear him Mr. Oats?


Oats. No my Lord, I do not very well.


L. C. J. Then my Lord of Huntingdon turn your face to the Jury; and say what
you said to us over again.


Which his Lordship did to the same Effect.

Oats. Very well my Lord.


Mr. J. Withens. There Is your Credit with the House of Lords, Mr. Oats.


Oats. My Lord, I called you in to answer my question, as to somewhat what is
past, and to give your judgment how you are inclined to believe now.


L. C. J. Nay, but with your favor, it was to declare what opinion the House
of Lords had of you; and he says very well, and that is in truth the same
answer that must be given, for the Judges and the Juries that tried the People
upon your Evidence: says my Lord of Huntingdon at first, truly I did believe
Mr. Oats did swear true, and he had credit with me, and so he had with others;
But now upon further Examination into things, and in process of time
Discoveries have been made of the truth, and that what he swore, is false; so
that now I believe in my Conscience he is actually forsworn, and has drawn
innocent Blood upon the Nation; and no body will believe a word he says.


Oats. Well my Lord, I have done with my Lord of Huntingdon.


Mr. J. Withens. And he has done with you, as I perceive.


L. C. J. Yes, truly methinks ye shake hands and part very fairly.


Mr. J. Holloway. There Is my Lord Chief Baron; what say you to him Mr. Oats?


L. C. J. Is my Lord Chief Baron sworn?


Crier. Yes, my Lord, he is.


L. C. J. Then what do you ask him?


Oats. My Lord, I called your Lordship, because your Lordship sat as a
Commissioner of Oyer and Terminer in the Old-Bayly, at Ireland, Whitebread and
Langhorn's Trials; and that which I call your Lordship for, is to give an
account to my Lord and the Jury, of the satisfaction your Lordship received
concerning the fullness and fairness of the Evidence then delivered by me in
those Trials.


L. C. Baron. My Lord, I cannot charge my memory with it.


L. C. J. He says he cannot remember.


L. C. Baron. No not in particular; but in general I remember there was a great
many Persons that gave Evidence in those Trials on the one side and the other:
There were a great many Persons that came from St. Omers, that gave Evidence
there of Mr. Oats being at St. Omers, when he said he was in Town.


Oats. And what Credit were they of at that time, pray my Lord?


L. C. Baron. I think they were Persons of very good Credit; they were
Gentlemen of good Families many of them.


Oats. Did the Jury believe them at that time?


L. C. Baron. I cannot tell what the Jury did.


L. C. J. Nor is it any matter at all what they did: But I would ask you my
Lord but one question: Have you heard this Evidence that has been given here to
day?


L. C. Baron. No my Lord, I have not.


L. C. J. If you had, I would then have asked you, whether you believe him now
or not.


L. C. Baron. Truly my Lord, I never had any great Faith in him, I do assure
you, as to my self.


Mr. J. Withens. You hear what he says Mr. Oats; you had never any great
Credit with him.


Oats. My Lord, I am not at all concerned at this; I value my self more upon
my own Innocence and Integrity, than any Man's good or bad Opinion whatsoever.


L. C. J. Ah! your innocence is very great!


Oats. Then my Lord, I will conclude my Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, before Mr. Oats goes to sum up his Evidence, we have
some other Evidence to give.


L. C. J. What say you Mr. Oats? will you call any other Witnesses to this
point?


Oats. My Lord, if they bring any other Evidence, I hope I may have my turn to
answer it.


L. C. J. Ah! Truly, if they bring any new Evidence that you have not applied
to already, God forbid, that you should not be heard; but if it only gives an
answer to the Evidence that has been given, then you must not retort on them:
for they are to have the last word; but it is not fit withal, that you should
be denied any thing that is necessary or really of advantage to you.


Oats. If they offer any new Evidence to my dis-reputation, the question is,
whether I may have a time allotted me to make my defense against that Evidence.


L. C. J. Ah! Ah! In God's name by all means?


Mr. At. Genesis This is the usual method of Proceedings; but I would know if Mr.
Oats has any more Witnesses to Examine to this point, that he has examined to
already.


Oats. My Lord, I think I have no further Evidence at present, till I hear
what they further say.


Mr. At. Genesis Then may it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury
--


Oats. I hope when your Lordship sums up the Evidence, you will remember what
has been said by the Witnesses.


L. C. J. You may assure your self, I will remember whatsoever has been said on
the one side and the other, as near as I can: the Gentlemen of the Jury are Men
of understanding, and I see they take Notes, and I Will give them all the
assistance I can.


Oats. Truly my Lord, I have some more Witnesses to the same purpose, if your
Lordship please to spare time to hear them.


L. C. J. Ah! Ah! We sit here to hear the Witnesses, call whom you will.


Oats. Is my Lord Lovelace here.


L. C. J. I cannot tell, I do not see him here; but you did call my Brother
Gregory, there he is, what say you to him?


Oats. Mr. Baron Gregory was Speaker of the House of Commons in one of the
Westminster Parliaments.


L. C. J. Swear my Brother Gregory, (which was done.)


Oats. I desire your Honor would be pleased to give this Court and the Jury
an account, you being Speaker of the House of Commons, what credit I received
there in that House upon my discovery of the Popish Plot.


Mr. B. Gregory. My Lord, that is a pretty general question, it is not possible
for me to remember the Proceedings in the House of Commons so long ago.


L. C. J. But Brother, I tell you what he means by it: he would have you to
answer this question, whether he was of good credit in the House of Commons or
not.


Mr. B. Gregory. I know not what answer to make about the credit he there had:
any Member of the House of Commons may give as good and better an account in
that matter than I; and truly I do not remember that Mr. Oats was before the
Bar of the House when I was Speaker: I believe it was before I was Speaker,
that he was Examined at the Commons Bar.


L. C. J. Well, he can remember nothing of it.


Oats. Is my Lord Lovelace there?


Crier. He has been called, but he is not here.


Oats. Call my Lord of Stamford.


Crier. He is not here.


Oats. Call Sir Francis Winnington.


Crier. He is not here.


Oats. Call Silas Titus Esquire


Crier. He is not here.


Oats. Call Sir George Treby.


Crier. He is not here.


Oats. Call Sir Francis Pemberton: These have been all Subpoena'd.


Crier. He is not here.


Oats. Is my Lord Bishop of London?


L. C. J. Here is my Lord Bishop of London, pray swear my Lord Bishop of
London; (which was done.)


Oats. I beg your Lordship, if you can, would give an account of your
remembrance in this matter: your Lordship was often in Committees of the House
of Peers about this business, and from first to last, you were in the Committee
for further Examination of the Popish Plot; And you were not only of the
Committee, but you also sat as a Baron in the House. I humbly beg your
Lordship would please to tell as far as you can charge your Memory, what
Reputation I had in the House of Lords, where I was upon my Oath, and in
particular, whether your Lordship remembers that I received the thanks of the
House for the Service I had done for the King and Kingdom in the Discovery.


Mr. J. Holloway. It is a long question my Lord.


L. B. of London. It is so my Lord; but my answer will be very short: for it is
a very little I can remember after so great a distance of time, and the
transactions have been public; nor can I acquaint the Court with any thing,
but what is known already; and that is this, I remember that the Plot was
discovered by him, and his discovery was received as Evidence at the Bar of
the House of Lords, and believed, and the thanks of the House were given him at
that time for it.


L. C. J. There Is Sir George Treby, What do you ask him? but first let him be
sworn? (which was done.)


Oats. Pray be pleased to ask Sir George Treby, who was Chairman of the
Committee of Secrecy, and was manager in the Trial of the Lord Viscount
Stafford, that he will be pleased to tell what Credit I had in both Houses upon
that Trial.


L. C. J. I told you before, you must urge nothing of that Trial, unless you
have the Record-here.


Oats. Then my Lord, I desire Sir George may give an account what he knows of
the correspondencies between Mr. Coleman and the Sea of Rome.


L. C. J. No, that will not be any Evidence at all in this case; for that is
not at all here in question.


Oats. Then my Lord, I desire Sir George Treby may speak what he knows of my
Credit in the House of Commons.


L. C. J. Ah! What says he to that?


Sir George Treby. My Lord, I can answer for nothing but my own Judgment; I
cannot tell what Credit he had with any particular Member of the House of
Commons; I do remember indeed, he was there several times at the Bar, but not
upon Oath, but as others usually are there, and concerning the discovery: there
was a Vote all the Kingdom knows of, that they were satisfied there was a Plot,
but whether that Vote was grounded altogether upon his Evidence, or how far
upon his Evidence, I cannot tell, nor what any Man thought of it besides my
self.


Oats. I desire Mr. Serj. Pemberton might be called again.


Crier. He is not here.


Oats. Then pray call Sir William Dolben.


Crier. He is not here neither.


Oats. Then I call Sir Edward Atkins.


Crier. He is not here.


Oats. Call Mr. Richard White.


Crier. He is not here.


Oats. My Lord, these were all Subpoena'd, but they will not come; they are
frighted away.


L. C. J. We know nothing of that, they may come if they will.


Oats. Call Mr. Thomas Cox.


Crier. He is not here, but here is Mr. White.


Oats. I pray he may be sworn, (which was done) I desire to know of him
whether he were not a Jury man upon the Trials of Ireland and Whitebread.


Mr. White. No, I was not.


Oats. Then I am mistaken, I beg your pardon for this trouble.


L. C. J. Well, there is my Brother Dolben come now. What say you to him? Swear
my Brother Dolben? (which was done.)


Oats. May it please you Sir William Dolben, you sat as a Judge upon the
Trials of Mr. Ireland, Mr. Whitebread and Mr. Langhorn; and I call you, Sir
William Dolben, to give an account to my Lord and the Jury, what Credit my
Evidence had at those Trials, and how the Jury was satisfied with it.


L. C. J. There is the Verdict man, that finds the Persons you speak of Guilty.


Oats. If that be Evidence enough, I am satisfied my Lord.


L. C. J. Is not that better than his Opinion to show how the Jury was
satisfied; Ah! certainly better than the Opinion of all the twelve Judges; for
that point they would not have Convicted them, except they had been satisfied
with the Evidence.


Sir William Dolben. Have you done with me Sir?


Oats. I have Sir.


L. C. J. Have you called all your Witnesses, or will you call any more?


Oats. No my Lord, I will call no more at present.


Mr. At. Genesis Then my Lord we will go on with another part of our Evidence.
Gentlemen, you see Dr. Oats, to support his Credit, has given two sorts of
Evidence; the one is, some Records of Trials at the Old-Bayly, wherein he had
the good hap to be believed: the other is several noble Persons, and other
Gentlemen, as to the Credit he has had given to hi^ Evidence before. What they
have said, I shall not meddle with at all at this time, but leave the
Observations that are to be made thereupon, till we come to sum up the
Evidence for the King. But as to the first part of his Evidence, that is, as to
the Records produced, and the Verdicts therein given, and the Opinions of the
Judges, we have this to say in point of Evidence as an answer. 1. We shall
produce to you, several Records, wherein he has not been believed; as that of
Sir George Wakeman, and my Lord Castlemain; and not only so, but we shall
actually prove that he was perjured in them; that what he swore against them
was utterly false, and you will hear, this was not the first time that he had
sworn false: for ^n an Accusation that he gave at a Trial at Hastings, we shall
prove he swore Buggery upon a Person, which was proved false.


Oats. Can you produce any such Record Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, we shall.


L. C. J. Do not interrupt the Kings Council; let them go on: you shall be
heard quietly in your time.


Mr. Hanses. Nay, Mr. Oats need not be so hasty to ask for the Records, by
degrees we shall produce Records enough against him.


Mr. At. Genesis We shall prove also by the Journals of the Lords House, that he
did forswear himself: for after he had there made a long Narrative of the Plot,
being asked whether he had any more to accuse, than those Persons that he had
named, and this upon his Oath; he did there swear that he had no more Persons
to accuse.


Oats. That were Members of that House, it was.


L. C. J. Sir, you must be quiet till they have done.


Mr. At. Genesis But soon after he bethought himself, and accuses the Queen and
His Royal Highness the Duke, our now present Sovereign, of being in the Plot.


Oats. What Plot did I accuse them of?


L. C. J. Nay, you must sit down and be quiet; how now, will you not let the
Kings Council speak? you were heard quietly, and so shall they be too.


Oats. Well my Lord, I will be quiet.


Mr. At Genesis These things, my Lord, will show of what Credit he was of at that
time: Another thing we say to these Records, is this; There were two other
Witnesses, Mr. Clay and Mr. Smith, besides those that were now produced, which
were the home Witnesses, that did positively swear, that in April and May 78.
Oats was here in Town: he did then indeed make use of those other canting
Witnesses, for I cannot call them any otherwise, that beat so about the Bush,
and speak of uncertainties, and contradict one another; but those that I name,
Clay and Smith, were home Witnesses, and there lay the Credit of his being in
Town, when the Witnesses which came from St. Omers, say he was beyond Sea.


Oats. My Lord, I beg I may ask one thing; whether my Lord Bishop of London be
there still?


L. C. J. No, my Lord of London is gone.


Oats. I am sorry for it, because he could have given an account of this
Smith, for he knows him.


L. C. J. I cannot help it, you should have desired him to stay while he was
here; go on Mr. Attorney.


Mr. At. Genesis I will my Lord; and this which I am going to say, as an answer
to his Evidence, which will give a full answer to that other Objection which he
made, which was, what was the Reason, when he had given such an Evidence so
long ago, it should be delayed so long e're it was prosecuted. I Will give your
Lordship a Reason and a satisfactory one, till those Discoveries were made that
have lately been made: The Evidence these Witnesses gave, carried a probability
of truth in it; and Sir Richard Barker himself added his Testimony to it, tho
he does not think fit now to come and confirm it: I say hitherto it had some
semblance of truth, and so did balance the other Testimony of them that came
from St. Omers: But when we had discovered that it could be testified by twenty
Persons, that had not been at any of the former Trials, that he was certainly
all that time at St. Omers; and when we had discovered the Tampering and
Practices of Mr. Oats, in Suborning these Witnesses to swear as corruptly as
he swore at first; which we shall show you palpably to be true that he did so;
that gave us encouragement to go on to make enquiry into the matter; but this
was not discovered till half a year ago, or thereabouts. Now as to one of those
Witnesses, that is Mr. Clay, the case stands thus; indeed I expected he would
have brought the same Witnesses he did then; for I presume they are all about
Town, but he has not thought fit to do that: This Clay was then a Priest, and a
Prisoner in the Gate House for that very reason as being accused for being a
Romish Priest; while he was there a Prisoner, Mr. Oats comes and threatens
him, and sollicits him to swear that he was here in Town in May 78. that he
might be provided with proof against what the Boys of St. Omers (as he called
them) would come to testify; and threatened him if he did not, he would hang
him, for he could swear him to be a Priest; and this was about three or four
days before the Trial of the Five Jesuits: At length they came to a Bargain and
Agreement, as you will hear, that he should come and swear this; when Mr. Oats
cannot pretend that the Evidence of Clay was known at all by any of the
Committees that were concerned in the management of his Discovery; or that he
was so much as though of for a Witness. But we shall prove how it came to pass;
and I believe, if Mr. Oats would call him now, (as I do not question he knows
where to have him) Clay would not be so hardy now, as to affirm his former
Testimony. Then as for Mr. Smith, his Case stands thus: Mr. Oats had sworn him
into the Plot, as you will find in his Narrative that he gave in upon Oath,
which is upon Record, and entered in the Journals of the Lords House. He was a
Schoolmaster in Islington, and Oats swears High Treason against him; and
thereupon Warrants went out to take this Smith, and Mr. Oats was very violent
in the pursuit of him but two or three days before the Trial; and then, when
all these Witnesses from St. Omers were come, as he knew very well, he was in
some doubt his design would have failed, and then does he prevail with Smith to
become a Witness for him. And it is evident he did tamper with him, from that
which was done by him at that time: For now he gives him under his hand, (to
show the Impudence, as well as Villainy of the man) as it has been evident
enough in all his carriage) a Paper that should give him Authority to go free
from all Process and Arrests upon any Warrants; and this Protection under Mr.
Oats hand, is directed to all the Kings Officers, thereby commanding them to
take notice that this Mr. Smith, whom before he had accused of being in the
Plot, was an honest man, and employed in great Service for the King at that
time. This Paper, when produced, will show the time when it was made; and then
it will appear, that two days after Smith comes and Swears that he dined with
him the first Monday in May in 78. This was what Smith swore then; and upon my
mentioning of this Practice, if he have any shame in him, it must put him in
some confusion: for we are prepared to prove by undeniable Testimony, that Mr.
Oats did not dine with this Mr. Smith that day: we shall prove it by the whole
Family; but the first time ever Mr. Oats came there, was in July after, when
he came into England from St. Omers, which these Witnesses say, was the latter
end of June. Then it was that he was with Mr. Smith, and came to his House, and
not before. And we shall prove by several Witnesses, that upon the questions
being asked of Mr. Smith, how he came to testify such a thing, his answer was,
I must have died for it, if I had not don't, 'twas only a mistake in point of
time: But he threatened me, and so did some others too, that he would have me
hanged for being in the Plot, if I did not comply with him, and swear this for
him. My Lord, I shall offer this Evidence that I have opened, and then I hope
we shall satisfy the Jury, and all that hear this Trial, that he is one of the
most notorious Villains that lived upon the Earth; to be sure that ever was
known in this Kingdom.


Mr. Soll. Genesis First my Lord, we will produce our Records, where is the Record
of Sir George Wakeman.


Mr. Swift. This is the Record of Sir George Wakeman, and this is a true Copy,
I examined it.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray Sir Samuel Astry, read a word or two of it.


C. Crown. Here is an Indictment against Sir George Wakeman for High Treason,
he pleaded not Guilty; and here is an Acquittal by the Jury.


Mr. At. Genesis He being acquitted, I desire he may be sworn, (which was done.)


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray Sir George Wakeman, was Mr. Oats sworn against you at the
Trial?


S. G. Wakeman. Yes Mr. Solicitor, he was.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Do you remember what he swore against you at that Trial?


S. G. Wakeman. Yes, I do Sir.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Was that true that he swore, by the Oath you have taken?


Oats. Is that a fair question? I desire the opinion of the Court.


L. C. J. Ah! Why not?


Oats. He was legally accused; he cannot swear himself off.


L.C. J. But he is legally acquitted to, we have a Record for that here.


Oats. Ah! My Lord, he was acquitted, it is well known how.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Come Sir, was that he swore against you at your Trial true?


Sir G. Wakeman. 'Twas false.


L. C. J. What do you say Sir?


Sir G. Wakeman. 'Twas false upon my Oath, my Lord.


Mr. Soll. Genesis What particulars did he swear against you?


Mr. Pollexfen. Ah! Pray tell the particulars as near as you can what he swore
against you.


Sir G. Wakeman. My Lord, if your Lordship please, I will give a little account
what he swore against me before the King and Council.


Mr. Soll. Genesis That will not do Sir George Wakeman, we do not ask you that.


L. C. J. No, it must be only the Evidence that was given upon this Acquittal,
which is the Record here produced before us, what did he swear against you then?


Sir G. Wakeman. He swore at that Trial as near as I can remember, that I
undertook for a certain Sum of Money, 15000 l. as I think it was to poison the
King, and I was to do it by the means of the Queen. I was to provide this
Poison by for her, and she was to give it to the King. This he swore at my
Trial, which God forbid it should be true; nothing can be more false.


L. C. J. I ask you by the Oath you have taken, you are now quitted, and so in
no danger; and being upon your Oath, ought to speak the truth without malice or
ill will to him that did accuse you; was that he swore true or false?


Sir G. Wakeman. False, false, upon my Oath; I speak it without any malice
against the Man in the World.


Mr. At. Genesis Then swear my Lord Castlemain, (which was done.)


Sir G. Wakeman. My Lord, I Will be bound to make it appear, that all he swore
against me was false.


Mr. At. Genesis And so was it he swore against my Lord Castlemain and others
that were acquitted at the same time with Sir George Wakeman.


Mr. Soll. Genesis First read the Record of my Lord Castlemain's Acquittal.


C. Crown. Here is the very Record it self: It was in this Court my Lord
Castlemain was Indicted of High Treason, and Tried and Acquitted.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord Castlemain, pray what did Oats swear against you at
your Trial and pray tell the Court whether that was true or false.


E. of Castlemain. My Lord, as near as I remember, Mr. Oats did swear at my
Trial, that he met me in Lincolns-Inn-fields, and that he went with me
somewhere to Mr. Fenwicks Chamber in Dukes-street in Covent Garden, where he
said I did talk a great deal of Treason, and a great discourse of that kind he
said there was, and he swore that I was in several Cabals in relation to the
Kings death: I was afterward acquitted by the Jury that Tried me, as appears
by the Record; and here I do declare, as in the presence of God, and with all
the Imprecations of divine vengeance to fall upon me, if I speak any thing but
the truth, that not only that which he swore was false, but that I never had
any thoughts in my heart, much less did ever declare in my words of any injury
or hurt against the late King. And besides, that I never saw the face of Oats
in my life, till after I was put in Prison upon his accusation of me.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know what Religion that Noble Lord is of?


E. of Castlemain. I am a Roman Catholic my Lord.


L. C. J. We all know what Religion my Lord is of, you need not ask that
question.


Oats. That Is not the point my Lord, I must have declared in Evidence.


L. C. J. I wonder to see any Man that has the face of a Man carry it at this
rate, when he hears such an Evidence brought in against him.


Oats. I wonder that Mr. Attorney will offer to bring this Evidence, Men that
must have malice against me --


L. C. J. Hold your Tongue; you are a shame to Mankind.


Oats. No, my Lord, I am neither a shame to my self or Mankind: what I have
sworn is true, and I will stand by it to my last breath, and seal it if
occasion be with my Blood.


L. C. J. 'Twere pity but that it were to be done by thy Blood.


Oats, Ah! Ah! my Lord, I know why all this is, and so may the World very
easily too.


L. C. J. Such impudence and impiety was never known in any Christian Nation.


Oats. But this will not do the work to make the Plot to be disbelieved;
things are not to be done by great noises: I will stand by the truth.


L. C. J. Can you think to outface such Evidence as this with your Impudence?


Oats. But I hope you will give me leave to make my defense.


L. C. J. Then carry your self as becomes you in the Court.


Oats. My Lord, I will do so.


L. C. J. If you do not, we know how to make you do it, you shall not think to
Domineer here.


Oats. My Lord, I hope I do behave my self as I ought.


L. C. J. No, You do not.


Oats. Ill Language may provoke any Man's Passion my Lord.


L. C. J. Keep your self within bounds, and you shall be heard; but we'll
suffer none of your Extravagancies.


Oats. My Lord, If I had been aware of this, I could have produced Evidence
that would have supported my Testimony in these matters.


L. C. J. Go on with your Proofs Mr. Attorney.


Mr. Attorney. We will do so my Lord.


E. of Castlemain. Have you done with me Sir?


L. C. J. Have you any other questions to ask my Lord Castlemain?


Mr. At. Genesis No, my Lord.


L. C. J. Then your Lordship may fit down again where you were.


Mr. At. Genesis Now my Lord, we shall show the Lords Journal where it is
Recorded, that he swore, he could accuse no body else but those that he named,
and then we shall give an account that soon after, he accused our present
Sovereign, and the Queen Dowager.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Where is the Clerk of the Parliament.


Mr. Swift. Here he is. Mr. Walker.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear him, (which was done.)


Mr. Soll. Genesis Mr. Walker, is that the Journal of the House of Lords.


Mr. Walker. Yes, my Lord, it is.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Deliver it in to the Clerk, and let him read it.


L. C. J. Then you must direct to the time, or else it will be to no purpose.


Mr. Swift. Sir Samuel Astry pray turn to Friday the 29th. of November 78.


C. of Crown Reads, Die veneris decimo nono Novembris 1678. Titus Oats being
called in at the Bar, desired to be heard a few words before he was sworn --

L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, I doubt this will not be Evidence: it is only a Paper
of what he laid, taken before the Lords; but now whether that was upon Oath or
no, is the question, nay it appears it was not upon Oath; but says, it was
before he was sworn.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire it may be read all out.


C. Crown Reads, Titus Oats being called in at the Bar, desired he might be
heard a few words, before he was sworn to speak to the main business, which
being granted to him, he complained of the restraint he is under, and being
debarred of the liberty of his Friends coming to him, and of conversing with
any body in private, and that no Englishman ought to be restrained, unless
accused by one or more Witnesses; and prayed that the restraint might be taken
off, that he might be enabled to give his Evidence more cheerfully, and that
the House would be pleased to address to the King for that purpose, and that
his pardon may be renewed, because he is under misprision of Treason, to which
the Lord Chancellor told him, that the House would take his condition into
consideration, and then being sworn, he was told by Lord Chancellor, that the
Lords have received an Address from the House of Commons in part upon Evidence
by him given there, and that the House expects he should give an account what
that is, which has begot such astonishment in the House of Commons as is
expressed in the Address, upon which Titus Oats said, that in July last, he
saw a Letter from Sir George Wakeman --

L. C. J. Is this Evidence Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, the use we make of it is to prove that he did accuse
the Queen.


L. C. J. What is the accusation of the Queen to this purpose?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we say he had sworn several days before that he had no
other persons to accuse.


L. C. J. You should produce that first that he swore so.


Mr. At Genesis My Lord, we should so, I think, and I thought it had been so done.


L. C. J. This is no Evidence, for it is not upon Oath; it does not say so.


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, it does my Lord; but we will go on in order.


L. C. J. Come then, let us see what was sworn about his having no more Persons
to accuse.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir Samuel Astry look the 30th. of October 78.


C. of Crown. (Read) Die Mercurii 30. Octobris 1678. Titus Oats being called
in, was sworn at the Bar, and required to answer to what he is now called in
for concerning his discourse with the Lord Annesly last night, about the Duke
of York.


L. C. J. I doubt this will not be Evidence neither; for we are now speaking
only about what shall be Evidence: We are not now meddling with the methods of
the House in their Examination of Witnesses, but what is Evidence here; suppose
an Oath be administered to me for a particular purpose in the House of Lords,
that I shall answer to what is asked me concerning a discourse that I had with
a third person.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Sir Sam. Astry look the next day; for there my Lord, he is
examined upon the general.


Sir Sam. Astry (Reads) Die Jovis 31 of Octobris 1678.


Mr. At. Genesis But first read the latter end of the former days Proceedings,
beginning at those words upon consideration.


C. Crown. (Reads) Upon consideration of what Titus Oats had said, he was
called in again, and told by the Lord Chancellor that the House has directed
he shall be heard again to morrow at Nine a Clock, and the Lords do expect that
by the Oath he has now taken, he should go through with what he has to say,
and therefore he should prepare himself to deliver the whole truth of what he
knows concerning the design against the Kings Person, and the Government of
this Kingdom.


L. C. J. But still Mr. Attorney, we are but where we were; for supposing upon
my Examination upon Oath given me in the House of Lords to a particular
purpose, That my Lord Chancellor should tell me here; my Lords intend to
morrow, that you by virtue of the Oath now given you, should come and give them
satisfaction as to other questions, I doubt that would not be Evidence in
Westminster Hall: let us not stretch any thing further than it should be upon
any account whatsoever: for suppose I give you an Oath to make true answer to
such questions as I shall ask you concerning what was said at the
Sessions House at such a Trial, and then I come after and ask you upon the Oath
you have taken, what do you say concerning such a business 7 Years ago, would
that be Evidence?


Mr. At. Genesis With submission my Lord, if a Man be told he is upon his Oath,
to say all he knows of such a design, what he says upon that Oath, is Evidence.


L. C. J. You say very true Mr. Attorney, if I give him a general Oath; but
what he says concerning any other matter than that particular thing, which he
was sworn to give an account of, can never be Evidence.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Truly my Lord, I think we need not labor in such a thing as
this is.


L. C. J. Truly Mr. Sollicitour, I think it is no Evidence at all, if you can
prove he was sworn to his whole Narrative, and can bring any thing out of that,
You say something.


M. At. Genesis We desire that my Lord of Berkley may be sworn, (which was done.)


L. C. J. What do you ask him?


Mr. At. G. Pray my Lord, will you give the Court and the Jury an account
whether M. Oats was not sworn to his Narrative, and delivered in his Evidence
at your Lordships Bar upon Oath.


L. C. J. My Lord of Berkley, let me ask you this question, was every thing
that he gave an account of at the Bar of the Lords House, given in upon Oath?


E. of Berkley. I cannot remember that my Lord.


L. C. J. It is impossible that he should.


E. of Berkley. All I can testify is but what I answered to the question,
which was asked me at my Lord Stafford's Trial.


L. C. J. But that is not material now my Lord, because the Record of that
Trial is not here.


E. of Berkley. The same thing is entered here particularly.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we desire it may be read again.


L. C. J. Read it again with all my Heart.


L. C. J. This is a particular Oath to a particular purpose; and shall I help
it by intendment that he was afterward sworn to the general matter? No, I will
not: suppose any thing had happened afterward that it should have been thought
fit to prosecute Oats; Could the Man have been Convicted of Perjury for this?
certainly he never could.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Well my Lord, we submit it to you; but we will now go on to
prove that which Mr. Attorney opened, that Oats did suborn these Witnesses to
swear what they did swear: you have had one part of the Evidence that was then
given; now we shall prove that Clay was sworn at Whitebreads Trial, and what he
did there testify about Oats being in Town.


Oats. I own it, he was sworn then.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you own that you suborned him?


Oats. No, I think not Mr. Attorney.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Then we will prove that you did tamper with him, and by
threatenings prevailed with him to swear for you.


Mr. At. Genesis Nay, we will prove that he was mistaken in what he did swear a
whole Year. Pray call Mr. Charles Howard.


Oats. My Lord, I desire I may have leave to ask the Court a question, and I
beg the Opinion of the Court in it, whether a Popish Recusant Convicted, may be
a good Witness.


L. C. J. We are not bound to answer your question; for we see no ground why
you should ask it: if you have any occasion to object against any Witness, and
can produce any Record against him; then we will tell you more of our minds.


Oats. Pray then let me ask you another question my Lord.


L. C. J. Prithee do not trouble us with thy questions, let them go on with
their Evidence.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to know whether a Man confessing himself a Popish
Priest --


L. C. J. We do not sit here to answer every idle question; it is nothing at all
to the purpose: When you ask a proper question, we will answer it.


Oats. Yes, it is my Lord, and you are of my Council in matter of Law.


L. C. J. I am not so.


Oats. Yes, my Lord, the Court is always of Council for the Prisoner.


L. C. J. That were well indeed, if we were bound to give advice in every case
where a Man is Prosecuted at the Kings Suit; indeed in those cases where a Man
can have no Council allowed him, the Court is of Council for him; but where he
may have Council, the Judges are not of Council for him.


Mr. J. Holloway. Besides, We are not here putting of Cases, but trying of a
Cause.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Here is Mr. Charles Howard, swear him, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we bring this Gentleman Mr. Charles Howard only to this
part of our Evidence, to prove that Mr. Clay was mistaken a whole Year, mistook
78 for 77.


L. C. J. But Mr. Solicitor, if you take this confused method, we shall never
be at an end, and for my part I cannot make any thing of it; it is impossible
for me to retain these things in memory, so as to give any direction to the
Jury, if there be not a method used: for do you think that it is possible for
any Man to retain in his head a hundred things hudled up and down without any
order.


Mr. Soll. Genesis We beg your Lordships patience but a little while, and we shall
have it in very good order. Swear Higgins, (which was done.)


L. C. J. Pray what do you ask him?


Mr. At. Genesis The matter we examine him to is this; for I would open to you
the nature of our Evidence, 1. He swore Smith into the Plot, and then gave him
a Certificate, that he was an honest Man.


L. C. J. Is that Oates's hand.


M. At. Genesis We shall prove it to be so.


L. C. J. You must first prove what he swore of Smith.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, We desire that we may read his Narrative.


L. C. J. But first prove it Mr. Attorney.


Mr. At. Genesis It is upon Record in the House of Lords.


L. C. J. Was that delivered in upon Oath to the House of Lords, or else we
shall be but where we were.


Mr. At. Genesis For proof of that we call my Lord Bridgewater.


L. C. J. Here he is, swear my Lord, (which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord Bridgewater, do you remember the Narrative that Oats
gave in to the House of Lords, and was it upon Oath? but first of all if you
please, I desire my Lord may see the Book, whether any thing be there under his
hand, and then whether it be entered to be upon Oath, and whether this be the
Journal agreeing with the Paper delivered in.


L. C. J. This is a Narrative my Lord, that he himself delivered in, and I
would ask my Lord Bridgewater this one question: Was not this Journal compared
with the Narrative given in upon Oath by Order of the Lords House.


E. Bridgewater. Yes, I must say I was one of the Commit appointed to take
care of the Journal, and here is my hand to it among other Lords, and that is a
Copy of what M. Oats did deliver in as his Narrative which was in inserted
upon a report of the Commit into the Journal Book by Order of the Lords, and
we did examine the Narrative with the Book.


L. C. J. But what is all this to our purpose now; do not mistake me my Lord
Bridgwater, I do not speak to you now, but to Mr. Attorney: What does this
prove as to the matter in hand?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray my Lord Bridgwater, did you see the Narrative brought in by
Oats?


E. Bridgwater. That Narrative was delivered to us by the Clerk of the
Parliament.


L. C. J. But my Lord, do you know that Narrative was given in upon Oath?


E. Bridgwater. I know no other, but that the Clerk of the Parliament brought
it to us.


Mr. At. Genesis Here is the Clerk of the Parliament, will tell you that Oats
was sworn to it.


L. C. J. Prove it if you can; but hitherto I see nothing that looks like
Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis Really my Lord, I should take it to be as much Evidence as any
that ever was offered in the World.


L. C. J. Pray Mr. Attorney let us Reason the Point a little; suppose you bring
an answer in Chancery; except the man be sworn to it, can you read his answer;
and yet I ever looked upon an answer in Chancery as Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis In that case the Record proves it self, and so it should here;
and therefore we desire it may be read.


L. C. J. But surely you would not allow an answer to be Evidence, unless you
prove it to be sworn.


Mr. At. Genesis Truly my Lord I always took it, that we need not come to prove a
man was actually sworn to his answer; but if it be once entered upon Record in
Chancery, it proves it self.


L. C. J. It is true Mr. Attorney, if it appears upon Record that the answer
was sworn.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, if this Journal of the House of Lords is a Record, then
that which is entered into it is a Record; it is a thing recorded as a Deed
enrolled is, and proves it self.


L. C. J. Mr. Attorney, either we mistake one another, or we do not differ in
opinion: if you could make it appear that Oats brought this thing in the House
of Lords, and delivered it upon Oath, that were Evidence; otherwise I cannot
see how you can make Evidence of it.


Mr. At. Genesis I always thought my Lord, that a Record out of a Court of
Record, would have that Credit in another Court of Record, as to be read.


L. C. J. My Lord Bridgewater tells you, it was delivered to them by the Clerk
of the Parliament.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray my Lord let the Clerk read what is at the end thereof.


C. Crown. (Reads) Hitherto examined the third of December 1678. The Narrative
and Examinations of Titus Oats, being first inserted according to the Order of
the House, of the 21. of November last, by us Anglesey, etc.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray read the Order of the 21. of November.


C. Crown. (Reads.) Die Jovis 21. of November 1678. Upon Report made by the
Earl of Bridgewater, from the Lords Sub-Committees for the examining the
Journal of this House; That upon Examination thereof, their Lordships find,
that the Narrative made upon Oath by Titus Oats at the Bar on the 31. of
October last, of the Horrid Design against His Majesty's Person and Government;
is only mentioned in the Journal, but not entered at large in such manner as he
then related it; and that therefore their Lordships desire, the direction of
the House concerning this matter: it is thereupon ordered, that the said
Narrative made by Titus Oats on the said 31. of October, shall be entered at
large, and inserted in the Journal, as the part of the business of that day.


L. C. J. Now you make it Evidence; for it appears that he was sworn, and gave
his Narrative upon Oath.


Mr. At. Genesis Then now my Lord, I hope we may read it.


L. C. J. Ay, read it.


Mr. At. Genesis Read the 54. Article.


C. Crown. (Reads.) This is the Narrative of Titus Oats, the 54. Article. That
one Matthew Medborne a Player in the Dukes Theater; one Mr. Penny, Mr. Mannock,
Mr. Sharp, and Mr. Seddon, and one William Smith a Schoolmaster at Islington,
and one Edward Everard and others, meeting in a Club on Thursday nights, and
Sunday nights, with one Jones a Priest, and one Keymash within mentioned; and
all these Persons are employed by the Jesuits, to vilify the House of Commons,
and to go about the City to incense the People against them, and against the
Bishops of the Nation; and they deliver this Treasonable Position, That the
Commons assembled in Parliament, are the Devils Representatives and not the
Nations; with treasonable and detestable words, the Deponent did hear at the
said Club which is kept at Fuller's Rents near Grey's Inn. And in the month of
August the Deponent was ordered by the Jesuits in London, to give the said
Persons great Respects, and in their names to thank the Club for their
faithfulness to them in that particular.


Mr. At. Genesis Thus you see what he had sworn against him; now we shall show
how he dealt with him. Is that Mr. Oats his hand?


Witness. It is; yes I believe it is.


Mr. At. Genesis I believe he will hardly deny it himself.


Oats. Let me see it I pray you, Mr. Attorney.


Mr. At. Genesis Show it him, (which was done) is that your hand?


Oats. I cannot say it is my hand; nor do I believe it to be so.


L. C. J. He does not own it to be his hand.


Oats. I do not say it is not my hand; but I do not remember any thing of it.


Mr. At. Genesis Read it Sir, pray you.


L. C. J. What is it you would read?


Mr. At. Genesis A Certificate under Oats hand of Mr. Smith's honesty, not three
days before the Trial of the Five Jesuits.


L. C. J. Read it, let us hear what it is. These are to certify that William
Smith is no Papist; and that he is upon good Service at this time for his King
and Country; of which, I hope, those that are Inquirers after Recusants will
take notice.

Witness my Hand this Third day of June 1679. Titus Oats.




L. C. J. What harm is there in all this? I must needs say, I cannot comprehend
what you would make of it.


Mr. At. Genesis This Protection was given Mr. Smith by Mr. Oats three days
before the Trial; but after he had sworn him into the Plot in his Narrative.


L. C. J. I see not any Plot, for my part, that he swore him into, unless you
mean Treason against the House of Commons: for that is the Accusation he made,
that he spoke such words of the House of Commons. Pray read it again. (Which
was done.)


L. C. J. Well, and what is all this?


Mr. At. Genesis Is not this a swearing him into the Plot?


L. C. J. No, not that I see: it only gives an ill Character of him.


Mr. At. Genesis But he is accused as a Confederate with the Priests and Jesuits.


Oats. Did I charge him, Mr. Attorney, with having any hand in the Plot
against the Kings Life?


Mr. At. Genesis I only offer this as an Evidence that there was tampering.


L. C. J. You call it a being in the Plot; I see no such thing.


Mr. At. Genesis And then he comes and gives him an acquittal under his hand, and
then produces him as a Witness.


L. C. J. There can be no great matter in this Mr. Attorney.


Mr. At. Genesis Then my Lord, we will call Mr. Smith himself, and he will tell you
how Oats drew him in: Swear Mr. Smith, (which was done) pray acquaint my Lord
and the Jury, how you came to swear at the former Trial; by whom you were
persuaded, and how you varied from the Truth.


L. C. J. That is very nauseous and fulsome Mr. Attorney, methinks in a Court
of Justice.


Mr. At. Genesis What did you swear in the former Trial? and was that true you
did swear then?


L. C. J. I tell you truly Mr. Attorney, it looks rank and fulsome: if he did
forswear himself, why should he ever be a Witness again?


Mr. At. Genesis It Is not the first time by twenty that such Evidences has been
given.


L. C. J. I hate such Presidents in all times; let it be done never so often.
Shall I believe a Villain one word he says, when he owns that he forswore
himself?


Mr. At. Genesis Pray my Lord give me leave; I must pursue my Masters Interest.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord, it was ever Testimony allowed to be given, to detect a
Subornation.


L. C. J. I am sure it is not fit to be allowed at any time: If he did forswear
himself in a Court of Record, in my opinion he is not to be received as a
Witness any more.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We do only make this use of him, to prove that Oats did suborn
him.


L. C. J. Pray call some other Witnesses, if you have them, to contradict him;
but do not offer to bring a man to swear that he did forswear himself before.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord, we give Evidence here of a man's being produced by
Oats, to swear he was here in May 78. and he did make such an Oath: now I
hope, with Submission my Lord, it is Evidence to contradict that Oath, if we
can prove that he has confessed he was forsworn, and mistaken in his Oath; such
Evidence perhaps will be of little value, yet Evidence it is.


L. C. J. Make it what you will, Mr. Solicitor; I think it is of no value at
all, nor to be admitted for the man to come and swear it himself: prove what
you can by others.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Surely my Lord, this Confession of his to others is of less
value, than when we bring the Man himself to confess his fault; that Man
himself coming and owning the thing, that he was mistaken, with great sorrow
for it, sure is a good Evidence.


L. C. Justice. Argue the matter as long as you will, Mr. Solicitor, you will
never convince me, But that he that has once forsworn himself, ought not to be
a witness after that in any Case whatsoever. If any man tell me otherwise till
Doomsday, I cannot be convinced of it.


Mr. Soll. Genesis I go but to ask him this Question, Whether or no what he swore
were true?


L. C. Justice. Mr. Solicitor, we are all of another Opinion, that it is not
Evidence fit to be given.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord, I must submit it to you.


L. C. Justice. I tell you, Mr. Solicitor, if you should call him to know what
it was he swore, and it does appear by any Evidence, or by his own Confession,
that it was false, you ought not to believe what he says even in that matter.
And I think truly, for examples sake, it ought not by any means to be admitted.


Mr. Solicitor. My Lord, I must submit it to you, but then I humbly conceive,
it will be in very many Cases impossible to detect a Perjury or Subornation, if
the Party suborned cannot be admitted to be a witness.


L. C. Justice. What good will the admitting him to be a witness do? for either
what he swore then, or what he swears now, is false; and if he once swears
false, Can you say he is to be believed?


Mr. North. My Lord, If a man come and swear --


L. C. Justice. Look ye, Sir, you have our Opinion; it has been always the
Practice heretofore, That when the Court have delivered their Opinion, the
Council should sit down, and not dispute it any further.


Mr. At. Genesis Then we will go about the Business of Clay, and for that we will
call Lawrence Davenport.


L. C. Justice. It Is certainly against the Law to admit a man that has once
forsworn himself to be a witness again in any Cause.


Mr. At Genesis Swear Lawrence Davenport. (which was done) 'Pray' give my Lord
and the Jury an account how Clay came to be a witness, and by whom he was
wrought upon to be so.


Davenport. May it please you, my Lords and Gentlemen of the Jury, Mr. Oats
came to the Prison, I being then a Prisoner at that time in the Gate House at
Westminster my self, and having no other Employment, I had the government and
care of some of the Prisoners for a livelihood, being in custody; and at that
time Mr. Oats, as I said, when old Clay was in Prison, did come there to visit
this Clay at several times; and coming there to visit this Clay, up stairs he
went to his Chamber, and desired to speak with him; and I did desire your
Worship, Mr. Oats, that you would go in to him, and you did go into his
Chamber, and there these words you did speak to him before the Trial of the
five Jesuits, That if he did not swear what you put to him, he should be
prosecuted as a Priest, which you did believe he would dye for.


L. C. Justice. What is this man's name?


Mr. At. Genesis Lawrence Davenport.


L. C. Justice. Did you hear him say so?


Davenport. Yes, my Lord, upon my Oath I did hear him say so, and Sir William
Waller was with him; and then he replied and said, with a Proviso, That you
would give him his Gold and Silver that was taken from him, being then a
Prisoner under My keeping in the Gate House, and wanting his money; if you
would do that, he said, he had been a Rogue before, and he could not say what
he might do.


L. C. Justice. Now make it appear that this Clay was sworn at the Trial.


Davenport. My Lord, afterward I was Keeper to him under the other Keeper, and
he had a Keeper to wait on him to Newgate Sessions at the Old Baily; wherefore
this Gentleman that is standing there, Mr. Oats, comes to us, says he, Do not
you trouble your self about this Prisoner; let him alone with me, I Will see him
at home again; and then the Jesuits there did take their Trials: how it was I
cannot tell; for we could not come into the Court: afterward they went to the
Fountain Tavern by Newgate to Dinner, and Mr. Oats and he went to Dinner
together; we were below in the house waiting there till it was Night, and still
thinking that he should come down again; but away went he home, and left us in
the lurch; but indeed he did come home to the Prison very honestly and civilly,
because he was civilly guarded.


Mr. At. Genesis Now, my Lord, we'll give you an account, That the next morning
after this Discourse betwixt Oats and Clay at the Gate House, this witness
told it to another that was a Prisoner there then too.


Oats. My Lord, I would ask this man a Question, Whether he had the sole
keeping of Clay without any other Keeper with him.


Davenport. There was no Keeper in the house, but my self, where he lay, which
was in Margaret's Lane, not in the Prison, but in the House.


Oats. 'Pray' ask this Gentleman, why he did not come in and testify this
Discourse, he speaks of, when Clay was a witness.


Davenport. I was not by when he was sworn.


Oats. Did he not know he was a witness?


L. C. Justice. No, he says he did not go into the Court with you, he was not
suffered to go in.


Davenport. My Lord, I am a poor Trandesman, and know nothing what belongs to
the Law.


Mr. At. Genesis Come, 'pray' swear this man, Mr. -- (which was done.)


Mr. Soll. Genesis 'Pray' tell what Davenport told you, and when.


Mr. -- He came and told me the next day in the Prison, where I was then, what
Mr. Oats, and Sir William Waller had been tampering with Clay about, to make
him swear for Mr. Oats.


L. C. Justice. What were the words he told you they said to him?


Mr. -- It was, That he must swear, That Mr. Oats dined at Mr. Howard's house
such a day of the month, and Mr. Clay did say he knew nothing of the matter,
but then Sir William Waller and Mr. Oats did reply to him again, here is your
Choice; if you will not swear this, we will try you for a Priest, and hang you,
and so Clay agreed; if he might have his money restored that was taken from
him, he had been a Rogue before, and did not know what he might do.


Oats. Is this Evidence, my Lord?


L. C. Justice. Yes doubtless, very good Evidence.


Oats. It Is only upon heresay that he speaks.


L. C. Justice. But that establishes the other man's Testimony, this being told
the very next morning; for he would not conceal it, it seems.


Mr. At. Genesis Now that Clay was sworn at the Trial, you admit, Mr. Oats.


Oats. Yes, I do, he was so.


Mr. At. Genesis Then I think here is a plain proof of a Subornation.


L. C. Justice. You must observe how they apply this Evidence: They say, You
are an ill man, not only as to swearing false your self, but as to suborning
others to swear more than they knew; and particularly as to this Clay, that you
and Sir William Waller did threaten him, you would hang him up for a Priest, if
he would not swear as you would have him; and by your Threatenings he was
prevailed with to swear.


Oats. Is Mr. Clay in Court, my Lord?


L. C. Justice. Nay, I cannot tell where he is.


Mr. At. Genesis He was your witness, Mr. Oats; we expected you would have
brought him.


Oats. I cannot tell where to find him, my Lord, now truly.


Mr. At. Genesis Call Mr. Howard.


Crier. Here he is, Sir, he is sworn.


L. C. Justice. Mr. A^torney, you have not proved what he swore.


Mr. At. Genesis We are now about it, my Lord. Mr. Howard, 'pray' were you at the
Trial of the five Jesuits, or at Langhorn's, when Clay was sworn as a witness
for Dr. Oats?


Mr. Howard. Yes, I was at Langhorn's Trial, my Lord.


Mr. At. Genesis What was the Effect of his Testimony there?


Mr. Howard. He did swear, That he was with me and Mr. Oats at dinner at my
House, in May, in the year 77.


Mr. At. Genesis 77 did he say, or 78?


Mr. Howard. Stay, I will look upon my Notes I took at that time.


L. C. Justice. Ay, do so to refresh your memory, Mr. Howard.


Mr. Howard. It was May 78, my Lord.


Mr. Soll. Genesis 'Pray' thus, Sir, Was he then at your house with Oats?


Mr. Howard. No, he was not there in May; Mr. Clay was with me and Mr. Oats
both together in July 78. after the fourth day of July.


Mr. At. Genesis That is after the time he came to London from St. Omers.


L. C. Justice. You say very well; have you any more witnesses?


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord, we must desire that the 28th. Article of Mr. Oates's
Narrative may be read.


O. Grown. (Reads.) That in order to this Command on April 24.78. Father
Warren, Rector of Leidge, Sir Thomas Preston, Baronet, Father Marsh, Rector of
Gaunt, and Father Williams, Rector of Watton, and Master of the Novices, Sir
John Warner, Baronet, Richard Ashby, Rector of the English Seminary at St.
Omers, being sick of the Gout, could not go. But out of the said Seminary, went
Sir Robert Bret, Baronet, Father Pool, Edward Nevile. There were in all with
the Deponent nine or ien, who met in London in Consult with Thomas Whitebread,
Father Harcourt Senior, and Father Harcourt Junior, John Fenwick, Basil
Langworth, William Morgan, John Keimes, Father Lovel, Father Ireland, Father
Blundel, Richard Strange, Father Mico, Father Gray, and others to the Number of
fifty Jesuits met at the White-Horse-Tavern in the Strand, where they plotted
their Designs for the Society, and ordered Father John Carey, who was also
there, to go Procurator for Rome; at which Consult thus held in the Month of
May, the Deponent was present to attend the Consultors and deliver their
Concerns from Company to Company; and then a little after they left the
White-Horse-Tavern and divided themselves into several Clubs, and Companies:
some met at Mr. Saunders House in Wild- Street; others at Mr. Fenwick 's at
Aireses his House in Drury Lane; others at Mr. Ireland 's in Russel- Street
near Covent Garden, and in other places. All which, though in several
Companies, five or six in a Company, did contrive the death of the King; and in
order to which there were Papers sent from Company to Company, which the
Deponent did carry, cortaining their opinions of the timing their Business, and
the manner how it was to be done, and within three or four days after the
Deponent went to St. Omers with the Fathers that came from the other side of
the water.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we produce this to overthrow their Witnesses, That
speak of his being here a week in May. Now Mr. Oats in this Narrative, says,
That the Consult ended the twenty fourth of April, and that three or four days
after, he returned back to St. Omers.


L. C. Justice. 'Pray' read that over again, where the names are; for the
Witnesses for the King swear, That Mr. Williams came over from St. Omers, but
he here says he did not, I think.


It was read again.

L. C. Justice. I thought it had been otherwise; It Is darkly penned.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I my self heard him declare in many Trials here, and at
the Old Baily, That all was finished in that day, and he went away in a few
days.


Oats. Mr. Attorney, you are mistaken: For if you please, my Lord, the Consult
was not dissolved in six or eight days, though they were not sitting or acting
every day.


Mr. At. Genesis It Is not a difference of six or eight days that is contended
for, but it is, Either Mr Oats or his Witnesses do not swear true. If it were
as Mr. Oats says, That six or eight days were allowed after the twenty fourth
of April, then it must be the fifth or sixth of May, that he went to St. Omers;
and then his Witnesses, that say he was here the Latter end of May, can not
swear true. And our Witnesses, say he was all April and May, until the twenty
third of June at St. Omers.


Oats. My Lord, Mr. Attorney does not apprehend the Evidence aright.


L. C. Justice. Well, you may make your Remarks by and by, and set him right if
you can.


Mr. At. Genesis We have done our Evidence, my Lord.


L. C. Justice. Have you any more Witnesses, Mr. Oats?


Oats. No, my Lord, I have not.


L. C. Justice. Then you must conclude, and say what you have to say to the
Jury.


Oats. My Lord, I have one thing more and that is, A Copy of the Record out of
the House of Lords. It is in the Journal the twenty fifth of March, seventy
nine.


Mr. Walker. My Lord, I have not the Book here, it was not spoke for.


Oats. But do you know this hand? Showing him a Copy.


Mr. Walker. Yes, and I Believe it is a true Copy.


L. C. Justice. Read it.


C. Crown. (Reads.) Tuesday the 25 of March 1679.


Oats. It is the last Clause in the Journal of that day.


C. Crown. (Reads.) Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and Commons in Parliament assembled, That they do declare that they
are fully satisfied by the Proofs they have heard, That there now is, and for
diverse years last past has been a Horrid and Treasonable Plot and Conspirary,
contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion, for the Murdering of
his Majesty's Sacred Person, and for subverting the Protestant Religion, and
the Ancient and Established Government of this Kingdom.


Oats. There is an Order to have that Vote printed and inserted before the
Form of Prayer for the Fast. 'Pray' Sir, read the next Page.


Cl. Crown. (Reads.) Die Lunae 25. Oct. 1680.

Upon Report from the Lords Committees for examining matters relating to the
discovery of the late Horrid Plot and Conspiracy, That Captain Thomas Bickley
has lately vilified Dr. Titus Oats at a public meeting at Chichester to the
prejudice of his Majesty's Evidence for the further discovery of the said
Plot: It is thereupon ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled, That the Said Thomas Bickley be, and is hereby required to appear
before their Lordships, in the Lord Privy-Seals Lodgings, near the house of
Peers, on Wednesday the third day of November next, at eight of the Clock in
the forenoon. And it is further ordered that Alderman Exon and Alderman William
Bury of Chichester aforesaid, who were then present at the said meeting, do
likewise attend their Lordships at the time aforesaid, to give Evidence of what
they know concerning this Matter.


L. C. Justice. What of all this? we know hereupon Bickley was turned out of
Commission, and now Bickley is in again. But it seems as you had credit with
some then, so you had not with others. Well, have you done now all?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Soll. Genesis If Mr. Oats will Sum up his Evidence, then I will do the same
for the King, when he has done.


L. C. Justice, Well, what say you, Mr. Oats?


Oats. Now, my Lord, here is an Indictment preferred against me for Perjury
and the Evidence they have given for the King, is this, 1. They have called Mr.
Foster, and he tells you that I was produced at the Sessions House in the Old
Baily, where he was summoned as a Jury man, upon the Trial of Ireland; and he
says, That when I was produced at the Sessions in the Old Baily as a Witness,
and sworn, (if I do remember Mr. Foster aright in what he says) he did hear me
swear, That there was a Treasonable Consult of Jesuits upon the twenty fourth
of April 78. at the White-Horse-Tavern in the Strand; and he does further say,
That I said those Jesuits afterward came to a Resolution to kill the King; and
that they separated themselves into lesser Clubs; the Resolution being drawn up
by one Mico; and that I carried it from Chamber to Chamber to be signed, and
did see it signed. My Lord, I did ask Mr. Foster, Whether I in my Evidence
called it a Consult, or a Traitorous Consult. Now, my Lord, it is true I did
call it a Traitorous Consult; it is as true that I did swear there was such a
Consult; and it is as true that I did swear this Consult did divide it self
into lesser Companies; it is as true that I did say I did carry that Resolution
about from Chamber to Chamber, and saw them sign that Resolution for murdering
the King, I do not mean of this King, but of the late King. My Lord, the
Evidence I think I nor no honest man shall need to be ashamed of; I am not
ashamed to own that I repeated this Evidence several times, nor that I gave
that Evidence upon Oath; for it is Truth, my Lord, and nothing but Truth, and I
resolve by the Grace of God to stand by it and confirm it with my Blood, if
there be occasion. My Lord, to Convict me of Perjury, they have brought a
parcel of St. Omers Witnesses, and these do swear that which they would have
sworn six years ago; but then the Court thought them not fit to be sworn, not
only because the Law will not allow them, but because of their Religion, that
can dispense with false Oaths, if it were for a good Cause, and that was the
Remark my Lord C. Justice Scroggs then made of it. I shall not insist much upon
what they have sworn, for that I suppose your Lordship and the Jury do very
well Remember: But I have five things to Object to their Evidence; and I hope
the Jury will take notice of my Objections, and make their Remarks upon them;
for since you have heard the Evidence that is brought against me, it will be
necessary for your Lordship to weigh the nature of these Witnesses and the
Value, that the several Juries of London and Middlesex had for them. It Is true
there are several brought here now, that never were Witnesses before; there are
indeed other men, but of the same Religion and the same Interest, and therefore
their Testimony must be of the same Value; I think your Lordship will allow me
that: Therefore I Begin with their Religion, and that I take notice to be a
great Objection to their Evidence, as I am advised by those that are Learned in
the Law. And I must appeal to the Court, whether a Papist in Case of Religion
may be believed and received as a good Witness?


L. C. Justice. We must nor hear any of these Idle Expressions.


Mr. Just. Withens. Do you think you are come here to preach, Mr. Oats?


L. C. Justice. I Will tell you, a Papist, except you will prove any Legal
Objection against him, is as good a Witness in a Court of Record as any other
Person whatsoever.


Oats. But if your Lordships, I Will tell you my Lord Cook's practice was not to
admit them as good Witnesses.


L. C. Justice. Do not tell me of my Lord Cook's practice; the Law is
otherwise; keep to the Business that you have here in hand; the Question before
us, Whether you were forsworn in Ireland's Trial or not? Answer that if you
can; but you must not run out into Clamors and idle Extravagances.


Oats. My Lord, I demand it as my Right to be heard what I have to except
against the witnesses.


L. C Justice. I tell you, you shall be heard when you speak properly: But are
you to determine what is Right, or what is Wrong?


Oats. I am to determine my own Right now in this point, and I insist upon it,
and demand it.


L. C. Justice. It may be presently you will tell us we have no right to judge of
it.


Oats. Yes, my Lord, you have; but I hope I have right to urge it.


L. C. Justice. Urge what you will that is to the purpose, but then you must
keep to the matter in hand, and not make such idle Excursions as these are.


Oats. I will keep to the matter, my Lord, if you will hear me.


L. C. Justice. So you shall, we'll make you keep to the matter, or we will not
hear you at all: Do not think your Impudence shall storm us out of our Senses.


Oats. My Lord, I do insist upon it, that these men's Religion is an exception
to their Testimony, and a Papist is not a good witness in a Cause of Religion;
and I desire I may have leave to argue that as a Point of Law in my own defense.


L. C. Justice. No, Sir, it is no point of Law at all.


Oats. Then I appeal to all the hearers whether I have Justice done me.


L. C. Justice. What Is that, why you Impudent Fellow, do you know where you
are? you are in a Court of Justice, and must appeal to none but the Court and
the Jury.


Oats. I do appeal to the hearers.


L. C. Justice. Take him away there; if you will not behave your self as you
ought, I can assure you the Court will do what they ought to do, and stop your
mouth.


Oats. What you please, my Lord, I must make my own defense as well as I can.


L. C. Justice. You are here in Judgment before us, and are to appeal to us;
we'll suffer none of your Commonwealth appeals to your Mobile; keep within the
Bounds of Decency, and say what you can for your self.


Oats. My Lord, this I move to the Court as one of my Objections to this
Evidence given against me, That their Religion makes them no good witnesses;
especially in this Cause.


L. C. Justice. I tell you that is nothing to the purpose, what their Religion
is.


Mr. Just. Holloway. Mr. Oats, we come not here to dispute Points of Religion,
we come to try a bare matter of Fact, whether you are perjured or no.


L. C. Justice. I tell you a Papist is a good witness without a Legal Exception.


Mr. Just. Withens. 'Pray', Mr. Oats, is not a Papist as good a witness as a
Dissenter?


Oats. My Lord Cook would not admit a Papist to be a good witness in any Cause.


Mr. Just. Withens. How, not in a Cause of Meum and Tuum?


Oats. No, my Lord, not in any Cause between Party and Party.


L. C. Justice. Where is that Opinion?


Oats. I Will cite you the Case, if you please, my Lord.


L. C. Justice. 'Pray' let us hear it.


Oats. It is in Bulstrod's Reports, the Second Part, 155. A Popish Recusant is
not to be admitted a witness between Party and Party. --


Mr. Just. Withens. May a Presbyterian be a good witness, Mr. Oats?


Mr. Just. Holloway. Or would Mr. College have been a good Witness, Mr. Oats?


Oats. I tell you this was my Lord Cook's practice.


L. C. Justice. You have our Opinion, and be satisfied with it; That Book says
it was my Lord Cook's practice, and we think if that was his practice, his
practice was against Law.


Oats. Then another thing I object to their Testimony, is their Education.


L. C. Justice. That Is no Objection at all neither.


Oats. My Lord, they are bred up in a Seminary against Law, and for which
their Friends are to be punished.


L. C. Justice. So is every man living that is bred a Dissenter, bred up against
Law.


Oats. My Lord, I have not offered any Dissenter as Evidence for me.


L. C. Justice. No, they are all no doubt of it very good People. Good-wife
Mayo, and her Companions excellent Protestants without all question.


Oats. My Lord, I humbly offer a Statute to your Lordship: And that is Law
sure.


L. C. Justice. Yes, a Statute is Law. What Statute is it?


Oats. It is 27o of Eliz. Cap. 2. The Law says there --


L. C. Justice. Come we will see what the Law says. Read the Statute he speaks
of.


Cl. Crown. It is Entitled an Act against Jesuits, Priests and other such like
disobedient Persons.


Oats. My Lord, I desire, That the Preamble of the Act may be read.


Cl. Crown. Whereas diverse Fersons called and professed Jesains, Seminary
Priests, and other Priests, which have been, and from time to time are made in
the Parts beyond the Seas, by or according to the Order and Rites of the Romish
Church, have of late come, and have been sent, and daily do come, and are sent
into this Realm of England, and others the Queen's Majesty's Dominions. --


L. C. Justice. This is nothing to this Business before us at all.


Mr. Justice Withens. Does this Statute say they are no good witnesses?


Oats. They own themselves to be Educated at St. Omers, and that is against
this Law expressly.


L. C. Justice. What then, Do they own themselves to be in Orders, Jesuits and
Priests, Then you might say somewhat to them upon this Law; but do not spend
our time in such Trifles.


Oats. I do not spend your time in Trifles, my Lord. It is my Defense.


L. C. Justice. Mr, Attorney, do you go on; for we will not sit here to spend
our time for nothing.


Oats. 'Pray', my Lord, let me but show this, I only propose one Statute more
to your Lordship's Consideration.


L. C. Justice. You may propose to read the whole Statute Book.


Oats. 'Pray', my Lord, hear me out.


L. C. Justice. Speak then to the Business in hand.


Oats. It is the Statute made in 3d. King Charles the First, Chap. 2.


L. C. Justice. It is nothing to the purpose.


Oats. I am advised it is very material for me.


L. C. Justice. I tell you it is not, and we'll not let your importunity
prevail upon us to spend our time for nothing: There has been a great deal of
time spent to no purpose already.


Oats. Then if you will over rule it, my Lord --


L. C. Justice. We do overruled it: For it signifies nothing to this purpose.


Oats. 'Pray', my Lord, be pleased to give me leave to offer their Judgments
in Cases of Conscience, whereby they own they have Dispensations to swear Lies
for the promoting of the Cause.


L. C. Justice. That is no Evidence neither.


Oats. This is very hard in such a Case as this.


L. C. Justice, No, It is not hard, that what is no Evidence in Law, should not
be suffered to be given in Evidence.


Oats. It is Evidence against the poor Dissenters, my Lord.


L. C. Justice. Indeed Sir, It is not Evidence against any one body in the
World; if you will take my word for it, if you will not, I cannot tell how to
help it.


Oats. Then I offer you one thing more, my Lord, and that is what was said and
done in the Case of the Earl of Shaftsbury, when he was charged with High
Treason, and committed to the Tower of London, at several Sessions in the Old
Baily and at Hicks's Hall; they did move that they might have liberty to bring
in an Indictment of Perjury against the witnesses which did accuse him of
Treason, but now the Court there overruled those Motions, and would not suffer
my Lord of Shaftsbury's Friends to bring Indidictments of Perjury against him,
because they would not have the King's Evidence Indicted of Perjury, nor the
Popish Plot called in question; This is matter of Fact in the Old Baily.


L. C. Justice. And this is all idle too.


Oats. 'Pray', my Lord, will you hear me.


L. C. Justice. But 'pray' Sir, will you hear me too. I tell you this is
nothing to the purpose neither.


Oats. My Lord, I desire to speak but these few words then, as to my own
Witnesses I have produced. And the first is Cicely Mayo; and, my Lord, though
it be your Lordships pleasure, not to have that good opinion of her, as I think
the poor woman does deserve, yet I hope her Evidence, will have it is due Weight
and Consideration with your Lordship, and the Jury; she says, she saw me in
Town in the Month of May: Now indeed she could not be positive, what May it
was, but she said it was the May before the Popish Plot broke out, that is
before the Rumor of that Plot was spread abroad, and she believes the Plot
broke out in 78. But this she says positively, she saw me in the Month of May
here; my Lord, she comes to give this Evidence freely and voluntarily; a man
that is a Knave is a Knave for something, either out of Malice, or for Gain or
Interest; but she has no Reward given her, nor can hope for any, but in Love to
Justice, without any byend or particular Interest; she came here to testify
the truth, about her seeing me in London in May 78. The next Witness is Mr.
Butler, he was then Sir Richard Barker's Coachman. He lived some years with
him, as his Servant; but he is now set up for himself, and he says, that when
he was about his Masters Business in the Coach-yard, and fitting the Coach for
to fetch his Master home from Putney, I came in, and this was in the beginning
of May, in a disguise; and he says he saw me a second time in another disguise.
Then comes a third Witness that I called, and that is Page, and he came into
the Hall, where the Patients use to wait for his Master, and there he met me,
and spoke with me. Then I called Walker, the Minister, but it happens his
Memory is not so good now, as it was heretofore, and indeed I cannot tell how
to blame him; for it is so long since, that it is impossible for any body to
remember the Circumstances of times and places, that in some short time after
the Fact, might have been remembered with far greater Ease. I expected Sir
Richard Barker might have been here, being Subpoened to Justify the Evidence
of these people; and I did expect that Mr. Smith would have been examined; but
I perceived the Court tender of that point, as knowing it would then easily
have been seen upon which side it was, that he was suborned, that is, to make
such a Confession as Mr. Attorney would have hinted at.


L. C. Justice. Have you a mind to examine him, Mr. Oats; with all my heart.
If you consent to it, he shall be examined.


Mr. Just. Withens. If you will, he shall be examined, it was for your sake he
was not.


Mr. Just. Holloway. It was to do you Right, that he was refused to be sworn
before.


Oats. Good Mr. Justice Holloway, you are very sharp upon me.


Mr. Just. Holloway. No, I am not sharp upon you; I think the Court did you a
great deal of Justice, you have no reason to complain.


Oats. But, my Lord, this I say, The Evidence upon which I am now indicted of
Perjury is the same, which was delivered six years ago at the Old Baily, at
Whitebread's Trial first, and then at Langhorn's Trial, where were sixteen
Witnesses then produced and heard against me: But then, my Lord, what Credit
did they receive at Whitebread and Langhorn's Trials? Now if this Evidence that
I gave was then to be believed, tho opposed by so many Witnesses, what new
objection does rise against it, which was not then hinted and received an
answer? For as to all the Records that are brought out of the House of Lords,
they have not amounted to a Charge sufficient to diminish any man's Evidence in
the world; for as to the Narrative that is entered there in the Journal; I think
I and any man else, that were concerned as I was, may very well defend the
truth of it; and I do avow the truth of the Popish Plot, and will stand by it
as long as I have a day to live, and I do not question but the Jury upon
Consideration of those Protestant Witnesses, that I have here brought against
these Popish Seminaries, will, acquit me of this Perjury. I leave it to your
Lordship and the Jury to judge, and I hope those passages of heat, that have
fallen from me in Court shall not make me fare at all the worse in your
Judgment. I have called some Noble Lords to testify for me; but I find, either
the distance of time has wrought upon their memories, or the difference of the
season has changed their opinion, so that now they disbelieve that, which they
did believe before, and perhaps for as little Reason as --


L. C. Justice. As they believed you at first.


Oats. Yes truly, my Lord, for as little reason as they believed me at first;
For I cannot expect that a man, who believes without a principal should not
recant that belief without a reason.


L. C. Justice. What do you mean by that?


Oats. I name no body.


L. C. Justice. But the Nobility, that are here, and that have been Witnesses
in this Cause, are all persons of that Honor, that the Court is bound in
Justice to take notice of, and vindicate them from your scandalous Reflections;
but only I think that a Slander from your Mouth is very little Scandal.


Oats. Nor from some bodies else neither.


L. C. Justice. But, Sir, you must be taught better manners.


Oats. I find, my Lord, I am not to be heard in this Cause with Patience.


L. C. Justice. I think you do not deserve to be heard at all.


Oats. I cannot tell how to help it, if you will not hear me.


L. C Justice. Cannot you say, what you have to say for your self without
Reflections and running out into such Extravagancies.


Oats. My Lord, you will suffer me to offer nothing that is Material for my
Defense.


Mr. Just. Walcot. Do you think it decent for this Court to suffer persons of
Honor, that by your own desire were sworn to give Testimony in this Cause,
should lie under the Reproach of your Tongue?


Oats. Good Mr. Justice Walcot, was there ever any man dealt with as I am, or
had such Evidence offered to be given against him? Here they offer to blacken
me with the Imputation of that foul, infamous Crime of Perjury; and who are the
Witnesses to prove it, but Youths out of a Seminary; Sir George Wakeman, and my
Lord Castlemain, known Papists, and perhaps Popish Recusants, Convict too; as
for my Lord Castlemain, the Record of his acquital is brought as a Charge
against me, to prove that I was forsworn; and not believed at his Trial; when
all the World knows, it was because there was but one Witness against him that
he came of, and that was the Reason that was urged by my Lord C. Justice
Soroggs at that very time, who would not admit Dangerfield to be a Witness, and
reflected not at all upon my Testimony, but directed the Jury, for want of
another Witness, to acquit him: Then my Lord, here is Wakeman brought and his
acquital too; he swears all I said against him was false; whereas, had it not
been for two dishonest persons, one I have now in my sight; I shall not name
any names; we could at that time have proved five thousand pound of the money
paid to him, and that he gave a Receipt for it; but my Lord, this I am sure of,
if I had been brought in as a Witness in the Case of those that suffered lately
for the Presbyterian Phanatick Plot (as they call it) I had never been called
in question, if my Evidence had been false; but it is apparent the Papists have
now a Turn to serve, and these Papists are brought in, the St. Omers Youths, to
bear this Testimony, on purpose to falsify my Evidence, and to bring of the
Popish Lords, that now stand impeached of high Treason for the Popish
Conspiracy; but, my Lord, I hope as the Court would never admit indictments of
Perjury against the Witnesses in that Case of my Lord Shaftsbury, so you will
not admit it here; and if my L. C. Justice Jones were in the Right, who did the
same thing in his Circuit, I hope I shall have that Right done me here. My
Lord, it is not me they indict, but the whole Protestant Interest is aimed at
in this Prosecution; and hereby they arraign the whole proceedings of so many
Parliaments, all the Courts of Justice, and the Verdicts of those Juries, that
convicted the Traitors that were executed; for my own part I care not what
becomes of me, the Truth will one time or another appear.


L. C. Justice. I hope in God it will.


Oats. I do not question it, my Lord.


L. C. Justice. And I hope we are finding it out to day.


Oats. But my Lord since I have not the liberty to argue those things that
were most material for my defense against this Indictment, I appeal to the
Great God of Heaven and Earth, the Judge of all; and once more in his presence,
and before all this Auditory, I avow my Evidence of the Popish Plot all and
every part of it, to be nothing but true and will expect from the Almighty God,
the Vindication of my Integrity and Innocence.


Mr. Sol. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury --


Oats. My Lord, I have one thing to move to your Lordship; I desire I may be
brought up to morrow by Rule of Court to hear my Trial, that is then to be.


L. C. Justice. Ay, let him be brought up by rule to his Trial.


Oats. My Lord, I lie under very great affliction with the Stone and the Gout,
and besides that, I have lain in Irons these twenty one weeks; I beseech your
Lordship, that this Cruelty may not be inflicted upon me. My Lord, I am but
hitherto a Debtor to the King upon a Civil Account; And if I should be
convicted upon these Indictments, I could then be but in Execution for a
Trespass; And I humbly conceive and hope the Court will show me that Favor as
to acquaint my keeper, that I ought not to be so handled.


L. C. Justice. Look you, for that I tell you again, what I have often said, I
expect from the Marshal, that he keep you as he ought to keep you; I have heard
that there have been abundance of Attempts made for your escape, and therefore
the Marshal must have the greater care of you.


Oats. Let any of those Complaints be made out, my Lord, and I Will be contented
to be used how they will.


L. C. Justice. I repeat it again, let the Marshal have a care to keep you in
salva et arcta Custodia, according to Law.


Mr. Just. Holloway. If the Marshal does otherwise than his Duty, inform
against him, and take the Remedy the Law allows.


Marshal. But the last night, my Lord, Ropes were brought into his Chamber, on
purpose to give him means to escape, and here are the bundle of Ropes.


Oats. I know nothing at all of them, I assure you, my Lord.


L. C. Justice. Well, you have our Rule. Go on Mr. Solicitor.


Mr. Soll. General. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
I am of Council for the King in this Cause; which is upon an Indictment of
Perjury against Titus Oats, the Defendant; and the Perjury charged upon the
Defendant, is laid to be in his Oath at the Trial of Ireland, at the Old Baily;
and it is thus, That he in his Evidence at that Trial, did swear, that there
was a Treasonable Consult of the Jusuits, held at the White-Horse-Tavern in the
Strand, the twenty fourth of April, 78. and that he was there present. --


Oats. Ay, I was there.


L. C. Justice. You must be quiet, and let the Council go on without
interruption.


Mr. Soll. Genesis And that they separated themselves into lesser Companies and
Clubs, and that the Jesuits came to a resolution to murder the late King, and
that he, the Defendant, Oats, carried this resolution from Chamber to Chamber,
and saw it signed by them; now all this is laid in his Indictment to be false;
for that in truth, he was not present at any such Consult of the Jesuits at the
White-Horse-Tavern in the Strand upon the twenty fourth of April, 78. nor did
carry any such resolution from Chamber to Chamber to be signed as he had sworn
in the Old Baily at that Trial, and so has committed Wilful and Corrupt Perjury.

Gentlemen, the Evidence, that has been given to prove, that he was not present
at any such Consult, nor did carry any such Resolution, has been by proving
where he was at that very time, that he swears this Consult was held, that is,
that he was really at St. Omers, in parts beyond the Seas, and not in London;
and to make out this, we have produced no less then twenty Winesses, that swear
positively, and give you very many Circumstances to induce you to believe, that
what they have taken upon them to remember is really and effectually true.

First, you have Mr. Hilsley, and he swears that he himself came away from St.
Omers, the twenty fourth of April, New Style, which is the fourteenth of April,
Old Style, which was a Sunday; that night he came to Callis, the next day he
arrived at Dover, and coming up to Town toward London, the next day he met
with Mr. Bournaby, who was then going to St. Omers. And he further swears, that
at that very time, when he came from St. Omers, he left Oats, the Defendant,
upon the place; this I say was the fourteenth of April: And for a Confirmation
of this to be true, he left him there at that time. I would mention what two
other Witnesses do testify, and therein do verify what he swears; for they tell
you, That at this very time when he came over, or within a day or two, but long
before such time as there was any occasion to bring this to be a question, he
told one of them, in a discourse that was between them, that he had left upon
the place from whence he came, which was the College at St. Omers, an English
Minister, whose name was Sampson Lucy. --


Oats, My Lord, I beg I may have leave to withdraw, for I am very weak, and
Ill.


L. C. Justice. Then make Room for him to go away, if he will.


Mr. Soll. Genesis And they give you an account, that the Defendant, Oats, went
by that name there, and it is not denied by him that he did so: And this is a
Circumstance greatly verifying Mr. Hilsley's Evidence. Then comes Mr. Bournaby,
who sears, That he met Mr. Hilsley when he came from St. Omers, about the
sixteenth of April, O. S. and the twenty first of April, O. S. he came to St.
Omers; and that when he came there he found Oats there upon the place, this
was the first of May, New Style, and he gives you this circumstance to
strengthen his Testimony, That he very well remembers, that upon the second of
May, N. S. the day after he came to St. Omers, Oats intruded into his Company
and got himself acquainted with him; he says further, that upon the third of
May, N. S. he particularly remembers Oats was in his Company there, and they
went into the Garden and walked together; he also says, he saw him the fifth of
May, N. S. which is the twenty fifth of April, O. S. the day after this day
assigned for the Consult, with this Circumstance, That he remembers to have
seen him in the Rhetoric School, and so successively afterward he gives you a
particular account down to Midsummer; after that Oats continued in the College
at St. Omers, and then went away.

Then the next Witness we produce is Mr. Pool, and he gives you an Account,
That upon the twenty fifth of April, 1678. N. S. which was the fifteenth of
April, Our Style, he came over here, and he left behind him at St. Omers, the
Defendant Oats; for he particularly remembers, that he saw him there when he
came away; so Hilsley left him the fourteenth of April; Mr. Pool came away the
fifteenth of April, which is our twenty fifth, and left him at St. Omers, and
does not remember, That he used to be absent out of the College; and Mr.
Bournaby finds him there the twenty first of April; so that particularly at the
times, the other two came away, and Bournaby came thither, there he was, and
there they saw him.

The next Witness is Mr. Thornton, and he gives you an account when Oats came
thither first, and how long he stayed there; he says he came about Christmas,
77. and there he stayed till Midsummer-Eve, 78; and he tells you some
particular days he saw him on; he says he saw him there on the first of May, N.
S. and he saw him the second of May, N. S. in Company with Mr. Bournaby, the
next day after his Arrival there, wondering at their sudden acquaintance. And
he adds a particular Circumstance, why he remembers it was the second of May;
because that day the Scholars at St. Omers, acted a Play, at which Oats had a
Skuffle for a Seat; and he says he does likewise remember him to have been
there, when Mr. Pool came away, which was the twenty fifth of April, N. S.

Then Mr. Conway, that was our next Witness, gives you an account likewise of
Oates's coming to St. Omers about December, 77. and how long he stayed there,
viz. till the latter end of June, 78. And he does not remember, that he lay out
of the College above one Night, and that was in January. And he remembers
particularly, that he saw him with Mr. Bournaby such a day in May.

Then we brought another Witness, and that was Mr. Haggerstone, and he tells
you, he had good reason to remember Mr. Oats, for he was in the same Classis
with him; and this Gentleman gives an account particularly, that he remembers
him to be there the next day after Mr. Bournaby came, and agrees in Testimony
with all the rest, that from Christmas till Midsummer, he was not absent out of
the College, but one night.

We have another Witness, Mr. Beeston, and he remembers, that Oats was playing
at Nine-pins the first of May; he remembers the second of May to have seen him
with Mr. Bournaby after the play was over; and that agrees with the other
Witnesses about his being in Bournaby's Company the Second of May; and he
remembers likewise, that he himself was chosen Reader to the Sodality; but upon
Mr. Oates's Importunity, he supplied the place in Mr. Beeston's Room, only
with this Reserve and Condition, That Mr. Beeston was to be Reader at any time,
if Oats failed; and he gives you this particular account, that Oats did read,
as he believes, every Sunday and Holiday, from the latter end of March, when he
was chosen Reader, to within a Week of his going away; for that he did never
read himself as he should have done, if Oats had been absent or failed to read.

We have another Witness, and that is Mr. Smith, and he swears his being there
from Christmas, 77 to Midsummer, 78. and he remembers particularly as to April
and May, because the twenty first of April, he himself fell sick in the
College, and went into the Infirmary, and remained there till the seventh of
May; and he does remember that Oats visited him very often in that time in the
Infirmary, and told him Mr. Hilsley was gone away, and Mr. Pool was gone away,
and two or three other particulars, which happened in the College at that time;
so that there is another Evidence, that is very strong with Circumstances to
confirm the Testimony of the rest; and he gives you a very satisfactory account
of it, by showing the reasons how he comes to remember these things.

Mr. Price, who was our next Witness, has given you a Relation all to the same
purpose of Oates's coming there at Christmas, and of his going away at
Midsummer. And he remembers particularly, that Oats was at St. Omers, when the
Jesuits went to the Consult at London; for that there was a Consult, and at
that time, is acknowledged to be true; but not such as he says, nor was he
there; but he says some of the Fathers did call there in the way to England.
And at that very time, and after, he saw him there. And Mr. Doddington gives
you the same account.

Then comes Mr. Gerrard, and he tells you a Story to the same purpose; how long
Oats was there, and when he came. And that the Second of May he remembers
Oats was at the Play; and he remembers the twenty sixth of May, Oats was
there, which was the sixteenth of May, O. S. And he is sure Oats was there at
that time, for this reason, that being the day whereon he himself was
confirmed, St. Augustine's day; and Oats was confirmed with him; and therefore
he has reason to Remember Oats was at St. Omers.

My Lord Gerrard of Bromeley was our next witness, and he gives you an account
to the same purpose; and to the General Evidence, in which he confirm, the
others, he adds this particular, That Oats used to read with a singular
Canting Tone; so that he must needs remember him, and was so remarkable for
other things that he could not be absent without being missed, which he never
was.

Then comes Mr. Morgan, who was there at that time, a Scholar; but he is now a
Minister of the Church of England; and therefore not liable to Mr. Oates's
great Exception of Religion; he confirms what all the witnesses said of the
time of Oates's coming, and of the time of his going away: And particularly he
swears, That when Mr. Hilsley went away, he was there; when Mr. Pool went away,
he was there; and when Mr. Bournaby came thither, he was there. And this is not
all; for there is somewhat more remarkable in his Testimony; for he tells you
particularly he does remember, That upon the twenty fourth of April, O. S. the
Day, Gentlemen, when Oats says he was at the Consult in London, Oats was then
at St. Omers. And the occasion of his remembering this, he gives you an account
of; for, he tells you, upon reading the Trial of Ireland, where Oats swears,
That he was here at the Consult the twenty fourth of April, 1678, O. S. all the
College reflected upon it, and wondered at the Impudence of the man, that he
should dare to swear such a thing, when all the College remembered him to be
there all the while: And upon recollection of Circumstances he himself did
particularly recollect his own playing at Ball that very day, and having tossed
his Ball over the wall, he borrowed Oates's Key to go into the Garden to fetch
it: And this was thought of whilst things were fresh, and every man Remembered
this, or that, or the other thing to be done at such a particular time.

Mr. Arundel, who was another witness, proves the general Testimony of the
rest, and agrees in some particular things; and all he says, is to the same
purpose.

Mr. Christopher Tubervile, he comes and swears Oates's being at St. Omers the
fourth or fifth of May, which is the twenty fourth and twenty fifth of April,
Old Style. For that upon Mr. Pool's going away, he changed his Chamber in the
College, and saw Oats diverse days afterward in his Chamber, and at the Door;
and he knew that he constantly read in the Sodality, and that he left
particularly the Sunday before he went away; which was about Midsummer, 1678.

There was another Gentleman, and that was Mr. Anthony Turbervile, who gives
Evidence all to the same purpose; and this Circumstance goes thorough all the
Testimony of these Persons, that there is scare any body can come to, or go out
of the College, but it is known to all that are there, every man takes notice
of it, it is the Common Discourse amongst them; and therefore they give this as
the Reason of their Belief, That he was there all this while, because they did
not remember any thing that should give them occasion to believe Mr. Oats was
away from the College from Christmas till Midsummer, but only one time; and the
remembrance of that does show, That they do really observe these things; for
they could all tell that in January he went to Watton, and stayed out one Night.

There is one witness more that is positive and particular, and that is Mr.
Clavering, and he remembers Oats, by a very remarkable Circumstance, was at
St. Omers at the very time the Congregation is said to be held in London; for
he tells you there came a Person to beg money of him, and there was a
Collection made in the House; and this Person did desire to speak with Oats,
who was then in the College; and whom it seems this Person had known in Spain;
but Oats did refuse to speak with him, and did not come down to him. Thus he
remembers such an one came there, and when he was there, he was sent to Oats
to desire him to come down to this man, and he would not. Ay but now how is
this remembered to be at the time when the Congregation was held here in
England? As to that, he gives this plain and full account, That it must be at
that very time; for the Scholars did discourse among themselves, and were
reckoning up what he had gotten among them, and what he had gotten at Watton:
and finding that it was very inconsiderable that he had gotten at Watton, they
talked among themselves what should be the Reason, and concluded it was, because
the Fathers were gone over to England to the Congregation.

These particular Circumstances our witnesses give you as the Reasons of their
particular Remembrances of the particular times: But, Gentlemen, you must take
along with you those General Considerations too that are offered, which do
affect the whole time, from Christmas till Midsummer. First, That none can come
or go, without being discoursed of in the College: Next, That much more Mr.
Oats must needs be missed, than any other, being so Remarkable a Person, as
they tell you, that scarce any week past without his making it remarkable by
some ridiculous Action or another. They say he sat singly by himself, at a
particular Table, that no man could come into the Hall, but they must see him;
and therefore if absent, must needs miss him. And yet they swear they do not
ever remember him absent, but that one Night; and if he had been absent, they
must needs have observed it, because of all those Circumstances that have been
reckoned up.

These are the witnesses, Gentlemen, that we have produced to prove this Charge
upon the Defendant, two of whom are brought only to verify Mr. Hilsley's
Testimony; having heard it from him at that time that he had left Oats at St.
Omers; when there was no thoughts of this Question.

Now among these twenty witnesses, there are not above two or three at most
that were at either of the Trials before. They were never produced as Evidence,
though indeed they proved the same thing that was testified by others then; but
with many other Circumstances and Particularities that were not before spoken
of; some are now produced that were produced before, and the reason is, because
they are themselves concerned in those particularities which gave occasion to
the others to remember them.

Gentlemen, after the producing of so many witnesses, and so strong a proof;
what is it that Mr. Oats has produced against it? His main Objection to their
Testimony, is, There were several that came from St. Omers to testify at those
former Trials, what these now swear, who were not believed, but I was believed,
and the men were Convicted, Condemned and Executed upon my Testimony: But is
that all he has to say? No, says he, I have likewise witnesses to offer as a
Counter proof to them, a positive proof that I was here in England at the time
they swear me to be at St. Omers; and he says well; if that be proved, there is
an end of the Case. Well, what is the proof? the witnesses that he has have
been these four, Ciceley Mayo, servant to Sir Richard Barker, Butler, his
Coachman, Page, another of Sir Richard's Servants, and the Parson Walker.

The Evidence of Page and Walker, though produced last by Mr. Oats, yet I
crave leave to mention first, and set them out of the way. Page he remembers to
have seen Mr. Oats in a Disguise at Sir Richard Barker's; that is in Gray
Cloths; but he is not certain as to the time, and he cannot take upon him to
say, what time of the year, or what year it was, only he believes it was in
May; and therefore that can be no sufficient Evidence to contradict witnesses,
that with great particularity speak to certain times. As for Walker, the
Parson, he said he saw him between St Martin's Lane and Leicester Fields; but
he cannot remember the time when neither: Nay, the remembrance he has of it
goes rather to another time, than the time in question; for being asked what
Circumstance he knew the time by, he said, it was about a year and a quarter
before the Plot was discovered, which must be in April or May, 1677. and that
will do the Doctor no Service at all upon this Question.

Now let us consider Mrs. Mayo's Testimony; and the Oath that she made was
this, That when Oats came over into England, she saw him at Sir Richard
Barker's House the latter end of April, or the beginning of May, and the week
before Whitsontide; the latter end of April, or the beginning of May, was the
first time that he came, that she faw him; but that he came before, as she
heard, but the Coachman only saw him, and told her that Oats had been there;
but the second time she did see him, and he went in and dined there in the
House: Sir Richard Barker was not there, but my Lady's Sister, her Sons and
Daughters were there; she says, that she saw him again a week before
Whitsontide; that when he came the first time, he was in gray Cloths, a white
Hat, and a short Periwig: Afterward he was in black Cloths, a pretty long
Periwig, not very long, but the Periwig was brown; and these are the
Circumstances she remembers to have seen him by.

Now let us see what Butler, the Coachman, says, he remembers about the
beginning of May he saw Oats at his Master's House in a Disguise; the other
said it was the latter end of April, or the beginning of May: But I stand not
upon that; but this he does swear, That the first time he saw him, Ciceley Mayo
saw him too, that he was then in gray Cloths, a white Hat, but his hair was cut
short, and he had no Periwig on; afterward he came in a cinnamon colored
Coat, and green Ribbons, and a long black Periwig: This is Butler's Evidence.

Now these two People's Evidence are utterly impossible to be reconciled, they
contradict one another so much: First, They contradict one another in this; she
says, The first time he came, she did not see him, but the Coachman told her,
he had been there; but he swears, That she did at that time look out of the
Window into the Yard, and did see him as well as he: Another Contradiction is
this, She remembers the first time he came in gray Cloths, a white Hat, and a
short Periwig; the Coachman he swears he had no Periwig on, but his hair was
cut short to his Ears: Then again she swears the second time, he was in black
Cloths, and an indifferent long Periwig, and the Periwig was brown; and the
other swears he was in cinnamon color Cloths, and a long Periwig, and it was a
black one. Now thus you see the witnesses contradict themselves, and cannot be
reconciled to one another.

But take one thing more, which is very considerable, wherein she contradicts
Mr. Gerrard; for she swears he was here a week before Whitsontide, that she is
sure of: Now that falls upon the nineteenth day of May; then upon the sixteenth
day of May, was the week before Whitsontide; now, that is a most Eminent Day,
by the Testimony of Mr. Gerrard; for that happens to be the twenty sixth of
May, New Style, and that was the day he was confirmed with Mr. Gerrard at St.
Omers: And no man sure can doubt, which of the two witnesses is to be believed;
and it cannot but be true, that he was there at that time; because so
remarkable a Circumstance cannot be forgotten; and yet this Woman swears that
he was here a week before Whitsontide, and that by Computation must be the time
of his Confirmation: But, Gentlemen, another thing that I offer upon the
Testimony of these witnesses, is this; If you will believe it, he himself
contradicts his own witnesses, or they him, and one of them is forsworn: For he
has sworn the Consult was the twenty fourth of April, and that three or four
days after that was over, he went back with the Fathers to St. Omers: Now, this
contradicts all that his witnesses have said: But he has given himself, as he
thought, some little latitude; says he, the Consult began the twenty fourth,
but it held six or seven days longer. We will for this time admit it to be so,
and give him the six days he requires; and yet after all, it will not come up
to the time that his witnesses speak to; for to the twenty fourth of April, add
six days, and that brings us just to the last day of April; and then take four
days in May, to make up the three or four days after the Consult was over, and
we are yet at a great distance from the Whitson week; for that was the
nineteenth of May, and the week before must be the twelfth or thirteenth, and
so it is impossible to be reconciled to Truth, what he and his witnesses swear;
either the Evidence that the Doctor now brings, must be a Contradiction to his
own former Oath, or his Oath proves they are mistaken; besides the
Contradiction that is between the witnesses themselves; for they vary in a
great many material Circumstances, which I have before reckoned up to you.

But, Gentlemen, false witnesses are very often detected by little
Circumstances, though I must needs say these are not small ones; for these are
very remarkable things in themselves, and great Contradictions to one another,
and therefore it is impossible they both can swear true.

There were some other witnesses that were produced by Mr. Oats formerly upon
this point; one of which was Clay, the Priest, and he you hear is contradicted
by Mr. Howard's Testimony, who not only tells you he was not at his House, when
he says he was; but shows that Clay was mistaken in point of time: It was not
in May, but in July: But that is not all, we have another Evidence, Gentlemen,
to show how this mistake comes to pass, and which will give a great light into
this sort of practice that has been used in this matter; for we have two
witnesses that give you an account how Oats and Sir William Waller were at the
Gate House with Clay, and there did threaten him, That unless he swore he dined
with Oats at Mr. Howard's in May, they knew he was a Priest, and he should be
hanged: The man was somewhat cautious at first, for truly he knew nothing of
the matter, but at last, upon condition he might have his money again that was
taken from him; he had been a Rogue formerly, and he did not know what he might
do. Now, we find presently after, that he was in fact brought as a witness;
what he swore, Mr. Howard tells you, and you have heard him contradicted in
that point of time. For Mr. Howard says, it was in July; and then it was
agreed, that Oats was in England; for our witnesses tell you, that at
Midsummer he came away from St. Omers.

So that, Gentlemen, the Evidence that was formerly produced for him, is not
only taken away by positive Counter-proof, but there is fixed upon him, with
great Infamy, the additional Crime of Subornation, by forcing People to swear
for him under the Threats of being hanged; and we all know how such People lay
under great fears and terrors at that time.

There was another witness that was produced formerly for him; but I shall not
take upon me to repeat all the particular Evidence that has been now given
about that matter: In short, our Objection to that Testimony lies thus; That
Oats did swear in his Narrative, that Smith was a dangerous man, and employed
by the Jesuits to stir up the People against the Government; that appears by
Oats his own Oath. But it likewise appears, that afterward they were
reconciled, and that he gave Smith a Certificate under his hand, that he was a
good Protestant, and a good Subject, and about Eminent Service for the King:
Now, we see no reason hitherto, why Mr. Oats should change his mind, after
having sworn him such an ill man, all of a sudden to be so kind to give him
his Protection, and so advantageous a Character, as that was in that Season.
But, Gentlemen, the mystery is easily unfolded, if we go three or four days
further in time, which brings us to the Trials of Whitebread and Langhorn; it
seems Mr. Oats was then aware of that, which is now an Objection to his
Testimony; for it was made an Objection at the first Trial of Ireland, That he
was not at this Consult, for he was then actually at St. Omers; but no
witnesses were there to prove it; but now he was aware that some were a coming
over, and it concerned him to make some good proof if he could, that really and
in truth he was here in London at that time.

And I cannot omit to take notice of what my Lord Chief Justice was pleased to
observe and object to him now; It is a wonder a man should be here in Town so
long; a man that had much Acquaintance, as it seems he had, a man that went
about freely and publicly, as his own witnesses say he did, should be seen by
no body, but these few, should not be able to give an account, by any body,
where he lodged, at any one time in this Interval. Nay, by no Circumstances
that must occur to his own Knowledge, to be able to show where he lodged, is
very strange; though it should be that he did lodge in the Houses of those that
would not come to give Evidence, as he alleadges, yet it is almost impossible,
but there must be some other Circumstances to prove his being here, besides the
Evidence of the Landlord of the House where he lodged; but he gives no account
where he was lodged, and whom he conversed withal, but these People only; and
that they should see him, who were not his Intimates, and none else in the
World, is to me one of the most strange things that can be conceived.

Now Gentlemen, when he has given no manner of satisfaction, that he was here,
and is by twenty witnesses sworn not to be here; What is it that he says to all
this? why, he does insist upon it, that his Credit must not be now Impeached,
because that once he had the fortune to be believed, and some men have died and
suffered for it; as if no Perjury were to be punished, but that which is
unsuccessful; whereas the reason why Perjury is taken notice of in the Temporal
Courts, is only because of the mischief that it may do: Shall it then be no
Crime when a man has done the mischief, when the fear of that mischief was the
ground of making it a Crime? that is a most monstrous way of arguing. And yet
this would Mr. Oats have look like an Argument, that because he has been
believed in his false Oaths, and men have suffered by his Perjury, and he has
been successful in his Crime, that Success has protected his wickedness from
punishment. This I confess is a new way of arguing; and such as none but Mr.
Oats could certainly have invented.

But, Gentlemen, to contradict this, we have shown you, that as he has had the
fortune to be believed; so he has likewise had the fortune to be disbelieved.
For there has been produced as many Records of Acquitals, where he was an
Evidence, as there have been produced Convictions upon his Testimony; so that
he has been as often disbelived as believed.

Whither then does he betake himself next? he has called a great many witnesses
to give you, as Evidence for him, an account what Opinions at that time the
Houses of Parliament, the Courts of Justice, and the Juries had of his
Evidence; and then insists upon it, that now to call his Credit in question, is
to arraign the Justice of the Nation, the Wisdom of both Plouses of Parliament
that believed him, the Honesty of the Juries that convicted those whom he
accused, and the Integrity and Understanding of the Judges who were Learned,
Wife and Just men; and with great earnestness he asks the question; Why now at
this time of day should this be called in question, which received so much
Credit and Approbation so long ago, by the good opinion that all forts of men
had of it at that time? And, Now to question this, he would have thought to be
a casting a Blot upon the Wisdom of the Nation, and an arraigning the Justice
of it; when, if the thing be duly considered, the not punishing this heinous
offense with the utmost severity that the Law will allow of, now, that these
Circumstances appear to make it plain and evident, would be a greater piece of
Injustice and Reproach rather to our Nation, than any ways a Reflection on the
Justice of it.

Gentlemen, when we consider the Circumstances of this Case now I do verily
think it will appear to be a very strange and wonderful thing to us, that ever
any man should have believed him. And it is a strange Consideration to reflect
upon, to think what Credit he had at that time. But withal consider, Gentlemen,
could any one imagine, that it were possible for any man on Earth to become so
impudent as to dare to expose himself before the High Court of Parliament, the
great Courts of Justice, and there tell a most Infamous Lie for the taking away
the Lives of men? the greatness of the Attempt was a great inducement to the
belief of it, because no man could be presumed to dare the doing of such a
thing, if he had not a Foundation of truth to build upon. And when he had thus
made his discovery, and that of such a nature too, a most horrid, bloody and
traitorous Conspiracy to murder the King, to overturn the Government, to
massacre all the Protestants in the Kingdom, and to deface the very name of the
Protestant Religion. What was more natural than that the Parliament should take
all imaginable care to prevent the accomplishment of so great a mischief. And
consider too how much easier it was for him to relate his Evidence in a
continued Story, than afterward it was to maintain it, when it came to be
examined and opposed by them that were accused, who best knew wherein, and by
what means to prove him false.

Gentlemen, the Care the Parliament took to disappoint any designs of this
nature, and the means they used for the security of the King and Kingdom, and
the Preservation of our Religion and Lives, (which I cannot but observe was
praevious to the Trial of any one Offender, that was tried and convicted upon
this Evidence) must needs put the whole Nation under great apprechensions of
danger, and make the way much easier for him to be believed, as by sad
experience we found it did. Under these circumstances came those men to be
tried, with this further (as we cannot now but think) that there were ill men
at work, that labored to improve those fears and Jealousies, that had already
possessed men's minds; the wonder then will be the less, if men under such
disadvantages, tried by men under those fears and apprehensions, had the ill
Fortune to be convicted. But when men had a little overcome their fears, and
began to consider his Evidence more calmly, the scene was changed, Oats lost
his Credit, and the men were all acquitted. Nor is this Prosecution any
reflection on the Protestant Religion, whose cause he falsty assumes to
himself. No, Gentlemen, the Protestant Religion had no share in that invention.
It needs not the support of a Lie, no not the most plausible Lie, much less of
one so Infamous as this does now appear to be. It is rather a Vindication of
our Religion to punish such Offenders as they deserve, and the proper way to
maintain the Justice of the Nation, and wipe off that reproach this man's
Perjury has brought upon it.


L. C. Justice. Then Gentlemen of the Jury, the Evidence has been very long,
and it cannot be expected after so much time has been spent in this Cause, and
such a difference of testimony, and especially considering that the testimony
has met with frequent interruptions, and I may say some part of it delivered in
great Confusion, it cannot be thought or imagined, I say, that I should be able
to remind you of the several particulars that concern this Case, and may be
necessary to be observed about it. But, Gentlemen, I am sure by the Knowledge I
have of the most of you, you are persons of great Understanding; so that what
may be omitted by me, I question not, but your own abilities will supply; I
confess I am much shortened in my Labor by the pains, that Mr. Solicitor has
taken to sum up the Evidence to you, and without all doubt has done it with
all Faithfulness to his Master, and with great Right to himself. I could not
hear much of what he did say; but you, who were nearer and did hear all, which
I could not do, your Judgments will direct you to lay that weight upon it,
which it deserves, and which the Law will allow; for Gentlemen I am bound to
tell you, that you are to lay no weight upon any Allegations on the one side or
on the other, or what is observed to you by the Court, further than is
supported by the Testimony that has been offered.

Now, Gentlemen, I think it not amiss for me (before such time, as I enter upon
the Consideration of the particulars, and reminding you what I take to be
Evidence in this case, and what not) to clear one point, that this person
Oats, the Defendant, against whom this Indictment of Perjury is brought, has
endeavored to insinuate on purpose to gain himself a Reputation, which if he
could acquire this way, would add a greater Reproach to the Justice of the
Nation, than it has contracted already by giving too much Credit to such
Profligate Wretches, as have too lately appeared among us. The Objection he
makes and insists so much upon; says he, I was believed very much before, I can
produce you the opinions of the Judges, that declared themselves very well
satisfied with my Evidence, and the Verdicts of Juries, two or three, that
convicted men upon my Testimony; and rot only that, but here were likewise
three or four Parliaments that did not only believe that Testimony, (or rather
Narrative; for I cannot call that Testimony which was given before the House of
Commons) that I gave, but did declare their Satisfaction of the Truth of what I
said, which Satisfaction and Belief of theirs did produce thanks from both
Houses to me for giving this Testimony.

But all this while, what Mr. Solicitor said upon this point, is a plain and a
full answer to it: If in case upon a sudden information, the King, the
Parliament, the Courts of Law, and Juries, were surprised into this Belief, as
not imagining there could be a pack of such Villains, that could be wound up to
that height, as these Fellows have been; that there could be such an horrid
Imposture, as this Fellow, that should make such attempts, unless there had
been some truth in it.

Therefore the surprise of the thing, at that time, might obtain a Belief; but,
God forbid, that that Belief which was so obtained, should protect the Party
believed from being called in question for the falsehood of that Testimony,
which was the ground of that Belief. It was hardly credible that any Person
could be so wicked as to declare such impudent falsities as these; but, God
forbid, that we should continue longer under the same blindness and delusion,
the whole matter is now laid open and detected. Therefore, Gentlemen, if you
are satisfied in your Consciences, and do believe upon the Testimony and
Evidence that has been given here this day, that those very things that were so
much believed before, were credited upon the surprise of a sudden discovery,
or the boldness of the undertaking, yet now do plainly appear to be false; then
be it, I say, upon your Consciences, if you let this falsehood go unpunished: It
is a Charge upon us who are upon our Oaths as Judges, and who must answer to
the great Judge of all the World for our Judgments; and it is likewise a Charge
upon you that are sworn to try this Cause, and must answer, as well as we, for
what you do in it, not to have regard to any thing that was done before upon
that hurry and surprise, but seriously to weigh and consider what is sworn now,
and from thence to make a Conclusion, whether you are not satisfied that
Innocent Blood has been spilt by the means of this Fellow: Nay, in this Case
it is a contracting of much more Guilt than ordinary, as it is Murder done under
the Forms of Law, and common Methods of Justice; that men should take away the
Lives of their Fellow Creatures, by Perjury and False Accusations, is of such
dreadful Consequence, that if the Justice of the Nation shall be afraid to have
such matters detected, there would be an end of all the Security we have of our
Lives, Liberties, and whatsoever is dear to us.

Gentlemen, the Justice of the Nation lies under a very great Reproach abroad;
for this particular thing, and we must be, all of us, that have any Concern for
the Honor and Good of our Country, uneasy, till this matter be thoroughly
searched into, and impartially determined; and I take it to be a Case of the
greatest Importance to the Settlement of the Kingdom, for the Credit of our
Laws, for the Honor and Justice of our Kingdom, that ever came in Judgment in
any of our Courts of Justice. And therefore as you respect your own
Consciences, and the Obligation of that Oath you are now under, and as you
would be thought to bear any regard to the Peace, Honor and Good of your
Country, take care to examine strictly and impartially into the Merits of this
Cause, and weigh the Evidence which has been given on all sides: Be not at all
dismayed with the Apprehensions of Clamor or Calumny, from any sort of People
whatsoever, for doing your Duty; neither be led away by the Insinuations of
what was believed formerly; for you hear the reason which might make Oats be
believed then; but it is incumbent upon you to enquire, whether you have not
sufficient reason to be satisfied what the truth now is.

And, Gentlemen, I take my self to be the more obliged to take some pains in
the pressing a serious and Impartial Consideration of these things upon you,
because I cannot but say, my Blood does curdle, and my Spirits are raised, that
after the Discoveries made, I think, to the satisfaction of all that has
attended this Day, to see a Fellow continue so Impudent, as to brazen it out,
as he has done this Day; and that there should appear no more Shame and
Confusion than what was seen in the face of that monstrous Villain that stood
but now at the Bar; the pretended Infirmiy of his Body made him remove out of
Court, but the Infirmity of his depraved Mind, the Blackness of his Soul, the
Baseness of his Actions ought to be looked upon with such Horror and
Detestation, as to think him unworthy any longer to tread upon the Face of
God's Earth: You Will pardon my warmth, I hope; for it is Impossible that such
things should come before any honest man, and not have some extraordinary
Influence upon him.

Gentlemen, as to the Merits of the Cause, you have the positive proof of many
Witnesses, whose Testimony, I shall by and by, as well as I can, repeat to you,
but pray you first give me leave to observe somewhat, as to some points, that
have been started at the Bar, as, Whether a Papist can be a Witness: Now
suppose all these persons, that come here to testify this matter against the
Defendant were Papists, as they are not, except you can take it upon your Oaths
and Consciences, that all these men are guilty of voluntary and wilful Perjury,
you must find the Defendant guilty.

As to their difference in Religion, which Oats so much hung upon, I must tell
you, every Papist or Roman Catholic, call them how you will, except the
contrary be made appear by a Legal Exception; I mean such, as would take off
the Testimony of one, that were not a Papist, is as good a Witness in a Court
of Justice, as any Protestant whatsoever; we are not come here to controvert
points of Religions, but to try a bare matter of Fact; so that all that stuff,
that you have heard here this day from the Defendant, and those Insinuations,
that he made about their Religion, on purpose to cast dirt and filth upon all
the Testimony, that they have brought against him; must signify nothing with
you at all. If in Case such Doctrine happen to prevail, as he has this day
preached, then it is in the Power of any Villain, to swear any Mischief
whatsoever against a Roman Catholic, and that Roman Catholic has no way to
vindicate himself, nor to make the Truth appear. We have no such Exceptions to
Witnesses in our Law; every man till it is made to appear; that his Credit is
forseited, may and ought to be received, as a Witness to give Testimony in any
Cause; so that all that matter is of no Import at all.

And, Gentlemen, I am the rather minded to hint this unto you, because he has
insinuated something out of the Trials of Grove, and Pickering, and Ireland,
which was in December, in the Year 1677 at which Trial, Whitebread and Penwick,
who had pleaded to the same Indictment, were brought on to Trial; but because
there was but one Witness against them, the Court discharged them for that
time, and they came not again to Trial, till the Month of June or July
hereafter, when they wereconvicted and executed; now between that time of
Ireland's Trial, and the time, when Whitebread and the rest came on to Trial
again, says Oats, they had sufficient time to have brought all their Witnesses
from St. Omers, to testify this business of my being there, having notice by
the former Trial, what Evidence was against them; but all the Witnesses they
did bring, which were about fifteen or sixteen, were not sufficient to
countervan the Testimony, that Oats gave of his being here in Town, and
thereupon they were convicted, condemned, and afterward (I am sorry to say it)
executed.

This is the Objection he makes, but at the same time I must repeat what I said
before, when such a dismal Story as this was told, when he had the Confidence
to relate it before, in the Houses of Parliament, and there obtained Credit; no
wonder, if in that hurry, all of that perswasson were looked upon with an Evil
Eye; and the conviction of those that were at that time accused were too easy.

We must remember the apprehansions some were under, of our Religion being to
be subverted, our Government to be destroyed, our King to be murdered, our
Throats to be cut by the Papists, to that height, that this very Fellow, Oats,
was so much credited, that all other people almost were below him, and greater
Respect shown to him, than to the Branches of the Royal Family. Nay it was come
to that degree of Folly, to give it no worse name, that in public societies,
to the Reproach and Infamy of them be it spoken, this profligate Villain was
caressed, was drunk to, and saluted, by the Name of the Saviom of the Nation. O
prodigious madness! that such a Title, as that was, should ever be given to
such a Prostitute Monster of Impiety, as this is.

Good God, whither were we running, when many easse people were so strangely
wrought upon by this Impostor, and when the Vislainous and black designs of
some Evil Instruments amongst us, could prevail so far, as to deceive almost a
whole Nation into the Belief of so horrid a Falsehood; even at the same time,
that a hidden Treason too deeply contrived was carried on amongst us! but, God
be thanked, was not too lately discovered. The Conspirators had a fair Game of
it, whilst this Fellow was believed, and they needed no other means to
accomplish their Design: But when he was found false, and the pretended Plot,
had lost its Credit in the World, what is their next step? why, then they enter
into that Black and Bloody Conspiracy, from which it has pleased God lately to
deliver us.

I speak this the rather, because I know there are in my Eye several persons,
whose fears of Popery, made them give Credit to such Villains as these before:
But when it pleased God to open their Eyes, and the false mist vanished, they
found a Real Conspiracy, against the Persons of that Blessed King, lately dead,
and of our Gracious Sovereign, now Living, carried on under the pretense of
that false, but so much credited discovery, and now God be thanked all our Eyes
are open. And I hope, as we are secured from what we so vainly dreaded, so we
shall not be afraid to have Villainy detected, and the greatest mark of Infamy
that can be, put upon it.

Yes, Gentlemen, there was a Consult, and there was a Conspiracy against the
Life of our King, our Government, and our Religion: Not a Consult at the
White-Horse in the Strand, but a Cabal and Association of perfidious Rebels and
Traitors, who had a mind to embroil us in Blood and Confusion, but, God be
thanked, it had not its desired Effect; the same sort of Villams, were Parties
in this Conspiracy, that had too great a hand in the late great Rebellion,
which we to this day feel the smart of, and they had a mind to make use of the
like Instruments, as they did before, to bring us into the like misery, as we
were before involved in.

And is it not a prodigious thing, to have such actions as these to day
defended in a Court of Justice, with that Impudence and Unconcernedness, as tho
he would Challenge even God Almighty to punish his Wickedness, and
Blasphemously blesses God, that he has lived to do such wonderful Service to
the Protestant Religion; and is so obstinate in his Villainy, as to declare, he
would venture his Blood for the Confirmation of so impious a Falsehood: and
indeed to speak the Truth, he makes no great venture in it; for when he had
pawned his immortal Soul, by so perjured a Testimony, he may very easily
proffer the venturing of his vise Carcass to maintain it.

Gentlemen, having thus said (and I could not forbear saying of it) give me
leave to put you in mind of what lies before you now to be tried. First, this
Indictment takes notice, that there was an Indictment, taken before the
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-deliver at Hicks's Hall, of High
Treason against Whitebread, Fenwick, Ireland, Pickering and Grove, and that
Indictment, and the whole Record is proved to you by Swift: For I must tell you
as I go along, what proofs there are of all the particulars, and you, upon
Consideration of all that is alleged, are to be Judges, what is sufficient
proof to convict the Defendant of the Crime, that is laid to him; which is
wilful and corrupt Perjury. The Indictment, Gentlemen, sets forth the Oath,
that Oats did make at Ireland's Trial, and then averrs it to be false: For the
Oath that he did take, that stands thus, That he did swear he was present at a
Consult, held at the White-Horse-Tavern in the Strand, the twenty fourth of
April, 1678: That he did swear, That it was there resolved to murder the late
King: How that that Resolution was carried by him from Chamber to Chamber, that
is, to Whitebread's and Fenwick, and Ireland's Chambers, and saw them sign this
resolution there; and the Assignment of the Perjury, is, That he was not
present at any Consult, it is not that there was not any such Consult, though it
appears by the Evidence that there was none such, but that he was not present
at any Consult at all held there at that time.

Now, that he did make such an Oath, is proved by a worthy Gentleman, Mr.
Foster; a Gentleman known to you all, that live in the City of London; and he
did truly make that Remark in the beginning of his Testimony, that any honest
man in his place would have done, That he was one of those unfortunate men,
that tried Mr. Ireland; for though a man do go according to his Conscience, as
to be sure there is no question to be made of it, but all these Jury men did in
finding that Verdict; yet when I come to find, that the Evidence, upon which I
convicted those men, is detected to be false; and that upon my Verdict the
persons were executed; tho no Guilt of their Blood is really contracted by me;
yet I cannot but think my self unfortunate, that I was, though innocently, an
Instrument of their death: and there is never an one of you, but would have
thought your selves unfortunate, if you had convicted men upon such a
Testimony, which though you believed then, yet afterward you should have
reason to conclude was false. And yet Oats would have you think, that because
they believed him when he was a Villain, and not known to be so, you must
believe him, notwithstanding his Villainy is now discovered; for that is all
the Argument this Learned Doctor has a mind to impose upon you by.

Gentlemen, Mr. Solicitor has been very particular, in giving an Account of
the whole Evidence, and then it comes to this, which is the natural question in
the Case, Whether upon the Testimonies, that have been given to you, there does
remain so much as a doubt, what Verdict you ought to give; for I confess, were
it a thing in the least doubtful, matters of Perjury are so nice and tender,
that we and you ought to be Cautious how we convict People for Perjury in
doubtful matters; but if it be a thing without doubt, and plainly Evident, that
there was a Verdict thereupon, adds to the Guilt; because the Justice of the
Nation is imposed upon; the God of Heaven deliver every honest man's Soul and
Conscience from such Guilt. For my part, I would not for the Universe, have the
least Guilt of Innocent Blood lie upon me.

Then, Gentlemen, to prove what Oats swore is not true, you have no less than
twenty two Witnesses, that swear directly he was not here in London the twenty
fourth of April, 1678. But it may be that it is not such a Positive Testimony
as the Law requires to prove a Perjury; but then to swear directly that he was
in another place at that time, is a positive contradiction to his Evidence; and
this has been testified by the Oaths of twenty two Persons, against the credit
of whose Testimony there is no Objection at all really made, but only
Impudence; and that shadow of an Objection, They are all Papists, and I am a
Protestant; and truly a wonderful credit it is, I must needs say, for the
Protestant Religion for to have such a Learned and Pious Supporter, as Mr.
Oats, to be of that persuasion; but it is certain there was a Judas amongst
the twelve Apostles, and there are Rascals of all persuasions. And truly I take
it makes never the more for his advantage, nor the Honor of our Church, that
he is pleased to call himself by that name, which he, and such as he, have
brought into some Scandal and Reproach, by setting themselves up, as the great
Pillars of it; but we know Doctor Oats has been very Liberal to himself, he
has given himself Baptism, and given himself the Doctor's Degree, and now he
gives himself the Title of the Reforming Protestant, Mr. Oats. We have
Protestant Shooe-makers, and Protestant Joyners, and Protestant Atheists, and
all sorts of true Protestant Rascals; but it becomes us and you to assert the
Honor of our Religion by disowning any Fellowship with such Villains, or their
Actions.

Gentlemen, the Method that was taken, gives you an exact account in point of
time, as to this whole Business. First, says Mr. Hilsley, I left him, in time
the twenty third of April, New Style, at St. Omers, and I am sure I saw him
there then, which is the thirteenth, Old Style; the twenty fourth of April, New
Style, which is the fourteenth, Old Style, I came from St. Omers, I did not see
him there that morning, but I my self came to Callis, it being Sunday; and I
stayed there till Sunday in the Afternoon, and all night. I came on Monday in
the Afternoon to take water at Callis, and from thence went to Dover. And from
thence the next day I went toward London; but I stayed four or five days by
the way before I came to London; but then there is this Circumstance that you
must take along with you, Gentlemen, That at this time, one Mr. Bournaby was
coming from London, and going to St. Omers, and met with Mr. Hilsley in his way
toward London; says Hilsley, I came afterward to Town, and that was upon the
Monday following, which happens to be the twenty first or twenty second of
April, Our Style; but this I do remember very particularly, ticularly, which
makes his Testimony to be true, and not dressed up for this occasion, says he,
I told one Osborn at that time that we had a pretty fellow at St. Omers, that
went sometimes by the name of Lucy, and sometimes by the name of Oats, a
Minister of the Church of England; and there he comes and gives an account of
his ridiculous childish Actions, and what a remarkable Fellow he was; and this,
says he, I told to Osborn.

Now to make this good, you have one Mr. Dorrel, who tells you there happened a
Discourse, where he was present, between his Mother and Mr. Osborn, about
Religion; and amongst other things, Osborn did say, Mr. Hilsley had told him he
left Oats at St. Omers when he came away from thence; and Mr. Osborn, he comes
and says, I remember I did tell Mr. Dorrel and his Mother, at that time that
Mr. Hilsley did tell me this Story: so that here are these two Witnesses which
support Mr. Hilsley in that Circumstance of the time of his coming away, and
his Relation of Oats being left behind him, and that this was related about
the twenty first or twenty second of April.

Bournaby is the next Person that was produced, and he swears he met Hilsley by
Cittinbourn; and he happens to set out for St. Omers the eighteenth of April,
Our Style, and to come thither to St. Omers the twenty first; and he swears
positively that he was there the twenty first, twenty second, twenty third, and
was there the twenty fifth day of April, Our Style; and he does positively
affirm, that all those days he saw Oats there at St. Omers; that Oats
intruded into his company at his first coming; and that he and all the other
Scholars wondered at the confidence of the man; and he particularly remembers
that he was with him at a Public Entertainment that was there the twenty
fifth; and if so, then it is impossible that what Oats has sworn of his being
at the Consult the twenty fourth of April, Our Style, can be true; and except
you can imagine Mr. Oats to fly from St. Omers the twenty fourth day in the
morning, and he at the Consult and back again at night, which is more than he
would have believed, because he swears the contrary, you must conclude that
what he swore was false.

The next Witness is Mr. Pool, and he comes and says, he was there at St.
Omers, and he came over from thence the twenty fifth of April, and that was the
day after Oats swears the Consult of the Plot to be here; and all the rest of
the Witnesses do directly swear, That at the time that Pool went from thence,
Oats was there; so that the Testimony of Pool is fully and positively
confirmed; and Pool gives you a reason, why he came over, which was the death
of a Brother of his, and upon a Prospect of an Estate he came into England,
which likewise is a reasonable Circumstance why he should remember the time,
because he had such Inducement to come over hither.

The next, Gentlemen, is one Thornton, and he comes to the Month of May, to the
first and second of May, Their Style, which was the twenty first and twenty
second of April. Our Style, and particularly he is sure Oats was there upon
the twenty second of April, Our Style, that is the second of May, Their Style.
For says he, there was an Action or a Play of the Scholars; and I can tell you
how I remember Oats was there, Oats had a mind to have a place to see the
Play, which he had no pretense or title to; and he had a scufftle with some
body about it; and therefore I remember by that token, that he was there at
that time.

Now, Gentlemen, it is not easy to be imagined, that six or seven men should
agree in their Testimony in all those Circumstances, which in themselves are
but minute; yet when offered as Reasons to induce men's Remembrance, must be
allowed as good Reasons; and yet this to be thought to be but a made Story. If
Sir Richard Barker's Coachman, and Mrs. Mayo had had any such Circumstances to
support their Testimony, they would have had much more Credit.

Then there is one Conway; and it is very observable what he speaks of: for he
was there all the while that they say Oats was there, and he gives you an
account that he saw him with Bournaby the first time he came over, and agrees
with Bournaby in this, that he wondered much at his confidence, and did think
that he was very well known to him before: He swears Oats came in thither
about the beginning of December 77, and he was not absent, says he and several
more, any one night, except in January once at Watton, till he went away in
June 78. Nay, they are so precise in their memory for very good reasons,
because they are so regular in their Societies, and keep a strict Order, each
has his fixed place in the Refactory, where all the Socii or the Members of the
College do meet; and because this Fellow was an old Fellow, older than the
rest, and likewise was a Dunce, therefore he was set at the Dunce-Table in
every bodies view, because he was a Blockhead, and too old to keep company with
the Boys; so that though perhaps one of those young Follows in a mixed Society
may escape the view, and be absent without being missed, yet Remarkable Mr.
Oats is not so easily forgotten, that used to sit by himself. And as that
Noble Lord my Lord Gerrard of Bromeley says, he has a particular Face, and a
particular Tone; and there was more reason to remark him than any other, both
upon the account of his Person and of his Actions; so that I must needs say
indeed, it is not a downright and positive swearing, but their Testimony is
given with deliberation and recollection of such particular Circumstances as
may reasonably induce any unprejudiced person to give credit to it.

The next Witness, Gentlemen, is Haggerston, whose Evidence is wonderful
particular, and very material, as to the Circumstances that accompany it. For
you are to observe, that in these Colleges some are of the Sodality, and some
are not; and some are of such and such Classes or Forms, and others of other.
Now this Gentleman and Mr. Oats were of the same Form, and he does
particularly remember that he was setting up for a Preacher, as he has an
excellent knack that way; and he tells you how ridiculous he made the late King
in a Sermon; that he halted between two Opinions, and there ran a stream of
Popery between his legs; and suchlike precious stuff he vented. And to fix it
to be about the same time that is now in question, he says, he particularly
remembers it was when he was Reader, when Mr. Oats was, it seems, the Buffoon
to the Society, or as I may call him, the Jack-pudding to the College, that
used to make them sport, and was guilty of so many ridiculous things, that they
could not but put particular Remarks upon him.

Next, I take notice that this person says, there were two persons, Williams
and Marsh, that were qualified to give Suffrages in the Congregation, that is,
they were passed eighteen years standing, and did go over: For that there was a
Consult, is not denied, nor that it was in London, nor that it was upon the
24th of April; but they say, it was a Triennial Meeting, which they used to
have once in three years for the choice of some Officers to manage the Affairs
of the Society; as for the choice of a Provincial, and other persons that they
were to send upon their Errands, in order to the support of their Society; so
that under the color and countenance of what was in it self ordinary and
usual, and that happened to be at that time, Oats, who had heard somewhat of
it, and that it was the 24th of April, and that such and such were to be there,
he upon that Hearsay, as should seem at St. Omers, does feign and contrive this
pretended Conspiracy.

The next is one Beeston; and it is very material too that he swears: For
besides what he testifies, that from the time of his coming, which was in
December 77, he was not absent till the 23th of June, when he went away; and
for the time in question, he very well remembers his being there, by this
Circumstance: says he, I was chosen to be Reader of the Sodality in the month
of March, but then Oats comes and gets the Office out of my hands; but still
with me there was that benefit reserved, that if he should at any time fail of
Reading there upon a Sunday, or a Foly-day, I was then to have read, and to
have supplied his place. Says he, I was there from March till the time Oats
went away in June; and Oats read there that very Sunday before the time in
June that he went away. And I am sure I heard him read every time; and in cafe
he had not read every time, I must have read in his absence: but I did not read
at all, during that time.

Now, Gentlemen, when a man is to succeed or to supply the absence of another
in an Office that is peculiar as to the Charge incumbent upon the Officer, and
confiderable as to the profit of it, that must needs make an impression upon
the mind, and give a man a more exact remembrance of the thing, and therefore I
reeommend it particularly to your observation.

The next is one Mr. Smith, and he says he saw Oats there all the time: And as
to one part of it, when he himself was in the Infirmary, Oats went to visit
him every two or three days; nay, and about such a time in May, says he, which
was about the beginning of May, Oats being then in the Infirmary not well, the
Doctor and he had a pretty Dialogue together, and Oats spoke false Latin to
the Doctor, for he said, Si placeat Dominatio vestra, in the beginning of his
Complement; this he did particularly say was the expression that this excellent
Scholar used to the Physician at his first application to him, and all the
whole College took notice of that piece of his Learning.

The next is one Price, and he tells you, he was there all the time that the
others speak of; he remembers him very well, and particularly says, I am sure
Oats was there the 11th of May N. S. which will be the first of May O. S.
Because, says he, I know he was soundly beaten that day upon a quarrel that he
had there; this particularly he speaks to, besides his remembrance of the other
Circumstances in concurrence with the former Witnesses.

Mr. Doddington swears the same, and Mr. Gerrard also swears the same, with
that other particular circumstance that Mr. Solicitor repeated to you, which
was of Oats being there upon the day of Confirmation the 26th of May N. S. the
16th of May O. S. and he is sure of it, because he was confirmed along with
him, and therefore it is impossible he should forget it: And my Lord Gerrard,
who was the next, gives this reason upon his remembrance of all the
forementioned particulars, that he always took special notice of the man for
his Canting Tone, his Physiognomy, and remarkable Behavior.

Then there is Mr. Morgan who is no Papist, but a Minister of the Church of
England; now Mr. Oats was angry with all the rest, because they were
Catholics; but what has he to say to Mr. Morgan who is a Protestant? Why the
truth is, there are none of them to be believed, because they swear against
him, and really he ought to be permitted to give that reason, or it is like to
go very hard with him; for if in case you believe but a third part of the
Testimony that has been given, it is enough to do his work. But what says Mr.
Morgan? truly he comes up to the 24th of April particularly, and he tells you
how he remembers it; and the first occasion he had to look into it was, they
being all surprised at St. Omers at what Oats had Sworn, and Mr. Morgan
recollecting with himself, did remember that that very day he was playing at
Ball within the College, and happened to toss his Ball over the Wall into the
Garden, and not being able to recover it any other way, he spyed Oats walking
and looking into his Book, and therefore he desired him to lend him his Key,
and by the help of that, he went in and fetched his Ball; and this was the very
day that Oats swore he was here.

Mr. Arrundel says the same: the two Turberviles say the same; and one of them
is positive to have seen him there either the 24th and 25th, or 23d and 24th of
April O. S. which is the 3d and 4th, or 4th and 5th of May N. S. and if it were
either of these days, it cannot be possible he should be here at the Consult.

The next is Mr. Clavering, and I cannot but particularly take notice of what
he has sworn: he says Mr. Oats was there all the time that the rest speak of;
but it seems particularly about the time of the Congregation in London: there
comes in a Stranger that was poor, and this Gentleman Mr. Clavering made a
Collection for him; and it was talked of in the College as the reason why he
had not success in his Collection, because the Fathers were gone to the
Congregation. Nay, and yet farther says he, I do remember particularly that Mr.
Williams and Mr. Marsh did go over to the Congregation, but Oats did not, for
I do remember when Williams and Marsh came back again, I had some discourse
with Mr. Oats about the Congregation: He came to me and desired to know of me
what account I was able to give of the matter of that Meeting after the Consult
was over. Now had Mr. Oats been there and been a person of that great Trust
that he had sworn himself into, he needed not sure have asked Mr. Clavering at
St. Omers what the business of the Consult was at London, where he himself had
been, but the other had not.

There is besides Mr. Capley, another Witness, Mr. Cook, that speaks
particularly of the 30th of April, that he was sure Oats was there then,
because of the Procession, and because he walked by himself in it; and Wright
the last Witness gives a general account, but speaks to no particular time.

And now, Gentlemen, after all this Evidenc, Viva voce, you must give me leave
to hint Testimonium Rei, an improbable Oath was that which Oats owns he made,
if it be considered in all its parts. Can any man believe that fifty persons
should meet together in a Tavern in London, and these fifty persons should come
to a Resolution to kill the King and subvert the Government, and alter the
Religion; and that this Consultation being drawn up in the Tavern (for so he
swears it was) they should sever themselves into lesser Clubbs and Companies,
and take care that none should sign when they were altogether and among
themselves, but must have it carried up and down from one man's Chamber to
another and find no body to trust with this Affair, that if discovered, must
subject them to present destruction, and ruin their whole party, but only Mr.
Oats, who was none of their own Order, nor does appear to be of such Credit
amongst them? Can you believe any men should be so void of sense and reason,
that of fifty together, and those reputed as subtle as any sort of men
whatsoever, there should not be one man of common understanding that should
take care for a more rational Management of so great and hazardous an
Undertaking? when they were met together, and might have dispatched it in a
quarter of an hour, they should separate themselves into several parts of the
Town, and trust a Resolution of that nature in Mr. Oats pocket, in whom if
they had had more Confidence than they seem to have, yet it was folly and
madness to give him that opportunity of destroying all them, and making
himself; were there no other Evidence but the very Testimony of the thing, it
would go a very great way with me I confess; but I must say withal, you are
Judges of this Fact upon a superadded Testimony of Twenty two Witnesses Viva
voce, I think it leaves the thing without any doubt.

Gentlemen, the Answer given by the Defendant to this Charge is very
fallacious; and though he puts such a Countenance upon it, as though his
Witnesses were such persons of Credit, that nothing could be objected against
them yet he is certainly very much mistaken in that: He has produced but two
potitive Witnesses, and those two as positive as they are in their proof, are
likewise positive in their Contradictions of one another, and what they have
said is left to your Consideration.

The one is a Coachman, the other was Sir Richard Barker's Housekeeper; they
indeed do say Sir Richard Barker's Wifes Sister, and his Nephew, and his
Daughter, and his Neeces, and a worshipful Knight, and I know not who, that the
old Woman tells me are gone into my Country, were all there at the same time,
and no body comes to testify it, but only this Coachman and this old Woman:
These, Gentlemen, are things fit to be thought of.

But now let us consider how they agree in their Evidence. Says the Woman, I
saw him not till the beginning of May, but I am sure he was there before once
or twice. And how does she know that? because the Coachman told her so, and he
came there several times, but he did Dine there but once; and when he came
there the first time she saw him, he came in such a disguise, and he had a
short Perriwig, and a kind of short white Coat, and a white Hat; but when my
Coachman comes to swear, he tells you the first time he saw him, the Woman saw
him too, that he had his own Hair, and cut close to his cars, that made him
look, as the young fellow told her, like a Quaker. And when I asked the
Coachman, Are you sure that Benjamin the young Fellow did see him the first
time you saw him there? he told me, No; but he was sure the old Woman did look
out of the window and see him, which she denies. I then asked him how often he
dined there? he tells you several times, and there were such and such, and the
old Woman did see him dine there several times; which she denies that she ever
saw him dine there above once: And I take notice of one of the Evidence, the
Coachman, he gives but an odd sort of reason for his remembrance: In February
says he, my Lady died, and my Master was sick at Putney, and Oats came into
the Yard while I was cleaning my Coach; and I am sure it was where the Coat of
Arms hung over the door because he asked me about my Ladies death, and
therefore it must be in May, when, for ought does appear to the contrary, it
might be in any other Month after the Escutcheon was up; and in the other
circumstances there is no certainty at all: So that it is plain, these
Witnesses swear according as their humor leads them, and not according to any
remembrance they have of the thing.

And I rather believe it, because the third Witness, that is Page the
Apothecary, that used to make up Sir Richard Barker's Medicines, gives an
Evidence contrary to both those, he cannot remember the year positively or
particularly; but I Will tell you how he thwarts and contradicts the other
peoples Testimony; for he remembers he came in such a disguife, but he believes
no body spoke to him but himself, because he found him walking in the place
that was for the common reception of the Patients, and he asked for Dr. Tongue,
and he not being within, he went away very discontented: and so now these three
Witnesses seem to contradict one another; and the last Witness Walker, who is
the Parson, he says nothing to the matter; for it does plainly appear the time
which he speaks of, which was about a year and a half before he was called to
testify at the five Jesuits Trial, must be in the year 77, and not in the year
78, which is the Question here, which must be before he went first to St. Omers.

Gentlemen, the other part of Mr. Oates's Defense has been upon this Topic:
says he, I have been believed heretofore, the Parliaments have given me credit;
and to prove it, he has called several Noble Lords and Persons of Quality. The
first was my Lord of Devonshire, who says he cannot remember any particulars of
his Evidence, it is so long since; but he remembers the Parliament, upon the
Evidence given of the Plot, did make such Votes as we do all know of. And there
were a great many people that gave credit to his Testimony, who, God be
thanked, are of another opinion now. And my Lord of Clare says, he was not in
the House of Lords at the beginning of the Discovery, and cannot remember any
thing in particular. But my Lord of Huntingdon was a little more particular;
and Mr. Oats began to be angry with him, because he spoke so much: says he, I
remember Mr. Oats was examined in the House of Lords, and was believed there,
because they did believe he spoke truth at that time; but now upon
consideration of the Contradictions and Falsities of his Evidence, I cannot but
say, I do believe him, says he, to be a great Villain, and that he has been
guilty of spilling innocent Blood. And this Noble Lord speaks with great Honor
and Consideration: And truly I believe, if every man that is here were to speak
his mind, my Lord has delivered the Opinions of us all, and many thousands more
in the Nation.

Mr. Oats called next my Lord Chief Baron, my Brother Gregory, my Lord of
London, Sir George Treby, Mr. Williams, and my Brother Dolben. But they all
tell you, they are able to give no particular Answers to his Questions; and
this was the sum of his Evidence.

To this Mr. Attorney General has given a Reply of Evidence that truly is of
very great moment. First, here is produced Sir George Wakeman, whom Oats
accused of High Treason, and he suffered his Trial and was acquitted; so that
as well as the Jury had given credit to him in the former Verdicts, so says Mr.
Attorney, I must speak likewise for the credit of that Verdict that did
disbelieve him, because though he did swear as roundly and briskly up to the
matter as he had done before, yet when he had not the hurry and surprise of his
Discovery to support him, his Villainy was detected, and the Innocent acquitted.
And besides the Record of the acquittal, here is the Person himself, who is now
under no dread or danger, having stood his Trial and being acquitted; and he
takes it upon his Oath, in the presence of the Great God the Searcher of
Hearts, That whatsoever Oats swore against him at his Trial, was every tittle
of it false: And this Acquittal of his, being after great and mature
consideration, is an Evidence of anothergets quality than the Verdicts of the
other Convictions.

Next to him, is my Lord Castlemain, a Person of very great Honor; and he
gives an account he was arraigned of High Treason at this Bar, and upon his
Trial Oats was produced as a Witness against him, and there he swore he met
with my Lord Castlemain in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, and great familiarity there was
between them, so that my Lord could not trust him in a less affair than the
Plot; and away he goes with him to Fenwick's Chamber, there to talk about a
Design of killing the late King. Mr. Oats, of all mankind, must be the great
Repository of this Secret; but the Jury then being Persons of great
Understanding and Integrity, did not believe Oats, but acquitted my Lord
Castlemain: And he does here take it upon his Oath, backed with all the
Imprecations of Evil to himself that a man can use, That there was not one word
of truth in Oates's Testimony; nor did he ever see Oats in his life, till such
time as he was taken up upon his Accusation. Now are here two persons of Honor
and Quality, that upon their Oaths do particularly give you an account, as in
the presence of Almighty God, that Oats has twice forsworn himself against
them.

Gentlemen, there is notice to be taken of the Journal of the House of Lords;
and though it is true for the sake of the Precedent, and to secure the Justice
of the Nation, we did keep them strictly to their proof, that it was upon Oath.
And as to the business of Smith, though we do believe the thing in our private
judgments, yet we thought it not fit to be permitted that persons should upon
their own Oaths confess themselves to be guilty of Perjury, and afterward
give Evidence against others; for such are not to have the countenance of ever
being Witnesses again: yet by the Records of Parliament, and other Evidence,
there is enough to make the matter aimed at clear.

For it is clear by his Narrative, that Oats did first swear, as far as he
could well swear, to bring him into the displeasure of the People: for that was
his way to intimidate all he had to do with, and thereby force them to comply
with his Designs. And there was no more plausible Accusation at that time,
than to accuse a man for saying somewhat against the Parliament, or being in a
Combination to subvert the Protestant Religion. But you see when he comes to
have his own turn served, then this man upon whom he had fixed such an odious
Character, is really no Papist at all, but engaged in service for his King and
Country, and has Mr. Oates's Passport, a thing of great advantage to him at
that season. This the Kings Council make use of with great reason, as an
Evidence of Tampering: for the man has altered his opinion of one he had before
accused, and now brings him as an honest to give Evidence for him. And this,
say they, must be intended to be done by Practice and by Threats.

And the rather, Gentlemen, for that you have an account by Witnesses sworn,
that there was one Clay a Popish Priest that lay in Prison at the Gatebouse,
and while he was there, Oats and Sn William Waller came into the Prison to
him, and tampering with him, says Oats, I hear there are some St. Omers Boys
that intend to testify that I was at St. Omers, when I say I was at London;
but you must swear, that you dined with me at Mr. Howards in May 1678: or if
you will not, you know I know you to be a Priest, and I Will hang you. Says Clay,
Where is my Silver and Gold that was taken away from me? And we all know Sir
William Waller was wonderful good at the fingering of Gold; he used to take
away broad Pieces as Popish Relics, because of the Crosses upon them. Says
Clay, Give me my Gold again, I will swear for you; I have been a Rogue before,
and I may be a Rogue again. And accordingly a Contract is made for him to swear
directly that Oats and he were together at Mr. Howard's house in May 78. This
very Fellow that tells you now the story, told it the next morning to another
man, who has likewise sworn the same. Then is Clay conveyed by Oats to the
Old Bailey, and there swears, being thus threatened and suborned, That in May
1678 he and Mr. Oats dined together at Mr. Howard's house, and you have Mr.
Howard produced, who does swear that Glay did swear so; but indeed he was not
there with Mr. Oats at dinner till July after.

This, Gentlemen, is direct Corruption and Subornation; and if a man will be a
corrupt Knave, and endeavor to suborn Witnesses to swear that which is false,
he is the more likely to swear false himself. Besides, that you are to take
notice, here is his own Narrative produced, where you have it sworn by himself,
That he went back to St. Omers about the beginning of May, and was there all
the month of May, and in June till the latter end of it. Then all this while
either Mr. Oats or, his Witnesses, are perjured in the Case: He says, he
stayed but three or four days in England after the Consult was over, and then
went straight back again to St. Omers. Which must be the first week in May; but
if you believe his two Witnesses, he dined with them several times after that:
and so it is apparent, some of them are guilty of gross and foul Perjury.

Now, Centlemen, I cannot but resort back to the Objection that I made at
first. It Is strange to me, that a man that came upon such a design, should go
publicly about the streets at noonday, though in a disguise, yet he was
known. But if you take the persons time to be in the year 1677, then it is
easily reconciled what they did say of their seeing him in such a disguise; and
so all their Testimony may stand together, and perhaps they may mistake in a
point of time, though not in the substance of their Evidence; and I would out
of charity conclude it to be so.

But I will say, if they are to be taken strictly to the year 1678, it is
monstrous to imagine, that we should have no body brought to let us know where
he lodged, where he eat, with whom he conversed for all that time.

Gentlemen, I have detained you the longer in this matter, because I take it to
be of so great weight, wherein the Justice and Honor of the Nation are so much
engaged, and it was therefore fit this Cause should be tried in the most solemn
and public manner, in order to vindicate the Nation from the Reproach and
Calumny of Injustice and Oppression. And sure I am, if you think these
Witnesses swear true, as I cannot see any color of objection, there does not
remain the least doubt but that Oats is the blackest, most perjured Villain
that ever appeared upon the face of the Earth.


C. Crown. Tipstaff, you must take care of the Jury.


L. C. J. Gentlemen, if any of you have a mind to drink at the Bar, before you
go, you shall have some got for you.


Jury. No, my Lord, we do not care for drinking.


L. C. J. Then we will stay for you.


Then the Jury withdrew to consider of their Verdict, and after about a quarter
of an hours stay, they returned and delivered in their Verdict: That the
Defendant was guilty of the Perjury whereof he was Indicted. Which being
Recorded, the Lord Chief Justice spoke to the Jury, to this effect.

L. C. J. Gentlemen, that we are not, God be thanked, in those times of
Disorder and Confusion that we have been heretofore in, to have Humming or
Hissings to declare the Auditors Approbation or Dislike of Juries Verdicts. But
because there has been this day mention made of the Opinions of Judges about
Verdicts, I shall take the liberty to declare my mind to you now, That formy
part, I am satisfied in my Conscience, you have given a good and a just
Verdict; and so I believe is every other Judge upon the Bench.


To which the rest of the Judges assented; and then the Court arose.


