A True AC^^^^NT of the Behavior and Confession Of the Nine Criminals that
were Executed at TYBURN, On Friday the 31st of May 1689. whose Names are as
follow, viz.
Charles Hughes, Jacob Turner, William Bird, Charles Lee, Edward Sibley,
William Miller, Richard Bullen, Thomas Watkins, James Felton.
ON the Lord's Day the Ordinary read Prayers, and preached twice to the
condemned Prisoners. In the Forenoon the Text was the 8th Verse of the 5th
Chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
see God. There is no Principle more sixth in a reasonable Creature, than a
restless desire after Happiness. Yet Men mistake in nothing more, than in a
fond persuit of such false measures and means as reach not true substantial
Blessedness. Therefore, to undeceive miserable Pretenders to Happiness, while
they wander in a painful Labyrinth of unsuccessful means to attain it, our
Savior in these eight Beatitudes directs to such proper and genuin
dispositions, as will certainly tend to, and instate the Soul in real Felicity.
Heart-purity is a Frame not only blessed at present, but leads to future
Happiness, in the perfect knowledge of God in Heaven, joined with an exact
Assimilation to him, and a delightful enjoyment of him to all Eternity.

The parts of the Text were explicated, and Evangelical Heart-purity stated as
the Spring of all sincere Obedience. Real Heart-purity is an universal
Conformity of all the Souls Faculties and Affections to all the Precepts of
Divine Revelation, tho cross to carnal Reason, or sly Self-Interest. It forms
clear and honorable Conceptions of God, suitable to his Divine Excellencies,
so as to be transformed into their Divine Effects.

Heart-purity strikes at the Root of all Self-seeking, which confines the Noble
Soul to particular low sordid Times. It will enter into us as the Refiner's
Fire. It will become every way absolute. It will not suffer any Corrival with
God, either in point of commanding our Obedience, or courting of our Love. It
strikes at all speculative retired spiritual Filthiness in the Heart. But a
mixture of Carnality, where Hypocrisy predominates, renders all the parts of
spiritual Religion uneasy, yea, casts them off as grievous. Contrariwise, the
power of Godliness will make a Man live up to the height and dignity of his
renewed Nature, and not to act degenerately, below his holy state, as not being
enslaved to any Lust or Passion.

An Heart purified by Divine Truth, may assure it self, that it is translated
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. It may view the Plot of its
Salvation transacted already, in the impression of a Godlike Nature.

Here were mentioned some Arguments, to demonstrate that the pure in heart are
blessed; also the misery of all profane persons, in being devoid of the Beauty
of Holiness.

After many Motives urged, to use some Rules or Directions how to attack and
promote Holiness, the Ordinary spoke thus to the condemned Criminals.

O who would not study to promote Heart purity in the present love and practice
of it that they may be welcomed to the Festivities of heavenly Glory. Why then
do we grasp after sordid Vanities, and not take hold of Blessedness by all holy
Violence?

Examine therefore, Is there a Change in your Hearts, Thoughts, Words, Actions
and Affections? Is there a mighty work of Renewing Grace on your Spirits? Try
your Title to heavenly Felicity, by your universal, constant, sincere and
cheerful Obedience to the Commands of Christ.

O why are we dead to the love and practice of true Piety, as if Heaven were a
fantastic Dream! Why are we as hot and eager on Sinning, as if Hell had no
Fire, or it was all vanished into Smoke?

O who would not ambitiously aspire to get a Sight of God, who is the matchless
Mirror of Divine Truth, and the infinite Beauty of all Perfection! If we hope
for such a Sight, why does it not warm us with the greatest love of Holiness,
and put us, as it were, unto a Transport of most active Zeal in a course of
Piety?

But why should I use farther Arguments to allure Men to embrace their own
Happiness? Holiness is the matter of our freest Choice. The Lord sets Life and
Death this day before you. Do not obstinately hate Knowledge, nor reject the
Fear of the Lord, by whose Smiles or Frowns men live or dye eternally. The very
Hell of Hell, is to be given up to the cursed consummation of wickedness; but
the very quintessence of heavenly Happiness, is to be made perfect in Holiness,
as a lively, lovely Representation of the Deity, Only the pure in heart shall
see and enjoy God, in whose presence is Fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand
are Rivers of the Divinest Pleasures to all Eternity, without any stint or
society.

On Monday the Ordinary visited the Condemned, and inquired what Divine
Impressions the Author of all Grace had made on their Hearts by the foregoing
Counsels and Prayers. They replied, That they were much awakened from their
security in a sinful course, that the sight and sense of their Iniquities did
much afflict and trouble their minds. To which I replied, That clear and strong
Convictions in Conscience may vanish in a fruitless sense of Sin, unless they
proceed to a through work of Conversion.

To this, One more knowing than the rest assented, and desired me that I would
expound in the Afternoon the 10th and 11th Verses of the 7th Chapter of the 2d
Epistle to the Corinthians.

After all the Seven Signs, as inseparable Concomitants of true Repentance, had
been treated of, the Condemned said, That they now understood the Nature of
Repentance more clearly and fully than before, yet they acknowledged that they
could not work such, a change in their own hearts. I told them, That the New
Creation was a more wonderful Effect of Gods Power, than the forthing of the
visible structure of Heaven and Earth. I declared in what Respects.

On Tuesday the Ordinary having prayed with the Condemned, asked them One by
One, of the Employment they were bred up into, and how they fell into a vicious
course of Life?

First Charles Hughes, Condemned for Murdering his Wife, who was punished for
the Fond Love of his Comeliness, tho they knew that he had been formerly
Condemned, as having been a Prisoner herself. Hughes told me, that he had very
Religious Education. I replied, the greater is your Sin, as being against
clearer Light, and for degenerating from the Counsels and Examples of pious
Ancestors. I told him, That their Virtues could not save him, unless he now
repent that he walked not in their steps. The Pharisees boasted that they had
Abraham to their Father, but the Baptist consuted that proud presumption, by
assuring them, That every Tree which did not bring forth good Fruit, should be
hew'n down, and cast into the Fire. He said that he was not brought up to any
Employment, which exposed him to many evil Temptations. He could not deny, but
that he had been refractory in running from the strict Government of his
Father, and thereby justly left to fall into farther Extravagancie. I several
times prayed with him, before he took his Trial, to compose his Mind, for he
was very impatient under his Imprisonment, than which there cannot be a more
barbarous Fact. He said he was transported by passion at some insolent words
his Wife gave him, but wishes that he had endured all Reproaches patiently,
rather than thus to have shortened her Life, and his own, yet he hopes that the
merits of Christ's Bloodshed will pacify God's angry Justice, and make his
shameful death a means to bring him to Repentance, and save his Soul. The
Second, Jacob Turner of the Parish of St. Botolphs Bishopsgute, was Condemned
for the Murder of his Wise. He was born in London, is about the Age of 44
years, was a Weaver by Trade, which he followed for some long space of time;
yet falling into decay, it bred discontents betwixt him and his Wife. He said
that he had not any design to kill her, but did it in a sudden violent passion,
for which he is very sorrowful; not because he must dye, but because he has
greatly sinned against God, and dishonored his prosessing of Religion to which
he pretended, but now questions the sincerity of his heart. He was much
dejected at first, but upon a more particular discoursing with him, and praying
for him, he said he found his heart more softened and relying upon God for his
mercy. He was the most knowing Person among the Condemned. He said that
Repentance to Salvation abhors every Act of Sin, and flies all Temprations and
Occasions leading to it. I asked him, How Faith and Presumption differ. He said,
That true Faith does purify the Heart, and renew the Conscience, as well as
pacify and be calm it, in the lively hope of God's pardoning Mercy. For, where
he remits the guilt of Sin, he mortifies and subdues the love and power of it:
So that the Sin which was most delightful, is rendered most bitter in a
penitential abhorring of it. Upon observation of his whole Behavior, I do
think that he was an Example of Repentance to the rest of the Criminals. The
Third, William Bird of the Parish of Harrow on the Hill, was Condemned for
Felony and Burglary. He was born in Holland of English Parents, but would not
give any account of his Conversation. The Fourth, Charles Lee was Condemned for
Felony upon one Thomas Trot in the King's Highway. He said that he was born in
Cheshire, that he was 19 years of age, that his Employment was to Fell Cloth in
the Country as a Pedlar. He came to London last Winter, but finding no
Employment here, he fell into bad Acquaintance, and says he was Fudled when he
Robbed. I told him that was no Excuse, but an Aggravation, because he added Sin
to Sin. He replied, th the was sorry for taking any extravagant Courses. I asked
him what Repentance was? He said, it must be for the least Sin, as an offense
against God, rather than for Fear of Hell. That it must be such a Sorrow for
Sin, as to hate and forsake it, and to loath himself for it; and that true
Faith is joined with a good Conscience. I hope he was penitent. The Fifth,
Edward Sibley of Stepney was Condemned for Felony and Burglary. He said that he
was a Burcher in St. Sepulchre's Parish, that he had traveled formerly into
Barbados Jamu^e^, and Virginia, his Employment lately was in the Victualling
House (...) the Navy He ^^d that he had received many Preservations (...) God
in his Travels, and did resolve thereupon to walk more circumspectly in the
course of his Life. But he stroke his Vows to God, and was negligent of
Religious Duties, whereupon he committed many Sins, and this Crime, for which
he is Condemned. But he begs of God to give him true Repentance, and Faith in
Jesus Christ, that he may obtain the pardon of all his Sins, and that of his
Life may be spared, he hopes he shall never sin in such Excess as formerly. The
Sixth, William Miller of Stepney Condemned for Felony. He said that he was bred
up to Husbandry, that be came to Sr. Giles's in the Fields a little before
Christmas to seek Employment, but meeting not with any agreeable to that he had
been used to he served under a Plaisterer for the space of two Months since
That he is sorry for all his Sins against God, more than for the Sentence of
Death past upon him. That it will not be terrible to him, if he may obtain
God's Pardon, and have a comfortable hope of Eternal Life. He seemed very
Penitent.
The rest of the Condemned were not willing to give any Account of the Course
of their Life, therefore here I must conclude my Report of this Session.

Dated the 30th of May 1689. Samuel Smith Ordinary


On Friday Morning about Ten a Clock, the Nine Prisoners Condemned were put
into three Carts, and Conveyed to the Execution.

But by the way take Notice of this Remark:

On Thursday Night about the Hour of One, these Nine and Cap. VValsing^a^ (who
was Condemned for Murder) being in the Condemned Hole, a Design or Attempt to
break the Goal was offered in Dispute amongst them, unto which the Capt. and
Jacob Turner would not consent, upon which the other Eight bound them Hand and
Foot, threatening them with Death if they cried out, after which the other Eight
fell to Wo^k upon the Boards reaching up about the number of three, and sliding
down into a bolt, beneath, by the help of a Rope fastened to a King near the
broken place all which Contrivance is supposed to be a betted by some of the
Prisoners Familiars. After they were beneath the Condemned Hole, they made
further Attempts and devised to ^^d out the Common Shore or at least to break
out next the Passage in the Gate-way, singing of Psalms all the while they were
at work, pleasing themselves with the Conceit of being upon their Duty, toward
God, as they were Condemned, etc. But God Almighty the Searcher of all Hearts
found them out. Thus, the Prisoners on the Common side hearing a Noise awakened
the Keepers in the Lodge, and the Major being called for, shot a Blunder b^ss
at them below, Charged with Pease, which did no Execution, only a frighted
them, and in short made them yield, etc.

When they were all in the Cart, the Ordinary exhorted them all to true
Repentance for all their Sins, and prayed with them, singing a Psalm, etc.
after which he asked them to confess to the People the occasion of their coming
thither. At which they seemed to give but a kind of a general slight Answer.
Those of them most concerned, were Thomas Watkins, William Bird, and Richard
Bullen. The other were little concerned, especially Charles Lee, who was
Condemned for Robbing on the Highway. As soon as he came into the Carr, he
seemed to be very resolute, and look with a very angry Countenance, taking a
handful of Money out of his Pocket, threw it out of the Cart amongst the
Spectates, saying Gentlemen here is poor Country Jack's Farewell. But after he
demonstrated himself further saying, I have followed the Road these seven Years
and more and have got Money enough to maintain me as long as I need to live.
The late King bad. 1500 l. of my Gettings, etc. He said further, That he never
committed Murder, nor never Robbed any poor Man in his Life. Upon his turning
off, he gave two extraordinary Jerques with his Legs, which was much admired by
all the Spectators.

Licensed May 31. J. Fraser.


Advertisement.
These are to give Notice to all Persons, for the Benefit of the Public, That
Mr. Elmy Operator, of known integrity, and above 25 Years Practice, Lives at
the Blue Ball in VVhale-Bone-Court, at the Lower End of Bartholomew lane by the
Royal Exchange, who most safely and expeditiously Cures Deafness and Noise in
the Ears in any of what Age soever, (if Curable) and at First Sight, by
Inspection, Resolves the Patient if so or not, as most Eminent Persons of
Quality in this City can Testify. He has likewise a most excellent Gargarism
or Mouth water, which cures any Canker, Ulcer, or Scurvy in the Mouth, fastening
loose Teeth, and making black ones as while as Ivory.

London, Printed by D. M. near Fleetbrdge. 1689.


