Lord hear my Cry -- LONDON. Printed for Ben: Harris

I.D. sc


OF THE Causes and Cure OF SAD Disconsolate Thoughts IN CHRISTIANS.

BY One of their Sympathizing Fellow Members, W. Traughton.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Harris, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Stationers-Armes in Sweetings-Rents in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1677.

EPISTLE. To a Pensive Disconsolate SOUL.
My dear Friend,
HAving taken these Notes on a subject of great concern (which may be much more
enlarged) I did consider with my self that they might be very seasonable and
suitable to your case and condition; for you have been an afflicted soul for a
long time, often complaining to God and Man of the darkness of your spirit, and
the sad and dismal thoughts wherewith you have been haunted and exceedingly
disquieted, as if no Man's condition were so sad and dark and disconsolate as
yours: But yet there is no Temptation (as you may assure your self) which has
seized on you, but other Christians have had experience thereof; and God, who
is Faithful, will with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that you may
be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13.

Blessed be God, you have a tender and gracious High Priest that undertakes for
you; in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. We have not (says the Apostle) a High Priest
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, but was in all
points tempted like as we are, yet without Sin; let us therefore come boldly
unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in
time of need, Heb. 4.15, 16. He it is that gathers the weak Lambs with his Arm,
and carries them in his Bosom, and gently leads those that are with Young, Isa.
40.11. He will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, but
will send forth Judgment unto Victory, Math 12.20.

This Merciful and Compassionate Jesus never rejected any that came to him; and
will he cast you off if you come to Him with the burden of your Sins, Sorrows,
Temptations, Melancholic distempers? No, he will not; he has promised he will
not, Joh. 6.37. There Is an Emphasis in the Original, two Negatives, He will not
in any wise, by any means cast ye out: The doubled Negatives serve to make the
Assertion so much the stronger, and to raise our Faith above all doubts and
fears.

O then poor Soul, be not discouraged, draw not back from ^he living God,
through an evil heart of unbelief: Give not way to groundless Jealousies and
carnal Reasonings; but believe, and you shall see the Glory of God in giving
you speedily a gracious Issue out of all your Temptations, and a comfortable
deliverance from the sad disconsolate perplexing thoughts of your own heart,
which indeed is your greatest Enemy; for the heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9.

Read over these Notes seriously, and beg of God earnestly to give you Grace to
improve the seasonable directions therein mentioned, and to teach you
effectually by his Spirit; for who Teaches like him? Job 36.22. When he gives
Quietness, who then can cause Trouble? And when he hides his Face, who then
can behold Him? Whether it be done against a Nation, or against a Man only, Job
34.29.

If ye think the publishing of these Notes may tend to the Edification and
comfort of some other tempted afflicted souls, who are in the like condition
with your self, it is left to your Freedom to get them published, otherwise you
may make a private use of them for your self and near Relations, as God shall
direct and enable you; to whose Gracious Protection I commend you and yours.

THE CAUSES and CURE OF SAD Disconsolate Thoughts, etc.
Text: Psalm. 94.19. In the Multitude of my Thoughts within me, thy Comforts
delight my Soul.


SOme Interpreters understand this Text of that Heavenly Delight, which David
found in Holy Meditation; a Work wherein he was much exercised, and whereof
Spiritual Joy and Delight is a Natural and Moral Effect.

But, if we look more narrowly into the Context, we shall see that the Prophet
speaks not of Holy Thoughts and Meditation; but of Sad disquieting and
perplexing Thoughts, which did arise in his Heart; against which, he found the
Consolations of God to be the most effectual Remedy.

Observe. That Saints should watch against sad, melancholy unbeleiving
disconsolate Thoughts and Cogitations.

Hence it is, (even from their Unbeleif) that they are so apt to make sad and
dismal Conclusions touching their Spiritual Estate: My Soul refused to be
Comforted (says David, Psalm. 77.2, 3, 7, 8, 9.) I remembered God, and was
troubled: I complained, and my Spirit was overwhelmed: Will the Lord cast off
for ever, etc? So Heman, that Godly wise Man, says, Psalm. 88.4, 5. I am
counted with them that go down into the Pit: I am as a Man that has no
Strength, free among the Dead, like the: Slain that lie in the Grave, whom Thou
remembrest no more, etc.

I will here describe, 1. What these sad disconsolate Thoughts are. 2. The
Causes of them. 3. The Remedies of them. 4. Give you some Helps and Directions
against them.


Quaery, What do you mean by sad disconsolate Thoughts?

Answ. Such Thoughts I mean, as the Saints themselves are exercised with, in
reference to their Spiritual Condition; oft-times they have sad uncomfortable
Reflections, heavy Burdens on their Souls, great Pressures of Spirit: Why haft
thou set me as a mark against thee (says Job, cap. 7. v. 20.) so that I am a
Burden to my self.

Quae. What are the Causes of these sad thoughts?

Answ. They are caused both by natural distempers of Body, and by spiritual
distempers, or Soul pressures.

First: Partly by bodily distempers, especially by Melancholy, which is a
black, cloudy, muddy distemper that darkens the Intellectuals, depraves the
Fancy, saddens the Spirit of a Christian, and renders his Condition and Life
uncomfortable to him; it is Satan's Chariot wherein he Tryumphantly rides; his
Anvil, on which he continually beats; the Element or Bath, in which he Bathes
himself. Though a Man have Grace and Spiritual experience and acquaintance with
God, yet if he be of a melancholy temper and constitution, he cannot act
cheerfully as a Christian should do, bu^ is like a VVaggon, or Coach, whose
wheels are out of order, so that the Passenger cannot comfortably perform his
Journey.

Secondly: There are spiritual Causes of these sad, dark, uncomfortable
thoughts, and they are six.

First: Those remaining Principles of darkness, carnal Reason, Slavish fear and
unbelief which are in the hearts of God's own People, who are but in part
Regenerated here in this Life; Satan (who is a Spirit of darkness, and delights
most in spiritual wickedness, Ephesians. 6.12.) works upon, and corresponds with
these remainders of unbelief and carnal Reason in the Saints, as being most
suitable to him, who improves his long experience, skill, and power to draw out
and heighten these Principles by the Engine of his Temptations.

Secondly: These sad thoughts are Caused by a deep sense of sin, and the desert
of it; this works terror, dejection, and despondency of spirit, when God
represents and sets before a Man the greatness of his sins: Thus David himself
sadly complains, Mine Iniquities are gone over mine head, as a heavy burden
they are too heavy for me, Psalm. 38.4.

Thirdly: They are caused by spiritual desertion, or God's hiding his Face from
the Soul: Thou did hide thy Face (says David) and I was troubled, Psalm.
30.7. And Sion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me,
Isa. 49.14. Wherefore hidest thou thy Face (says Job) and hold me for thine
Enemy? Will thou break a Leaf driven to and fro, and will thou pursue the dry
Stubble? For thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess
the Iniquities of my Youth, Job 13.24, 25.

Fourthly: From the apprehension of Divine wrath and displeasure: Though God be
Reconciled to Believers in Christ, yet they often apprehend God's Frowns rather
than his Smiles; his Chidings rather than his Kisses, and these make sad
impressions upon them: Thus Job complains, The Arrows of the Almighty are
within me, the Poison whereof drinks up my Spirit; the Terrors of God do set
themselves in array against me, Job 6.4. and verse 8, 9. He wanted words to
express the greatness of his misery and sorrow, wherewith his spirit was even
overwhelmed: Such sad apprehensions Heman also had, Whilst I suffer thy
terrors (says he) I am distracted; thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors
have cut me off, Psalm. 88.15, 16.

Fifthly: These sad thoughts and cogitations are sometimes caused by violent
temptations and suggestions to the most horrid evils; as to Selfmurther, final
Despair, Blasphemy, cursed Atheism; the Soul is so terrified therewith, that
it is ready to choose a sudden violent death rather than life. Thou scarest me
with Dreams (says Job, cap. 7. v. 14, 15.) and terrifiest me through Visions,
so that my soul chooses strangling and death rather than my life: Such horrid
Blasphemous suggestions and injections from Satan, some poor Christians have
sad experience of, which fill their souls with terror and amazement, and make
them even weary of their lives.

Sixthly, Sad Thoughts are caused by looking at Death in the Chastely Glass of
the Law of God, and not in the Comfortable Glass of the Gospel; and so, Death
appears to be the King of Terrors; and of all Terrible things, the most
Terrible. Oh! What will become of me (thinks the poor Trembling Soul) when I
dye! How shall I be able to shoot that great and vast Gulf of Eternity, and to
endure the Bitterness and Terrors of Death! I that cannot bear with Patience, a
little Pain of the Tooth-ake, Stone, Strangury, How shall I look upon that
Pale-Horse, and his Rider, whose Name is Death, Rev 6.8! Saints themselves,
have many times sad Thoughts and Apprehensions touching Death, when the Soul
shall be stripped naked of the Body, and all worldly Comforts, and brought into
the Immediate Presence of God: The Conscience here in this Life, being not
perfectly and wholly purged and pacifyed, there remains still some Defilement,
some Guilt, which causes some Doubts and Fears even in true Believers.

You have heard the Causes, now let us come to the Remedies of these sad
Thoughts.

First then, If Melancholy be the Cause, use the means which God has appointed
for the Cure of it: Three Things I commend to you.

(1.) Ye should (with Dependence on God, the Supreme Cause and Being) use the
most proper Physic, moderate Exercise, good Diet.

As for Bodily Distempers, they are ordinarily cured by Corporal Medicines, and
not by Spiritual Means: I say, with Dependence on God for Success, ye must use
Physic; for, except the Lord build the House, they Labor but in vain that
build it, Psalm. 127.1. And, King Asa is blamed, because in his Disease he
sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians, 2 Chronicles. 16.12.

(2.) Converse frequently with wise, compassionate, experienced Christians,
such as have been exercised with Melancholy Distempers themselves, and are not
ignorant of Sathan's Methods; otherwise ye speak to them, and they to you, in
an unknown Tongue.

(3.) Consider, That though the Cure of Melancholy, be a torture to the most
Learned Physicians in the World; yet God, the Sovereign Physician, can easily
rebuke it: If He speak the word, Be thou healed, then thou shall be sound and
whole: The Lord knows our frame, how frail and weak we are, what advantage
Satan takes against us from these melancholy Distempers; and how they disable
and dis-spirit us for Religious Services, and render our Lives burdensome and
uncomfortable to us; and therefore, he will pity us, as an indulgent Father
pittieth his Children: And, though the Distemper should not wholly be removed;
yet we may well hope, that he will so abate it for his own Names sake) that it
shall not over-whelm us, no, nor hinder our Spiritual Good; but be a means to
humble us, and keep us low in our own Eyes.

Secondly, If your sad disconsolate Thoughts be caused by Spiritual Distempers;
as Unbelief, carnal Reason, Doubts and Fears, something is to be done in the
general; and then more particularly.

(1.) In general: Endeavor in the Strength of God, to comfort these sad
Thoughts, by applying Spiritual Consolations su^table to your Distemper; so you
find in the Text, In the multitude of my Thoughts ( i. e. sad Thoughts) within
me, Thy Comforts delight my soul, Psalm. 94.9. Let not the Consolations of God
^^em small to thee, neither do thou indulge any secret Sin, Job 15.11.

(2.) You should often chide your selves keenly and rationally for these sad
unbelieving thoughts: Why art thou cast down (O my Soul)! and why art thou
disquieted within me! Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my Countenance, and my God, Psalm. 42.5, 11. This sadness and
dejectedness in Saints is very unreasonable, and of ill consequence, for it
drinks up their spirits, disables and dispirits them for the Service of God and
Men: But I will speak more particularly to this matter.

First: Does Satan work upon, and by those Innate Principles of Darkness,
Unbelief, carnal Reason, which are in thy heart and nature; and likewise on thy
Bodily distempers, especially Melancholy: O then take to thee the whole Armor
of God, especially the Shield of Faith, that ye may be able to stand against
the wiles of the Devil, and to quench all his fiery Darts, Ephesians. 6.11, 16.
Pray earnestly that God would rebuke Satan, and remember that Christ prays for
you: And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord Rebuke thee, O Satan: Is not this a
Brand plucked out of the fire? Zach. 3.2. Greater is Christ that is in you and
for you, than Satan that is against you.

Secondly: Do thy sins make thee sad and disconsolate? Do they press thee down
with a great weight? and do thou groan under the body of Sin as an
intolerable burden, Romans 7.24. O then remember that sweet Invitation of thy
Savior, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest, Matthew. 11.28. Apply to thy soul the Sovereign Blood of Christ, which
cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. which pacifieth the Conscience, and purges
it from dead works, Heb. 9.14. which speaks better things than the Blood of
Abel, Heb. 12.24. Cast the burden of thy sins, thy guilt, thy punishment on
Christ, on whom, God made to meet the Iniquities of us all, and by whose
Stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5, 6. His soul was sad and sorrowful to the
death, that thy soul might rejoice; the Spirit of the Lord God was upon him,
and he was sent by God to bind up the broaken-hearted, to give them that mourn
in Sion, Beauty for Ashes, the oil of Joy for Mourning, and the garment of
Praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61.1, 2, 3.

Thirdly: Does the Lord hide his Face from thee, so that thou beholdest not the
light of His Countenance as formerly? Think with thyself, notwithstanding that
God's Love is Unchangable and Everlasting, He changes not as Man does, Mal.
3.6. Though he seem to hide his Face, and forsake thee for a small moment, yet
with Everlasting kindness will I embrace thee, says the Lord, thy Redeemer,
Isa. 54.7, 8. He retains not his Anger for ever; He will turn again, He will
have Compassion upon us, Micah 7.18, 19. If thou prayest to God in Faith, He
will be favorable to thee, and thou shall see his Face with joy, Job 33.26.
Who is among you that fears the Lord, that walks in darkness, and has no
light, let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, Isa.
50.10. Though the tender Mother go sometimes where the Child does not see her,
yet still her Bowels are toward the Child: God, when he seems to withdraw
from his people, yet still his Love and Compassion are toward them. Christ
upon the Cross, cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? that we
might not be forsaken of God.

Fourthly: Do thou yet apprehend some tokens of God's wrath and displeasure,
which fills thy heart with fear and amazement? Remember that Christ our Sponsor
and Surety, has born the whole Wrath of God, the whole Curse of the Law for
all those that come to him, and believe on him: He has Redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13. He it was that trod
the Wine Press of the fierceness of the Wrath of God, and there was none to
help him, Isa. 63.5, 6. Rev. 19.15. By this Jesus we are delivered from the
wrath to come. 1 These. 1.10. The Lord is merciful and gracious, He will not
always Chide, neither will he keep his Anger for ever: As a Father pittyeth his
Children, so the Lord pittyeth them that fear Him; for he knows our frame, He
remembers that we are but dust, Psalm. 103.8, 9, 13, 14. He will not contend
for ever, neither will He be always Wrath, lest the Spirit should fail before
him: He will restore Comforts to him that Mourns, and will Create the fruit of
the lips, Peace, Peace, Isaiah 57.16, 19.

Fifthly: Does Satanical Injections, and violent Temptations to the most horrid
Evils and Blasphemies haunt and hurry thee day and night. Consider (poor soul)
that they are thy Trials, not thy Sins; (if thou do not yield thereunto, but
abhor and resist them) thou art like the modest Virgin that is forcibly Ravished
by a wicked Man without her consent: It Is his Sin, not hers, though a great
Affliction to her. Oh fly to the Throne of Grace and Mercy for help and succor
in this time of Need; rest thy self on God's free promise and word of Grace: He
is Faithful, and will not suffer you to be Tempted above that you are able, but
will with the Temptation also, make a way to escape, that ye may be able to
bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. The Lord is Faithful, who shall stablish you and keep
you from Evil, 2 These. 3.3. The Lord shall preserve thee from all Evil, He
shall preserve thy soul, Psalm. 121.7. Thou shall be kept by the power of God,
through Faith to Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Let thy soul take Sanctuary in the free
Promise of Grace.

Sixthly: Does the fear of Death and Eternity cause sad thoughts of heart in
thee? O learn to look at Death in the comfortable Glass of the Gospel of
Christ, and not in the dreadful glass of the Law: Death to a Believer is
swallowed up in Victory; the Sting of this Serpent is taken away by Christ: O
Death (says he) I will be thy Death; O Grave, I will be thy Victory. Christ
has conquered Death, perfumed the Grave, and opened a way for poor Sinners to
Everlasting Glory: The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the
Law: But, Thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. Forasmuch, as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and
Blood, Christ Himself took part of the same, that through Death, he might
destroy him that had the Power of Death; that is, the Devil; and deliver them,
who through fear of Death, were all their Lifetime subject to Bondage, Heb.
2.14, 15.

Here five or six special Helps and Directions, when ye are troubled and
perplexed with sad Thoughts and much Darkness upon your Spirits.

DIRECTION, I.
Call to Remembrance what has formerly passed betwixt God and your Soul; what
Love Tokens ye have received from him, (though you be now under a Cloud): As,
when the Title of your Land is questioned, you search old Records and
Evidences; so ye should do in this Case: Thus David, when his Soul had before
refused to be Comforted, and his Spirit was in a manner overwhelmed; yet now he
would consider the Days of Old, the Years of Ancient Times, and call to
Remembrance his Songs in the Night, etc. Psalm. 77.2, 3, 5, 6. And Job, when the
Wrath of God seemed to be kindled against him, and God counted him as one of
his Enemies, and his Reins were consumed within him; yet still says he ( Job
19.11, 27, 28.) The Root of the Matter is found in me: He acknowledged, that he
had the Root of true Faith in him; and knew, that his Redeemer lives: Though
the Exercise of his Faith was at present suspended, as to the comfortable
Effects of it; yet, he had an evidence of his good Estate, from his former
Experience: As in the Winter-Season, though the Plant seems to wither, yet the
root of it still remains in the Earth; and when the Spring comes, and the Sun
shines upon it with a powerful Influence, it will appear.

DIRECTION, II.
Plead and expostulate Humbly with thy God, when he seems to hide his Face from
thee; make use of Arguments in thy Prayers taken from the Infinitness of God's
Mercy, and the Greatness of thy Misery: Thy Savior, in His great Soul-Agony
and Distress, prayed often and earnestly, Luke 22.44. Is any among you
Afflicted (says the Apostle, Jam. 5.13.) let him Pray.

This Direction may be drawn out and improved in five Particulars.

(1.) Suppose thy Case be as sad as Jobs was ( Cap. 10. v. 15, 16, 17.) thou
art full of Distraction and Confusion; the Lord hunts thee as a fierce Lion,
and increases his Indignation upon thee; contending still with thee, as if he
were thy greatest Enemy; Yet now, fall down and Prostrate thy self humbly at
his Feet, as a poor, silly, helpless Lamb; and, if thou must needs dye and
perish, yet dye at His Feet, mourning and bleeding out thy-Heart in Sighs and
Tears. Take heed of a fretting murmuring Spirit, which is exceeding offensive
to God: Be still and quiet; not a word; put thy Mouth in the Dust: It is good
that a Man should hope, and quietly wait on God, Lam. 3.26, 29. I will bear the
Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against Him, (says the Church,
Mic. 7.9.) Kiss the Rod as a submissive Child, and acknowledge that it is of
the Lord's Mercy, that thou art not consumed.

(2.) When God seems to pursue thee hard, and to bend his Bow, and shoot his
Arrows against thee; desire him humbly to Remember the Thoughts of Love and
Peace, which he had to poor Sinners from Eternity: These Thoughts he delights
in; they are more than can be numbered, Psalm. 40.5. and what, Are they
restrained in Him! Has God forgotten to be Gracious! Has He for ever shut up
his tender Mercies! Surely, He has not, Psalm. 77.9. Put him in mind of that
infinite All-sufficient Righteousness and Merit, which is in Christ, whereof
Himself has no need; no, nor the Blessed Angels that never sinned; But, it is
reserved for poor sinful Men and Women, such as thou art: If thou say, Thou
art unworthy; yea, but He loves freely, Hos. 14.4. If the greatness of thy Sins
be objected against thee, tell him, That there is plenteous Redemption for thee
in (and with) Christ, Psalm. 130.7. Art thou ungodly and wicked in thy self? the
Scripture says, That he Justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. and that Christ
received Gifts for Sinners, yea, for the Rebellious; that the Lord God might
dwell with them, Psalm. 68.18. Art thou no better than a Dog? Yea, but the
Dogs they eat the Crumbs that fall from their Master's Table; Christ has
reserved some Crumbs of Mercy and Comfort for thee, Math. 15.27.

(3.) If he still pursue thee in his Anger, and set thee as a Mark to shoot at,
so that thou art a Burden to thy self, Job 7.20. Ask him humbly with Tears in
thy Eyes, What he aims at? Is it to have the Victory over thee, that he might
be justified in his Sayings, and might overcome when he is Judged, Romans 3.4?
Tell him freely, Thou will yield to him as a poor Captive, and stand out with
him in nothing; and, that he shall need no other Judge or Jury to condemn thee,
but thy self: Thou art very willing to justify him in all things, and to
sentence and condemn thy self; only beseech him to consider, what Victory, what
Honor it will be to so Great and Infinite a God as He is, to pursue a little
dry Stubble, to break a poor Leaf that is bruised already, and crumbles under
his Fingers if he do but touch it, Job 13.25. Say to Him, Thou art Impar
Congressus; Thou art far from being an equal Match to Him; and, He is so Noble,
so Generous, as not to set Himself against a Worm, against a poor weak Leaf,
that yields and falls under His hand; having said, That He will not contend for
ever, lest the Spirit should utterly fail before him, Isa. 57.19.

(4.) If it should be hinted to thee, as if God would glorify Himself in thy
Eternal Destruction and Condemnation; tell him, It Is true, he may; But yet,
before he thrust his Sword in thee, desire Him (with Reverence and Submission)
to consider, That he first sheathed it in the Blood of His Son; and what profit
will there be in thy Blood and Destruction: If Satisfaction to Divine Justice
be his end and design, He may have that in and from the
Propitiatory-Sacrifice, and Death of Christ; and so, be no loser: And, as for
thy Salvation, it will be more for his Glory, than thy Condemnation. If he
require more Ojbedience of thee, Alas, this is not the way to perform it; when
thy poor Soul is distracted with his Terrors, and thou art as a Man that has
no Strength, numbered amongst the Dead, (as Heman speaks, Psalm. 88.4, 5, 15.)
The more Spiritual Peace and Joy and Soul has, the more Service and Obedience
it will be able to perform to God, who loves a cheerful Giver: The Joy of the
Lord, is the Strength of the Soul, Nehem. 8.10. If it be suggested to thee;
That if thou had more Assurance, Joy, and Enlargement, thou would abuse it,
and grow wanton; Tell God humbly, That he may also prevent that, if He please,
by the Power of His Grace; and by writing the Law of Love in thy Heart by his
Spirit, which will constrain thee to love Him, and to live to Him, 2 Cor.
5.14. And, Love is as strong as Death; Many Waters cannot quench it, neither
can the Floods drown it, Cant. 8.6, 7. And, though thou have a froward and
stubborn Heart, which thou can not choose but sadly complain of; yet, so had
he whom the Prophet speaks of, Isa. 57.17, 18. God hid his Face from him; was
wrath, and smote him; and he went on frowardly in the way of his Heart: Yet,
for all this (says the Lord) I have seen his ways, and will heal him, and
restore Comforts to him.

(5.) If thy Temptation be so great, and thy Condition so sad, as if there were
no other Remedy, but God and thou must part; yet labor notwithstanding to have
good thoughts of God, and to bless Him for those glorious Attributes and
excellencies of Mercy, Truth, Wisdom, Holiness, that are in him: Bless Him for
his mercy and goodness to others, and for enabling them to serve him with
cheerfulness and success. Bless him for the good things which thou have
formerly received from Him; and if thou have done, or suffered any thing for
God in thy time, wish with all thy soul it had been a thousand times more: And
confess thy self unworthy, lesser than the least of those Mercies he has
bestowed on thee; and that thou art infinitely engaged to Him for what is past,
if He should cast thee off for time to come, and never smile upon thee again:
Desire Him only that He would preserve and maintain in thee good and honorable
thoughts of His Majesty, that thou may not in the least derogate from His
Honor, or Blaspheme his Holy Name, however he is pleased to deal with thee as
to Spiritual Peace and Comfort: And who knows, but whilst thou art thus
bemoaning thy self (as Ephraim did) though the Lord at present seem to look
Stern, and to speak Angerly to thee, yet he will quickly come and speak Peace
to thy soul, and list up the light of his Countenance on thee. I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself (says the Lord). Is Ephraim my dear Son, Is he
a pleasant Child? For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still; therefore my Bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy on
him, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.

DIRECTION III.
Call to mind and improve the Soul sorrows and Agonies of thy Savior and
Surety, who bore the Wrath of God in his soul for thee, that thy poor Pensive
soul might be comforted and delivered from the Terrors of God: His Soul was
heavy and sorrowful to the Death; yea, he was surrounded and environed with
sorrow and amazement of Spirit, and cried out bitterly on the Cross, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46. And in the days of his Flesh, He
offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him
that was able to save him from Death, and was heard in that he feared, Heb.
5.7. Now tell God humbly and believingly, that he has laid thy Sin, Guilt,
Curse, upon his Son, and in the fierceness of his Wrath fell upon him, standing
in thy stead and room, that he might set thee free (who is not in the least
able to wrestle with the Terrors of God); say to him that his own blessed Son
has drank off the Cup of Divine Wrath to the bottom, even the very dreggs of
it; and therefore why should thy poor soul (which is redeemed by the precious
Blood of thy Savior) taste any part of this bitter Cup? Did God withdraw the
comforts of his Spirit from the humane Nature of Christ, and fill it with
sadness and sorrow for thy sake, that thou might obtain Spiritual peace and
comfort? O then why should not thou earnestly pray for, and expect the
fruits of Christ's Agony and Death in having thy soul revived and filled with
spiritual peace and joy?

DIRECTION IV.
Renew thy Faith and Repentance in good earnest, as if thou had never done
it before. Suppose it be suggested to thee by Satan, that thou did never as
yet truly believe and repent of thy sins? Thou may Answer thus, Well, I will
not question that now, but resolve by the Grace of God forthwith to Repent
heartily of my Sins, and believe on the Lord Jesus. Some Christians are apt to
look back altogether on what they have done, and if that do not afford them
comfort, then they are ready to give up all for losk, and to sink under
discouragement. But though a Christian may sometimes look back, and reflect on
his former evidences and experiences; yet certainly, to cast thy self at
present by a direct act of Faith, upon the free Grace of God in the
Gospel-promise, is the shortest cut, and the readiest way to silence thy
doubts, and Satan's suggestions; as sometimes it falls out, that a Man may with
as little charge and trouble, obtain a new Lease, as prove the old one good and
Authentical. Be peremptory and resolute therefore in believing and casting thy
self on a Crucified Jesus, and say with Esther, I will go to the King, and if I
Perish, I Perish, Esther 4.16. and with Job, Though he Kill me, yet will I
trust in him, Job 13.15. Venture thy Soul upon him, as one that is ready to sink
when the Bladders are taken from him, will yet venture to swim without
Bladders. And as the four Lepers said one to another, Why sit we here until we
dye? If we enter into the City, the famine is there, and we shall dye; and if
we sit still here, we shall dye also: Therefore, let us fall into the Host of
the Syrians; if they save us alive, we shall live; and if they Kill us, we
shall but dye, 2 King. 7.3, 4. So resolve to throw your self upon Christ, and
if ye must dye, then dye at his feet: But this is so far from being the way to
Perish, that it is the direct way to true Peace, Comfort, and Happiness.

DIRECTION V.
Trust in the Name of God Jehovah for Comfort and Salvation. He that walks in
darkness, and sees no light, let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay
himself upon his God, Isa. 50.10. Vid. Mr. Goodwins Child of light walking in
darkness.
the consideration of the Sweet, Gracious, Merciful Nature and Name of God,
will support and keep the soul from sinking: The Name of the Lord is a strong
Tower, the Righteous runeth to it, and is safe, Prove. 18.10. There is enough in
the Name of God to Answer all our Objections, and resolve all our doubts; as
this name was proclaimed to Moses, The Lord, the God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, Exodus 34.6, 7. This Name
of God is to be found, and is revealed in and by Christ to poor Sinners.
Hearken to him, and obey his Voice (says the Lord) for my Name is in him,
Exodus 23.21. God was in Christ, Reconciling the World unto himself, not
imputing their Trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. This is the Name wherewith
he shall be called the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. And his Name shall be
Jesus, for he shall save his People from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. When we see
nothing in our selves to rest upon, (as in the case of desertion) no sight of
Graces, no light of comfort therefrom, as in Paul's Voyage by Sea for many days
together, neither the light of the Sun, nor Stars appeared, Act. 27.20. Yet
then the Name of God will stay and bear up the drooping spirit of a Christian.
My flesh and my heart fails (says David) but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever, Psalm. 73.26. And though my House be not so with
God, i. e. as the tender Grass springing out of the Earth by the clear shining
of the Sun after Rain, yet he has made, with me, an everlasting Covenant,
ordered in all things and sure; for this is all my Salvation, and all my
desire, although he make it not to grow, 2 Samuel 23.5.

DIRECTION VI.
[On which I shall a little enlarge.]

Furnish thy self with fit matter out of the holy Scriptures, for Heavenly
thoughts and meditations, that thy heart may endite and meditate a good matter,
and thy Tongue may be as the Pen of a ready Writer, Psalm. 45.1. The Lord help
thee (poor Soul) not only to read these Divine writings, but to meditate
therein day and night, to hide them and lay them up in thy heart as a divine
Cordial to revive and comfort thee; as a divine Lamp to guide and direct thee,
Psalm. 119.92, 105. and as part of the spiritual Armor, to enable thee to
vanquish thy spiritual Enemies in the Hour of Temptation, Ephesians. 6.13.

David, even in those dark times, before the Incarnation of Christ, professes
of himself, that the Word of God was in the midst of his Bowels, Psalm. 40.8.
And that he had hid the word in his heart, that he might not Sin against God,
Psalm. 119.11. And Hierom tells us of one Nepotian, who by long and assiduous
Meditation of the holy Scriptures, had made his breast the Library of Jesus
Christ, in respect of Divine thoughts and cogitations. Holy Job esteemed the
Word of God more than his necessary food, Job 23.12. And the Psalmist preferred
it before the Honey and the Honeycomb; before great spoils, and thousands of
Gold and Silver, Psalm. 19.9. Psalm. 119.103, 162. And the blessed Apostle
commands us not only to have the word of Christ with us, but in us; and not
only to have it in us, but to have it dwelling and abiding in us richly, in all
Wisdom and spiritual understanding, Col. 3.16.

As for Men's writings, they are mingled with Vanity, Mistakes, Imperfections,
Corruptions, savouring too much of a carnal Spirit; but God's Word In Sacra
Scriptura quicquid docet veritas, quicquid praecipitur bonitas, quicquid
promittitur felicitas: Nam Deus veritas est sine fallacia, bonitas sine
malitia, fellcitas sine miseria.
is satisfactorily full, without all Vaninity, most Wise, Faithful and True,
without Falsehood or Folly; completely perfect, without the least Imperfection;
most pure and refined, without Corruption or Carnal mixtures; wholly Spiritual,
sweetly resembling that most Divine Spirit which endited the Scriptures.

Here are unfolded the mysteries of the Covenant of Grace made up of Heavenly
Cordials for Sin-sick souls: Here are the promises of this life, and of that
which is to come, exceeding great and precious: Here are the comforts of God
able to counterpoise and overcome the greatest sadness and sorrow.

Art thou poor? Here Is a Treasury of Riches: Art thou sick? here is a Shop of
Soul-medicines: Art thou fainting? here is a Cabinet of precious Cordials: Art
thou Afflicted? here is thy Solace: Art thou Persecuted? here is thy Protection:
Art thou deserted? here is thy support: Art thou Tempted? here is thy Victory:
Whilst thou live, here is the Rule of thy Conversation; and when thou dyest,
here is the hope of thy Glorification; and therefore, well might one of the
Ancients profess that he adored the fullness of the Scriptures: And Luther
himself used to say, he would rather eat up his own Writings (which yet were
instrumental to give much Heavenly light and knowledge) than that People, by
reading them, should neglect the reading and studying of the Holy Scriptures.

This is the Book of Books (as David said of Goliah's Sword) there is none like
that.

Ex allis paleae viles, hinc grana leguntur
Aurea: Tu paleas linquito, grana lege.
Men's Books with worthless Chaff are stored;
God's Scriptures golden grains afford.
Reject the Chaff, and spend thy pains,
In Gleaning up these golden Grains.
The Holy Scripture is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction,
for Instruction in the paths of Righteousness, and for Support and Consolation;
that drooping dejected Spirits, may not be overwhelmed with Satan's Temptations.

This sweet Consolatory Virtue, and Soul-supporting Property of the Scriptures,
is demonstrated by the happy Experience and Sense of Spiritual Comfort and
Refreshing, which Saints find therein; even such of them as are exercised with
great Dolors and Troubles of Spirit.

Thus David did comfort and support himself with the word of God in his saddest
Affliction: This is my Comfort in my Affliction (says he) for thy Word has
quickened me: And, unless thy word had been my delight, I had perished in my
Affliction, Psalm. 119.50, 51, 92.

Paul writes unto the Saints at Thessalonica, that they should comfort one
another with these Words, 1 These. 4.13. And the Lovesick Spouse (being ready
to fall into a Spiritual Swound through the Sense of Christ's Estrangements
from Her) cries out to the Ministers of the Word, the Friends of the
Bridegroom; O stay me with Flaggons, and comfort me with Apples, for I am sick
of Love, Cant. 2.5. Wine and Apples are pleasant refreshing Cordials to
fainting Spirits; And, so are the precious Promises, and sweet Doctrines of
Christ, to sad and pensive Souls.

Augustine, and his dear Companion Alipius, How were they in their great
Soul-Afflictions, raised up and comforted, with two Sentences of Scripture?
Augustine (as he tells us in his Confessions, lib. 8. Cap. 12. Tom. 1.) deeply
laying to heart his Sin and Misery, such a mighty Storm arose in his Soul, as
brought a shower of Tears; whereupon, he withdrew from Alipius a good
distance, that he might more freely and fully pour out himself in Tears. I laid
me down ( says he) under a certain Fig Tree, I know not how; and I opened
Sluice to Tears, and the Floods of mine Eyes burst out, thy acceptable
Sacrifice: And, not in these Words, but to this Sense, I spoke many things to
Thee; But thou, O Lord, how long! How long will thou be angry for ever! O
Remember not former Iniquities! For, I felt my self held by them, and I cast
forth miserable Expressions: How long! How long! To- Morrow, and Tomorrow! Why
not now? Why not this Hour, an end of my Filthiness? These things I spoke, and
wept in the bitter Contrition of my Heart. And behold! I heard a Voice (as of a
Boy or Girl, I know not whether) from a neighboring House, saying, (with
Singing, and often repeating) Toll lege, Toll lege.
Take up and Read, Take up and Read. And presently, with changed countenance, I
intentively began to think, whether Boys in Playing were wont to sing any such
thing; Nor, could I remember, that ever I heard it. The violence of my Tears
being repressed, I rose up; Interpreting nothing else to be divinely commanded
me, than that I should open the Book, and read what Chapter I first found; For,
I had heard of Antonius, that by Reading of the Gospel (which he happily light
upon) he was admonished, as if what he had read, had been spoken to him; Go,
and sell all that thou have, and give to the Poor, and thou shall have Treasure
in Heaven, and come follow me; and that, by this Oracle he was presently
converted to thee. Therefore, being thus incited, I returned to the same place
where Alipius sat; for, there I had laid the Apostle's Book, when I thence
rose: I snatched it up, opened, and silently read that Chapter on which mine
Eyes were first cast: Not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and
Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying; But, put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and make no Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, Romans 13.13,
14. Nor would I read further; nor was there need: For presently, with the close
of this Sentence, as it were with the light of Security infused into mine
Heart, all my darksom Doubtings fled away. Then, either putting my Finger in
the place, or what other sign I know not, I shut the Book; and, with a
cheerful Countenance, I told it to Alipius. But, what was done in himself,
which I knew not, he thus declared: He asks to see what I read, I showed it;
and, he attended further than I read, I not knowing what followed; But it
followed, Him that is weak in the Faith receive ye, Romans 14.1. which he applied
to himself, and opened unto me: But, by this Admonition he was Confirmed; and,
without all turbulent delay, was conjoined in a good Pleasure and purpose, most
congruous to his Manners, wherein he long ago excelled me. Thereupon, we go in
to my Mother; tell her: She rejoices; We declare how it was done; She exults
and Tryumphs, and blesses Thee who art able to do, above All that we are to
ask or think; Because she saw, that thou had granted her far more concerning
me, than she was wont with her miserable and lamentable Groans, to ask of Thee.
Thus far Augustine.

Who would not now delight to read and understand the Divine Scriptures,
whereby Augustine and Alipius were thus Converted and Comforted?

Mr. Fox, in his Acts and Monuments tells us, That Mr. Bilney, the blessed
Martyr, having been long under great Doubts and Fears in his Soul, (whilst he
adhered to the Popish Doctrines); at length, opening the New Testament, he
light on that Text, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, That Christ Jesus came into the World, to save Sinners, of whom I
am chief; which God so blessed to him, that thereby his doubts and Fears were
dispelled, and he received much spiritual Peace and Comfort in the Assurance of
the love of God from this free promise of Grace.

Bishop Latimer (that Godly Martyr) standing at the Stake, ready to shed his
blood for the Truth, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven with an amiable and cheerful
Countenance, comforted himself with that Scripture, Faithful is God who will
not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, 1 Cor. 10.13.

Alice Benden, Martyr, being kept in Prison nine weeks with Bread and Water,
and Sequestered from her Companions, was in great heaviness and Soul distress,
till on a Night, as she was in her sorrowful Supplications, rehearsing those
words, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, etc. And again, The Right Hand of the
most High can change all this; she received much comfort.

Mr. Midgeley, Minister at Ratchdale in Yorkshire, oppressed with melancholy
thoughts and temptations to Self-murder; and going down to the Waterside to
Drown himself, having the New Testament in his Pocket, it came into his
thoughts, before he flung himself in, to read a little in his Testament; and
opening the same, he happily cast his Eye upon that precious word of Grace,
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest,
Matthew. 11.28, 29. Whereupon this poor tempted Soul was much revived, and broke
forth into these words, Say thou so? then I will not down my self. It Is well
observed by a Godly Writer, that we had better want Meat, Drink, the light of
the Sun, Air, Earth, and all the Elements, yea, Life it self, than that one
sweet Sentence of our Savior, Come unto me, etc.

Mrs. Katherine Brettergh (who was wont to task her self to the reading at
least eight Chapters of Scripture every day) in her Sickness, before her Death
Vid. Mr. Will. Leigh's Souls-Solace against sorrow.
she fell into great distress and anguish of Spirit; sometimes she would cast
her Bible from her, and say, it was indeed the Book of Life, but she had read
the same unprofitably, and therefore feared it was become to her the Book of
Death: Sometimes she would say her sins had made her a prey to Satan, a
spectacle to the World, a disgrace to Religion, and a shame to her Husband,
Kindred, and all true Christians: And here she would weep most bitterly; she
wished she had never been Born, or that she had been any other Creature rather
than a Woman: She would often cry out Woe, Woe, Woe, etc. a weak, a woeful, a
wretched, a forsaken Woman! and utter such like pitiful Complaints against her
self, with Tears continually trickling down her Cheeks. But at last, before her
death, she was raised up to unspeakable joys and comforts by applying
Scripture-promises: Oh said she, my soul has been compassed about with terrors
of Death, fear within, and fear without; the sorrows of Hell were upon me, and
a roaring Wilderness of Woe was within me (which she repeated again and again):
But Blessed, Blessed, Blessed be the Lord my God, who has not left me
Comfortless. One time she took her Bible in her hand, and looking up toward
Heaven, she said, O Lord, it is good for me that I have been Afflicted, that I
might learn thy Statutes; the Word of the Lord is better to me than thousands
of Gold and Silver. She desired her Husband to read some part of Scripture to
her; he read that excellent Chapter, John 17. and as he read v. 9. she
interrupted him, saying, O Lord Jesus, do thou indeed pray for me? O Blessed
and Sweet Savior, how wonderful, how wonderful, how wonderful are thy Mercies!
When he came to v. 24. Father, I will that they whom thou have given me, etc.
Stay, said she, and let me meditate on the goodness of the Lord, for now I
perceive and feel the Countenance of Christ, my Redeemer, is turned toward me,
and the bright shining Beams of his Mercy are spread over me: Oh happy am I
that ever I was Born, to see this Blessed day: Praise, praise, Oh praise the
Lord for his Mercies, for He has brought me out of darkness, and the shadow of
death! O my sweet Savior! shall I be one with thee, as thou art one with thy
Father? and will thou Glorify me with that Glory which thou had with the
Father before the World was? And do thou so love me that am but Dust and
Ashes, as to make me partaker of Glory with Christ? What am I, poor Wretch,
that thou art so mindful of me? Oh how wonderful, how wonderful, how wonderful
is thy Love? To a Christian Friend that came to see her, wondering at her joys;
she said, O the joys, the joys, the joys that I feel in my soul! they be
wonderful, they be wonderful, they be wonderful! Thus she was ravished in
Spirit, and tryumphed in the praises of God. At last, with a sweet Countenance
and still Voice, she said, My Warfare is accomplished, and mine Iniquities are
pardoned: Lord, whom have I in Heaven but thee? And I have none on Earth but
thee: My Flesh fails, and my Heart also, but God is the strength of mine
Heart, and my Portion for ever. He that preserves Jacob, and defends his
Israel, he is my God, and will guide me unto Death. Guide me O Lord, my God,
and suffer me not to faint, but keep my soul in safety, and with that she
presently fell asleep in the Lord.

Mr. John Holland, an eminent Saint and Preacher of the Gospel, did wonderfully
raise and comfort himself with the holy Scriptures; even in the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, his Heart was replenished with Heavenly Thoughts and
Delights. The Day before he dyed, he called for the holy Bible with these very
words, Come, O come! Death approaches, let us gather some Flowers to comfort
in this Hour: And, turning with his own Hands to the Eight Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, he gave me the Book (says Mr. Leigh, who relates these
Passages in a printed Book) and bade me Read: At the end of every Verse, he
made a Selah or Pause, and gave the Sense in such sort and feeling, as (we
perceived) was much to his own Comfort, but more to our Joy and Wonder. Having
thus continued his Meditation and Exposition for the space of two Hours, or
more; on the sudden he said, O stay your reading; What Brightness is this I
see? Have ye light up any Candles? To which it was Answered, No; It is the
Sunshine: For, it was about five a Clock, in a clear Summer's-Evening.
Sunshine (says he?) nay, my Savior's Shine: Now, farewell World, welcome
Heaven; The Day- Starr from on high has visited mine Heart. O speak it when I
am gone, and Preach it at my Funeral, That God deals familiarly with Man! I
feel his Mercy, I see his Majesty, whether in the Body or out of the Body, I
cannot tell; God, He knows; But, I see Things that are unutterable: And,
raising himself, as Jacob did upon his Staff, he shut up his blessed Life, with
these blessed words; O, What a happy Change shall I make! from Night to Day,
from Darkness to Light; from Death to Life, from Sorrow to Solace; from a
factious World, to a Heavenly Being: O my dear Brethren, Sisters, and Friends,
it pittieth me to leave you behind; yet, Remember my Death when I am gone: And,
what I now feel, I hope you shall find ere you dye, That God does and will deal
familiarly with Men. And now thou fiery Chariot, that came down to fetch up
Eliah, carry me to my happy Hold; And all ye blessed Angels, who attended the
Soul of Lazarus to bring it up to Heaven, bear me, O bear me into the Bosom of
my best Beloved; Amen, Amen. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. And so he fell
asleep.

O therefore, Enrich thy Soul with those Hevenly Treasures, and fill thy Heart
with those blessed Truths, and Divine Mysteries, that are contained in the
Scriptures; as the Saints whom I have mentioned, and many thousands more have
done in their great Straits and Temptations. Acknowledge the Goodness of God,
and magnify the Riches of his Grace toward poor Sinners: Many and wonderful,
O Lord my God, are Thy Thoughts to usward, they are more than can be numbered,
Psalm. 40.5. And again, How precious are thy Thoughts unto me, O God? How great
is the Sum of them, Psalm. 139.17.

Now, that thou may, have a right and spiritual understanding of the Holy
Scriptures (whilst thou read them) for the benefit and comfort of thy sad
disconsolate soul:

First, Beg Wisdom of the only Wise God, who gives liberally and upbraideth
not, Jam. 1.5. that by God's Wisdom thou may know God's Mind, and discern
the true sense and meaning of the Scriptures by the Assistance of the Divine
Spirit which Indicted the same. What the Woman said of Jacob's-Well, may be
truly affi^med of the Scriptures; Thou have nothing to draw with, and the Well
is deep, John 4.11. Scripture mysteries are profound, and our Capacities but
shallow; desire the Lord therefore to anoint thine eyes with Eyesalve, that
thou may see; and to open thine Understanding, that thou may rightly and
spiritually understand the Scriptures, Rev. 3.18. Psalm. 119.18. Luke 24.45.
Luther professed, that he got more Understanding by Prayer than by all his
Study besides.

Secondly: Labor for a truly gracious Spirit, which being once attained, thou will be able to penetrate into the inward Marrow and mystery of the Holy
Scriptures. He will best comprehend the true sense of Scripture in his head,
that has it written and impressed upon his heart. Thou will never (as one
truly observes) understand Paul's meaning, unless thou art endued with Paul's
spirit. The Secret of God is with them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant, Psalm. 25.12, 14. And Christ in the Gospel, will manifest himself to
them that Love him; and such shall know the mind of the Lord, Joh. 14.21, 22,
23.

Thirdly: Come to the reading and perusing of the Scriptures with an humble
self-denying frame of heart, and be not puffed up with a vain Conceit of thine
own knowledge and seize. He that thinks he knows any thing, knows
nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. Empty Vessels are most receptive,
and so are self-emptied Christians. It Is a great help to Knowledge, not to be
ignorant of our Ignorance. Deo meo gratias ago quod Ignorantiam meam non ignoro.
The fruitful showers quickly glide away from the lofty Hills; But they stay
and smoke in the Low-Valleys. God, who resists the Proud, gives Grace and
Spiritual Knowledge to the humble: With the Lowly is true Wisdom, Prove. 11.2.
And the Meek and Humble he will teach his Way, Psalm. 25.9. Math. 11.25.

Fourthly: Observe and eye Christ, and Salvation by him, as the very Scope,
Marrow, and Substance of the whole Scriptures: What are the Scriptures, but as
it were the Spiritual swadling-Cloaths of the Holy Child Jesus? He is the Truth
and Substance of all the Types and Shaddows: He is the Matter and Quintescence
of the Covenant of Grace, under all the Administrations thereof. The Center of
all the Promises, In whom they are, yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. The Thing
signified, sealed, and exhibited in all the Sacraments of the Old and
New Testament. The holy Scripture, What is it else but Christ's Light, whereby
we come to know him? Christ's Voice, whereby we hear and follow Him? and
Christ's Cords of Love, whereby we are drawn into sweet Union and Fellowship
with Him?

But to Conclude; Suppose thou should have Breach upon Breach, and still
remain a sad pensive Soul, all thy Days here in this Life, without any
Spiritual Comfort or Inlargment (after all thy Wrestlings and Endeavors), it
may be for twenty, thirty, or forty Years; yet, What is this to Eternity? What
if it were for a hundred Years, so thou come to Heaven at last, and escap'st
those Everlasting Torments, which are prepared for the Wicked? Ye shall weep
and lament (says Christ to his Disciples, Joh. 16.20.), but the World shall
rejoice; Yea, but your Sorrow shall be turned into Joy, and the World's
Rejoicing into Sorrow and Lamentation. Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be Comforted, Math. 5.4.

The Lord supports his People by the secret powerful Influence of his Grace,
whilst they walk in darkness, and want the Light of Spiritual Consolation. And
here let us consider these four things:

(1.) God does never totally desert his Saints: The Lord will not forsake his
People for his great Name's sake, 1 Samuel 12.22. He has said, I will never
leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. The Words are Emphatical: Here is a
Duplication of the Subject of the Promise, I will not leave, I will not
forsake: And a Multiplication of Negatives; no fewer than five Negatives, by
which God intimates, That he will not, yea, he will not, surely he will not
forsake his Servants; He will never wholly reject them, nor utterly leave them:
If he leave them, it is but for a Season; If he go from them, it is but as one
that goes from home, to return speedily again: I will not (says Christ) leave
you Comfortless, or as Orphans at Sixes and Sevens; but I will come to you,
Joh. 14.18. He may sometimes frown, but he will smile again: If at any time his
Compassions toward his People seem to be restrained, yet they cannot be
extinquished.

(2.) Though God may vary in the Operations of his Love; yet his Love in it
self, is still the same, and shall be the same for-ever, Jer. 31.3. Psalm.
89.30, 44. Joh. 13.1. In the Summer, there is Light inherent in the Sun, and
Light fluent from the Sun; That Is ever perfect and permanent; but this may
suffer Changes, and be obscured, as in the Night it happens. The Root does not
always give so much Sapp to the Branches, as to make them Budd and Blossom;
yet she does always stick close to them, and influence and maintain them. A
Father may have a dear Love to his Child, and yet show but little of it in his
Carriage, as David toward his Son Absolon; and so it may be in this Case.

(3.) When God hides his Face from his People, he withholds those Acts of Love
only, that are for their well-being; not those that are for their being. Though
a true Christian may want that, without which he cannot have Comfort; yet he
shall never want that, without which he cannot live: In this respect, God never
withholds any good Thing from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11.

(4.) A Christian may miss much of the External Presence of God, and yet enjoy
inward Communion with him; He may want the Comforting Presence of God, (in
respect of Soul-ravishing Joys and Inlargements) and yet at the same time,
partake of the powerful gracious Influence of the Spirit of God, for his
Sustentation and Support: This does never utterly forsake him: And this is
oft-times most in Power, when it is least in out-ward show and Appearance; and
Saints have most of God, when they see him least; whose gracious Power may, and
does operate effectually, where there is but little Sense and Feeling of it.
Metals that lie deep under Ground, and see not the Heavens; yet partake of
their Powerful Influence. When God covered Moses his Face in the Cleft of the
Rock, Exodus 33.22. then did he pass by, and gave Moses to see his Glory: So,
the Clouds and Vailes, which now cover the Eyes of many Pensive disconsolate
Christians, are often Forerunners of the Clearest Light, and most
Soul-ravishing Sight of God.

How-ever (poor Soul) be content to remain for a while in this World, without
these Soul-ravishing Joys, and Tastes of Heaven, (if God will have it so):
Doubtless, there is a great Difference betwixt the Condition of Saints in the
Church- Militant, and the Church- Tryumphant. Heaven, at last, will make amends
for All; and that glorious Communion with God, which is Reserved for the Saints
in the Church- Tryumphant, will Countervail all the Sad and Sorrowful Thoughts,
Pressures, and Temptations, which now they are exposed unto, in their Militant
Estate and Condition.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS of this small Tract, touching Sad Disconsolate Thoughts.
Text. Psalm. 94.19. Opened and Explained.


Observation. Saints should Watch against Sad, Melancholy, Unbelieving Thoughts.
I. Such Sad Disconsolate Thoughts, are here described. II. The Causes of them
are set down. First: Bodily distempers, especially Melancholy, do partly cause
them. Secondly: There are spiritual Causes of these Sad Thoughts. As 1. Those
remaining Principles of Carnal Reason and Unbelief that are in the Saints. 2.
They are Caused by a deep sense of Sin, and the desert of it. 3. By Spiritual
Desertion, or Gods hiding His Face from the Soul. 4. From the Sad apprehension
of Divine wrath and displeasure. 5. From the Violent Temptations and Injections
of Satan, the Prince of Darkness. 6. By looking at Death in the Terrible Glass
of the violated Law of God.


The CVRE of these Sad Thoughts.
I. IF Melancholy be the Cause, then use the means which God has appointed for
the Cure of it. As 1. Use Physic, moderate Exercise, good Diet. 2. Let your
Converse be with Wise, Compassionate Christians, that have had experience of
this sad Distemper, and of Remedies against it. 3. Consider, though the cure of
Melancholy be a torture to Physicians, yet God can easily Rebuke it.
II. If your Sad Thoughts be caused by Spiritual Distempers, Then, 1. In
General, endeavor to Comfort these Sad Thoughts by applying spiritual
Remedies. 2. Often chide your selves for these Sad Unbelieving Thoughts.

More particularly,

First: Does Satan, that Spirit of Darkness, work upon thy Melancholy
distemper, Unbelief, Carnal Reason? Then take to thee the Shield of Faith, that
thou may quench his fiery Darts. Secondly: If thy Sins make thee Sad, and
press thee down, go to Christ, who freely Invites the Soul that is burdened and
heavy laden. Thirdly: If at present thou do not behold the Face of God with
joy, yet consider His Love is Unchangable, and whom He Loves once, He loves for
ever. Fourthly: If thou have Sad Apprehensions of Divine Wrath and Displeasure,
remember that Christ thy Surety, has borne the Wrath of God for Sinners.
Fifthly: If thou art Tempted by Satanical Injections to Blasphemy, etc. and
do abhor and resist the Temptation? Consider it is thy Trial, not thy Sin.
Sixthly: If the fear of Death cause Sad Thoughts, learn to look at Death in the
comfortable Glass of the Gospel of Christ.
Some further Directions for a poor Soul that is perplexed with Sad and dark
Thoughts.
I. Direction. Call to Remembrance, and improve former evidences of God's Love
and Kindness to you. II. Plead and expostulate humbly with God when He seems to
hide His Face from thee. This Direction is drawn out and enlarged in five
particulars. III. Improve the Soul sorrows and sufferings of Christ, who bore
the wrath of God in His Soul, that thy soul might rejoice in God. IV. Renew thy
Faith and Repentance in good earnest, as if hitherto thou had never done it
to purpose. V. Trust in the Name of God Jehovah for Comfort and Salvation:
There Is enough in this Name to support thee under all thy sad pressures. VI.
Furnish thy self with fit matter out of the Holy Scriptures for Heavenly
Thoughts and Meditations.
This was the practice of the Prophet David.
Of Job who esteemed the Word of God more than his necessary Food. Of
Nepotianus, whom Hierom speaks of. Of Augustine, and his dear Friend Alipius. Of
Mr. Bilney, Martyr. Of Bishop Latimer, Martyr. Of Alice Benden, Martyr. Of Mrs.
Katherine Brettergh. Of Mr. John Holland, an Eminent Saint, and Preacher of the
Gospel.
Rules to be observed in reading the Sacred Scriptures for the Comfort of a Sad
Disconsolate Soul.
1. Rule. Beg Heavenly Wisdom of God, that thou may discern the true sense of
Scripture. 2. Labor for a truly gracious spirit. 3. Come to the Reading of
Scripture, for thy Comfort, with a Humble, Teachable, Self-denying frame of
heart. 4. Eye Christ for thy Comfort and Salvation, as the chief scope, marrow,
and substance of the Scriptures.
Here are four Considerations subjoyned.
1. Consid. God never totally deserts his Saints. 2. Though God may vary in the
Operations and Manifestations of His Love, yet His Love in it self, is still
the same, Constant and Everlasting, 3. That those acts of Divine Love, which
tend to the Essence and being of a true Christian, God never withholds from
him. 4. A Christian may want the sensible Presence of God, as to Spiritual joys
and inlargements, and yet at the same time partake of the powerful influence of
the Holy Ghost for his Support.
Books Printed, and are to be Sold by Benjamin Harris, at the Stationers-Arms,
at the East End of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
Quarto.
THE Mathematical Jewel. price 3 s. Newton's Help to Calculation, price 2 s.
Octavo, and Twelves.
Lord Hale's Contemplations, Moral and Divine; the First and Second Part.
price, 10 s. The History of Erastus: Or, The Seven Wise-Masters of Rome,
Adorned with Cutts: price, 3 s. Love to the Life: Or, Some Meditations of
Loving, and Washing in the Blood of Christ: together, with a Taste of
Gospel-Promises: By Richard Mayhew. price bound, 8 d. The Accomplished Ladies
Delight, in Preserving, Physic, Beautifying, and Cookery: The Second Edition,
with large Additions. price, 2 s. Animae Astrologiae: Or, A Guide to
Astrologers; with a new Table of the fixed Stars, Rectifyed for several Years
to come, and diverse other Illustrations: By W. Lilly, Student in Astrology.
price 1 s. 6 d. The English Rogue Complete, pr. 12 s. Newton's Scale of
Interest. pr. 12 s. War with the Devil: Or, the Young-Man's Conflict with the
Power of Darkness; discovering the Corruption and Vanity of Youth, the horrible
Nature of Sin; in a Dialogue: To which is added, An Appendix, containing a
Dialogue between an old Apostate, and a young Professor; the Fifth Impression:
price, 1 s. The Second Part of the War with the Devil; the Grand Impostor
Discovered: Or, The Quaker's Doctrine weighed in the Balance, and found
wanting; a Poem by way of Dialogue, wherein their chief and most concerning
Principles are laid down; and by the Authority of God's holy Word, thereby
Refuted: price, 10 d. Darkness vanquished: Or, Truth in its Primitive Purity;
being a Treatise of Laying on of Hands; together with a Testimony of many
famous Authors, both Ancient and Modern concerning it. price, 1 s. Sion in
Distress: Or, The State of the Church. price, 6 d. Summons to the Grave: Or, A
timely Preparation for Death; demonstrated in a Sermon, Preached at the Funeral
of John Norcott, with two Elegies thereunto persixt; price, 8 d. All five
written by Benjamine Keach, Minister of the Gospel. The History of the Young
Converted Gallant: Or, Directions for the Reader, of that Divine Poem, War
with the Devil; Here showing the Readers thereof, how to read the same Poem
right in these four Respects, etc. First, In reference to the Substance or
History thereof. 2dly. In reference to the Intent or Mystery thereof. 3dly. In
reference to the Consequent Doctrine thereof. 4thly. In reference to Practical
Application thereof;
Complied in a Poem, by John Mason, Gentleman, of Fordham in Cambridgshire. pr.
1 s. The Parable of the Kingdom of Heaven; being an Exposition on the first
Thirteen Verses of the Twenty-fifth Chapter of St. Matthew; by Han. Knollis:
price 1 s. The Beauty, Vigor, and Strength of Youth, be-spoke for God, in a
Sermon lately Preached to Young Men, from the 12th. of Ecclesiastes, on Verse
first: by Thomas Powel, Minister of the Gospel: price. 6 d. Blessed Rest, for
the Burdened Sinner: Or, The only Center of the Soul; wherein is discovered,
first, Who He is that Invites, and Calls Sinners to this Rest. 2dly. The
Encouragement to come unto Him for Rest. 3dly. Many Obstructions and
Impediments, which keeps back Sinners, with their Unreasonableness, Answered.
4thly. The Rest that every one shall have, that Comes unto Christ: Delivered in
several Sermons; from Matthew 11.28. by John Hopwood, Preacher of the Gospel:
price 2 s. The Mystery of the Temple and City described, in the Nine last
Chapters of Ezekiel, unfolded: Also, these following Particulars are briefly
handled; First, The Calling of the Jews. 2dly. The Restitution of All Things.
3dly. The Description of the two Beasts, Rev. 13. 4thly. The Day of Judgment,
and the World's Perishing by Fire. 5thly. Some Signs of the Times when the
Fall of Babylon is near. 6thly. Some Advantages which the Knowledge of these
Truths will afford. 7thly. The Conclusion of All, in some Councels and
Directions: By William Alleine, M. A. some times Preacher of the Gospel at
Bristol. price 1 s.

