THE TRIAL OF WILLIAM STALEY, Goldsmith; For Speaking Treasonable Words Against
His Most Sacred MAJESTY: And upon Full Evidence found Guilty of HIGH TREASON
And received Sentence accordingly, on Thursday November the 21th 1678..

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery Lane near
Fleetstreet. 1678.

November 20. 1678.

I Do appoint Robert Pawlet to Print the Trial of William Staley: and that no
other presume to Print the same.

WILLIAM SCROGGS.

THE TRIAL OF WILLIAM STALEY, Goldsmith; For Treasonable Words. Upon which he
was Condemned for High Treason, Nov. 21. 1678.
MR. Staley being accused of High Treason, was on the 20th day of November
1678. brought from Newgate, and arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar, and the next
day was brought to the same place to receive his Trial; where being come, and
the Jury Impannelled, the Court told the Prisoner, that if he would challenge
any of the Jury, he must speak unto them as they came to the Book to be sworn,
and before they were sworn; the Prisoner challenging none, the Jury were sworn,
viz,

JURY.
Sir Phillip Matthews. Sir Reginald Foster. Sir John Kirk. Sir John Cutler.
Sir Richard Blake. John Bifield, Esquire. Simon Middleton, Esquire Thomas
Cross, Esquire. Henry Johnson, Esquire. Charles Vmfrevile, Esquire. Thomas
Eaglesfield, Esquire. William Bohee, Esquire.
The Indictment Read. You stand Indicted by the name of William Staley, etc.
Crier. If any can give Evidence on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King,
against William Staley, let him come forth and he shall be heard.


Sir Creswel Levins. The Prisoner stands Indicted as not having the Fear of God
before his Eyes, being led by the Instigation of the Devil, not minding his
Allegiance, but Traitorously endeavoring the Death and Destruction of our
Sovereign Lord the King, he did on November the 14th, in the thirtieth year of
the King, falsely, wickedly,, and traitorously Compass, Imagine, Devise and
Invent the Killing the King; that he did maliciously contrive (I say) the Death
of our Lord the King of England.

To this he has pleaded Not Guilty. You are to try whether he be guilty or not.


Kings Sergeant, Maynard. The Offense is as great as can be, and will be proved
as clear as can be. Call the Witnesses to prove the Offense.


Attorn. Genesis It would be fitting before we enter upon the Evidence, to give
some account, why (among so many Offenders, some of them of greater Quality
than William Staley) we chose first to bring this man to Trial. It is not
unknown to any man that lives in England, what a Discovery there has been of
horrid and damnable Designs against the King's Person, and the Protestant
Religion. There are a sort of men in the World, that endeavor what they can to
cry down this Discovery, as that it was altogether Suppositious, and a Fable.
It is true, some are so charitable as to think the Roman Catholics in England
might endeavor to promote the Roman Catholic Religion, but that they should
have a Design against the Kings Person is a Fiction. But they shall be
convinced by the Trial of this man, that there was such a Design, seeing the
Prisoner even since the Discovery of this devilish Plot, and after so many have
been imprisoned for it, does persist in a Treasonable mind, and a Traiterous
attempt against the King's Person; the clear Evidence of which, is his speaking
those words with which in the Indictment he is charged. This Prisoner by
Religion is a Roman Catholic, he calls himself so; in plain English he is a
Papist: and finding that since this Plot was discovered, his trading decayed,
(being one that was a Banker for the Catholics) he grew enraged that their
Money was called so fast for, and being in the company of one Fromante a
Foreigner, at a Cook's shop, he takes notice of the discovery of the Plot,
(being a very great well-wisher to it) and enters into a great Passion, and
spoke these words of the King: That he was a great Heretic, and the greatest
Rogue in the World; then holding up his hand, he clapped it upon his Heart, and
said, I would with this hand kill him my self. These words were heard by two
Gentlemen that were present, but spoken in French.


William Carstaires, a Witness. Attorn. Genesis Acquaint the Court and Jury what
you know of any words spoken by the Prisoner about killing the King.


Witness. So far as I know or can give an account, it was about Eleven of the
Clock in the day, on the fourteenth day of this month; he called for a pot of
Ale, and a slice of Roast Beef, which when it was called for, his Landlord said
it should be brought him: there was another Frenchman with Staley, a stranger
to me: they discoursed together in French, and Staley then said twice over, The
King was a grand Heretic, making this Demonstration, with his hand upon his
Breast, and stamped five or six times with his Foot in great Fury. The old man
Bartholomew Fromante, his Friend, said, That the King of England was a
Tormentor of the People of God, and he answered again, The King of England, and
repeated it again in a great Fury, the King of England is a great Heretic and
the greatest Rogue in the World; there is the Heart, (striking his hand on his
Breast) and here is the Hand that would kill him my self, and he said further,
the King and Parliament think all is over, but the Rogues are mistaken.


Lord Chief Just. Did you know Staley?


Witness. No my Lord, I had never seen him before.


L. Chief Just. What did you do upon this?


Witness. I did not know what to do, being ignorant of the Laws of the Country,
I thought it was a great matter, and being sensible that Staley was gone out, I
caused one to attend him, and came to his Fathers Shop, and looked up and down,
and the next day I apprehended him.


L. Chief Just. Are you sure (looking upon the Prisoner) that was the man?


Witness. Yes.


L. Chief. Just. Did you see him when he spoke the words?


Witness. Yes I saw him; there was no more distance betwixt the two doors, but
just as far as that Gentleman and me; his face was strait toward us.


L. Chief Just. Were you in the same Room?


Witness. No, but just over against it; the Doors were open.


L. Chief Just. How near were you to him?


Witness. Seven or eight foot from the place where I was and where he was. He
was standing at one door, and I at the other. In French the words were spoken,
he making a Demonstration, stamping with his foot, I would kill him my self,
(which the Prisoner would have evaded by saying, the words signify, I would
kill my self. The Prisoner farther said, that the King and Parliament thought
all was over, but the Rogues were beguiled and deceived.


Alexander Sutherland Witness. Mr. Sutherland, Tell what you heard the Prisoner
at the Bar say, were you there?


Witness. Yes.


L. Chief. Just. Which was nearest to him, he or you?


Witness. He was nearest to him, and I just by the Gentleman. He said
afterward, when a word or two past betwixt them. The old man said, That the
King of England, was a Tormentor of the People of God: the Prisoner answered,
The King of England, and repeated it again with a great fury, The King of
England is the greatest Heretic and the greatest Rogue in the World there is
the Heart, (striking his hand on his Breast) and here is the hand that would
kill him my self; and the King and Parliament thinks their business is over,
but the Rogues are mistaken.


Pris. I said (replied the Prisoner) I would kill my self.


L. Chief Just. Would you kill your self because you said the King was a
Heretic? You acknowledge your self to be a Roman Catholic.


Pris. And in that Faith I intend to dye.


Attorn. Genesis Here the Prisoner does not deny but he said the King of England
was a great Heretic; and can we imagine him to be for that reason in such a
Passion that he would therefore kill himself? whether that be a natural
Conclusion from such Premises, I must submit to any impartial Hearer.


L. Chief Just. Did you see Mr. Staley perfectly, was the door open?


Witness. I saw him perfectly.


L. Chief Just. Did you know him before?


Witness. I never saw his face before.


L. Chief Just. Did you write the words presently?


Witness. I writ them down presently, as God shall be my witness.


L. Chief Just. Look upon the Writing, is it your Hand?


Witness. It is; and it was writren the fourteenth of November. 1678. About
eleven a clock they came to the Black Lion in Kings-street, and called for a
quart of Ale, and a slice of Roast Beef, and it was answered, it should
presently be had. William Staley said, having struck on his Breast, and
stamping with his foot five or six times, I my self would do it.


L. Chief Just. Did you write all that is in the Paper at that time?


Witness. I writ the words in French as I heard them from him, then formed it
as to the Person and time afterward when I was gone.


L. Chief Just. Who told you it was Staley the Goldsmith?


Witness. We asked the Man of the House; and we found he went to his Fathers
house in Covent Garden; we asked his Fathers name, and his name; and that is the
very man


L. Chief Just. He confesses he was in this place at that time with the old
man. He acknowledged that he spoke some words, but denied he spoke those: That
he was the man, he does not deny.


Attorn. Genesis The third man is a Gentleman that does not understand the French
Tongue, he was in the company of these two men at that time; we do not call him
to prove the words, because he does not understand the Language, but to prove
what followed.


L. Chapter Just. There is no mistake of the Person, the Prisoner does not deny he
was there. Call the third Person to know what he has to say.


Phillip Garret, third Witness. Wit. All that I can say is this; my Captain
William Castaries came to me in a great Passion, and said, I cannot suffer
this, I will run upon him, I cannot be quiet.


L. Chief Just. What are those things he charged upon him?


Witness. That he would kill the King himself: it is impossible to suffer it, I
will run out for a Constable presently, this cannot be suffered. I went to
enquire for his name; the answer was, he was a Goldsmith, and that his name was
Staley. That Is the very man (looking upon him) I saw there, and heard him speak.


L. Chief Just. What were the first words?


Witness. [The French words were spoken twice, [in English thus] The King was a
grand Heretic [French again] Here Is the hand, here is the heart, I would kill
him my self.


L. Chief Just. What can you say to this?


Prisoner. My Lord, the matter of Fact happened thus: This Gentleman, Mr.
Sutherland, comes over to me in the morning when I was in the shop, and said,
Sir, I would have a red Button like this, I said I had none of that nature, you
had better go to the Exchange. I would have one of a true Stone; you must (I
replied go to the Jewellers, I have none of these. Upon that I dismissed him; he
went over, and presently comes in a quarter of an hour after, and tells me that
an Honorable Person would speak with me: I went over; this Gentleman makes a
great many Ceremonies to me, and reads me this Paper; he tells me you see what
the Gentleman reads, I would advise you to look to it, then taking me aside by
the Window. I said, I do not understand you, I am innocent, you must not put
any bubble upon me; with that the Captain runs out in a fury, and fetches a
Constable, and carries me to the Gate House. I was in my shop the day before,
which very day I did intend to go out with a Friend into the Country, and
prepared my self accordingly; and Mr. Fromante, the old man that was the Friend
of mine, comes, saying to me, the Constable would have something, I know not
what it is, come and assist me; I went to the place, the Constable told me,
that I was to appear by ten of the Clock; with that comes the old man out. I
owed him a little money, I went and paid him the money which I owed him. I came
back, and sat down by the window out of sight, the old man sat at the right
hand, so we sat and discoursed as innocently, as I thought, and (before God) as
ever I spoke in my life.


L. Chief Just. What discourse had you?


Prisoner. Our chief discourse was about the materials of our business, and it
was about the King of France his Usurpation over his Subjects, and the
Happiness of our little People, the Commonalty of England, that was indeed
usually our discourse when we met together.


L. Chapter Just. Did you say you would kill the King of France? and that he was a
great Heretic? Do you believe the King of France is an Heretic?


Prisoner. I know not what his Opinion is, that is to his own Conscience.


L. Chief. Just. Did you name the word Heretic?


Prisoner. Not to my knowledge upon my Soul, not of the King of England; we
might have discoursed of the Happiness and of the difference of their
Governments. I have been thought a person of some Intelligence, and of some
Understanding in the World, and not to expose my self to speak in a public
large Room, the Door being open, with so high a voice that these Gentlemen
being in the next Room should hear me in French, and in a Street where almost
all are Frenchmen, to speak these Blasphemous Words, words that I abhor. I have
been a great Admirer of my Prince.


Court. Read the Statute of Decimo tertio, etc.


L. Chief. Just. Speak the words in English about killing the King, speak them
all.


Witness. That the Prisoners Companion did say, The King was a Tormentor and
Persecutor of the People of God. The Prisoners words were again, The King of
England is the greatest Heretic, and the greatest Rogue in the World; there is
the Heart, and here is the hand that would kill him; my self.


Prisoner. Here Is the Hand, and here is the Heart which would kill my self: not
would kill him my self.


L. Chief Just. What Jesuit taught you this trick? It is like one of them, it
is the Art and Interest of a Jesuit so to do.


The Statute Read. L. Chief Just. Have you any thing more to say for your self
than what you have already said?


Court. Sir John Kirk, do you understand French?


One of the Jury. I do, my Lord; the words have been interpreted all right.


L. Chief Just. Let me ask you one Question, When you said the King was a great
Heretic and a Rogue, and there is the heart, and here is the arm that would kill
him my self; was it not the King you would kill?


Prisoner. I have this to say in Justification of my self, and Allegiance to my
Prince and King, that I never thought, nor imagined, or contrived any way, but
have been a true Subject to the King upon all occasions; I am sorry it proves
so, Gods will be done, my Soul depends upon it; I am a dying man by the
Statute, never with Intention, or any thought or ill will, spoke I any word
about this matter.


L. Chief. Just. Out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks, the
Statute has been read, which has made it criminal.


Call a witness for the Prisoner. Prisoner. The old Man to whom I spoke is not
here, I had so short notice of my Trial, that I could not find him.


Attor. Genesis That old Man has been examined upon Oath. The Prisoner shall see
the examination if he please, he shall have it read, if he will not, I will not
press to have it read. (Here the examination being shown the Prisoner, he gave
it back to Mr. Attorney General again, then the Prisoner called for a witness
who was present in Court.

One Anselm Spoke. They came to my house, where I live, at the Cross-keys in
Covent Garden, about eight a clock in the morning, these two Gentlemen, the day
they took him away, was the day after these words were spoke, and he was kept
prisoner from eight till eleven of the Clock without any Constable, they had
five Bottles of Wine, and bespake meat, but they did not stay to eat the meat.


L. Chapter Just. How came you to stay so long?


Witness. I was two hours in looking for a Constable, they would not come with
me without a warrant from a Justice of Peace.


L. Chapter Just. Who told you you had best take it up?


Prisoner. The middlemost man, the first witness.


Witness. We were about three long hours, I sent out this Gentleman for a
Constable, in the mean time the Prisoners Father sent his Maid for him to come
home, I told him he should not go, if he desired to eat we would eat there. I
sent to White Hall and desired a guard, the Officer of the guard told the
messenger it was the Constables part.


Court. Call another Witness for the Prisoner.

VVitness for the Prisoner. I have heard him often declare as much Loyalty to
his Prince as any person. One day we fell into a discourse of these affairs,
the business of the Jesuits, which are a people he did as much condemn as any:
for in Padua he saw so many cheats, that he forsook the Jesuitical Religion,
and if he knew any of the persons concerned in this plot, he would be the
Executioner himself, and whoever comes to reign afterward, they shall never
enjoy so much peace as now; and I heard him often say, he would lose his
blood for the King, and heard him speak as Loyally as I ever heard any man
speak in my life.


L. Chapter Just. That is when he spoke to a Protestant.


Court. Have you any thing else to say for your self, or have you any more
Witnesses, that you would have examined on your behalf?


Prisoner. No.


Lord Chief Justice his Speech.
THe Statute has been read, which was made since the King came in, for the
preservation of his person, and during his life: the Parliament thought it
reasonable, even to make desperate words to be Treason, although there was no
other thing but words, that is, such words, as if the thing had been done would
be Treason, the speaking it is Treason. When we come to observe the manner of
this speaking, methinks there is no great difficulty to satisfy the Jury that
they were spoke advisedly and maliciously. They were in a public house, and by
accident heard: they concealed them not a moment, and not from the man that did
not understand French. To hear a man say in a great passion, that his King was
a Heretic, and the greatest Rogue in the world, and that he would kill him, to
write down the words presently, they slept not upon it, they found out who he
was, the next day they came to attach him: they kept him, for what? till they
could get a Constable. So that here is nothing doubtful either in the
circumstance or substance of his Case: so that you cannot have a plainer proof
in the World then there is in this. For my own part, when it is in the Case of
a man's life, I would not have any compliance with the rumors or disorder of
times that should be an evidence against him, but would have a verdict depend
upon the Witnesses, that swear the fact down right upon him. You and we all are
sensible of the great difficulties and hazards that is now both against the
Kings person, and against all Protestants, and our Religion too, which will
hadly maintain it is self, when they have destroyed the men; but let 'em know,
that many thousands will lose their Religion with their lives, for we will not
be Papists, let the Jusuits press what they will (who are the foundations of
all this mischief) in making proselites, by telling them, do what wickedness
you will it is no sin, but we can save you, and if you omit what we Command we
can damn you. This they will not own when it comes to be an objection and penal
upon them, but they will never get the Pope of Rome to declare he has not a
power to Excommunicate what he calls a Heretic, King, and if he does, that the
Subject is not discharged from his obedience, they would do great service to
their Papist friends, if they could obtain such an Edict. They print, preach,
dispute, and maintain otherwise, and thereby lead people to their own
destruction and the destructions of others. Excuse me, if I am a little warm,
when perils are so many, their Murders so secret, that we cannot discover the
murder of that Gentleman, whom we all knew so well; when things are transacted
so closly, and our King in so great danger, and Religion at stake. It Is better
to be warm here than in Smithfield. But that the man might have justice done
him, he has had his Witnesses, and might have had this old Man, if he had
named him to Mr. Richardson: and to show what fair play he has had, Mr. Attorney
tells you the old Man has been examined upon Oath, and offers him the Copy of
his Examination to use, but he thinks not fit to use it for his defense,
therefore nothing is smothered The offense you have heard in words plain
enough, unless the sense is perverted by Jesuitical cunning and equivocation,
the best part of their learning and honesty. They swear it expressly, That the
King was a Heretic and the greatest Rogue in the World, and here is the heart
and hand, that he would kill him himself; and has and can have no other
signification. The Statute says Advisedly and Maliciously. The manner of
speaking, and the words spoke, prove both: When a Papist once has made a Man a
Heretic, there is no scruple to murder him. Whoever is not of their
Persuasion are Heretics, and who ever are Heretics may be murdered, if the
Pope commands it, for which they may become Saints in Heaven; this is that they
have practiced. If there had been nothing of this in this Kingdom, or other
parts of the World, it would be a hard thing to impose it upon them, but they
ought not to complain, when so many instances are against them. Therefore
discharge your Consciences as you ought to do; if guilty let him take the
reward of his Crime, and you shall do well to begin with this man, for
perchance it may be a terror to the rest. Unless they think they can be saved
by dying in the Roman Faith, tho with such pernicious and traitorous words and
designs as these are; let such go to Heaven by themselves, I hope, I shall
never go to that Heaven, where Men are made Saints for killing Kings.


William Staly, hold up your hand. Court. Is William Staly gulty of the High
Treason whereof he has been Indicted.


Jury. Guilty.


Court. What Goods, Chattels, Lands or Tenements?


Jury. None.


L. Chapter Just. Now you may die a Roman Catholic, and when you come to die, I
doubt you will be found a Priest too.


Kings Council. I pray Judgment according to the Verdict.


Court. You have been indicted of high Treason, you have put your self upon
your Country, which Country have found you guilty, what have you to say for
your self, wherefore the Court should not proceed to Judgment against you?


Prisoner. I have nothing to say.


L. Chief Justice. I pronounce Judgment upon you. You are here found guilty by
the Jury of high Treason, for saying you would kill the King, with other
irreverent words; but the matter which makes you a Traitor is proved upon you
by most apparent evidence. The matter, manner, and all the circumstances of it
make it plain, you may harden your heart as much as you will, and lift up your
eyes, but you seem instead of being sorrovvful, to be obstinate, betvveen God
and your Conscience be it, I have nothing to do with it, my duty is to
pronounce Judgment upon you according to Law, which is this.


The SENTENCE.
You shall return to the Prison, from thence shall be drawn to the place of
Execution, where you shall be hanged by the Neck, cut down alive, your Quarters
shall be severed and be disposed of as the King shall think fit, and your
Bowels burnt, and so the Lord have mercy upon your Soul.

FINIS.

