A True and Faithful ACCOUNT OF The most material Passages of a Dispute betwixt
some Students of Divinity (so called) of the University of Aberdene, and the
People called Quakers; held in Aberdene in Scotland, in Alexander Harper his
Close (or Yard) before some hundreds of Witnesses, upon the fourteenth day of
the second Month called April, 1675. There being Opponents John Lesly.
Alexander Shirreff. Paul Gellie.
Mast. of Art. And Defendants upon the Quakers part. Robert Barclay, and George
Keith. Praeses for moderating the meeting, chosen by them, Andrew Thomsone
Advocate: and by the Quakers, Alexander Skein, sometime a Magistrate of the
City. Published for preventing misreports, by Alexander Skein, John Skein,
Alexander Harper, Thomas Merser, and John Cowie. To which is added, Robert
Barclay's offer to the Preachers of Aberdene, renewed and reinforced.

Act. 4.27 For of a truth, against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have
anointed; both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the People of
Israel were gathered together.

London Printed, in the Year, 1675.

The Epistle.
Friendly Readers*
FOrasmuch as our opposers threatened they would Print an account of the debate,
and boasted of a victory, we thought it our concernment for the Truths sake,
and to undeceive these that may be abused by such reports, to give this true
and faithful account of what past: which we are confident all the impartial and
attentive Auditors, will affirm to be a true account; neither is there any one
Argument omitted that we can remember of, or any thing added. There were many
things spoken extrinsick from the matter; and sometimes confusedly two or three
of our opposers speaking often at once, and also some others that were not
concerned, as particularly, one Brown the Bishops Chaplain, who though he
refused to Subscribe the Articles, and so was excluded from speaking, did often
most impertinently interupt, and intrude himself. But these being only
transcient, and no Arguments insisted on; we have not inserted them, studdying
to keep to the matter: and we do faithfully declare that we have herein dealt
impartially according to our memory, as we hope such serious Auditors as may
read this will acknowledge. So leaving you to the perusal hereof, we rest,

Your Souls well-wishers, Alexander Skein. John Skein. Thomas Mercer. John
Cowie.


In the first place the Articles were read, which are as follows.
1. IT is hereby declared that this is to be a private conference betwixt the
Students of Divinity (so called) of the Colleges of Aberdene, and the People
called Quakers, as a fulfilling of any Challenge wherein these Students may be
included, within the Theses set forth by Robert Barclay (or may have received
from any of that People) but abstract from the Public Challenge given to the
Preachers in general in the end of the English Theses; because it is offered
with particular condition of having the Public places to dispute in, before
the Auditories, before whom they conceive they have been misrepresented.

2. It is provided that when any of either Party is speaking, if any of their
company offer to speak, he that is speaking is to be silent; but if two of a
Party speak at once, he that is seen to obtrude himself, shall be judged
impertinent, and excluded thereby from farther access.

3. That each speaker on any of the sides have full liberty, and time to speak,
without interruption of the contrary Party; and that he that interrupts shall
be debarred from farther speaking.

4. That each side abstain from School-terms and distinctions (as much as
possible) but if any use them, that they may be opened to the People in plain
English, so that any of ordinary capacity (that are not educated in Colleges)
may understand them.

5. As for Retortions they must not be impertinent, and from the purpose; and
none shall be so insisted on as to divert us from the point, or turn the
Opponent into the Respondent.

6. The day appointed for the Conferrence, is the fourteenth of April, in the
Year, one thousand six hundred seventy five, (being the day called Wednesday)
the place is to be at Alexander Harpers House or Close (in case the Gray-Fryers
Church (so called) cannot be obtained) and that the Conferrence is to continue
from two to five a Clock in the Afternoon.

7. Both Parties shall endeavor to procure a Praeses to moderate, but not to
have any decisive judgment; yet if such a one cannot be procured, the
Conference is not to be broken up.

8. And it is hereby declared that both Parties intend this for mutual
edification; and therefore intend to abstain from any thing that may obstruct
so good an Event.

9. It is likewise agreed, that none shall have liberty to speak, but those
that have, or shall Subscribe before the Dispute begin, these aforesaid
Articles.

Here Alex. Skein one of our Friends chosen Praeses for Us (because we could
not at that time procure another) standing up with the other Praeses. Studient,
It was condescended that no Quaker should be a Praeses. Quaker, We are wronged;
for we never condescended to any such thing: and seeing ye have chosen one of
your way, how can we be hindered to choose one of ours.

Andr. Thomsone their Praeses, There needs no debate in this matter; for we are
chosen not to have any decisive judgment, but only for the Moral part, to take
notice if the Rules be observed; or whether ye keep to the purpose. Then John
Leslie had a long and tedious discourse, concerning what was fit to be done,
and how we ought to dispute.


G. K. Praeses. I suppose we came not to this place to hear from this Young man
a long Logique discourse.


R. B I desire to be heard, we being a People so generally misrepresented, as
heretical and erroneous, did conceive our selves obliged to give a true and
faithful account of our Principles; which I did in a certain Paper now under
debate, and that our innocence therein might appear, there was a Challenge
added to the end of it, offering to defend these our Principles, if we might be
allowed so to do in these Public places where we have been so much
misrepresented, and against those Persons who had there so often traduced us:
To which having received no Answer, some of the Studients of Divinity come to
us; and signified that they looked upon themselves as concerned; because
mention is made of such in the beginning of that Paper. To whom we answered,
that they were not the Persons challenged by Us; as not being the Public
Preachers that had misrepresented Us: But seeing they were desirous to debate
the matter, we were not unwilling to render to any, a reason of the hope that
is in us; and therefore should not decline it. And forasmuch as some did
object, that we were at a loss, as engaging with them; because there would be
little advantage in case we had any victory and a greater reflection, should we
appear to be at any loss. To such we had, and have this to say; that as we are
not afraid to meet with the greatest and ablest of the Preachers themselves: so
the Truth leads us not to despise any. As R. B. was going on, he was
interrupted.


Alex. Shirreff, If it were pertinent I could easily disprove much of what is
said; but to be short, R. B. having given Theses, provoking all the Scholars of
Europe and Great Britain, though R. B. pretends in his Preface to be against
School Divinity; yet his Theses are full of it: and there are many other
contradictions, which I will not now take notice of, The Preachers and
Ministers of the Word, not finding themselves concerned; we Young Men, and but
Students, have offered to dispute: in the Articles the Quakers have been very
unreasonable; and particularly, G. K. did refuse any Article should be put in,
against railing; because he said, that might be railing in me, which was not in
him; because he (to wit, G. K.) was immediately led by the Spirit. We have
concluded, that being Young men, in case the Quakers should have any advantage,
it will not be of great consequence, and if we have advantage, we hope it may
be useful; because these are the great Prophets and Preachers, of the Quakers.


G. K. I could take notice of many things not true in that Young-mans long
discourse; as particularly, that R. B. has provoked all Europe; but I pass
them by, because I Am here exceedingiy abused; and therefore desire to be
heard: for I declare in God's ^^ar, and in singleness of my heart, I never said
any such thing as is by that Young Man alleged upon me; as I can appeal to the
Auditors who were there present, but what I said was this; I cannot bind my
self, not to rail because I Am bound already that I should not rail, by the
righteous Law of God in my Conscience; And it may here be observed, that
afterward J. L. speaking reflectingly against the Quakers, said, it was no
railing to speak the truth; which was all we pleaded for.
and may perhaps speak that, as believing it to be true, which ye may call
railing.


A. Shir. I being chiefly concerned, and having mostly occasioned this Debate,
am employed by the rest to speak first; and therefore I will impugn the second
thesis, which R. B. read; and is as follows.

Seeing no Man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
reveals him, Mat. 11.27. And seeing the revelation of the Son is in, and by
the Spirit; therefore the Testimony of the Spirit, is that alone by which the
true knowledge of God has been, is and ca^ be only revealed; who as by the
moving of his own Spirit converted the Chaos of this World, into that wonderful
order, wherein it was in the beginning; and Created Man a living Soul to rule
and govern it: so by the revelation of the same spirit, he has made manifest
himself all along unto the Sons of Men, both Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles; which Revelations of God, by the spirit, whether by outward voices,
and appearances, Dreams, or inward objective manifestations in the heart, was
of old the formal Object of their Faith, and remains yet so to be, since the
Object of the Saints Faith is the same in all Ages, though set forth under
diverse Administrations: moreover these Divine inward Revelations, which we make
absolutely necessary for the building up true Faith, neither do, nor can ever
contradict the outward Testimony of the Scriptures, or right and seund reason;
yet from hence it will not follow, that the Divine Revelations are to be
subjected to the examination, either of the outward testimony of the
Scriptures, or of the natural reason of Man, as to a ^ore noble, or certain
Rule and Touchstone: for this Divine Revelation, and inward Illumination, is
that which is evident and clear of it self, forcing by its own evidence and
clearness the well disposed understanding to assent, irresistably moving the
same thereunto, even as the common Principles of natural truths, move and
incline the mind to a natural assent.


R. B. People, this is that which we affirm, and which these Young Men are
about to dispute against as false; notwithstanding that A. Shir. had thus
offered himself first to dispute, yet I. L. intruding himself put him to
silence; Beginning as follows.


I. L. That which is not to be believed as the Rule of Faith, is not to be the
Rule of Faith; but the Spirit is not to be believed as the Rule of Faith,
therefore the Spirit is not to be the Rule of Faith.


R. B. Having repeated the Argument I deny the Minor or second Proposition.


I. L. I prove it, that which has not a sufficient evidence, to evidence it
self to be a Rule, is not to be a Rule; but the Spirit in the Quakers has not
a sufficient evidence, whereby to evidence it self to be a Rule; therefore the
Spirit in the Quakers is not to be our Rule.


R. B. (Having repeated the Argument) I distinguish that second Proposition, If
thou meanest any Spirit in the Quakers, which they peculiarly assume to
themselves as Quakers, or say they have as a part of themselves, or of Man's
Nature; we concede that such have no evidence, neither do we say that any such
Spirit is to be our Rule; but if thou meanest that Universal Spirit of God, a
manifestation whereof is given to every one to profit withal; we affirm it
has a sufficient evidence in us, and in all Men.


I. L. I urge that distinction, If the Spirit has a sufficient evidence,
either this evidence is from your own declaration, or some other; but it is
neither from your own declaration, nor from some other; therefore, it has not
a sufficient evidence.


R. B. It is from both.


J. L. What is it then?


R. B. That it teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World; this is an evidence to
all Men.


J. L. I prove that is not a sufficient evidence thus, That is not a sufficient
evidence, which Heretics may pretend unto, as a sufficient ground for their
heresy; but Heretics may pretend this as a sufficient ground for their
herisie; therefore it is not a sufficient evidence.


R. B. I answer this first by a Retortion; this is the same Argument upon the
matter, which the Jesuit Dempster used against your Master, viz. John Menzies:
for the Jesuit pressing him to assign a ground for the Protestant Religion,
which Heretics could not pretend unto. J. M. named the Scripture, and the
Jesuit further urged, that Heretics could, and did pretend unto the
Scriptures. Now what evidence can ye give from the Scriptures, which we cannot
give? yea, and greater from the Spirit, that Heretics cannot justly lay claim
to.


Stud. With one voice, We will not have Retortions.


R. B. Praeses read the Articles which contain a particular provision for
Retortions, as being lawful, if not insisted too much on; so the fifth Article
abovementioned was read.


G. K. I offer to answer directly to his Argument without Retortion, though I
pass not from the Retortion; for it stands over your heads, which ye will never
get over. Then I say, we have a twofold evidence, which no Heretic can justly
lay claim to. The one is the inward evidence of the Spirit of God, by its own
immediate Testimony in our hearts. The other is the Testimony of the
Scriptures, which I affirm in the Name of the People called Quakers, is the
best external and outward evidence, and rule that can be given: And my reason
why we have the Testimony of the Scriptures, as an evidence that we have the
Inspiration of the Spirit, is this. All Men have a measure of the Inspiration
of the Spirit of God according to the Scriptures testimony, That Christ the
true Light inlighteneth every man that comes into the world; and that a
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal: But this
universal Illumination or minifestation is inspired; and if all men be in
measure inspired, then consequently we who are men are inspired.


J. L. I prove ye have not the testimony of the Scriptures for a sufficient
evidence. That which is fallacious is not a sufficient evidence. But the
Scriptures testimony according to the Quakers, without the indwelling of the
Spirit is fallacious: Therefore the Scriptures testimony is not a sufficient
evidence.


R. B. (Having repeated the Argument) I deny the second Proposition.


G. K. The Argument is wrong in its Structure, and vicious as consisting of
four Terms, which no right Syllogism should have.


Stud. It is not informal, for it has not four Terms.


G. K. It has four Terms, and this I offer to prove before either your
Masters, or any other judicious Logicians in any University of this Nation. I
say it has four Terms, because it subsumes that in the second Proposition
which was not in the first Proposition.

At this the Students fell a laughing, and so provoked the people to lightness.


Al. Skeine one of the Praesesses, I appeal to all Logicians, if when any thing
is subsumed in a Syllogism, which is neither in the first Proposition nor in
the Conclusion, whether that Syllogism has not four Terms.
I am sorry to see those who profess to study* Divinity behave themselves so
lightly, and so far from seriousness in such weighty matters as concern the
Truths of God.


G. K. I am ready still to prove that the Syllogism has four Terms: but this
being not so proper here for this Auditory, proceed ye to prove the second
Proposition, which R. B. has denied.


J. L. I prove the second Proposition, That which may beguile a man is
fallacious: But according to the Quakers, the Scriptures may beguile a man,
without the indwelling of the Spirit: There fore according to the Quakers, the
Scriptures are fallacious.


G. K. This Argument is also wrong in the Structure, having four Terms.


R. B. But waving that I deny thy second Proposition: For the Scripture cannot
beguile any man, although men may or have beguiled themselves by a wrong use of
it.


A. Shir. Take notice, People, The Quakers say, the Scriptures cannot beguile
you.


R. B. Speak louder yet; for we do and have constantly affirmed it. And we hope
it will help to clear us of those misrepresentations, as if we despised or
spoke evil of the Scriptures.


G. K. I would my words could reach from the one end of the world to the other,
when I say the Scriptures cannot beguile any man, for the Scripture is
innocent, and a true testimony in it self; but men do beguile themselves often by
making perverse Glosses upon the Scriptures; the Scripture cannot be
fallacious, because according to you, it is your principal rule of Faith; and
if we can prove from your own principal Rule that we are inspired, then the
Scriptures testimony is not fallacious; else your Principal Rule would be
fallacious.


Stud. But that is not according to vour Principle.


G. K. But it is an Argument ad hominem, which ye know is lawful; and besides,
though we do not acknowledge them to be the principal Rule of our Faith; yet we
affirm, that they are a a true testimony, and the best outward testimony and
Rule in the world. And besides, there is a manifestation of the Spirit in many,
where there is not an in-dwelling of the Spirit, and by this manifestation of
the Spirit, all men may understand the Scriptures as they do improve it.


Stud. We will go to another Argument.


R. B. People take notice, this Argument is left upon this Point, that
according to the Quakers Principle these young men say, the Scriptures may
beguil People, which we utterly deny as proved, or that can be proved.


Al. Shirreffe. I argue against the later part of the second Thesis, where ye
affirm, That inward, immediate Revelations are necessary to the building up of
true faith. We confess that subjective Revelation is necessary, but we deny
that objective Revelation is necessary, which ye affirm.


G. K. Explain what ye mean by subjective and objective Revelation, that the
people may understand according to the Articles.


A. Sh. I explain it from this Scripture, Luke 24.17. And beginning at Moses
and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things
concerning himself. Here is the objective Revelation to wit the Scriptures, so
that they needed not any new objective Revelation, but only that which was
before; but needed a subjective Revelation, or Divine Illumination to make them
understand the objective Revelation, to wit, the Scriptures.


G. K. That is not a sufficient explanation of objective and subjective
Revelation; therefore I desire to be heard, that I may open it more
sufficiently, according as is provided in the Articles of Agreement.

Objective Revelation, or the object of our faith is twofold, to wit, first,
the material object; secondly the formal object.


Stud. Do the people understand this.


G. K. I shall explain it to them, for it is necessary to the matter in hand.
The material object is that which is to be believed; the formal object is that
for which principally we are to believe, or the principal motive of
credibility. Now to apply, I say, the Scriptures are the material object, or a
part of the ma^erial object of our faith; but not the formal object of our
faith.


Al. Shir. I prosecute my Argument against such objective Revelations as being
necessary to faith.


G. K. We confess the Scriptures are sufficient to move us to an Historical
faith, and that to a more excellent degree of Historical faith, than any other
Histories in the world; because it has more excellent outward motives of
credibility, as the consent of all ages since they were written, and of all
Christians, however differing among themselves, etc. but they are not
sufficient to beget in us a saving faith, without inward objective Revelation.


Al. Shir. I prove such inward objective Revelations are not necessary to beget
saving faith, by this Argument: If there be no such Seed in man as the Quakers
maintain, then there are no such Revelations as the Quakers maintain; But there
is no such Seed in men as the Quakers maintain: Therefore there are no such
Revelations, etc.


R. B. (After he had repeated the Argument) I deny that second Proposition.


A. Shir. I prove it. If there be no such Seed in men, as a substantial, living
Principle, distinct from the Soul, that can be heard, seen, savoured, tasted,
aad felt, then there is no such Seed in men as the Quakers maintain: But the
first is true, therefore the last. And then the said Alexander Shirreffe read a
passage at length out of G. K. his Book of immediate Revelation, page 6, 7.
that the Seed was such a living, substantial Principle, and that in the Seed
these Revelations were only received.


R. B. This is a digression from the matter, and a passing from the Theses,
which should have been the subject of this days debate, to G. K. his Book of
immediate Revelation.


G. K. I must now appear to defend my Book, and Apologize to R. B. because I am
necessitated to put my hand in another harvest; Therefore I distinguish upon
the word such in the first Proposition. If by such, thou meanest a substantial
Principle, etc. I say, that is altogether extrinsick to the subject of the
debate; and besides it will engage us into the greatest nicities and
obscurities of Philosophy and School divinity, that is not proper for this
Auditory. But if by such thou meanest, An Universal Principle of Gods saving
Grace in men, whereby they are capacitated both to know and do the will of God;
I affirm and am ready to maintain there is such a Principle in all men.


Al. Shir. But I prove that that Seed in men is not of a substance, or
substantial Principle.


G. K. I am ready to defend, that it is a substantial Principle. But that
belonging to the second Proposition, we ought not to come to it before the
distinction of the first Proposition be discussed. Here the Students made a
great noise. And G. K. appealed to the Praeses And. Thomson, who answered
discreetly, that G. K. did not refuse to defend that the Seed of God was a
substantial Principle; but this was not its proper place, until the distinction
of the former Proposition be discussed.


Al. Shir. I shall wave the word substantial, etc. and I offer to prove, that
there is not a Seed of God in men, as the Quakers affirm, if there be such a
Seed, it is either created, or uncreated: But it is neither created, nor
uncreated, choose you whether.


G. K. After he repeated the Argument: I distinguish the word Seed, as being
either a Concrete Term, or an Abstract Term.


J. L. Does the people understand this Distinction?


G. K. I hope ye understand it, and I shall explain it to them, who understand
it not. A Concrete Term comprehends two things; the one in recto (as they
say) the other in obliquo, that is to say, the one has the other belonging to
it, as merciful is a Concrete Term, which is as much as to say, one that has
mercifulness in him, and so mercifulness is the Abstract, which signifies that
one thing belonging to the Concrete. Now to apply: If we understand Seed as the
Concrete, it is both uncreated and created; for it is God himself discovering
himself to the Creatures capacity, in his work of manifestation, which work is
created; but he who does manifest himself in that manifestation is uncreated.
And because he manifests himself at first in a low and small degree unto the
Soul; therefore he in that manifestation is compared unto a Seed; even as
Clemens Alexandrinus says, that Christ compared himself to a grain of
Mustard Seed in his inward appearance in men's hearts.


Al. Shir. The Seed is not a substantial Principle, because it is the
manifestation of God; but the manifestation of God is not a substantial
Principle, but accidental.


G. K. That may be substantial or a substance, which in another respect is
accidental, as Gold is a substance, so Silver, Houses, Lands are substances;
but they are accidental to me, because I may want them.


Al. Shir. He says, his Seed is a substance or substantial Principle.


G. K. This is an abuse, I speak not of my Seed, or the Seed of man, but of the
Seed of God in men.


A. Shir. I prove that manifestation is not a substance.


R. B. That brings us again into a Philosophical debate which is here to be
avoided.


I. L. I prove that manifestation is not created. Whatsoever is of God, is God:
But this manifestation is of God, Therefore it is God.


G.K. Take notice of this young man's blasphemy; for if whatsoever is of God be
God, then all the Creatures are God, as stones, Horses, etc. for the Scripture
says, of him, and through him, and to him are all things. Here the Students
made a noise, and fell a laughing to cover this: some of them speaking
irreverently of God.


G. K. I beseech you, yea, I charge you all in Gods fear, that when you speak
of that Holy and Dreadful Being, ye do it with fear and reverence.


A. Shir. Ye say then, this Seed is God in a manifestation: I prove it is not.
That is not God which can be measured in measures, and can grow from a lesser
measure to a greater, can be formed and grow up in men. But God cannot be
measured in measures, nor grow, etc. Therefore this Seed is not God in a
manifestation.


G. K. After he had repeated the Argument, I answer, God as in himself, or as
in his own Being cannot be measured or grow up, it is true. But as in respect
of his* manifestatione quoad nos (or as to us) that is to say, as he comes
forth as to us, discovering himself, he or his Spirit may be said to have
measures. And this I show from Scripture: As where it is said in John
concerning Christ, God gave not the Spirit by measure unto him; implying he
gave it forth in measures unto others; and where Elisha said unto Elijah, Let a
double portion of thy Spirit in upon me.


J. L. He says God comes forth into the Creatures: I prove he cannot come
forth into the Creatures, because he is in himself.


G. K. He does come forth into the Creatures, and yet is still in himself; for
he is not limited as Creatures are, who go from one place to another; but he is
in all Creatures, and in himself also; but this young man, as I perceived by
him the other day, is a nullibist in his Opinion, as they term them; so that
according to his Principle, the Soul of John Lesly is as much in France, even
now as in his body, or in this place, that is to say, neither here nor there;
but herein I speak according to Scripture-words, which says, God boweth the
Heavens and comes down; yet not that he leaves his own Being; but it is
spoken after the manner of men, who is every where in all his Creatures; but
manifests himself in several measures unto them.


Al. Sh. There is nothing in the Seed but God; therefore God in his own Being
is measured forth according to the Quakers Doctrine; for the Seed (...) nothing
but God and his Manifestation.


G. K. The Manifestation is in it self and not out of it self. Can Al. Shir. be
out of himself; or can any thing be out of it self?


R. B. If some of them be not without themselves, it is like they are beside
themselves.


G. K. In a moral way of speaking, when a man is as a Madman, or beside his
purpose, he is beside himself. Upon this the Students fell to debate among
themselves, whether they should prosecute the Argument or not; some being for
it, and some against it, and those who were for it boasting of their advantage.


G. K. I see no strength in your reasoning to glory in, it has not the
strength of a cobweb; but if you think it has, produce it, and if any more
water remain in your Bottle, bring it out.


A. Shir. Yea, we have water enough yet in our Bottle to quench your Spirit.


R. B. Come on with it then.

We will go from this to the eleventh Thesis, which R. B. read out, and is as
follows.

All true and acceptable worship to God is offered in the inward and immediate
moving and drwaing of his own spirit, which is neither limited to places,
times, or persons; for, though we be to worship him always, in that we are to
fear before him; yet as to the outward signification thereof in Prayer, Praises
or Preachings, we ought not to do it where and when we will* but where, and
when we are moved thereunto by the secret Inspirations of his Spirit in our
hearts, which God hears and accepts of, and is never wanting to move us
thereunto, when need is, of which he himself is the alone proper Judge. All
other worship then, both Praises, Prayers, and Preachings which man sets about
in his own will, and at his own appointment, which he can both begin and end at
his pleasure, do or leave undone as himself sees meet, whether they be a
prescribed Form, as a Lyturgy, or Prayers conceived ex tempore, by the natural
strength and faculty of the mind* they are all but Superstition, will worship,
and abominable Idolatry in the sight of God, which are to be denied rejected,
and separated from in this day of his spiritual arising. However it might have
pleased him who winked at the times of ignorance, with a respect to the
simplicity and integrity of some, and his own innocent Seed, which lay as it
were buried in the hearts of men, under that mass of superstition to blow upon
the dead and dry bones, and to raise some breathings, and answer them, and that
until the day should more clearly dawn and break forth.


Al. Sh. By this Thesis ye affirm, that no man ought to go about any duty
without a particular impulse of the Spirit.


R B. Impulse is not a word used by me, but an obscure word; therefore say,
Inspiration, or Influence.


Al. Sh. Either this Inspiration ye have it in all things, or in some things,
choose you whether.


R. B. We have it in these things relating to our duties of worship toward God.


A. Sh. This contradicts G. K. who in his Book of immediate Revelation, says,
That in all things whatsomever, we ought to have an inspiration of the Spirit
for the doing of the same; otherwise we cannot do in faith.


R. B. This is another digression and going from the purpose; for the Question
is not how far I contradict another, but what in Reason ye can say against what
I have here affirmed: for when I show you before how ye contradicted your
Master, viz. John Menzies in another matter, ye would not admit it as relevant,
though the Case be alike, alleging it was a Retortion, ye undertook to dispute
against the Theses; but it seems you find not room enough there, but ye must
ran to G. K. his Book for further matter.


G. K. I see it is more against G. K. than R. B. his Theses that you set your
selves. And therefore G. K. must defend G. K. But I say, in this there is no
contradiction between R. B. and me, for there is a twofold sort of
Inspirations or influences, N^te, diverse of the Auditors were displeased with
their going from the Theses.
the one General, the other Special. The General Influences are given in
general, or common for the doing of all common or ordinary Actions, and by the
special influences of the Spirit we are enabled to go about those special
duties, as of Prayer, Thanksgiving, etc. Now of these special inspirations or
influences R. B. in his Theses is to be understood; and thus there is no
contradiction betwixt him and me.


R. B. To which I have this to add, there is a difference betwixt the
influences of the Spirit, as we are particularly acted by them in singular and
particular Acts of Worship, and as we are generally influenced by the Spirit,
in so far as we come habitually to live and walk in the Spirit, for in that
respect we may be said to do every thing in the Spirit, as we grow up into that
state, though there be more particular influences requisite in matters of
worship.


G. K. I say further, particular Influences or inspirations of the Spirit are
of several sorts, which are analogous or proportional to the several* sorts of
duties, as Preaching, and Praying are several sorts of duties. Now the
particular influence to Pray, is not to Preach, and so on the contrary. Also
the influences which serve to duties only inward, as to wait, fear, and love
God, do not serve without a superadded influence to the performance of outward
duties. Therefore every influence is to respect the duty that it is given unto.


A. Shir. I prove that such particular influences are not needful to acts of
worship; thus: If such particular influences of the Spirit were needful unto
outward acts of Worship, then they were also needful unto inward duties, as to
waiting, desiring, loving, and feeling God: but the last is absurd, therefore
the first.


R. B. Having repeated the Argument, I deny that the last is absurd.


G. K. Come on with that Argument: I confess, it has some Acumen or sharpness
in it; but ex tua pharetra nunquam venit illa sagitta, this Arrow has not come
out of thy Quiver, but out of thy Masters, who has formerly used this Argument
against us.


Alex. Shir. I prove the last is absurd: If the inspirations of the Spirit be
necessary to inward duties, as to wait, desire, etc. then we must not wait
without them; but this is absurd, therefore is the other.


G. K. Having repeated the Argument; I deny that this is absurd; for we cannot
suppose, that ever at any time an influence or inspiration can be wanting to
wait upon God, to desire, and fear, and love him; and the particular influences
to particular duties, such as Praying, Preaching, Thanksgiving is not wanting,
whenever the season comes to go about them.


Al. Shir. If ye have these particular influences, why do ye not make use of
them? Why do ye not say the Grace?


R. B. It will not follow that we do not pray, nor make use of those particular
influences, because at sometimes we do not take off our Hats, or speak words,
which are not essential to true Prayer.


J. L. I prove that that distinction concerning general and particular
influences is not sufficient, That which may be a ground for a Heretic to
forbear Prayer for a whole year is not a sufficient distinction; but this may
be a ground for a Heretic to forbear Prayer for a whole year; Therefore it is
not a sufficient distinction.


G. K. Having repeated the Argument; I deny the second Proposition.


J. L. I prove it, for a Heretic may pretend he has not those particular
influences for a whole year.


G. K. Though an Heretic may pretend, yet he has no ground from our, Principle
to pretend to any such thing because these particular influences cannot be
wanting, neither for one year, nor for any time that the particular duties
ought to be gone about; and if any did pretend the want of particular
influences, to pray, etc. they are to be judged as guilty and deceitful, as
giving that for an excuse which is not sufficient, although all have not the
utterance of Prayer, so as to pray in words, nor can any pray truly in words,
but by a particular Influence.


A. Sh. This Influence or Inspiration is either commanding or forbidding; so G.
K. understood it: but because of the great confusion or noise, he cannot
certainly say; and upon this understanding, G. K. answered, it is not a
sufficient enumeration; for there is a midst.


Praeses A. Th. Master Keith, ye know we say, nondatur medium.


Students. There is no midst betwixt contradictory Propositions.


G. K. But these Propositions are not contradictory; for there is a midst
betwixt commanding and forbidding.


A. Shir. Either he does command or not command; there is no midst here, choose
you whether.


G. K. He does not command us in all things in which we are inspired; for some
Inspirations are Mandatory, and commanding, some Permissory, or permitting; and
some forbidding; so betwixt commanding and forbidding, the midst is permitting.


J. L. But a Permission cannot be an Inspiration, otherwise ye might say, a
stone does inspire you as much as God, because a stone does permit or not
hinder you.


G. K. I deny the Consequence; for I offer to show from Scripture, that Paul
when he did a thing by permission was inspired, as when he said, I speak this
by permission and not by Commandment. Here he was writing Scripture by
inspiration in the very time. See 1 Cor. 7.6. and compared with 40. verse. See
Acts 16.7.
And again, where he said, I assayed to go to such a place, but the Spirit
permitted not.


A. Shir. This was not a permission, but a hindering, or not a permitting him.


G. K. But I gather out of these words by the Rules of Contraries, that if the
Spirit did not permit Paul at sometimes, it did permit him at other times, and
this permission was by Inspiration, and I hope it is lawful for me to make this
observation or note upon this Scripture; seeing your Masters will make half a
dozen not so much to the purpose. But for the further opening of this matter, I
distinguish of permission thus: There is a negative permission, and a positive
permission: A negative permission is a simple forbearance, or not meddling in
any case; and such a negative, permission is no sufficient warrant to us to do
any thing. The positive permission is when God by some inward evidence or
signification of his Spirit by words or otherwise, makes us know that he
allows us to do such a thing, although he command it not. As for Example, if
a Scholar should go forth out of the School without getting of his Masters
leave, this is a negative permission, and is not a sufficient ground for the
Scholar to go forth: but when the Scholar comes, and says. Let me go forth;
and the Master answers, thou may go, this is a positive permission, and
not a command.


Praeses Andr. Th. Examples are not Demonstrations.


G. K. But they may be used to illustrate.


Praeses A. Th. But the Master says to the Scholar, exi, go forth, which is in
the Imperative, and that signifies to command.


G. K. That is but a Grammaticism, for the Imperative Mood does not always
signify to command, but sometimes to command, and sometimes to permit; which I
refer to the judgment of Schoolmasters who teach the Grammar.


A. Th. Praeses. This is rather like a debate about Grammatications of
Imperative Moods, As in the third person in the Imperative, exeat, Let him go,
is permissive.
than about the matter intended, therefore come to the purpose.


A. Shir. In the prosecution of this Argument against this Thesis alleged on
G. K, he will not pay his debt, because he may pretend he wants an Inspiration
to do it.


G. K. I hope none can blame me for refusing to pay my debt, and I pay my debt
as well as any of you, nor can any be supposed that men can want an inspiration
to do any such thing, and we refer our selves to the judgment of discretion in
all sober persons here present.


Paul Gelly. I have an Argument to propose for Water Baptism.


R. B. Then let me read the Thesis, which was read, and is as follows:

As there is one Lord and one faith, so there is one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. which
is not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience before God by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. and
this Baptism is a holy and spiritual thing (to wit) the Baptism of the Spirit
and fire, by which we are buried with him, Col. 2.12. that being washed and
purged from our sins we may walk in newness of life, Romans 6.4. of which the
Baptism of John was a figure, which was commanded for a time, and not to
continue for ever: As to the Baptism of Infants is a mere humane Tradition, for
which neither precept nor practice is to be found in all the Scripture.


R. B. What have thou against this Thesis, is it not the express words of
Scripture?


P. G. It is true, and therein we agree, but I oppose your meaning of it.


R. B. Note, that while this young man was prosecuting his Argument, J. L. did
insolently intrude himself and interrupted him, and they spoke of them three at
sometimes.
We make no meaning in the Case, for the Scripture declares our meaning.


G. K. Ye have a large field to Dispute in; in the last part of the Thesis, if
you please where he positively affirms that sprinkling of Infants is a mere
humane Tradition.


Students. We will not meddle with that at this time.


P. G. Either you mean by this Thesis, that Water Baptism is ceased or not
ceased.


R. B. Come on, we mean it is ceased.


P. G. I prove it is not ceased thus: If the presence of Christ is to continue
with his Church for ever, then Water Baptism is to continue for ever, But the
first is true. Therefore the second.


G. K. People take notice, he says, Water Baptism is to continue for ever; if
so, then we must be baptized in Heaven after this life with Water Baptism.


Stud. He means by for ever, to the end of the world.


R. B. Having repeated the Argument, I deny the sequel of the first Proposition.


P. G. I prove it from Matthew. 28. Go teach and baptize all Nations, etc. Here
Christ commanding them to baptize, shows he will be with them to the end of
the world; therefore as long as he was to be with them, that Baptism was to
continue.


R. B. I grant the whole: but the Question is, if that Baptism be by Water,
which I deny.


P. G. I prove it was by water, If the Apostles baptized with water, then they
were commanded to baptize with water; but the Apostles baptized with water:
Therefore they were commanded to baptize with water.


R. B. (having repeated the Argument) I deny the Consequence of the first
Proposition.


P. G. I prove it thus, Either the Apostles did baptize with water by the
Command of Christ, Matthew. 28. or they were ignorant of the meaning of that
Command, choose you whether.


G. K. It is not a sufficient enumeration, for they might have known the
meaning of the Command, and yet baptized with water, not from that command, but
in condescension to the weaknesses of the Jews.


P. G. If they condescended to baptize with water for the weakness of the Jews
though without a Command, then ye ought to baptize now with water to condescend
to peoples weakness now, seeing ye confess that there are who are weak both
among us and your selves.


G. K. That will not follow, more than in the Case of Circumcision, for the
Apostle Paul did Circumcise without a Command in condescension to the Jews, yet
it follows not that any now should Circumcise to condescend to the people who
should require it.


Stud. The parity is not alike, because Baptism with water was Commanded to the
Apostles, so not Circumcision; for John Baptist was sent to baptize with water.


R. B. John Baptist was not an Apostle, and so not concerned in that
Commission, Matthew. 28. And his Baptism was to decrease, that the Baptism of
Christ by the Holy Ghost might increase.


Al. Shir. It must be Water Baptism, because the baptizing of the Holy Ghost is
ceased now.


G. K. People, take notice, he says the Baptism of the Holy Ghost is ceased
now.


A. Shir. It is ceased to be given by men, for do ye give the Holy Ghost by the
laying on of hands.


G. K. The Holy Ghost may be given without the laying on of hands, and holy men
now are Instruments in conveighing the gifts of the Holy Ghost to others.


R. B. Did not Paul say, Romans 1.11. that he longed to see them to communicate
some spiritual Gift: And besides, as to the matter of condescendence,
abstaining from blood and things strangled though particularly commanded by the
Apostles, yet is not now to be practiced by any condescension, as your selves
confess.


G. K. Hear what Augustine says in the Case of Circumcision observing of
meals, drinks, washing sacrifices, etc. They are to be considered in a
threefold respect, viz. First as living under the Law, Secondly, as dead after
the death of Christ, Thirdly, as deadly as being once buried, and being once
buried they are not to be again raised up out of their Grave, out of
Condescension to any, so I say the same as of Water Baptism, it being once dead
and buried, is not again to be raised up now after the Apostasy.


P. G. I prove that Water Baptism was thought needful even to those that were
Baptized with the Holy Ghost, Can any man forbid Water, etc. as Paul said Acts
10.


G. K. Say Peter not Paul.


P. G. Peter I say not Paul.


R. B. That proves not all that it was done by necessity, but to condescend to
their weakness.

About this time the praeses, And. Th. going forth said, it was now five a
clock the time appointed for the continuance of the dispute and so went away
nor was there any argument farther urged.


G. K. Praeses AL. Skeine, I see there is like to be no more here but
confusion, seeing the other praeses is gone. I shall only propose this just and
reasonable desire to these Students, that since we have given them a fair
opportunity to impugn and oppose our principles, they also will promise us
another day to impugn and oppose theirs.


Stud. When we set out Theses then ye shall have one opportunity to impugn them.


G. K. Your Theses are set out already, for your confession of Faith is your
Theses, which I offer to impugn.


Stud. Our Faith is established by the Law of God and of the Nation, and
therefore ought not to be called in question,


R. B. That it is established by the Law of God is the thing under debate, and
as for the Law of the Nation, so is the Popish Faith in Italy and Spain, and
Mahometanisme in the Turks dominions, will it therefore follow that Popery and
Mahometanisme are not to be called in question or oppugned.


Stud. We will come to your meetings and debate further with you.


R. B. Our Meetings are not for debate, but to wait upon God and Worship Him,
but if ye please to meet us here again to morrow, we are satisfied.


Stud. We will not.


R. B. It seems ye need a longer time to prepare you, for your present strength
is all exhausted.


Stud. We will come to your Meeting, and wait till it be done, and then oppose
you.


R. B. I have told you before, that is not proper, but on this condition I will
admit it, that when I see meet, I may have the like opportunity to come to your
meetings, and when your Preachers have done, that I be allowed to oppose and
impugn your principles.


Stud. No, no.


The confusion and tumult increasing thorough the removing of the Praeses.
A.Th. and diverse of the soberest people; and the Students vainly boasting of
their victory, laughing, clamouring, and making a noise, and telling they would
cause, publish in Print their (imaginary) Victory, occasioned such lightness
and rudeness in a rabble of the grossest sort that were without the bar, that
laying hold on a heap of Turffs, they threw many of them against us without
offering the least violence to our opposers on the other side, so that having
beat diverse with hard Turfes, Peates, and also with stones. R. B. with diverse
other friends received several knocks in his head, and was wounded in his hand
with a stone, while as the Students (the Masters of Art) and their Companions
who had been disputing in matters of Religion instead of interposing themselves
to prevent, stood diverse of them laughing, hollowing, and clamouring thereat,
and so the meeting broke up. G. K. said to others more sober that were present,
these are your Church Members.

This true and impartial account (which was offered to be read to their
Praeses, And. Thomson but he declined it, alleging the matters treated of were
so Extrinsick from his employment, and these things that took up his head, and
he so apt to forget such things, that though the matter might be true he could
not attest it* neither for us nor our opposers; it was also read in writing to
some judicious and unprejudicate persons that were present, and are not of our
way, and acknowledged by them to be according to their best memory a full and
ingenious account, as may be further proved in case it be called in question)
will we hope serve to appease these empty clamours which the Students vain
ostentation, and the ignorance and prejudice of others might have raised, some
of whom did so little or at least will needs appear so little to understand the
matter, as to affirm the Quakers were all routed, for they could prove nothing,
whereas we were by mutual agreement to be mere Defendents, and not to be
admitted at all to prove, but only to answer, and whether we answered not all
was urged, will by this account appear, where none of the arguments are
omitted, nor any whit of the strength of them concealed; as for what was or may
be accounted reflections, we have not put them in the body of the dispute,
because we remember not particularly at what time they were spoken. But that we
may not seem designedly to conceal any as tending to our disadvantage, so far
as we remember they were as follows. That G.K. said to I. L. he spoke more
with his fingers than his tongue, after, what need he make such a work with his
finger, and affect a canting tone like his Master I. M. that his head was too
full of Mercury, and his heart in his tongue, whereas a wise man's tongue is in
his heart. Now whether I. L.'s. extravagant behavior did not deserve such
checks while he oftentimes would be speaking when his companions were, and put
them by with both his elbows, that he alone might be heard, to which add his
forwardness in his blasphemous assertion above observed, let the discreet and
judicious hearers judge. A. Shir. said he would overturn Quakerisme and he
hoped in so doing to have his end. I. L. that he might not miss to hit as he
thought. G. K. said it seemed, he was an Aberdeens man and would take his word
again, which was noted by G. K. as being a reflection upon the City where I. L.
himself was born, which G. K. was not, also A. Shir* laughing and raising
lightness called upon G. K. speaking some words if there was a Notar that he
might take Instrument.

To which R. B. answered, that he desired the Notar might take Instrument, how
Divinity Students and Masters of Arts that were preparing themselves for the
Ministry were so light and unserious in Religious matters, etc. But however if
they have gotten such a Victory as they boast of, how is that consistent with
what we are informed of, and is noised up and down in the City, that Jo.
Menzies their Master went within a day or two to desire the Bishop to complain
to the Primate and Kings Council, and procure us to be punished for holding the
Dispute; andan Order that none such further be admitted; and indeed if the
Scholars have proved so good Disputants, we think the Masters cannot in reason
refuse this following offer.

R. B. His Offer to Jo. Menzies Professor of Divinity (so called) George
Meldrum, Minister at Aberdeen, and William Mitchel Catechist, at foot of Dee.
AS in this late Rencountre it was specially provided, that it shall be
abstract from the Challenge made to you, and so no fulfilling of it; so now
this being past, of which you have here presented to you a good and faithful
account, which we hope being seriously weighed by your more mature Judgments,
may allay any hasty joy that might have proceeded from the windy Triumphs the
Students might have possessed you with a belief they had obtained, who at every
turn to the nauseating of the more serious and impartial Auditors, were
proclaiming themselves Victors, we think you more concerned; and indeed we are
the more desirous to meet and debate it with your selves; for either this is
all ye have to say, which ye have put in their mouths, or ye have more to say;
if this be all, then indeed it may be your wisdom not to accept this offer; but
if ye have more, we shall be willing to hear it, and endeavor to answer it;
and as your appearing your selves would be more satisfactory to the people, and
is most desired by them as well as us; so diverse inconveniences that has in
this, or may fall in the like would be avoided; for first, it being in your
public houses, there would be less occasion of tumult, because the house is
capable to hold diverse thousands. Secondly, as it is probable ye would not so
readily be put to a stand as they, if it should happen ye were: we are hopeful
ye would not by raising a laughter and clamor amongst the people, and crying
out three or four at once, seek to cover it, or boast of Victory, and cry out
your Argument is pungent before we have time allowed us to answer it. Thirdly,
you engaging we are hopeful to procure discreet, Learned, and persons every way
considerable to be Judges consultative upon our part, though not professing our
way, to help to moderate and keep good order. Fourthly, it is probable, that by
the solemnity of such an action and the influence of your presence* as well as
other persons of condition being there, might secure us from the hazard of
clods, and stones; for I do truly assure you, I conceive my self more able to
answer the most pungent of your Argument, than defending my self from the
stones and blows of your unreasonable and brutish Church Members. It is by some
of your people objected to us (whether it come from you or not I will not
affirm) that it is below you to engage with us; but as this is altogether
unsuitable to Christian Ministers, whose Mr. disdained not daily to debate, and
answer the Questions of such as opposed themselves unto him, and taught his
Disciples to leave the ninety and nine, and go seek after the odd one. Next it
is most unreasonable, for since ye take liberty to speak against us in your
Pulpits, and particularly to design us, yea and sometimes to speak untruths of
us. I desire then to know whether it be agreeable to the Rules of Christianity,
or even of common honesty, to take liberty to speak ill of men behind their
backs, abuse their Principles and Reputations, and yet say it is below them to
prove these Charges to the men's own faces. Secondly, it is objected, that it is
against the Laws to call the faith established by Law into question; but may
not the same be said against Protestants in those Nations where Popery and
Mahomitism are established by Law; yea, is not this the very pretense and put
off whieh the Papists both in Germany and France gave the Primitive
Protestants, when they desired public conferences with them? And was not both
the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and his Brother Ferdinando sorely checked by
diverse Bishops of Rome for granting these Conferences? and the Queen Mother of
France openly reproved and cried out against by Cardinal Turnon and other
Clergymen, for giving way to that of Poysy, as suffering the universal faith
of the Church to be called in question, which had been established by many
Laws, and for a far longer time than the Profession we oppose. It seems ye
defend your selves chiefly by Popish Weapons, as will anon further appear: in
order whereunto I shall speak a word or two to John Menzies, and so make an
end. The greatest and frequentest Argument that both thy Scholars and others
make against us, is, that we have no certain evidence by which we can make
known that we are led by the Spirit that Heretics and others cannot pretend
to. Now if this may be admitted as relevant or strong against us, I desire thou
would be pleased to show me how thou can extricate thy self out of the same
difficulty, when urged by the Jesuit Dempster, that the Scripture which thou
assigned as the ground of the Protestant Religion is an evidence for you,
seeing all Heretics also pretend to it? Let me see what difficulties occur in
our Case as to the Spirit, which likewise occurs not the same very way in
yours, as to the Scripture. For (besides that we have as good ground to lay
claim to the Scriptures as your selves, and are ready, and I hope able to prove
our Principles from them as well as your selves. If ye say men may be deceived
by a seducing Spirit, What then? will it therefore follow that the Spirit of
God will deceive any, or that men ought not to be guided by it, more than
because many men have been and are deceived by a misunderstanding and wrong use
of the Scripture, that therefore the Scripture does deceive people, or ought
not to be the Rule? If it be said diverse men pretending to the Spirit
contradict one another, does not the same recur as to the Scriptures? What
greater contradictions can there be than there is betwixt certain Churches both
acknowledging the Scriptures to be the Rule? Have thou forgotten ( John) how
thou and thy Elder Brother Andr. Cant, who both affirmed the Scripture to be
the only certain Rule, and yet oftentimes before the same Auditory in the same
Pulpit did from the very same ver. of Scripture, Ps 93.5. Holiness becomes thy
house O Lord, for ever, draw different and contradictory Doctrines, Uses and
Applications? If that then will not infer according to you the Scriptures to be
an uncertain Rule; neither will the other as to the Spirit. If it be said that
the same man pretending to be guided by the Spirit, has been of different
Judgments, does not the same also recur as to the Scriptures? Or need we go
further, John, than thy self to prove this, who has all along acknowledged the
Scripture to be the Rule, and yet sometime judged the Congregational way to be
preferable to the Presbyterian, and then the Presbyterian better then
Independent, and now the Episcopal preferable to both? Or tell me, John,
honestly, did the Scripture deceive thee when thou preached upon that Text, Why
mournest thou for Saul? If thou say thou only here misunderstood the place, and
misapplied it; yet is the Scripture for all that true and certain; may not the
same he said, if one pretending the Spirit to be the Rule, should fall in the
like error that the Spirit were not to be blamed, or thence termed uncertain*
but the man that mistook the voice thereof, or took his own imaginations
instead of it, as thou did thy misapprehensions for the sense of that
Scripture. If thou can extricate thy self out of these difficulties, so as to
satisfy me, or any other rational and indifferent person, I may seriously say
to thee according to the Proverb, Eris mihi magnus Apollo. And really thou
may not be without hopes of making a Proselyte. But if it appear to all
judicious and unprejudicate persons that John Menzies's Arguments against the
Quakers are no other than the Jesuits against him; and whatever way he can
defend himself against the Jesuits, so the Quakers can do against him, and
impugn and straiten him the same way, so that his Argument is like the Vipers
brood, that destroys him that brings it forth. I say, if this appear, what may
candid persons judge of John Menzies honesty that has asserted in Print, that
Quakerism is Popery under a disguise; and the Papists and Quakers are one.

The state of the Controversy in the first place then both upon our part and
yours is in Thesis and not in hypothesi, that is not whether or not we be truly
ruled by the Spirit, or can give an evidence of it, more than whether ye be
truly led by the Scriptures, or can give any evidence that ye are; but whether
we do well in saying the Spirit is the principal Rule of Faith; for though
diverse Sects now, to wit, Lutherans, Calvinists, Episcopalians, Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Arminians, etc. do all quarrel one
another, each laying claim to be led by the Scripture, and denying it of the
other; yet do they all agree in this, that the Scripture is the only Rule, will
it therefore follow that the Scripture is not the Rule or certain, because none
of these can give a certain evidence convincing their respective opposers, that
they are led by it? So on the other hand, though such as affirm the Spirit to
be the principal Rule, cannot give any evidence to convince their Opposers,
that they are led by it; it will not follow that it is not the Rule, or that
they err in affirming it so to be.

A Postscript.
AS the Apostle Paul said concerning the Spirit of God, that there are
diversity of operations, but one Spirit, and one body of Christ, which is his
Church* so I may say concerning Antichrist, and his spirit and body. The body
of Antichrist is but one, having many members* and the spirit of Antichrist is
but one in the root, though in different operations, and appearances. And what
is this body of Antichrist, but all these (whether Papists or others, though
pretending to Reformation, under whatsoever designation, as Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, or any else) who oppose the Spirit of
Christ in his spiritual appearances and operations in the body of Christ, which
is his Church. A manifest instance of the truth of this, I my self of late have
been an ear and eye witness of. For not many months ago I had occasion at
London, both to see with my eyes, and hear with my ears, how the people called
Anabaptists, some of their chief Teachers, opposed, denied, slighted, and (by
all means their earthly and devilish wisdom could invent) labored to make of
none effect the inward evidence of the Spirit of God in his people, alleging
openly in the faces of thousands, That whoever ^ould not give an evidence to
their Adversaries, that they were inspired with the Spirit of God such as no
heretics could pretend to, were no Christians but deceivers. So these
Anabaptists lately argued against us at London in an open Assembly. And so now
since in my own native Country within these few days, I have seen the same
Spirit to appear in men professedly very much differing from Anabaptists, and
slighting them as a sort of Heretics, yet one with them in the ground; and in
this particular work and service also, to carry on the great design of
Antichrist. These are some Masters of Arts, Students of Divinity, as they call
themselves, in the University of Aberdene, who openly in the hearing of diverse
hundreds of people, some whereof were sober and judicious, did oppose the
inward evidence of the Spirit of God in his people, as not being a sufficient
evidence unto them, unless they could give an evidence of it unto others, even
their very Adversaries, that they were inspired; and so if we the people called
Quakers could not give an evidence of this unto these our opposers, we were but
deceivers. After it had been shown them, that Papists and Jesuits used the same
Argument against all the Protestants, that indeed did more militat against
them, out of the Papists Quiver, than out of these our Adversaries Quiver
against us. I produced the Testimony of the Scripture, as the best and most
convincing outward evidence that could be given, as a witness to the Doctrine
and Principle of Immediate Revelation and Inspiration of the Spirit of God,
owned by us, as being in all men in some measure, and consequently in us. This
is, I say, not the the best and most principal evidence, nor the greatest, that
we have unto our selves, or unto one another, who are gathered into the same
Faith, Spirit, and Power, for that is the immediate evidence of the Spirit in
our hearts, which witnesses both to our selves and to one another, that we are
the Children of God* but it is (I mean the Scripture) the greatest outward and
visible evidence, that can be given unto our Adversaries, who in words own the
Scriptures, as their only Rule, and chiefest evidences. And in doing so, I
followed the example of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who while he
reasoned against the Jews, who professed to own the Scriptures, but denied him;
he brought a testimony for himself out of the Scriptures, which they in words
owned as their Rule; Search (said he) or ye search the Scriptures, for in them
ye think ye have eternal life, and these are they, which testify of me. Now
thoug^ Christ his own immediate Testimony should have been received as greater
than any of his Servants, such as Moses, and the Prophets were, yet he used
this, as an Argument against them, as bringing them to their own Rule; and said
he, had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for Moses wrote of me.
And he laid again, I have a greater testomony than that of John: and yet John
was the greatest of all the Prophets. So in like manner we say, We have a
greater testimony to Christ Jesus by his Spirit, and Power revealed in us, than
the testimony of Moses and the Prophets, even than John, who was the greatest.
But when we produce the Testimony of Moses and the Prophets and Apostles as an
evidence to the truth of what we affirm, I say it should be received by our
Adversaries who own the Scriptures as their chief and only Rule. For either
they should receive it, or not receive it; if they should receive it then they
are faulty, who in the late Dispute at Aberdene did refuse to receive the
evidence of the Scriptures, as from us, only because we say we have a greater,
to wit, that of the Spirit within us, although we own the Scripture as the
greatest visible and outward evidence that we can give to our Adversaries. If
they should not receive the Scripture evidence and testimony as from us,
because we say we have a greater, to wit, that of Christ himself immediately in
us by his Spirit, then they must needs also say, for the same reason, that the
Jews ought not to receive the testimony of the Scriptures as an evidence for
Christ, because he said he had a greater; and certainly he had a greater,
though they would not receive it, nor could not, as they stood in their
prejudice and malice, werewith they were filled against him, who did not
receive him.

Now this I say with freedom and boldness of Spirit to all those whether
Papists, Anabaptists, Prelatical or Presbyterian Professors, who with one mouth
require of us an evidence that we are inspired, or have a measure of the
Inspiration of the Spirit of God and Christ in us; I offer unto all of you the
Scriptures for an evidence of this truth, viz. that the Quakers so called have
a measure of the Inspiration of the Spirit of God and Christ in them; for
according to the Scriptures testimony, Christ the true Light enlighteneth every
man that comes into the world; and his illumination is his inspiration; I
profess sincerely in Gods fear, that the Scriptures Testimony is to me as full
and plain, and convincing to prove this Truth, viz. that an Illumination,
Manifestation, and Inspiration of the Spirit of God is given to every man, is
in every man; as to prove this truth, that Christ, who according to the flesh,
was born of the Virgin Mary, was the promised Messiah; now if we can prove from
Scripture that all men have in them a measure of this Divine Illumination and
Inspiration by the Spirit of Christ, we have gained our point, which is, that
we have also a measure of the same in us; for ALL MEN does comprehend us called
Quakers, as well as other men: I see not what our Adversaries can with any
color object against this evidence from Scripture, but this, that they will
deny that the Scripture bears testimony to this Universal Illumination or
Inspiration of the Spirit of God in men. But this brings the matter of the
debate from being personal to be doctrinal, and so puts us upon equal terms at
least, with all our Adversaries, especially Prelatical, Anabaptistist, and
Presbyterian, and Independent opposers whatsoever, who say, the Scriptures are
their chief and only Rule. And though our Adversaries say, the Scripture does
not testify to that universal Inspiration of the Spirit of Christ in men, that
moves us not more then when the Jews denied that the Scriptures bore testimony
to him, that was born of the Virgin Mary to be the Christ. We are able by the
help of God to prove from Scripture the truth of this Doctrine of Divine
Illumination and Inspiration in all men, and consequently in the Quakers as
much as they, or any professing Christianity upon earth, can prove any
Principle or Doctrine of their Faith. Secondly, we are able, and do offer by
the Grace of God against all our Opposers whatsoever, to prove from the
Scriptures Testimony, that this universal Inspiration and Illumination of
Christ by his Spirit in men is a sufficient evidence of Truth, and Rule of
Faith and Life in all men, and consequently in us called Quakers. Thirdly, that
this Divine Inspiration and Illumination, where it is not wilfully resisted and
rejected, but regarded and attended, is a greater evidence than the Scripture
is, and witnessed by the Scriptures. Fourthly, and yet the Scripture is the
greatest visible and outward evidence that either we or they can give of their
Rule.

I shall conclude with a reasonable demand to these Young men, Masters of Arts,
their Masters and Teachers, which is this, Whether they own these Assertions,
Affirmations and Arguments of their Scholars in the late Dispute, as follows,
viz. That whatever is of God is God, that the Scriptures according to the
Quakers is fallacious, and can beguil us, that the Baptism with the Holy Ghost
is ceased, and the rest of their Discourse inserted in this foregoing Treatise.
If yea, Let them declare so much to the people, who are greatly stumbled at
these their expressions, even diverse of their own Church; if nay, then let them
publicly reprove and disown those words, otherwise not only we, but many
others will say, ye have both taught and allowed them so to affirm.

G. K.


