A True Account of the Dying Behavior of Ambrose Rookwood, Charles Cranburne,
and Major Lowick, who were Executed at Tyburn for High Treason, on Wednesday,
April 29.
With Mr. Cranburn's Speech at the place of Execution.
ABout 11 this Morning, the three Prisoners were put together in a Sledge, and
being come to the place of Execution, went out of the Sledge into the Cart;
Major Lowick first, who turning round to all the Spectators, who were numerous,
desired them all to pray for him. Then he and Mr. Rookwood kneeled down
together on one side of the Cart, and Cranburne on the other, and prayed about
a quarter of an hour, or more; Cranburne had first done, and the Executioner
coming to fix the Halter, in opening his Bosom, took out a Paper, which the
Executioner delivered to the Sheriff; but Cranburn coming forward, desired it
again, and having received it, he spoke to this effect, sometimes reading.

I am come here to Dye, and shall shortly appear before the Dreadful Tribunal
of God the Searcher of all Hearts. I confess my self a great Sinner, and that I
have misspent my Youth, but hope for Mercy in and through the Blood of my
Savior Jesus Christ.

Gentlemen, I advise you all to take warning by me, and do not mispend your
time, but learn to be truly Religious, for he that is truly Religious, will be
Loyal to his lawful King, etc. or words to that effect. Then he said, that for
his Loyalty to his Lawful King he came there to Die, and acknowledged the late
King James to be his Rightful King, and hoped he would be restored to his
Throne in Gods due time. As to the Assassination, said he, of the Prince of
Orange, I confess I came to the Knowledge thereof from Mr. Chernock between 10
and 11 a Clock on the 22th of February; here the Sherriff spoke to him, and
some Discourse passed, which was not so loud as before; Then he went on again,
and said as before, that he came to the Knowledge thereof between 10 and 11 the
22th. of February, and that between 11 and 12 the whole Design was over, or
words to that effect, and this he repeated several times, as if he would have
created a Belief thereof in the Auditory: As for his Religion, he said he was
Baptized and Educated, and now Dyed an unworthy Member of the Church of
England, that what he had Learned from that Church, was truly to serve God, and
to be Loyal to his King: Mr. Sheriff asked whether that Religion had taught him
to Murder Kings, or to that effect; which he did not positively answer, but
seemed to evade. And soon after Kneeling down he prayed for King James, Queen
Mary his Consort, Katharine the Queen Dowager, his Royal Highness the Prince of
Wales ( to give you his own words) and then re-delivered his Paper to Mr.
Sheriff. He seemed very composed and little concerned, Prayed several times,
and kept his Countenance to the last; he wished their Blood might be the last
that should be shed, and that the Nation might never come under a Foreign
Power. He said an Aspersion had been cast upon him, as if he had behaved
himself Irreverently on some occasion, which he disowned, and appealed to some
persons, whom he said very well knew the contrary.

The two others were all this time on their Knees, and then rising up Major
Lowick, who appeared very composed and penitent, addressed him to the Sheriffs,
and delivered them a Paper. He protested he dyed in Charity with all the World,
and begged, that all who should happen to suffer any thing on his account,
would forgive him; he said, he had lived, and now dyed a Roman Catholic; he
had a little Book in his hand, out of which he prayed, and often kiss't a
Crucifix in it, and gave it to Mr. Rookwood, who did the like: He gave the Book
away to one of the Spectators, and sometime after called for it again; and he
and Rookwood having kiss't the Crucifix, he restored it again.

Mr. Rookwood seemed the most dejected, scarce said any thing, but prayed
heartily, he delivered a Paper to the Sheriff and wept much. Major Lowick also
Wept. After they were Tied up and had prayed some time, the Executioner asked
them for a Sign, Mr Cranburn desired Major Lowick to give a Sign, which he
declining, Mr. Cranburn said we will give no Sign, Draw away when you please.
They all gave Money to the Executioner.

London, Printed for R. Green. 1696.


