A TRUE AND EXACT RELATION OF The Araignment, Trial, and Condemnation OF Tho.
Tongue, George Philips, James Hind, Francis Stubbs, John Sallows, Nathaniel
Gibbs.
FOR High Treason: AT THE SESSIONS-HOVSE IN THE OLD BAILEY ON Thursday the 11
th. of December 1662.

Being a full discovery of the whole Plot.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1662.

The proceedings at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey on Thursday the 11th.
of December 1662.
THe Court being set, Proclamation was made, the Grand Jury sworn, and several
witnesses also: After which the prisoners were commanded to be set at the Bar;
viz. Tho. Tongue, George Philips Francis Stubbs, James Hind, John Sallows, and
Nathaniel Gibbs, being directed, severally held up their hands, and afterward
the Clerk of the Peace read their Charge, the Tenor whereof follows, That they
the said Tho. Tongue, Philips, Hind, Stubbs, Sallows and Gibbs, together with
several others as false Traitors to his Majesty, not having the fear of God
before their eyes: 31. Aug. in the 14 year of his Majesty's Reign did
traitorously imagine and intend the killing and death of the King, and to alter
the Government; and to that purpose did agree to go to Whitehall, there to
seize the King, against the peace of his Majesty, etc. To which they all
(except James Hind, who pleaded guilty, and begged mercy) severally pleaded
Not-guilty, and for their Trial, put themselves upon God and their Country.

They being again called by their names, were told, that the persons to be
called, were to try them for their lives, if they would challenge any one they
must do it before they be sworn. These are the names of the Jury that were
allowed by the prisoners. Edmund Butlen, Clement Punge, George Dixon, Pain
junior, Bagrall junior, Gurney, Will. Galer, Silverton, Will. Dudley, Drake
junior, Peak, Rob. Morris, being twelve.

Then the prisoners (except Hind) were again commanded to hold up their hands,
which they did, and the Jury were charged with them; their Indictment again
read.

Sir Edw. Turner. May it please your Lordships and Gentlemen of the Jury, there
are five prisoners at the Bar stand indicted, and here he opened the
Indictment: and afterward Sergeant Maynard enforced it at large, and
afterward Sir Jeffery Palmer pressed it.


Several witnesses were sworn, and first one Parson Hill spoke to the effect
following.

That one Baker meeting him, invited him to drink, and asked him what news, who
answered he had little; then Baker told him if he would stay he would tell him
some, and told him that the King being lately abroad a hunting, he could have
been one of the twenty that would have killed him; there is something on foot
in the City, but I will bring some persons to you to inform you fully: and
afterward he and I and some of his acquaintance went into Leadenhall-street,
there was one Hind, there they told us what their intention was, that all the
Phanatiques were agreed to get their deliverance from those at Whitehall; we
met again Hind and Baker, and then they discoursed about securing Windsor
Castle; that Tongue was said to be an active person, I was brought to his
house, and there was Ward and Stubbs and others. Tongue told us of securing
Windsor Castle and the Tower, I and some others met Gibbs at Bridewell, we
looked for this Gibs's brother who came to us afterward, and then this Gibbs
at the Bar told us that the Council was broke up already: the time to be
Alhallontide for the rising, Ludlow to be General. Mr. Rigs and I met Mr.
Philips at the Exchange that Sunday the Trained Bands dispersed the private
meeting in Thamestreet, and Philips wished the enemy were up, and that a few
would do their work, The next day we saw him, and he promised his help at the
Insurrection. I was to have thirty Arms, and Sallows, when I came for them,
told Mr. Riggs, that went with me to him, that they were all delivered, but
suddenly there would be more.

Sir Hen. Finch. Did Tongue tell you of one Strange that was gone into the
Country.


Yes he did, and said at his return he should know more of the business.

The Counsel. What did he speak about the Tower of London and Windsor.


He talked of some service he had done at Windsor, that a Gunner there was his
friend, and he had a great number of friends there. Tongue said he was an
instrument in laying the plot for taking of Windsor-Castle.

Council. Did you tell him what time the Insurrection would be.


No, only he expected to hear it from Strange

Council. Did you not hear something of the Popish Massacre.


Yes, I received this letter from one of them, which was read, and to this
purpose; That a Correspondent with the Papists, informed one that they intended
to kill all the Protestants at Alhallontide: and therefore the Kingdom was
desired to take notice of it, and to prepare, and called God to witness, it was
not a trepan, but a truth; and that some thousands of these Letters were to be
scattered about the streets.

Council. What do you know about taking Whitehall?


At a meeting with Brown and some others, Hind was there, and then we talked
of it; but at Stubs house we discoursed fully about it and agreed, that a party
should come down Charing-crosse, and another by the Cockpit, and kill the Duke
of Albemarle, and slay Sir Richard Brown; and Tongue said, they must look to
the Trained-bands, or they did nothing: And they talked of getting into the
Privy Garden to get into White Hall; and at Black-Friars, Stubs and Gibs at the
Bar, they would be sure to make an end of Kings and Bishops, and so have a free
Commonwealth, and be troubled no more.

Council. was any other way spoke of?


No Sir.

Council. Did they say how great number was provided?


It was said by Mr. Stubbs, that many in Smithfield would be ready; And
Sallowes said, the Arms was delivered in Crooked-Friars, and the^ ^ore would
be there some few days after: Tongue (...) Phillips would be sure to get the
Word, and betra^ (...) Trained-bands of the City of London.

Council. What did they say they would do to the King?


They said, he should have no quarter but such as Ludlow should have; Gibbs,
and Tongue, and Stubbs said this.

Council. What said they of their Council?


They spoke of them, and named some of them, Danvers, Nigh, and Cole a
Southamptonshire Gentleman: They said, they had many friends several miles
about, and said one Mr. Strange had provided a great number of Horse: They said
they had four hundred friends in the County of Dorset ready to help them: They
said at a Meeting at Black-friars, several Pistols were sent down.

Council. Was not Mr. Tongue nor Mr. Phillips there?


No Sir.

Council. What know you of other Counties, as of Kent and Derby?


Tongue told us, one Colonel Kendrick was faithful, and promised some Arms.

Sallowes replied, For my part, Gentlemen, I do abhor this that is laid to my
charge; I am sure he did not hear me say Arms was delivered, I am sure, I do
appeal to your Lordships in that; but it is true, I might say to Mr. Riggs,
that one Watshot told me some were delivered, but I prayed him not to meddle
with such things, knowing it dangerous; but afterward he told me there was
none so, it was a Lie he told me.

Parson Hill. Indeed, my Lord, when I went with Mr. Riggs to the Exchange, this
Mr. Sallowes told Mr. Riggs, they were all delivered, but there would be more.


Sallowes. I declare he never saw me until I was apprehended and brought before
Sir Richard Brown.


Court. Has any of the Prisoners any questions to ask?


Sallowes. Will he positively say he spoke with me upon the Exchange.


Mr. Hill. No I did not, but I heard you give that answer to Mr. Riggs when he
went to demand thirty Arms.


Sallowes. Did you hear me?


Hill. Yes Sir.


Sallowes. Who was there?


Hill. It was upon the Exchange, it was full.


Sallowes. What day?


Hill. I cannot remember the day.


Sallowes. I declare to you all, I did not see him, till I was apprehended: But
that which I said to Mr. Riggs I heard Watshot say; this man never saw me, nor
exchanged a word with me; Nay I do not believe Mr. Riggs saw him there.


Hill. Mr. Adjutant knows when he went to take him, it was my self that showed
him this man, and surely I could not then know him if I had not seen him before.


Sallows. I do abhor to act against the King; I have born all Offices in the
Parish, my Neighbors can testify it, that I have quietly behaved my self.


Sir Robert Foster. Have you any more questions to ask him?


Stubbs. I do here deny what this man lays to my charge, it is very false, and
I believe none will prove it.


Gibbs. In the sight of the Lord, and in his own conscience, let Mr. Hill speak
no more of me then he knows, he cannot say I received or sent any Pistols into
the Country, I am sure I abhor it.


Stubbs. This Mr. Hill said he had four Horses, and two hundred pounds to buy
things for this business: I was no Plotter, but am very innocent; but being
once at Mr. Tongues house, I confess somewhat was said there by Mr, Riggs of
this business.


Sir Orlando Bridgeman. First, if you will, you may ask him what questions you
please, and afterward you may make your defense, God forbid you should be
hindered, but loose not your time now.


Gibbs. I desire he would answer my question, whether I said I received or
delivered Pistols to any for such an end.


Hill. I do not say he did, but in his company it was said, several Arms were
sent to Dorset-shire; I confess I said I had Arms and money for that end, but
I know some of this Court are acquainted with the grounds of it.


Gibbs. I did not in the least know of his coming and am sure did not send for
him, I was not privy to any such plot.


Sir O. Bridgeman. Truly you wrong your self Mr. Gibbs, you may spend this time
better, ask him some questions now, and say what you will for your self by and
by, you shall have all fair liberty, but go in a right way.


Council. Who said the King must have Ludlows quarter, and who was there?


Hill. It was spoken in Black-friars, Gibbs was in company.


Gibbs. Who was there besides your self?


Hill. And it please you, there was Mr. Riggs, and Mr. Gibbs, and some others.


Tongue. Pray who was in company also when I was in company with Mr. Gibbs?


Hill. I do not say you was in his company.


Tongue. Who was by when I talked of the three hundred men at Windsor?


Hill. Sir, it was at your own house, there was my self, one Mr. Ward, Mr.
Stubbs, Mr. Riggs, and Mr. Hind.


Sallowes. Mr. Hill, was I one of the Council of forty or the Council of six.


Mr. Solicitor. He did not charge you with any such thing.


Edward Riggs was sworn. Edw. Riggs. About three and twenty weeks since I came
acquainted with Mr. Tongue upon one Captains Bakers reporting him to be a man
of great intelligence: Being at Mr. Tongues house I heard him say, he was at
Windsor, with a Sargeant and Gunner, and they promised the Castle would be
ready upon notice. He told me he met a company, a pretty many, one Mr. Cole,
Captain Elton, Captain Leigh, and they often met, but they could not agree, and
one Mr. Strange also met them: Mr. Tongue told me some considerations were
drawn about the government, and gave them me, and some proposals about Seamen;
that they had great advantage in a Commonwealth; they were to declare against
the government of the Church and State: that no Seaman should pay Custom; that
care should be taken abroad and at home, that Seamen might not beg nor starve:
Mr. Tongue named some others, but I forget them; he told me also, that there
was a Council of six; he said he knew not their names, but judged Captain Elton
was one of them.


Mr. Solicitor. Was you at any meeting where the securing of the King was
discoursed, and altering the Government, and who was there?


Mr. Riggs. On the 24. of October. there was a discourse about securing
White Hall, and of the Tower, and there was Mr. Hill the Parson. Mr. Tongue,
Mr. Stubbs, Mr. Ward, and others.

At another time Mr. Tongue proposed, that when my Lord Mayor went into the
Tower late at night, a Party might follow the Coach and seize on the Guard, and
one Mr. Baker said, the King must be secured, and said, he would give no
quarter.


Mr. Solliciter. Were you present when it was discoursed about taking of the
Tower, or the King, or any thing of that nature? answer me in few words.


Mr. Riggs. October. 24. I say, Tongue did propose the taking of the Tower as
aforesaid; and Baker said, the King must be secured: Stubbs was present when it
was agreed how to assault White Hall through the Privy-garden

Mr. Phillips once said, there was three hundred Arms in the Artillery, and he
knew where they lay, and could tell them how to take them, and that the Word
was necessary, which he doubted not to get.


Mr. Solliciter. Was not you upon the Exchange with Sallowes once, what did he
say to you there?


Mr. Riggs. Mr. Hill telling me a few days before, that he had 200 l. to
bestow in this business, and that he wanted Arms; I told him one Mr. Sallowes
told me, there were some to be delivered, and so we both went to Mr. Sallows
one day upon the Royal Exchange, and then he told me there was some delivered
the night before, and forty went away lacking, but within two or three days
more would come in.


Mr. Sol. Did Hill see Mr. Swallows upon the Exchange?


Mr. Riggs. Yes, we stood close together.


Mr. Sol. What have you to say touching Nath. Gibbs at the Bar?


Mr. Riggs. I brought Mr. Hill acquainted with him, we went with one Stubbs to
Mr. Buseley at Fleet-bridge, and then we all went to this Mr. Gibbs, and this
Mr. Gibbs told us, that he knew no news, but his Brother did, and he would send
for him, but he was not at home; by and by he came to us, and he speaking to
this Mr. Gibbs and Stubbs went away again; but afterward this Gibbs said, if
you are honest this is the news, now the Council of six is broken up, and all
is ready, and Alhallontide is the time, Ludlow is our General, and Messengers
and Arms are sent into the Country.


Mr. Soliciter. Did you ever hear any thing of the Popish Massacre?


Mr. Riggs. There was a Lieutenant upon the Exchange told me of it, and gave me
a copy of a Letter to that purpose, and Mr. Hill had a copy of it, and was
lately read.


Mr. Soliciter. Did you ever hear of any rising by the Papists?


Mr. Attorney General. What said they about surprising the King?


Riggs. Phillips said, the King was to come to see his Mother at Greenwich; and
Tongue said, there might be an opportunity twice a week to surprise him.


Sir Orlando Bridgeman. Prisoners, ask them what you will.


Phillips. Mr. Riggs, you know you met me in Cheapside, and I went toward
Birchin-lane with you; you told me of a rising to surprise the King: Mr. Riggs
had me to Tongues, and there told me the reason why the time was not appointed,
for it was, because all parties were not agreed; And, Mr. Riggs, did not I
disclaim it, and said, I would not meddle with it.


Riggs. Some time after, he said, he would not meddle with it; but Captain
Baker said, that the King came through the City, and proffered to be one of the
fifty to surprise him; Mr. Hill, Mr. Bradley, and my self were together.


Mr. Solliciter. What about the getting into the Privy-garden?


Riggs. Mr. Baker told us, he knew the way to the backstairs through the
Garden, and Bradley said so too, Mr. Stubbs, Mr. Hill, and Mr. Tongue with
others were present.


Sir J. Maynard. These Witnesses have given evidence against them all; if the
Jury are unsatisfied they would do well to declare it. But there is Mr. Bradley
also to be sworn, let him speak.


One Mr. Bradley was sworn. Sir J. Maynard. This Mr. Bradley was not in the
design, only employed to give notice thereof, and find it out.


Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Riggs, did you hear from me that Ludlow was in Town, or that
the design went forward.


Riggs. When Mr. Hill, Mr. Stubbs and another were with you, you said you knew
nothing, but your Brother did, and said, when you had spoke to your Brother,
that Ludlow was in Town, that the Council was broke up, and this was the News.


Gibbs. I spoke not these words.


Mr. Solliciter. Mr. Bradley, were you present when they discoursed about
taking White Hall?


Bradley. I was at Mr. Tongues house, and there was many there; some said, a
Party must surprise the Duke of Albemarle, and his Guard, and that a Party
might go by Charing-crosse to surprise White Hall; but I am sure Mr. Tongue
said it was not safe to go that way, because two Guns stood in defense of that
way; but said, if they could get into the Privy-garden it were better.


Mr. Solicitor. What said they at other meetings.


Bradley. Mr. Rigs and Mr. Hill told me, that Mr. Gibbs said the design was
ready, that the Council of six was up, and notice sent into the country, and
that Ludlow was to be Commander in chief.


One Mr. Tyler was afterward sworn. Who said, that he had often met Mr. Tongue
and others at several times at Mr. Luns at Widow Jourdans in Dukes-place, and
they discoursed of securing White Hall, the King, Duke and Nobles, and one of
them said he had a friend in Court would give them notice of a fit opportunity:
Mr, Tongue said, he would secure the Tower, and that by a Gunner at Windsor the
Castle would be delivered him, that the Soldiers were his friends. Mr.
Phillips I met once at Captain Fosters with one Mr. Chapman, and there he
talked much of Ships, I understood him not. Mr. Chapman told me this Phillips
lived in Abchurch-lane: And one in Southwark told me, that Phillips said Mr.
Foster was engaged, but afterward, I telling Mr. Foster of it, he was much
troubled, and declared he abhorred any such act, and seemed so much troubled,
that truly he went presently to Mr. Phillips, and told him he was a base fellow
to report such a lie of him, and then Mr. Phillips said, he neither knew of it,
or said any thing like it.

Mr. Solliciter. What said Mr. Tongue about the Counsel of six.


Mr. Tylar. He was to meet once at the Shears, not coming he sent a note and
mentioned nine of the late Parliaments names now in the Tower to set as members
of their Parliament and said they would do good service.


Mr. Maynard. What said they of a Correspondency in the Country.


Mr. Tyler. Please you my Lord, Mr. Tongue said the Lord Lockhart Governor of
Dunkirke had thirty or forty servants and he and they would join, and that Mr.
Rossiter was to head one thousand five hundred at Sturbridge, and spoke of one
Captain Lee a stout man of his acquaintace.


Mr. Solliciter. Say what you know.


Mr. Tyler. One Mr. Cole, Gibbs a Hatmaker, Mr. Elton, Mr Tongue and Mr. Pryor
was speaking that all interests were united; and these are the names of the
Council: Mr. Thomas in Shoo-lane, Mr. Elton, Mr. Raddon, Captain Spurway, Dr
Ward and Mr. Jones a Minister.


Mr. Maynard. What discourse was there concerning Leicester.


Tyler, Mr. Hill said he dwelt there and came from some there, that there would
be a rising, and one of Lamberts Soldiers was to carry notice down into the
Country; Mr. Tongue said that the old Parliament that had been faithful should
be chosen again, that none should elect or be elect, but such as had been
faithful, that the house should be filled within a month, That there should be
liberty of Conscience, That it was Treason to disturb them, that all should be
united Anabaptist, Leveller, Quaker and all, Mr. Gibbs told us he had a
Correspondence in the Country. That in Essex was many Horse, and others said
there was a great many at Bristol.

And others there said Colonel Templar had two or there thousand men ready, and
that one Thornely told me the Country did fear a Massacre by the Papists.


Sir John Maynard. My Lord, pray direct that Phillips Confession be showed him;
and being showed him he owned his hand, it was taken before Sir. Rich. Brown
and was read, who said he knows one Parson Riggs a Brewers Clarke near St.
Katherines who told this Examinant there was to be a rising for preservation of
Religion, and to seize the Kings person, the Frigate would revolt from the King,
and said he was going to surprise Deal Castle, that Mr. Riggs told him all the
Congregational Churches were agreed, that Riggs told him there was a
Declaration against Common Prayer, And this Examinant says, that Mr. Bradley,
Mr. Tongue, and Mr. Baker know of all this design, and that Riggs said there
would be great help with Money, and the Treasury at Guild Hall would be
secured, and that they would surprise the Tower.

Sir. Will. Morris said, that he had Intelligence that that there was to be a
rising, and that the disaffected party in the Country reported the Papists
would massacre the Protestants.

Sir. John Talpott said, that upon this fear of the Massacre there was a strict
watch the Papists disarmed, and many Gentlemen of quality very much censured.

And another said, that in Dorsetshire a discovery was made of a design to
rise, that several were taken into custody.

Major Boufoy said, that Mr. Philips used often to come on the Exchange, and
endeavor to get the word of his officers.


Mr. Philips, I went there sometimes, but none will say I desired the word; it
is true, I went to drink with some of the Soldiers, and that was all; and as
for Capt. Foster, I know nothing in the least of him, only I was once at his
house, and there we were talking of ships, but he walked and minded us not; Mr.
Riggs knows I said I would not meddle with this business.


Mr. Stubbs. As to the Council of 6. or 40. that Mr. Tyler spoke of, I know
nothing of it at all.


Mr. Gibbs. My Lord, I told no man of any Arms delivered, or of any rising, I
was ignorant of this; I speak in the presence of God, to whom I must give
account; but they being guilty themselves, shroud themselves this way; none can
prove I delivered any: When the insurrection of the Fifth-Monarchy men was, I
ventured my life for his Majesty, and always lived peaceably; my neighbors
will justify it; and here is a Certificate under their hands.


Mr. Tongue. I have nothing to say, only that Mr. Tyler was the first man that
brought me into this business.


Mr. Sallows. I am charged that I should say, Arms were delivered, and more
would be; Mr. Watshet told me such a thing, but I delivered none; I can have
testimony of my civil conversation; I am only charged with a report.


Serj. Maynard. One speaks to the number delivered, and the other speaks to the
thing; what more clear?


Sir Robert Foster. What made you, Mr. Riggs, go to Mr. Sallows about Arms?


Mr. Riggs. Mr. Sallows told me there were some delivered, and would be more,
and Mr. Hill wanting some, we went to him.


Court. What made you enquire about Arms?


Sallows. I did not enquire, but I was told it by Mr. Watlot in Mark-Lane, and
that I told to Mr. Riggs.


Mr. Tongue. They are not competent witnesses, being guilty of the same.


Sir Robert Foster. Mr. Bradley and Mr. Hill did nothing unjustifiable; they
are good witnesses, and the other in this case is also good; you mistake to say
they are not good witnesses, for in works of darkness none are better than such
as are concerned; but besides this, there were diverse other circumstances; and
these are good by the Statutes of the first of Edward the sixth, and the fifth
of Edward the sixth.

You are a chief Leader in it; and if a man be but present when Treason is
spoke, and he approves of it, and does conceal it, he is guilty of the same
Treason.

Mr. Gibbs produced a Certificate under some of his neighbors hands, to
testify his good conversation, but it was not accepted.


Mr. Solicitor. May it please your Lordship, and you of the Jury: The five
Prisoners at the Bar; there is a clear proof against them, there are four
Witnesses against Mr. Tongue, and they say he knew of the design, and contrived
it, and said he could secure Windsor, and would endeavor White Hall, and other
evidences to like purpose: He consulted about it in his house, and expected the
word from Philips. What better proof than this? And then Philips he promised to
betray the Artillery Arms, and to get the Word, and sent notice to the meetings
to be gone. And Stubbs was present at the discourse of surprising the Tower and
the King, and asked Mr. Hill whether he had Arms; it seems he enquired about it
what strength there was; and when he was present it was said the King should
have Ludlows Quarter, but they deny all. And Gibbs tells you, That God is a
righteous Judge, and these Witnesses are false. You heard the Relation about
the Letter concerning the Papists, where they call God to witness it was true;
and they will not scruple to tell as bad a lie at the Bar. Gibbs says; He can
give good testimony of his conversation. He said he knew nothing. But this is
the news after he had spoken with his Brother, the Council was up, Ludlow was
to be the General, and all was ready, Sallows he says, the Witnesses do not
agree, because but one speaks to the number, though they both agree in the
matter. Riggs came to a very fit person to know about Arms, when he went to Mr.
Sallows, because Sallows told him before there were some delivered. You see
there are four Witnesses against Tongue, and two a piece against the rest: We
have cause to thank God it wens no further; it is plain that this evil spirit
went through the Nation: You are to enquire about blood, and the blood of
Princes, and of Religion. Put all together, and you have enough for a Verdict
against them.


Sir Robert Foster. You of the Jury, you understand the nature of this
business, and the mischievous consequences; the Witnesses are unquestionable
They all agreed to kill his Majesty, and to alter the Government: These are
boughs that must be cut off, for they are fit instruments to set up a Jack
Straw, and a Wat Tyler. One of their own company has confessed the fact; but
go together, and consider of it.

Then the Jury went together; and when they had spent some time in the debate,
they brought their verdict, and the several Prisoners standing at the Bar, were
commanded to hold up their hands; and the Jury being demanded, they said, They
were all guilty of the High Treason that they stood indicted for.

Then Tongue being asked what he could say why Judgment should not pass, only
said he desired the mercy of the King.

And Philips being asked the same, prayed the mercy of the King.

And Stubbs begged mercy, and said he was drawn in.

And Sallows also begged mercy.

And Gibbs begged that God would put it into the heart of the King to show him
mercy.

And Hind said he had declared all already, and humbly begged mercy of the King.


Sir Robert Foster. Tongue, Philips, Hind, Stubbs, Sallows, and Gibbs, you
have been indicted for a very great crime, The sin of High Treason, that is not
to be equalled in the World: You have been arraigned, and your Country has
brought you in guilty. I find but little sense of sin in five of you. This came
not from you your selves, and you would do good service to discover the rest.
You desire mercy, but what mercy would you have had, that would have killed so
many souls? Be sorry for your sins; you know the good counsel, Fear God and
honor the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change; but if you
will commit sin, you must expect punishment. There is nothing but the Judgment
of the Court, and that is this:

That you all six be carried back to the place whence you came, and from thence
shall be drawn in a Hurdle to the place of Execution, and there you shall be
hanged up by the neck, and your Members shall be cut off, and your Entrails to
be thrown into the fire while you are living, and your Head to be cut off, and
your body to be divided into four quarters, and your Head and Body to be
disposed off by the King: And the Lord have mercy upon your Souls.


FINIS.

