A true ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE SESSIONS For London and Middlesex,
Begun in the OLD-BAILEY on Wednesday the Twenty sixth of May. 1680. Giving the
substance of the Trials of several Malefactors; the Number and Crimes of those
Condemned, Burnt in the Hand, etc. With an Account of the Proceedings Against
Captain TOM.
THE Court being sat, the London-Jury first came on, and two persons were
severally brought to Trial, one for a common Felony, of which there was
sufficient proof, the other for stealing a Gold-watch, of which in the opinion
of the Court, and all the Jury but one man, there was very convincing Evidence,
it being proved that it was stolen from the owner, and that it was found upon
the Prisoner; a person of very ill fame, and who could give no account how he
came by it. The Jury retiring to consider of these two matters, and staying
longer than usual, the Court sent to know whether they were not agreed; who
thereupon coming into Court, the Foreman declared, That they were all agreed
except one, who would by no means yield to find the Prisoner for the Watch
guilty: then the Court demanded what should induce him to scruple it, after
such plain Evidence, and the thing taken upon him: to which the Juryman
answered, That he was not satisfied in his Conscience; for the Watch might be
found with the man, and yet he not steal it. The Court expressed a great deal
of tenderness, how fit it was the Conscience of every Juryman should be
satisfied, but told him, they conceived in this Case there was no ground for
scruple: But two of his fellow-Jurors informed the Court, that when in the
morning this Gentleman had very much insisted to be excused from serving on the
Jury, and found that the Court would not allow him that favor, but looked on
him as a fit man to serve, he thereupon in seeming discontent did say in the
Court so loud, that they heard him: -- If I must be on, I Will be cross, or
plague them, or some words to that effect: which he absolutely denied; but the
other two being particularly sworn touching that matter, and testifying the
words upon Oath, the Court resented the same as a high misdemeanour, and laid a
Fine of fifty pounds upon him: For though Jurymen, it is said, are not by Law
to be punished by Fines, for giving Verdicts according to their Consciences, yet
it seems both just and necessary that such misdemeanors of resolved
stubbornness be restrained. Then the Court having given the said Juror good
Advice, the Jury was returned back again to consider further of it; but he
still continued in the same sentiments, and so occasioned them all to be kept
without Eating or Drinking from morning till six or seven a clock in the
afternoon: in which interval the Middlesex-Jury proceeding upon business, there
were several Indictments for other Felonies committed in Middlesex, brought
against the same person, who was so charged with the Watch in London, and upon
two of them he was found guilty. so that there being enough against him, the
Court in respect to the London-Jury, (who could not by any means prevail with
their Brother to join with them) discharged them of the said Prisoner, and took
their Verdict only against the other; but withal ordered, That the said
Jury-man should find sureties to appear in the King's Bench the first day of the
next Term.

Another remarkable Trial was about the Murder of a Constable at the
Armitage-stairs, for which a poor Waterman stood Indicted; there were abundance
of Witnesses examined, and the Trial was very tedious. But the sum of the
matter was to this effect: Some Scotchmen, half a dozen or more in all,
belonging to a Ship that lay in the River, having been on shore, and it is
probable taking plentiful Cups, as Sailors use, about nine of the Clock at
night were returning to their Vessel; and in order to get to their own Boat,
some of them stepped through a Boat of the Prisoners, in which there was a Boy,
whom a Scotch-boy of this company either trod upon or affronted, which made him
strike him, and the Scotchmen as fast fell on the English-boy, who ran and
called his Master the Prisoner, and so the Fray increased: to quell which, the
now Prisoner called the Constable living just by, and who was his intimate
Friend; for at his house he used commonly to leave several Tackling belonging
to his Boat, and other offices of Kindness frequently passed between them. But
so it happened in the Scuffle, it being pretty dark, the Constable's Brains were
beat out, supposed to be done with one of their Poles, or Hooks, which they use
with their Boats. The Scotchmen shifted for themselves and got away, and a
person that was there alleged, that the now Prisoner struck the fatal Blow;
but besides that there was no former Malice, so 'twas a most unlikely thing,
that he should go to hurt one that was his Friend, and came thither at his
request to assist him. So that upon the whole matter, it was believed such
witness might possibly be mistaken, in so great an Hurry and Confusion; so that
the Waterman, who had the repute of an honest, civil, quiet man amongst his
Neighbors, was Acquitted.

A Person was Convicted for a Robbery in Middlesex, committed in a
Victualling-house that stood alone, remote from Neighbors, whither the
Prisoner, for some time before the Exploit was committed, used for some days
frequently to resort, and seemed a very civil Guest: but having laid the
Design, he and two or three more of his Companions came one Evening, about 9 or
10 of the Clock, before the Doors were shut, there being no body there but the
Woman of the house and her Maid; where presently swearing in a furious manner,
they begun to demand her Keys, and this Fellow held the Woman below, whilst the
rest went up stairs and ransackt her Trunks, etc. taking away in Money and
Goods to the value of near Twenty Pounds; and then binding the Woman and her
Servant, went away with the Booty. The Woman, whilst the rest were making
havoc above, seeing her self like to be quite undone, wept bitterly, and said
to the now Prisoner who held her below, Alas, Sir, I did not imagine that you
would have dealt thus by me! To which all the Answer the hard-hearted Villain
returned, was with a scornful Smile, No indeed Landlady, I believe you did not.
He had then a Perriwig on, and other Clothes, but the Woman knew him by his
Voice; and the Maid swore directy that he was the man: And so he was found
Guilty.

An old fellow, one of those that broke out of the Goal, and upon their
retaking at St. Albons being brought up, were publicly exposed with Collars
about their Necks, to the view of the people without Newgate, having now
several Indictments against him; when he was required to plead to the first,
said, He was Guilty of that and whatsoever else should be hrought against him;
and being thereupon asked, Why he would plead so unadvisedly, and whether he
had a mind to cast away his Life, answered, That he were as good cast it away
himself, for he was sure he should be Hanged. And indeed he had no reason to
promise himself a better Destiny, for he had been a notorious Housebreaker, and
the occasion of many other men's ruin, by his bad Example, and pernicious
Counsel and Enticement.

A kind of Distracted Woman was Arraigned for stealing a great sum of Money;
but she seemed to take no notice of, nor understand any thing that was said
against her; and the Officers of the Jail affirmed, that ever since her
Commitment, she appeared to them as a person Lunatic, or not compos mentis;
and therefore in respect of her condition she was set aside.

A young man was found guilty of a Felony and Burghlary in London, breaking
into an House that he was well acquainted at in the night, and stealing thence
a Gold Watch and other things, to the value of one hundred pounds and upwards.

A Bailey belonging to the Marshals-Court, going to Arrest a poor man for a
Debt of seven shillings, and according to the usual Cruelty and barbarousness
of those savage Cattle, beating and dragging him along; a Child of the man's,
seeing her Father so used, cried out: whereupon this brutish fellow turned
about and struck the poor Child a blow on the head with a great Cudgel, so
furiously, that a Gentleman that saw it, testified it was enough to have knocked
down the stoutest man. However, the Child was for the present recovered to
life, and by the help of a Surgeon, the Wound in some time seemed to be healed,
but still she complained of her Head, and seemed to languish ever after, and
not long after dyed; so that it was concluded he was the occasion of her death,
and accordingly the Jury found him guilty.

An Ale-house-keeper was likewise Indicted for killing a poor weak man, whom
'twas said he kicked; but the proof not being positive, and the party deceased
having long been known to be very infirm, he was acquitted.

Two Shop-lifts were Convicted of Felony for stealing of three pieces of Damask
Silk out of a shop in London, where they came pretending to buy Diap^r, and
whilst the man went to reach it, they got the silk; but he soon missed it, and
pursuing them, they according to the usual tricks of Practitioners in that
Mystery were seen to drop it.

A Gentleman belonging to a Person of Honor, took a Trial for killing another;
it appeared to be a sudden Fray, and so was found Manslaughter, for which he
took his Clergy; and for the other Infliction of Law, produced a Warrant for a
Pardon.

Two Women of the unlucky Gang, commonly called Gypsies, were Tried for Robbing
of a Countrey-Maid of a Silver Bodkin and some other small things; but there
being many of them when they came to the House where she lived in the Country,
she was not able to swear these were the persons that did it: and so they were
Acquitted.

Before the London-Jury was Discharged, some of them interceding for their
Fellow beforementioned, his Fine was remitted by the Court; but still to
answer the Misdemeanour in the King's Bench.

The Prentises all but Captain TOM, (as commonly called) formerly Committed,
and some of them Bayl'd out last Sessions, were now all Discharged, there being
no Prosecution against them.

A Woman that came to be a Servant in a Gentleman's house, before she had been
there five days, took an opportunity to Rob them of a considerable parcel of
Plate and some Money, and carried it down into the Country by a Carrier; being
discovered, was now Indicted together with the said Carrier, and she was found
Guilty: but the Carrier being a very honest man, and nothing Criminal proved
against him, was deservedly Acquitted.

Several people were Arraigned for Stealing of Tankards, Cups, etc. out of
Drinking-houses, to which some Pleaded Guilty, as being within the Benefit of
Clergy, others were Convicted; but though there be such frequent Damages
suffered in this kind, yet nothing can warn our proud Ale-drapers, but still
partly out of Ambition, and partly Covetousness, to put off a Pint and a
quarter instead of a Quart, they will continue the Custom (though they forfeit
their Licenses by it) of selling their Liquour in Silver Tankards, etc.

Two persons were charged with High Treason for Coining, and some suspicious
Circumstances were made out; but if they designed any such thing, they were but
Bunglers at the Trade; and there being no punctual Proof, they were found Not
Guilty.

A person was convicted touching Horse-stealing; who it seems (...) long
followed the Trade of Receiving and putting off what Horses his Confederates
stole; and particularly now they having got a Stonehorse and Mare, to disguise
them, guelded the Horse; and artificially marked the Mare; yet notwithstanding
all their Art, it was discovered, and he Condemned.

There were in all Fourteen Condemned; that is to say: Tho. Newel, Will.
Gilman, Mary Bird, Elianor Davies, Anne Rye, Will. Hall, Richard Speckman, John
Biggs, John Eakins, Tho. Pardy, George Dugdale, Eliz. Brown, Robert Gale, and
Tho. Shaw: And Ten burnt in the Hand, one for Transportation, and two to be
Whipped: one woman being Reprived before Judgment, and the other four found quick
with Child.

Most of the Prentices were discharged, as aforesaid; but he that is usually
called Captain TOM, was thought fit to be kept in Prison.

FINIS.

