A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the last Speeches, Confessions, AND EXECVTION OF Christopher
Vrats, George Boriskie, and John Stern, who were Tried and found Guilty of the
Barbarous Murder of Thomas Thinn Esquire on the 12 of February last, and Executed
in the Pallmall near the place where they committed the Murder, on the 10th of
this instant March. Together with the manner of their behaviors in Newgate
after their Condemnations, and at the place of Execution, containing several
very remarkable Passages that happened there.
IT has been observed in most Ages, that offended Heaven seldom suffers Murder
to be long concealed, or the Murderers to escape unpunished, for by one means
or other they are still brought to light, and Justice most deservedly takes
place, as in the fatal Catastrophy of these miserable Villains, we shall more
amply demonstrate, viz. of John Stern, Christopher Urats, and George Boriskie,
Executed for the base and Villainous Murder of Thomas Thinn Esquire who on the 12th
of February last was shot by Boriskie with a Blunderbuss as he was Riding in
his Coach, which was charged with four Bullets, and they being shot into his
Body at four several places, he died of the wounds within Ten hours after, and
although at that time the Murderers by the swiftness of their Horses, made
their escape, and got to their Lodgings, yet such was Heavens pleasure, that
they should not escape unpunished, though not one of their Faces were seen at
the time the Murder was committed, so as to be known again. But Justice, as we
most truly may affirm, discovered them almost by Miracle; for not only a
Pistol which one of them had with them, was found upon the place, but likewise
a Chairman that having carried Captain Urats to the Bull-Inne in Holbourn the
Morning before the Murder was committed, going accidentally in to ask him
whether he would discharge him, found him charging Pistols, and upon hearing of
the Murder, directed such as sought for the Murderers to that House, where
after a short time they found Amens Berge the Captains man, who owned the
Pistol so found to be his Masters, and also upon Examination disclosed the
place where he Lay, who upon his being taken, discovered the rest; who all
being apprehended, upon Examination confessed the Murder, for which being
committed to Newgate, after 16 days continuance there, they were brought to
their Trials at the Old Bailey, (where a Jury of half English and half Strangers
being Sworn) they Pleaded not Guilty, but the Evidence being Sworn against
them, and their Examinations produced, they confessed the Murder, though in a
different manner; Urats the Captain declared, That he having heard that the
Deceased had put some affronts upon Count Coningsmark, he (as having been a
Servant to his Uncle and Father) thought himself bound in point of Honor to
take the Quarrel upon himself, and that he only took Boriskie and Stern as his
seconds, he being minded to Challonge the Deceased. Boriskie confessed, That
Captain Urats bid him fire into whatsoever Coach he stopped. And as for Stern,
he confessed, That he knew not the Design, but only went for Company: Upon
this they received sentence of Death, and were remanded to Newgate, there to
continue until their Execution; since their Sentence they have been for the
most part kept a sunder, and several Persons of Quality have been to visit
them, and by many Arguments persuaded them to confess the real cause of the
Murder, and what induced them to undertake so base and villainous an
Enterprises but especially the Captain stood obstinately (as it were) in
vindicating what he had done, alleging, That it was the Custom in their
Country to Pistol any one that refuses a Challenge: And notwithstanding the
earnest Exhortations of many Pious Divines, to prepare himself for another
world, he seemed very careless of their Instructions, which some persons
imputed to the hopes he conceived of obtaining his Majesty's Pardon, but as for
the other two, viz. Boriskie and Stern, they seemed much more concerned,
especially the latter, who often retired himself from the company that came to
visit them, being often seen in private at his Devotion, and much bewailing
himself for the Innocent Blood he had shed, wishing that he had not lived to
have seen the day wherein the cause of his Death was effected, declaring, that
he had never any Malice against the Deceased, but that he was drawn into the
wicked Enterprise through the persuasions of the Captain, with whom he had
first taken acquaintance in the French Kings Service. As for Boriskie that
Bloody Assassinate who discharged the Piece, he had little convers with any
person, by reason he was not so well versed in the English Tongue, so as to
understand what was said unto him, but being asked whether he knew the
Blunderbus to be charged, by reason that upon his Trial he pleaded Ignorance,
he replied, That notwithstanding what he had there said (when there was some
hopes of saving his Life) he well knew it to be Charged with Powder and Bullet,
but with how many Bullets he was not certain, and that the Captain delivered it
to him under pretense to defend him against the Esquires Footmen, in case the
Esquire should come out and fight as Urats at first pretended he believed he
would, but that afterward he bid him (when he stopped the Coach) Fire into the
same, or to that effect, whose unfortunate directions he followed to his own
undoing; And further, that he came over in hopes of Preferment, but that now he
was like to meet with such as would spoil his return. He and Stern were very
attentive at any time when Ministers came to pray with them, as past doubt not
being unsensible that they had but a small remainder of life left, and that it
was high time to prepare themselves for another world: Dr. Burnet not only
Preached to them on Sunday last, but likewise was with them six or seven times
to exhort them to a free Confession, and to show them how they stood (as it
were) upon the brink of Eternity, just ready to be pushed off, their time being
limited to a certain day, and that they could not reasonably hope or expect any
prolongation of their lives, who had bereaved a worthy Gentleman of his so
suddenly, and to him unexpected, one from whom some of them had confessed they
never received any prejudice, nor had cause of conceiving any hatred, and to
this effect were they daily exhorted by Pious men, who, notwithstanding their
Villainous act, had a regard to their Souls. They likewise made great profession
that they had been brought up in Protestant Countries, and that they had served
against the Papists, but that was but a small excuse to mitigate the heinous
Crime they were convicted of. The day appointed for their Execution, according
to the Warrant directed to the Sheriffs, was to be on the 8th of this Instant,
but at their humble request, for a longer time to prepare themselves for
another world, they were reprieved till this day, when about Nine in the
Morning the Sheriffs Officers came to demand them; after having had some
conference with such as came to pay their last visits, were brought down by
Captain Richardsons Servants, and delivered at the door of the Prison to the
Sheriffs Officers, as is usual in such Cases. The Captain at his first coming
down looked very brisk, but he perceiving there was no way but that he must go
to his long home, his countenance greatly altered, and he many times in the way
to the place of Execution, hung down his head, the other two looked like Men
whom the fear of Death had altogether stupefied, so that we may perceive that
such as are bold and daring to commit Murders and bereave others of their
Lives are most timorous when Death begins to stare them in the face, all along
as they passed there were Crowds of People, not only in the Street, but in the
Windows and Balconeys, that the like has not been seen since the Execution of
their fellow Murderers, those detested Wretches that as Inhumanly and basely
Murdered that Worthy Knight Sir Edmundbury Godfrey. They being come to the
place of Execution, where the Gibbets were placed as near as could be guessed
on the spot where the Coach stood, when the Deceased was shot, the Carts
drawing under them, stood still, and being enclosed round with the Guards that
went to see Execution done, the Murderers being unbound, stood up with
dejected looks, several Ministers being with them, the Captain often looking
wishfully about him, (as some thought) in hopes of a Reprieve; when after an
hours space, having received several Exhortations, and said some Prayers in
their own Language, Urats being a German, Boriskie a Polander and Stern a
Sweed, the two last often lifted up their Hands, and bewailed their unhappy
ends, not in the least denying the Murder, nor that they deserved to dye for
the same: the Captain likewise spoke several words in French, and after they
had thus done, the Executioner did his Office, where after they had Hanged
about three Quarters of an hour, they were taken down and conveyed thence.

London, Printed for E. Brooks.


