A True and Brief RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Common Council OF THE CITY
of LONDON, The 13th of MAY, 1681.

A PETITION was presented to the said Court by diverse Citizens of the said
City, as follows.

To the Right Honorable Sir Patience Ward, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and the Right Worshipful the Aldermen and Commons in Common Council
Assembled.
The Humble Petition of Us whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, Citizens of the
said City.
Shows,
THAT notwithstanding the late Parliament Summoned to meet at Oxford, was
Dissolved before any thing was done; yet your Petitioners being satisfied, That
those Worthy persons, Chosen to represent this Honorable City, did not only
give their Attendance there, but faithfully discharged their duties according
to the Representation and desire made to them by the Common Hall at their
Choice, do humbly conceive, That they deserve the Thanks and Acknowledgments of
the City.

That on the 28th of April, on occasion of another Petition, some of the
Petitioners (and other Citizens) did humbly Petition the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen for the Calling of a Common Council, etc.
Which Petition not being Transcribed till the Court was sitting, there were but
few persons who did then Sign the same, for want of time (and even now are
straightened in that respect); but your Petitioners below, and many thousands
would have subscribed it, had the same been sent abroad, and offered as the
other was.

That though on the Answer given by the Court of Aldermen, your Petitioners went
away sutisfied, and hoped the others had done the like; yet afterward they
found in Print a Declaration, put in the Name of the Subscribers to the said
other Petition (without the consent or knowledge of most of them (as your
Petitioners believe) tending to a Defamation of all that differed from their
way of proceeding, thereby to beget feuds and divisions in the City, which
might endanger the Peace, and bring a scandal on the good Government thereof.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that this Honorable Court would be
pleased in some public way to own the faithful Endeavors and Service of their
late Representatives in Parliament; And also to take into their serious
Consideration the matter of the said Petition, a Copy whereof is hereunto
annexed (which Petition was formerly printed) and thereupon to resolve on what
they shall find most for the Honor of his Majesty, the Safety of his Royal
Person, the Security of the Protestant Religion to Posterity, and the Peace and
Prosperity of this City.

And your Petitioners (as in duty bound) shall ever pray, etc.
The said Petition being after some debate relating to the Petitioners that
presented it, the Court took the same into consideration; and on the debate
touching the first part, the Court being well satisfied, that the Members who
served for this City in the three last Parliaments, had faithfully discharged
their duties,

Ordered, That the thanks of this Court in the name of themselves and all the
Citizens of this City, be given to the said Members ( viz. Sir Robert Clayton,
Sir Thomas Player, Alderman Thomas Pilkington, and William Love, Esquire;) for
their faithful and unwearied service in the said Parliaments, and particularly
in the Parliament at Oxford.

After which, it being late, about Three of the Clock, a debate arose, whether
the Court would then at that time proceed to the consideration of the other
part of the Petition, now or not; and on the question it was resolved in the
Affirmative, there being 84 Commons and 7 Aldermen, which make 91. together,
for a present proceeding therein, and but 66. Commons and 11. Aldermen, which
is together but 77. for deferring the same.

The Court then proceeding on the consideration of the said matters, it was on
the debate, with a general consent, resolved, and the Court did nominate and
appoint Sir Robert Clayton, Knight, and Alderman, Mr. Recorder, and Thomas
Pilkington, Alderman, Sir Thomas Player Knight, Mr. Dubois, Mr. William
Ashurst, and Thomas Western, Esquire; Commoners, to withdraw, and immediately to
prepare a Petition to His Majesty upon the debates then had, and the
subject matter of the said Petition.

The said Gentlemen accordingly withdrew, and after some time returned again to
the Court, and there presented the draught of a Petition to His Majesty, which
Petition is already Printed.

On the reading of the said Petition, it was so well approved, that on the
question there appeared not above 4. or 6. hands against the presenting the
same to his Majesty, which the Court ordered should be done to morrow, or as
soon as conveniently might be; and the Court nominated and appointed Sir Robert
Clayton, Mr. Recorder, Sir Henry Tulse, and Mr. Sheriff Cornish, Mr. Swynock,
Tho. Western, Esquire; Mr. Michael Godfrey, and Mr. Deputy Flawell, to present the
same to His Majesty accordingly.

Then the Court resolved and ordered, That the thanks of the Court be given to
those persons who signed and delivered the Petition, now presented to, and read
in this Court, for their Care and good intentions therein expressed.

The said persons were then called in, and Mr. Recorder in a very elegant and
excellent Speech gave them thanks accordingly.

On Saturday the 14th of May, Sir Robert Clayton, and others of the persons
appointed, did repair to Windsor, to have presented the said Petition; but were
acquainted, that on Thursday the 19th of May, His Majesty would be at
Hampton Court, where they might attend him; which accordingly they did, and
presented the said Petition to His Majesty, in pursuance of the Order of
Common Council.

On Saturday the 21st of May, at the Sessions of Peace and Jail-deliver held
at the Old-Bayly for the City of London: The Foreman of the Grand Jury, in the
name of 15 of the said Jury (which were 17 in all) did in open Court return
their Thanks to the Right Honorable Sir Patience Ward, Knight, Lord Mayor of
the City of London, for his taking care to have the Petition of the City of
London to his most Gracious Majesty for the Sitting of a Parliament, presented
according to the Order of Common Council: And one of the other two Jurymen
that dissented, declared himself in Court, that he did thank his Lordship for
that in particular; but that his Lordship had done many other Services, and he
intended to have joined in a general Thanks to his Lordship.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Janeway, in Queens-head Ally in Paternoster Row.
1681.


