A True and Full NARRATIVE OF THE Protestants Success AGAINST THE LATE K.
James, and the French in Ireland, CONTAINING A Farther Account of the last
Encounters and Engagements by Sea and Land.
SIR,
ACcording to your Desire, I have here sent you that full Narrative of the
Irish Affairs, which may be of some little Satisfaction to your Self and your
Friends: The Transactions of this Kingdom being (I doubt not) the present
Subject of all Men's Inquiry amongst you: What has happened in Munster, is not
considerable enough to deserve the trouble of recounting; they never having an
opportunity to make any considerable Body: But the North has presented many a
fair opportunity to the English and Scotch, to have made themselves Famous, and
their Country Happy; if either Degeneracy of Spirit in the Commonalty
(occasioned by long Ease, Plenty, and Luxury) or the base Villainy of some of
their Commanders (who preferred the French Gold before heroic Virtue) had not
rendered them unwilling, or incapable of acquitting themselves according to
Honor and Duty. The Irish Forces, a little before the late King Landed, had
advanced Northwards, as far as Monaghan without any resistadce, the English
thinking (and discreetly enough) it would be sufficient to defend their own
Pale from the Encroachments of the Enemy. About the beginning of March they
began to look farther, and sent out some Detachments of Horse and Foot into the
County of Ardmagh; and hearing that the Lady Blany was arrived at Glascough, a
handsome Town about 7 Miles from Monaghan, they resolved to stop her Journey
Northwards, and accordingly send a party of Seven Hundred Horse and Foot to
Glascough, to secure her The Protestants had together in the Town near One
Hundred and Fifty, and notwithstanding the number of the Enemy, resolved to
defend the Lady and the Town; and being bravely led on by one Mr. Matthew
Ankthill, and Capt. Richardson's Eldest Son, they made a Gallant Sally upon the
Enemy; who not being able to endure the first Shock, presently Disperse and
Fly; a good number of Horse and Foot getting up to a small Fort, near a Mile
from the Town, thought there to Entrench and Secure themselves; but Capt.
Ankthill and Richardson so well pursued them, that notwithstanding the
disadvantage of riding up a steep Hill, they soon made them quit their Hold,
killing about Fourscore, taking as many, or more Prisoners, and chasing the
rest. In this Encounter we lost only One, which was that worthy Gentleman,
Capt. Ankthill; who, after the Rout, coming softly down the Hill, a Villain
lurking behind a Bush saw him, and taking aim, Shot him down with a Musket. Of
the Irish were Slain, John Macken^ah, their Leader, and two of his Sons, the
third taken Prisoner, besides several others of note amongst them. This so
daunted them, that they came not within ten Miles of the place, '^ll Coll.
Sheldon came down with good part, and the choice of their Army, which was not
till 3 Weeks after, But before this Coll. Luudy was shrewdly suspected to be
poisoned by the French Gold; and several others of Note were suspected to play
^^^ty.

For now instead of Uniting the Forces, which amounted to near Ten Thousand
Strong; Lundy, upon several srivolous Pretenses, disperses them at such
distance from one another, that we seldom had 150 in a Body; or another Body of
the like Number, within 8 or 10 Miles; so that the Enemy, with very little
Molestation, had Free Passage up as high as Clawdy-ford, within 15 Miles of
Derry; and now by this time, the Country crying Shame on these strange Dealings
of Lundy, and others, with much ado, Muster about 7 Thousand Men together, with
all the seeming Vigor imaginable, to Guard that important and difficult Pass.
Colonel Shelton commanded the Enemies Party in Person, and traversing with his
Men near the other side of the River, which was deep and strong, he suddenly,
with his Horse, upon a sign (as is credibly reported) from Lundy, encouraging
his Men, leaps boldly into the River, and Lundy and another Great Officer, as
hastily drawing off our Men, not in the least designing (as it seems) to make
any Opposition; the Enemy without one stronke, gained that important Pass, and
pursuing our Foot destroy them for many Miles, and march directly to the very
Gates, as it were, of Lonnon-derry. And now the Country were too late sensible
of the Just Suspicions they had entertained of Lundy and Others, and
accordingly, resolve to take him to Account; but he knowing what he had
deserved, privately got off, and we hear since, is taken in Scotland.

Nevertheless, this Unfortunate Miscarriage has since been repaired; for since
their choice of Mr. Walker for their Governor, they have behaved themselves
with that Courage and Conduct, as has signalized a Resolution in them as
Glorious as their Cause: Their Sallies upon the Enemy, and their Success
thereupon, having sufficiently animated them to that Vigorous Resistance; that
when the English Succors shall arrive, and enable them to take the Field, I
hope to be able to give you that Account of their Valiant Performanc, as may
with God's Providence, give new Life to the present drooping Face of the
Protestant Affairs in this Kingdom.

Admiral Herbert, in the mean time was cruising about our Coast, to prevent
Succors and Assistance from France, and coming near Cork, he lights on a
French Caper, going with Ammunition into the Harbor, which he without
Resistance seizes; and going in, the Mariners desery another lying at Anchor,
and not being able to make up so high with his Ships, he Man's a couple of
Long-Boats, in the dusk of the Evening, and being armed with good Firelocks,
and Curt-laces; notwithstanding, she had 3 Guns on each side, they bravely
Attacque, Board her, and bring her off; and we have since an Account of a
desperate Engagement with the French Fleet, which not doubting, with all
particulars, is come to your Ear, by the more Expeditious Conveyance of
Expresses on that Account to White Hall, I shall omit the present needless
Relation of; which being all at present, 'till farther News Occurs, Farewell.

LICENSED, According to Order.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker, in Bishopsgate-street, 1689.


