A True and Brief ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN Mr. David Fitzgerald AND
William Hetherington, Before His MAJESTY in COUNCIL, On Friday the 11th. of
February 1680/1. Where the Attorney General was ordered to prosecute the said
William Hetherington, and one Bryan Mac Donagh, (that goes under the name of
Bernard Denis) a Dominican Friar that came out of Ireland in October last, who
formerly belonged to a Convent at Sligoe in the Kingdom of Ireland: AND ALSO
The ARTICLES of the said Hetherington against Mr. Fitzgerald: with Mr.
Fitz-Gerald's ANSWER to each Article. With Six high and transcendent ARTICLES
preferred by the said Mr. Fitzgerald against the said Hetherington, fully
proved before His Majesty in Council.

LONDON: Printed in the year MDCLXXXI.

The ensuing Interrogatories were preferred by Mr. Fitzgerald against
Hetherington, and upon Hetherington's own Confession, and full proof, as
afterward appeared before the King and Council, on Friday the 11th. of
February instant. Mr. Fitzgerald grounded his Charge against the said
Hetherington, and one Bernard Dennis (called in Ireland, Bryan Mac Donaugh) a
Dominican Friar, who is of the County of Sligoe in Ireland, as he says: This is
he who used sinister means to persuade one Hugh Duffey, and several others, to
swear against the Queen; which was fully proved upon him, and an Order made to
the Attorney General to prosecute both the one and the other to the utmost of
the Law, which will be speedily done: The Quaeries are as follows.

Interrogatories put to Mr. Hetherington, before His Majesty and Privy-Councel,
on Mr. David Fitz-Gerald's Petition.
1. MR. Hetherington, Have you any misdemeanour, or other crime to lay to Mr.
Fitz-Gerald's charge?

2. Do you know of any Collections of Money that have been made in London for
the Irish Witnesses? if so, who were the Collectors by name, and who were the
Pay-masters by name? by whose direction or authority was those Moneys demanded
or received? what method was used in applotting the same? where was their usual
place of meeting?

3. Mr. Hetherington, How much did you receive of this Money? who appointed you
to receive it? what have you done with it? how much of it did you keep to your
own use? how much did you pay of it to others? name their names, and the
particular sums you paid them? what were they to do for that Money? and who
treated with them, or to what purpose? declare your knowledge at large to each
particular.

The consequences of Mr. Hetherington's Answers I humbly submit to your
Majesty, and crave leave to proceed to further Interrogatories grounded Granted.
on my Petition.

4. Mr. Hetherington, You said I tampered with the King's Evidence, and
endeavored to suppress it; you complained of me to Justice Warcup; you said I
endeavored to stifle the Evidence of one Mr. Dennis against the Queen; I was
summoned to appear before a Committee of the House of Commons thereupon: Now
declare, what Evidence was there against the Queen, Sir John Davis, or any
other, that I endeavored to stifle? name the Witnesses I tampered with, who
have any thing to say against the Queen, or any other; I desire they may be
called in.

Now I desire the Opinion of this Honorable Board, whether I was unjustly
convened before the Committee of the House of Commons; whether I am guilty of
stifling the King's Evidence, or deserve a Vindication: And I desire I may
proceed further on the matter of my Petition.

I allege in my Petition, that the practices of Mr. Hetherington and others
are of dangerous consequence to the Government: and before I come to show that,
I humbly ask leave to ask Mr. Hetherington the ensuing Questions.

In Dondalk Gaol. After his denials, as last confessed that he brake Gaol in
Dublin, and stole away.
5. Mr. Hetherington, How came you first acquainted with Mr. Edm. Morphy now in
Town, one of the King's Evidence, and where? and where was it in Prison? if so,
in what Town? how came he committed, and for what? and how came you also
committed, and for what? and how were you enlarged? were not you in for Debt?
if so, how much was it? at whose Suit? did you pay it? did not you get your
self removed to the King's Bench Prison, or the Marshalsea of the four Courts,
so called in Dublin? do you know Mr. Lovet the Keeper thereof? how got you out
of Prison? In plain terms, did not you break Prison, or steal away thence? what
sums was he forced to pay by your escape then? and durst he touch you the last
time you were in Dublin, you being (as you pretended) one No answer to that.
of his Majesty's Evidence? And if you are not, who Commissioned or appointed
you, or styled you the Manager of the Irish Evidence?

6. Mr. Hetherington, How long were you and Mr. Morphy in Dondalk Gaol
together? were you both under one Crime? if otherwise, declare the particular
cause of your commitment? what time of the year were you both, or either of you
committed? how long were you in restraint before you knew any thing of the
Plot? how, when, where, and by whom were you made privy to it? did you reveal
your knowledge of it to any of the Privy-Councel in Ireland? if you did not,
tell your reason why? was it because you broke Prison and ran away from Dublin?
be punctual, how long were you a Prisoner in Dondalk and Dublin before you came
away?

7. Mr. Hetherington, Have you any Estate in Ireland? if you have, name the
Lands, County, and place, and the yearly value: were you ever a Justice of the
Peace in any County there? if so, in what County there? did you ever, as a
Justice of the Peace, examine Mr. Morphy in Ireland, as a Discoverer of the
Plot? did not you persuade the people in London to believe these things?

8. Mr. Hetherington, How came you and Mr. Morphy so great? did you declare,
that Mr. Morphy endeavored to suborn Witnesses to swear that Mr. Smith and
Baker were Confederates with the Tories in Vlster? where Made no discovery.

No.


was Mr. Morphy then, and some time before? of what life and conversation? did
he then discover the Plot in Ireland? or did he say that he knew any thing of
it?

Very little, but borrowed, but forgot the man's name.
9. Mr. Hetherington, What Money did you bring with you into England, and how
much? was it in Cash, or by Bill of Exchange? if by Bill, who drew it? and upon
whom in London? name the parties.

Now Sir, you have an account of Mr. Hetherington's life and conversation, the
principal manager of the Irish Evidence, as he styles himself. I will now go on
and prove, that instead of doing his Majesty service, or rightly managing the
Evidence, he endeavored to render his Majesty odious to his people in London,
and to persuade them that the Popish Subjects of Stood up to justify the Bull
or Brief, but at last was utterly convinced.
Ireland, were discharged from their Allegiance by the Pope. And that he showed
the Popes Bulls, or Briefs to that purpose, to his Majesty, and that his
Majesty took no notice thereof; that he concluded therefore his Majesty was
actually in the Plot, or a Favourer of it: And that the Earl of Essex called
him Rogue and Rascal for producing those Bulls. All these things he endeavoursd
to insinuate into the hearts and minds of the people here, to do the King harm,
and to breed confusion and mischief.

10. Let Mr. Hetherington declare if he e're received any such Bulls or Briefs,
where they are now, who gave them to him, and to whom did he deliver them?

But let the Reader observe, that when Hetherington found himself to be
Impeached, he popp'd in the ensuing Charge against Mr. Fitzgerald, though he
could neither justify nor prove any or either of the ten Articles, which
defeated his malice.

Articles of Misdemeanour humbly proposed by William Hetherington, against
David Fitzgerald Gent. With Mr Fitz-Gerald's Answer to each Article, read
before his Majesty in Council.
1. THE said Fitzgerald, at the first coming ^^er of the Witnesses o^t of
Ireland, to prove the Hellish Po^ish Plot, did s^em to be very glad of their
coming to justify their Evidence, and in particular that of Eustace Comyns,
saying that he was an honest man, and was wrongfully ^lept up in Prison by the
means of Sir William Davis, for discovering of the Plot, which he swore he
could say more to then any of them all, and that he could charge the greatest
Men, or Man in Ireland therewith, or in words to that effect: But after he saw
Comyns Narrative printed, and found that several of his Friends, as he
pretended, were charged therein, then he began to rail and reflect upon him,
and threaten to be the Death of him; and afterward took occasion to abuse and
revil^ the rest of the Witnesses.

1. The said David Fitzgerald, saving to himself all advantages and benefit of
Exceptions, in answer to the first Article says, That he was then, and would
be still heartily glad to see honest and credible men (such as neither the said
William Hetherington, nor Eustace Comyns in the first Article named, are
reputed to be) to come in and discover any Plot that should be against your
Majesty's Person or Government; but abhors Villainy, Combination, and
contrivance to disturb the peace and tranquillity of your Kingdoms. And further
says, That it was impossible for him to commend the said Fustace Comyns, as in
truth he did not, he having little or no acquaintance with him; only seeing him
sometimes Threshing and Ditching for Mr. Manus O Brian, this Respondent's
Neighbor in the County of Limerick, and knowing that he was a Fellow not above
the quality of a daily Labourer, who commonly wrought for 4 d. per diem in that
Country, and hearing by credible persons that he was esteemed a Rogue, and
threatened to burn the said Manus O Brian's House, and stole out of Limerick
Gaol, as Mr. Hetherington did out of the Black-Dog Prison in Dublin; and the
said Eustace Comyns being of no other quality or reputation as aforesaid, (as
the Lord Bishop of Limerick, Sir William King Governor of Limerick, and
Lieutenant Croker and others can testify) it was unreasonable that this
Respondent should think (as he never did) that the said Eustace Comyns could
charge the greatest Men, or Man in Ireland with any Plot, any more then he
thinks, it was otherwise then wicked in Mr. Hetherington to bring over honest
men from their Habitations in Carrick and Clonmell, thinking to bribe them
groundlesly to accuse some of your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, thereby to affirm
and countenance the Contrivances of the said Hetheringtrn and others.

2. That amongst other matters that he pretended he could prove touching the
Plot, he said he could prove the Day and Time that the Duke of York was to be
proclaimed King in Ireland, and that he would tell the King of it; and that he
did acquaint the Earl of Burlington, coming out from the Committee of the
Lords, that he could and would hang those he had accused, and bring Great ones
to prove the matters he had charged them with.

2. This Respondent absolutely denies the charge of the second Article; only
that he told the Earl of Burlington, that the Lord Brittas and Bishop Mullony
must stand to your Majesty's mercy, or undergo the Rigor of the Law: He
confesses, that since his coming into England, he was very often solicited and
entreated by diverse persons, whom he shall name when your Majesty shall be
pleased to command him, to accuse Her Majesty, his Royal Highness the Duke of
York, the Duke of Ormond, the Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and Sir John Davis
with the Plot, which the Respondent (having nothing to lay to their charge)
always refused; and then they earnes^^y requested this Respondent, since he
could not swallow Oaths, and gallop along with them, not to contradict others,
or to hinder them to accuse Her Majesty, his Royal Highness, and the rest of
the persons aforesaid.

3. That notwithstanding the said Fitzgerald has since endeavored by many
ways and means, to bring this Informant and the said Witnesses into his
Majesty's dis*favour, and to cast reproaches upon them, the better to
invalidate their Evidence; alleging untruly, that they had received Three
thousand pounds from the City of London, or some of the Citizens thereof, or
some others, whom he would mention if he could.

3. To the third Article this Respondent says, That he believes that neither
the said Hetherington or Comyns ever were in your Majesty's, or any good man's
favor, and therefore to endeavor or take the least pains to bring them and
their Witnesses into your Majesty's dis-favour, or to cast Reproaches upon
them, is needless, the Character enstamped upon them already by Oral Testimony,
and matter of Record, sufficiently evidencing their demerits: He confesses he
said that he heard, and does verily believe that Three thousand pounds have
been collected from some of the Citizens of London, and that part thereof was
paid to Sir William Waller, and other part thereof to the said Hetherington,
where, (in breach of his Trust) paid but little or nothing of it to the
Witnesses.

4. That the said Fitzgerald has sometimes by Threats, other times by Feasts,
Treats, Moneys, Promises, and other ways of persuasion, labored to take off
the said Witnesses from giving their Evidence on his Majesty's behalf;
particularly in the case of Sir John Davis; and when all that would not prevail
upon them, told them that his Majesty was displeased with this Informant's
proceedings, and would be so with them, if they followed his directions; and by
these devices so affrighted them, that he got them to sign to a Petition to his
Majesty did not look upon them as coming to do him Service, and that if it were
so, they should readily desist appearing further, though their Intentions were
really to serve his Majesty therein. That the said Fitzgerald, when he knew
the said Witnesses were to be called into either Houses of Parliament, or some
Committee relating to them, to give in their Evidence, has endeavored to hide
them, or some of them, that they could not be found; and when they have been
found, he has laid violent hands on them, or some of them, and would not
permit them to go, until they forced themselves away from him; and then he
threatened them, and those that called them, and with an Oath said he would
break Shaftsbury's Knot; and the better to prevail with the Witnesses,
acknowledged he had received for his service One hundred pounds of his Grace
the Duke of Ormond, Five hundred pounds from the King, and a Commission to be a
Captain; and that his Majesty had given him two blank Patents for Baronets, the
one for his Father-in-Law, and the other to be at his own disposing; and also a
Grant of the Commons of Rakeale, and all the Commons of Knock-Greary, in the
County of Limerick.

4. To the fourth Article he says, That he never in his lifetime labored or
endeavored by any ways or means to stifle or keep back any Evidence against
Sir John Davis, or any other; though at the same time he firmly believes, that
Sir John Davis is a loyal faithful Subject to your Majesty, and does from his
heart abominate any Villainy or Contrivance against your Majesty, he having been
as scrutinous to find out the truth upon the several Examinations of this
Respondent, taken before him and several others in Ireland, as any person
whatsoever. He confesses he said he would break Hetherington's Knot, but denies
he ever mentioned the Earl of Shaftsbury to that purpose: He confesses he
received One hundred pounds of your Majesty's money out of your Treasury in
Ireland, by order of the Lord Lieutenant and Council there, and not a penny of
the Duke of Ormond's own money, as is maliciously suggested; and he received
also One hundred pounds sterling more out of your Majesty's Treasury in
England, by your Majesty's order in Council, and no more, which is all the
Respondent ever received to defray the extraordinary great charges expended by
him in several Journeys in Ireland, and his Voyage from thence to this place,
in prosecution of his Discovery, being far short of the real sums laid out by
him purely on the account aforesaid, having spent seventeen months entirely in
that Service, wholly neglecting his own private concerns. He confesses, that
he was desired by some of his Friends and Relations, to procure (if he could)
two blank Patents for Baronets in Ireland, from your Majesty; denies that ever
he said he had a Grant of the Commons in the said Article mentioned, but
confesses that he intended to apply for the same, being parcel of his ancient
Estate, and would have raised a considerable sum of Money for the procuring
thereof, if it could be obtained; and as to all and every other matter and
thing in the said fourth Article contained, this Respondent denies the same.

5. That he the said Fitzgerald had not only vilified and threatened the said
Comyns, but had also informed several of the Members of the House of Commons,
that the said Comyns was a very Rogue, and that he could produce many Records
against him, and that he was not fit to be credited; and also terrified and
threatened to kill him the said Comyns, so that he was forced for some time to
keep himself in obscurity. That the said Fitzgerald has not only vilified and
abused him this Informant, and the Evidence which he was concerned for, but
also Mr. Thomas Samson, who came over upon his own accord to serve his Majesty
in that matter, who by his Testimony therein has given great satisfaction to
both Houses of Parliament.

5. To the fifth Article the Respondent answering, confesses and says, That
he did inform the House of Commons, that Comyns was esteemed a Fool and a
Knave: whereupon, and by reason of the incoherency of the said Comyns
Narrative, as the Respondent humbly conceives, the same was rejected; but
denies that ever he threatened to kill him, or do him any other bodily harm: He
also confesses, that being provoked, he did correct Samson in the said Article
named, for some saucy language he gave this Respondent, whereof the said Samson
did complain to the House of Commons, who did in hearing of his Complaint,
adjudge it to be idle and ridiculous: This Respondent denies that the said
Samson came over out of Ireland of his own accord to serve your Majesty, but
was wrought upon to come over out of wicked ends, by persons not yet named,
(whom this Respondent shall name, whenever your Majesty shall be pleased to
command him) to disturb and destroy some of your Majesty's good Subjects in
both Kingdoms.

6. That the said Fitzgerald being examined by a Committee of the House of
Commons, against Sir John Fitzgerald, refused to give his Evidence (being his
Relation) unless the Committee would promise to intercede to his Majesty for
his the said Sir John's Pardon: And before a Committee of the Lords, in his
Evidence he charged Col. John Fitz-Patrick, and Sir Edward Scot, to be
Confederates in the Plot, but at the Lords Bar would not, though asked; and
left their Names out in his Narrative published in print, of his own knowledge,
in that matter hts mind being since altered, upon what considerations may well
be judged: He also said before the said Committee, that he fared the worse
because they knew the King had a kindness for him.

6. To the sixth the said Respondent says, That he did never mention to the
Committee of the House of Commons for a Pardon for Sir John Fitzgerald,
otherwise then as follows: (viz.) That the Committee asking this Respondent
what he knew concerning Sir John Fitzgerald, and the Respondent answering,
That what he had to say against him, was mentioned in his Narrative then in his
hand, which he adhered unto; a Member of the Committee thereupon demanded,
whether the said Sir John would own his being in the Plot? To which the
Respondent then replied, he did not conceive it would be proper for Sir John
Fitzgerald (if he knew he was guilty) to accuse himself, before he was sure of
his Majesty's pardon; or words to that effect. He also says, that he declared
at the Bar of the Lords House, that by flying report he heard that Col. John
Fitz-Patrick, and Sir Edward Scot were concerned in the Plot; but how far they
were concerned therein, this Respondent did not, nor does not charge them with
of his own knowledge: He denies to have altered his mind, or to deviate from
Truth or Justice; and hopes that God will not leave him, after the example of
Hetherington and others, to follow evil ways, and promote wicked designs, upon
any temptation whatsoever: And therefore he does not understand Hetherington's
meaning, who says that the Respondent's mind is since altered, upon what
considerations may be well judged, the same being absolutely false, and
scandalously insinuated. And the Respondent further answering, says, That he
being summoned to answer Hetherington's complaint, before a Committee of the
House of Commons, the said Hetherington urged as a great crime in this
Respondent, that he was a Favorite of your Majesty's; to which this Respondent
answered, that supposing he were, (as he never had the vanity to pretend unto
any such thing) he hoped he should not fare the worse for that.

7. That the said Fitzgerald asked the Witnesses, or some of them, whether
they retained the Romish Religion yet, or no; who replied, they did: for which
the said Fitzgerald commended them for so doing, for that the Protestants
would only make use of them for their own purpose and advantage, and afterward
would hang them.

7. To the seventh the Respondent says, That he was, and is still of opinion,
that the Testimony of such Witnesses as were all their lifetime Papists, would
bear more credit, by their not publishing their changing of their Religion,
until they had first given in their Evidence; but after that done, it behoved
such of them as were Priests, and whose Judgments were convinced, to declare
their Conformity to the Church of England, lest they be questioned upon the
Statutes.

8. That the said Fitzgerald also told the said Witnesses, or some of them,
that the King was satisfied that the late Lord Stafford was innocent, denying
the Fact at his death, or words to that effect; and that his Majesty was
resolved not to Try any more of the Lords in the Tower: And after the
Parliament was prorogued, he told the said Witnesses, or some of them, that he
would remove their Nests.

8. As to that part of the eighth Article, (viz.) That the Respondent also told
the said WItnesses, or some of them, that the King was satisfied that the late
Lord Stafford was innocent, denying the Fact at his death, or words to that
effect; and that his Majesty was resolved not to Try any more of the Lords in
the Tower: The Respondent says, the same is utterly false, malicious and
hellish, and humbly submits it, whether any man in his right wits, would utter
such horrid things, which never entered into the imagination of the Respondent:
so as he humbly hopes, your Majesty will look upon this as a design of the said
Hetherington's merely to defame this Respondent, and render him as obnoxious to
your Majesty, as the said Hetherington has made himself infamous to such as
know his pernicious practices: And as to the residue of the said Article, this
Respondent confesses he would endeavor, if he could, to have the said
Hetherington removed from the said Witnesses, to prevent his continuing of
those attempts he had formerly used, of persuading the Witnesses falsely to
accuse persons, against whom they declared they had no crime to object.

9. That he the said Fitzgerald had kept continual correspondency and
familiarity with the four Witnesses which were brought over by a Messenger from
Ireland; and a Person of Quality perceiving it, told him that he had not
observed the Orders the Commons gave him, which was, that he should not come
near any of the Evidence, nor converse with them: the said Fitzgerald replied,
that he was commanded by the King to come there; and also gave the said Person
of Quality very scurrilous and abusive language. The said Fitzgerald also
abused the said four Witnesses, or some of them, and asked if they came to hang
poor Plunket.

9. To the ninth the said Respondent answering, confesses, that he had
ordinary converse with the four men, that lately came from Ireland, namely
Manrice Fitzgerald, Morlagh Downing, George Coddan, and Paul Gor^ly, the two
first giving him an account of his Wife and Family, which he conceives to be no
crime in him; knows not what Person of Quality the said Hetherington means; if
it be Sir Henry Ingoldsby, as he can guess no other, this Respondent has
already given an account of what passed betwixt Sir Henry and this Respondent,
though this Respondent cannot but admire what Sir Henry had to say to those
persons, and to what purpose, and on what design, or by what authority did he
come to them: But to what passed betwixt this Respondent and the said four
persons, this Respondent refers himself to them, who are yet in Town.

10. That the said Fitzgerald said he was abused, because he would not accuse
the Duke of Ormond, and the Chancellor of Ireland, which he knew to be as
honest men as any in the three Kingdoms.

William Hetherington.
A true Copy,

John Nicholast



10. To the tenth this Respondent answering, confesses that he said, and he
still says, and is ready to depose, whenever your Majesty shall think fit,
that several persons did labor to persuade this Respondent to accuse the Duke
of Ormond, and the Lord Chancellor of Ireland, of the Plot, as also Her
Majesty, his Royal Highness, and others, as he has already in his Answer to
the second Article declared; and he also confesses, (which he conceives to be
no misdemeanour in him) that he in his conscience believes that the Duke of
Ormond, and the Lord Chancellor of Ireland, were never concerned in any Plot or
Contrivance against your Majesty's Person or Government, but are true and firm
to your Royal Interest: And ^e further says, that he believes that the persons
who designed, or do still design to impeach or accuse them thereof, or of any
such abominable practices, do ^bhor and detest your Royal Government, and the
happy state and condition of your Kingdoms: And the Respondent also says, that
the reason why the said Hetherington has so much falsely abused this Respondent,
was for that he the Respondent would not comply with the said Hetherington to
ac^use the aforesaid persons.

And this Respondent having in obedience to your Majesty's Order in Council,
bearing date the 4th* day of February instant, answered the said Articles
exhibited against him by the said Hetherington as aforesaid, does with all
humility submit himself, and his said Answer, to your Majesty and this
Honorable Board, and does humbly pray your Majesty's severe Reprehension, or
gracious Vindication, as his Case shall deserve.

And as in duty bound shall ever pray, DAVID FITZGERALD.

Mr. David Fitz-Gerald's Arguments against Hetherington's Articles before his
Majesty in Council.
THE said David Fitzgerald being convened the last Session of the last
Parliament before a Committee of the House of Commons, upon the complaint of
the said Hetherington, alleging that the said David Fitzgerald stifled
Evidence against the Queen, and others, in relation to the Plot, was discharged
by the said Committee, and received a just Vindication: Whereupon the said
David petitioned the House of Lords to the same effect, with the following
Petition; and before any progress could be made thereon, the Parliament was
dissolved: so as he was forced to address himself to his Majesty and Council by
Petition, the substance whereof is briefly thus.

That some collections of Money has been made, and applied to the disposal of
the said Hetherington and others, the said Hetherington pretending himself to
be the Manager of the Irish Evidence; That the Petitioner has great reason to
fear, that the consequence thereof will be prejudicial to his Majesty Sir John
Davis is Clerk of the Privy-Councel in Ireland, and a Member thereof.
and the Nation in general; That the said Hetherington had publicly defamed
him, as a person that should endeavor to stifle some Irish Witnesses against
the Queen, Sir John Davis, and others, and by sinister means to prevent their
Testimony; That the Petitioner conceives, that this is a practice set on foot
of purpose to prevent the true discovery of the Plot, and has just cause to
suspect the same; and that the said Hetherington will attempt his life, The
said Hetherington has spread several Libels and Pamphlets of Mr. Fitzgerald,
which he and the Printer are like to smart for.
as he did his reputation* And because the Petitioner can prove by several
instances, that he has always encouraged the Witnesses to discover the whole
Truth, and to conceal nothing thereof; and because he has just cause to fear
the great disadvantage and dishonor that may ensue such practices to his
Majesty, (if not speedily prevented) he made this Address to his Majesty in
Council, that such foul and dangerous practices may be detected and defeated,
and that the Petitioner himself (if guilty) may receive condign punishment, but
if innocent, a just Vindication.

And so he prayed a speedy day for the hearing of the matter of his Petition
and Summons, requiring Mr. Hetherington, and such as shall appear to be his
Confederates, to Answer; and Summons for his own Witnesses to prove the Charge
in his Petition.

Hereupon the said Hetherington appeared personally at the Councel-Board, where
he was examined by the Lord Chancellor in full Council (his Majesty then
present) upon the Interrogatories before specified, which the Petitioner
delivered in writing under his hand: And by Hetherington's own Answers
thereunto, (appearing by the Minutes taken by the Clerk of the Council) it is
evident, that some Money has been collected in London; that Hetherington
received part of it; that there was no Evidence against the Queen, or any
other, that the Petitioner ^fled; that Hetherington is a Fellow of ill life and
conversation; that he was in Dundalk Gaol for holding correspondence with the
Outlaws and Tories in Ireland; that he was these two years past in the
Marshalsea in Dublin, and broke Prison there, and so came for England; and that
he is not worth a shilling, etc.

Nota.
Now to anticipate Mr. Fitz-Gerald's proceedings against him on the said
Petition, Hetherington exhibits Ten Articles of Misdemeanour against Mr.
Fitzgerald, the substance whereof is briefly thus.

1. That Mr. Fitzgerald at the first coming of the Witnesses out of Ireland,
cherished the Witnesses, commended Eustace Comyns one of them, and said he
could accuse the greatest Men, or Man in Ireland: but afterward threatened to
kill him, and took occasion to abuse and revile him, because he accused some of
Mr. Fitz-Gerald's Friends.

Answ. 1. That he would be glad to see honest men to appear for the King* that
Hetherington and Comyns were none* th^^ he never did commend Comyns; that he
was but a Thrasher and a Labourer at 4 d. per diem with Mr: O Brian, Mr.
Fitz-Gerald's Neighbor in the County of Limerick; that it was unreasonable to
think such a Fellow could accuse the greatest men, or man in Ireland.

2. That Mr. Fitzgerald said he could prove the day and time when the Duke of
York was to be proclaimed King in Ireland; and that he acquainted the Earl of
Burlington he would hang those he accused, and bring Great ones to prove the
matters he had charged them with.

2. He denies this charge; he told the Earl of Burlington, that those he
accused must submit to his Majesty's mercy, or undergo the rigor of the Law;
he says he was earnestly solicited, since he came to London, to accuse the
Queen, the Duke, Ormond, Chancellor of Ireland, and Sir John Davis of the Plot.

5. That Mr. Fitzgerald labored to bring Mr. Hetherington and the Witnesses
into his Majesty's dis-favour, and to cast reproaches upon them; and that 3000
l. was collected for them in London.

3. He says it is needless to labor that, Witnesses and Records prove him and
his Witnesses to be Villains* be confesses, that he believes such Collections
have been made; that Sir Will. Waller received part of it, and Hetherington
another part of it, but paid nothing of it to the Witnesses.

4. That he endeavored to take off the Witnesses from giving their Evidence on
his Majesty's behalf, particularly in the case of Sir John Davis; that he told
them, his Majesty was displeased with Hetherington's proceedings; that he
procured them to Petition his Majesty, intimating they were informed his
Majesty did not look upon them, as coming to do him Service; and that if it
were so, they would desist appearing further. That he did use to hide the
Witnesses, when they were called upon by either of the Houses of Parliament;
that he laid violent hands on some of them; that he swore he would break
Shaftsbury's Knot; that for this Service he had 100 l. from the Duke of Ormond,
Note here, he would make the King author of stifling the Evidence of the Plot,
and the discovery of it; which ought not to pass without due reprehension.
500 l. from the King, a Commission to be a Captain of Foot, and two blank
Patents for Baronets.

4. He denies to have stifled any Evidence against Sir John Davis; he
confesses he said he would break Hetherington's Knot, but dou^^s he ever
mentioned the Earl of Shaftsbury to that purpose; he confesses to have
received 100 l. out of the Treasury in Ireland, by Order of Council there, and
no more, and not a penny of the Duke of Ormond's money; 100 l. more in England
by Order of Council, out of the Treasury, and not a penny more; he confesses he
was desired to procure the blank Patents* and that he would lay out money for a
grant of those Commons, being part of his ancient Estate, if it might be
obtained.

5. That he informed several Members of the House of Commons, that Comyns was a
very Rogue; that he could produce many Records against him; that he was not fit
to be credited; that he threatened to kill him: That he also abused Mr. Thomas
Samson, who came over upon his own accord to serve his Majesty, who by his
Testimony gave great satisfaction to both Houses of Parliament.

5. He confesses that he did inform the House of Commons, that Comyns was a
Knave and a Fool, and that by reason of the incoherence of his Narrative, he
conceives it Note, this Samson is one of the Witnesses that accuses the Earl of
Tyr^ne.
was rejected; he denies to hare threatened him; he confesses, that being
provoked, he did correct Samson for saucy language; he denies that Samson came
out of Ireland to serve the King, but was wrought upon to come over to disturb
and destroy your Majesty's good Subjects.

6. That before a Committee of the House of Commons he refused to give Evidence
against Sir John Fitzgerald, unless the Committee would promise to intercede
to the King for his Pardon: That at the Lords Bar he accused Col. Fitz-Patrick
and Sir Edward Scot, and left their names out in his Narrative.

6. He denies the first part, prout answer more particularly; he only heard by
flying report they were present at Consults in Dublin, and said no more of them
at the Lords Bar.

7. That he commended some of the Witnesses for retaining the Romish Religion,
for he said, that the Protestants would make use of them for their own purpose,
and hang them afterward.

7. He says, he was and is still of opinion, that the Testimony of such
Witnesses as were all their life time Papists, would bear more credit by not
publishing the change of their Religion; but after that done, the Priests must
conform, lest they may be questioned on the penal Statutes here in England.

8. That he told some of the Witnesses, that the King was satisfied of the
Innocence of the Lord Stafford, and that his Majesty was resolved not to Try
the Lords in the Tower; and said, that after the Parliament was prorogued, he
would remove the Witnesses N^^^^.

8. He denies that presumption* but confesses he did and will endeavor to
remove him, he being a wicked Suborner, etc.

9. That he kept continual correspondency and familiarity with the four
Witnesses that came lately from Ireland, contrary to the order of the Committee
of the House of Commons; That he reviled and abused a Person of Quality, that
reprehended him for so doing; That he abused those four Witnesses, and asked
them if they came to hang poor Plunket.

9. He denies this; he refers himself to the four Witnesses, namely Maurice
Fitzgerald. Mortagh Downing, George Codden, and Paul Gormly; if he means, by
that Person of Quality, Sir Henry Ingoldsby, he refers himself to the Board as
to that.

10. That he said, he was abused because he would not accuse the Duke of
Ormond, and the Chancellor of Ireland, which he knew to be as honest men as any
in the three Kingdoms.

10. He confesses, as in his Answer to the second Article, he was solicited to
accuse them, and also the Queen, and the Duke of York; he Note, that he would
make it a crime for a man to declar the honesty of these two Great men.
knows nothing against them; he says, Hetherington abuses him thus because he
would not comply with him to accuse the said persons.

Hereupon an Order was conceived by his Majesty in Council the 4th of February
instant, that a Copy of the said Articles should be delivered to Mr.
Fitzgerald, to return his Answer in writing, and also that Mr. Fitzgerald
should exhibit his Charge against Hetherington; both which Mr. Fitzgerald
performed, the substance of his Answer being briefed in the margin to each
Article, as before; and his Articles against Mr. Hetherington, with the proof
of each Article, is briefly as follows. Read the Articles at length.

1. That he broke Prison in Dublin; that he corresponded with the Outlaws and
Tories in the North of Ireland; that he was for the same imprisoned at Dundalk;
that after breaking Prison in Dublin, he fled over into England; that he
pretended to be a Justice of the Peace in Ireland, to gain himself reputation
here; that he had no money in his purse but 1 s. 6 d. and his Apparel not worth
half a Crown; that he procured himself to be styled, the Manager of the Irish
Evidence; that he endeavored to suborn Witnesses to accuse persons of the
highest Quality under the King, of Treason.

As to his breaking of Prison, vide his confession to the 5th Interrog on the
Minutes; that he corresponded As to Hetherington's life and conversation, show
Se^ jeant Osborn Certificate, who goes Jud^ in the North Circuit in Ir l^nd
sometimes.
with the Tories, vide his confession at to the 5th Interrog. that he was upon
su^pi^ion of it committed to Dundalk Geol then, call Ja. Murphy, Owen Murphy,
read their Letters or Depositions, or examine them personally upon Oath (...)
that he pretended to be; but was no Justice, vide his confession on the 7th
Article; to prove his poverty; call Mr. Bradly and Mr. Roberts, vide his Answer
on the 9th Interrog. Constat, he is so called; ask him who made him a Manager:
that he endeavored to suborn Witnesses against the Queen, the Duke of York,
etc. call Hugh Duffy, John Mac Cleve, John Moyre, George Murphy.

2. That Hetherington got 100 l. of the Kings money, that he kept all to
himself, and did not distribute it according to Orders, only 10 l. he gave the
four Priests; and that he received moneys in London for the Irish Witnesses.

Let Mr. Hetherington prove what he did with the money, and bring Witnesses
viva voce, if he can.

To prove he received the 100 l. call Mr. Squib an Officer of the Treasury, and
show the Orders and Receipts; that he did not pay the money over as he should,
call John Moyre, Edm. Murphy, Daniel Fynane, James Callahan, these were to
receive part, and did not: to prove the money collected and received in London,
call Mr. Roberts on Oath, etc.

3. That he labored to bring an odium upon the King; that he declared he
brought a Bull or Brief out of Ireland, under the Popes Seal, etc. as in the
Article.

Let Mr. David Fitzgerald have his Oath; let him declare the place at
Westminster, the place with the Parliament Man, the place in London before
Capt. Morley.

Let John Mac Nemarra's Oath to this point, upon the last and 10th of my
Interrogatories, be read; and let Mac Nemarra be asked, if he did not confess
it before a Committee of the House of Commons: let Burk also be examined to
this; though they both now, to prop up themselves, side with Hetherington: so
as I desire to know whether there be good proof without them. Fully proved.

4. That the said Hetherington intending to take away the lives of the Queen,
and the Duke of York, and to weaken the Kings Interest in Ireland, etc. did
endeavor to suborn Witnesses against the Queen, the Duke, Ormond, and the
Chancellor of Ireland.

This is proved on the first Article; but if you require it call Hugh Duffy,
John Mac Cleve, John Moyre, George Morphy; all proved by the aforesaid persons.

5. To prove his correspondence with Hanlan, and the rest of the Tories in
Ireland, and endeavored to procure them to come in to discover the Plot,
(though falsely.)

First, that Hanlan and his Confederates are proclaimed Rebels and Traitors,
call the Right Honorable Lord Conway, one of the Council in Ireland.

This appears on the first Article, Hetherington being committed to Dundalk
Gaol: and if your Majesty be not satisfied, call James Morphy and Owen Morphy,
and let Secretary Jenkins show James Morphy's Letter. James Morphy proved the
same.

6. That he has brought over Witnesses out of Ireland, as he pretended, etc.

Call John Luker, Peter Linch, Michael Rely, and Keho; fully proved.

Let them declare if one Geoghan a Friar did not go hence from England, and had
his Majesty's Warrant, (which is the same that Mr. Hetherington procured) and
that they were harrassed upon this Warrant: that John Power Esquire a Justice of
the Peace, was on his relation imprisoned in Waterford; so was Mr. Richard
Fitzgerald, a great Dealer and Trader; so was Matthew Hoar Esquire John Nugent Esquire
Mr. Dalton the Minister of Dungarvan, a Justice of Peace, threatened: he has
got a deal of Moneys in several places; others he forced from their Houses,
etc. let him declare the misery and trouble the Country is put in; and that
this Geoghan is now for his great Villainy committed in Dublin by the Lord
Lieutenant.

Now it is easy to make appear, that there was but one blank Warrant obtained,
and hereupon these Carrick men were brought over. The Charge proved to the full.

ARTICLES of a most high and (...) presented and exhibited to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and to the Right Honorable the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy-Councel, by David Fitzgerald, against William Hetherington,
in obedience to his Majesty's Order in Council bearing date the 4th day of
February instant.
1. THE said David Fitzgerald, praying the liberty at any time hereafter, as
occasion shall require, to explain the Articles hereafter following, and
^urther to Impeach the said William Hetherington, does now most humbly say and
propose, That the said William Hetherington, having broken Prison in Dublin,
corresponded with Hanlan, and the rest of the Outlaws and Tories in the North
of Ireland, and having defrauded and cheated many of his Majesty's good
Subjects in that Kingdom, repaired into England, and untruly pretended to some
of his Majesty's good Subjects here, to gain himself reputation and credit in
England, that he was sometimes a Justice of the Peace in some County in
Ireland, and had a considerable Estate there, though he had but eighteen pence
in his Pocket when he came to London, and all his Apparel was not worth half a
Crown; procured himself (but by what, or whose means or Authority, this
Proponent does not yet know) to be styled, the Manager of the Irish Evidence,
thereby to have the opportunity to relieve his distress* though by the
shipwreck of his Conscience, and utter ruin of his Soul; and also by suborning
Witnesses to accuse Persons of the highest Quality, next and under his Majesty,
of Treason, and to accuse others of the like crime, thereby instead of serving
his Majesty, according to the duty of his pretended Office, to disturb his
Majesty's happy reign over his Subjects, and the peace and tranquillity of his
Kingdoms.

2. That the said Hetherington, the better to effect his said wicked designs,
got into his hands One hundred pounds of his Majesty's money, to be distributed
amongst the Irish Witnesses, who were all needy, and miserably poor, which sum
he converted to his own use, but Ten pounds only he distributed amongst four
Priests, and others of the Witnesses; and has also received diverse sums
collected in the City of London, for the Irish Witnesses, wherein he has not
justly discharged his Trust.

3. That the said Hetherington labored all ways and means he could, to render
his Majesty's Royal Person and Government odious, as well to his Subjects of
England, as of Ireland, and to induce them to a belief, that his Majesty is a
favourer of Papists and Popery, thereby to stir up the people to Rebellion,
both in England and Ireland; for he the said Hetherington did diverse times, in
open Companies and places in the City of London, and elsewhere, publish and
declare in the hearing of his Majesty's Subjects, that he brought with him out
of Ireland into England, a Bull or Brief under the Seal of the Pope, or Bishop
of Rome, discharging his Majesty's Popish Subjects of Ireland from their
Natural Allegiance to his Majesty; And that he himself in person, did show and
produce the aforesaid Bull or Brief to his Majesty, and acquainted his Majesty
with the tenor thereof; and that his Majesty took no notice of it, but in and
toward the favoring and countenancing of Papists, and for the introducing of
Popery, did reject the same.

4. That the said Hetherington, intending to bring the Queens Majesty, and his
Royal Highness the Duke of York, into the hatred of his Majesty and of all his
Subjects, and to deprive them of their Lives, Estates, and Royal Dignities, and
also intending to weaken his Majesty's Interest in Ireland, and draw away the
affections of his Subjects there from him, has by entreaties and other ways of
persuasion, endeavored to suborn Witnesses to swear, that the Queens Majesty,
his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and the Duke of Ormond, as also that the
Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and others his Majesty's loyal and faithful
Subjects, were privy to, and principally concerned in the Plots both in England
and Ireland, against his Majesty's Person and Government.

5. That the said Hetherington, the better to compass the enterprises
aforesaid, and to strengthen his proof against her Sacred Majesty, his Royal
Highness the Duke of York, the Duke of Ormond, and others as aforesaid, as also
to anticipate the said Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, his
endeavors to reduce Hanlan, and the rest of the Tories in the North of
Ireland, to their due obedience, has for some time past held, and still does
hold, private correspondence with the said Hanlan, and other Outlaws and Tories
in the North of Ireland, though many of them are guilty of Murders, and
Outlawed or proclaimed Rebels, according to the course of the Laws there: And
did by his Letters invite the said Hanlan and his Confederates, to give out in
speeches, that he and his Confederates were privy to the Plot in Ireland
against his Majesty, and that he and they could prove that her Majesty, his
Royal Highness the Duke of York, the Duke of Ormond, and the Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, were principally concerned therein, so as such Declaration might be
made public here in England: That then if Hanlan would but send him the said
Hetherington a competent sum of money, and would really swear (though falsely)
against the Queen, his Highness, and the rest, he would under pretense of such
his discovery of the Plot, and giving Evidence as aforesaid, obtain his
Majesty's Pardon for the said Hanlan and his Confederates, for all Treasons,
Murders, Felonies, and all other offenses whatsoever; thereby intending no
good to his Majesty and People, but confusion and trouble, and to put a piece
of Hanlan's money into his own Pocket, and to suborn the said Miscreants to
swear as he should dictate to them, hoping to better his condition by the ruin
of his Majesty's good Subjects, that he projected would ensue thereupon.

6. That he pretended to have a great many substantial and credible Witnesses
in Ireland, to prove the Irish Plot, whose Names he could not then remember, as
he alleged, and therefore obtained a blank Warrant from his Majesty, to fetch
over the said Witnesses into England: That under color thereof, he has by his
Emissaries there caused several Gentlemen, as well Papists as Protestants, and
Justices of the Peace in many Counties, Towns, and places in Ireland, to be
Imprisoned, forced other ignorant men to pay moneys for not troubling or
molesting them, and at length brought over into England (amongst others) six
honest persons, Inhabitants of Carrick and Clonmell, as Witnesses, and on their
arrival in London, employed one Eustace Comyns to persuade them to swear
against their knowledge, in Affirmance and Justification of what Comyns had
already untruly sworn; And this he did purposely to abuse his Majesty's Warrant
and Royal Authority, to put his Majesty to great charges, to amuse the Vulgar,
to hinder the said persons in their own private concerns, because they would
give his Emissaries no moneys, to discourage Trade and Dealing in Ireland, and
to create an universal disquiet, and terrible apprehensions in the hearts and
minds of his Majesty's Subjects there, of imminent and sudden dangers and
calamities, the said Hetherington thereby laboring and wickedly designing to
bring an odium and scandal upon his Majesty, and his Royal Government.

All which Articles the said David Fitzgerald is ready to aver and prove, as
his Majesty and this most Honorable Board shall award: And humbly prays,
that the said Hetherington may be committed, or so secured, as that he may be
compelled to Answer the same: For that the said David Fitzgerald has good
reasons to believe, that the said Hetherington will not abide a Hearing in this
cause, but will make his Escape with Impunity, to the Encouragement of ill men,
and in contempt of his Majesty and this Honorable Board; wherein the said
David Fitzgerald humbly submits to his Majesty, and your Lordships great
wisdom and direction.

FINIS.

