A True Account OF THE HORRID MURDER Committed upon His GRACE, The Late Lord
Archbishop OF St. ANDREVVS, Primate and Metropolitan of all SCOTLAND', and one
of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of that KINGDOM.

WITH A DETECTION Of the LIES Published in a late Scandalous RELATION of that
MURDER; and of the pretended occasion thereof.

Published by Authority.

DUBLIN, Reprinted. 1679.

A True Account OF THE HORRID MURDER Of His GRACE The Lord Archbishop of St.
Andrews etc.
AFTER that GOD had Restored to these Kingdoms their KING and Liberty, (Mercies
never to be forgot, till by our Ingratitude for them we have deserved to be
thrown back into those Miseries, that we have so lately escaped) Reasonable men
might have concluded, That we would have rested with much satisfaction, under
those great blessings, for which we had so much longed. But that restless
Bigottry, which had in the late Rebellion, dissolved Monarchy, unhinged our
property, and enslaved our Liberties, did soon prompt the Execrable Authors of
Naphthali, and Jus Popuali, who in those Books endeavored to persuade all men
to Massacre their Governors and Judges by the misapplyed Example of holy
Phineas, and did in Specific Terms assert, That there could be no greater Gift
made to JESUS CHRIST, than the sending the Archbishop of St. Andrews's Head in
a silver Box to the KING: Jus populi, page 471, and 472.
Which Doctrine prevailed with Mr. James Mitchell, a Zealous Naphthalite, to
attempt the Killing of the said Lord Archbishop upon the chief Street of
Edinburgh, in face of the Sun, and of the multitude. And he having died owning
his Crime as a duty, and others having writ Books comparing him in this crime
to Sampson; Twelve, or more, of the same sect, did upon the third day of May
last murder the said Archbishop in this ensuing manner.

After His Grace had gone from the secret Council, where (to aggravate their
Grime) he had been pleading most fervently for Favors to them, having Lodged
at a Village called Kennoway in Fiffe, upon Friday night, the second of May, He
took his Journey next morning at ten a Clock toward St. Andrews; and his
Coachman having discovered some Horsemen near Magus, (a place near two miles
distant from St. Andrews) advertised the Archbishop thereof, asking, If he
should drive faster? which His Grace discharged, because he said he feared no
harm: They drawing nearer His Daughter seeing Pistols in their Hands, and them
Riding at a great rate, she persuaded her Father to look out, and he the reupon
desired his Coachman to drive on; who had certainly out-driven them, if one
Balfour of Kinloch, being mounted on a very Fleet Horse, had not cunningly
passed the Coach, (into which they had in vain discharged very many Shot) and
after he found that he could not wound the coachman, because his coach-whip
did fright the sprightly Horse, wounded the Postillion, and disabled the
foremost coach-Horses: whereupon the rest coming up, one of them with a
Blunderbuss wounded the Lord Primate in the coach, and others of them called to
him to Come forth Vile Dog, who had betrayed Christ and His Church, and to
receive what he deserved for his Wickedness against the Kirk of Scotland; and
reproached him with Mr. James Mitchell's death. Whilst he was in the coach, one
run him through with a sword under his shoulder, the rest pulled him violently
out of the coach. His Daughter came out and on her Knees begun to beg mercy to
her Father: But they beat her and trampled her down. The Lord Primate with a
very great calmness, said, Gentlemen, I know not that ever I injured any of
You; and if I did, I promise I will make what Reparation you can propose.
Villain, and Judas, said they, and Enemy to God and His People, You shall now
have the Reward of your Enmity to Gods People: which words were followed with
many mortal wounds, the first being a deep one above his Eye. And though he put
them in mind that he was a Minister, and Pulling off his Cap, showed them his
Gray Hairs entreating, That if they would not spare his Life, they would at
least allow him some little time for Prayer; they returned him no other answer,
but That God would not hear so base a Dog as he was; and for Quarter, they told
him, That the Strokes, which they were then giving, were those which he was to
expect. Notwithstanding of all which, and of a Shot that pierced his Body above
his Right Pap, and of other Strokes which cut his Hands, whilst he was holding
them up to Heaven in Prayer, he raised himself upon his Knees, and uttered only
these words, God Forgive you all. After which, by many strokes that cut his
Skull to pieces, he fell down dead. But some of them imagining they had heard
him groan, returned, saying That he was of the Nature of a Cat, and so they
would go back, and give one Stroke more for the Glory of God. And having
stirred about his Brains in the Skull with the points of their swords, they
took an Oath of his servants not to reveal their names; and so desiring them to
take up their Priest, they rode back to Magus, crying aloud, That Judas was
Kill^d, and from thence made their Escape. But God having in an unexpected way
furnished Probation against all who were Present, it cannot but with a Dutiful
Confidence be expected, that His Divine Majesty, who is so highly offended,
will, by the same care, bring the Assassinates themselves to suffer for that
Crime.

This Narrative, warranted by the Depositions of many famous Persons upon Oath,
will discover the many false Insinuations expressed in a late Relation printed
at London: For whereas it is pretended, That this Murder proceeded from a
Private Iujury done to one of the Assassinates, the contrary will easily appear
by these Subsequent Considerations.

First, That this Murdering principle has been Printed and practiced by others
formerly against the same Person, such as he never knew nor offended. Secondly,
It appears by the many Expressions aforesaid that he suffered for his Function.
Thirdly, Many of the same Persuasions had foretold it in several Places; and
one of the Murderers had that morning, after a Sacrilegious Form of Devotion,
held up his Hand and sworn, That that Hand should Kill the Arch bishop;
whereupon his Hostess Kissed him. Nor can it be denied, but that he, who
commanded the Foot for Mr. Welsh upon Reupar-Law, (that famous Field
Conventicle) owned That their Friends thanked God for the Archbishops Death,
but were sorry they knew not to whom they owed the Obligation. Fourthly, It is
known both by all the Archbishops acquaintance, and the present low State of
his Fortune, that he never used any Rig^ur to his Debtors: And one of the Lords
of Session, who transacted that inconsiderable Affairs relating to Hackstoun,
(on which the sale Narrative charge this Murder) did declare publicly amongst
his Brethen Judges, That the Archbishop had dealt most Generously with that
Miscreant, who was never a servant to his Grace. And how can it be be
pretended, in a Nation where no Man was ever murdered for using Legal
Execution, even in the greatest Concerns, that the other Eleven would have
hazzarded their Lives and Fortunes in Killing a Church Man, and a Privy
Councellor, to satisfy the useless Revenge of one of their Number in so mean a
matter? And, their not taking his Gold nor Watch, and a considerable sum which
lay open enough in the Coach, did convincingly prove, That there was more of
Bigottry than of Avarice in that Undertaking. Fifthly, It is undeniable, that
those of the same profession and Way, have lately wounded many of His Majesty's
Officers, for putting of his Uncontroverted Laws in Execution; and particularly
they contrived the Death of the Town Major of Edinburgh, and in pursuance of
that Design, did with many Wounds leave him, and some of His Majesty's
Soldiers, almost dead upon the place, one of them having been actually Killed.
They also at Loudoun Killed one of His Majesty's Soldiers in his Bed, and
VVounded and Robbed others of them without the least Provocation; pretending in
defense of their Cruelty, That the Soldiers were Enemies to Christ, and that
they would conclude themselves Damned, if they paid the Cess granted by the
Convention of all the Three Estates for the necessary Defense of the Kingdom.
Sixthly, by a Manifesto dispersed some few days before the murder, His Grace,
and all who served the King in Fiffe, were threatened with certain Death. All
which does but too much justify the Courses taken in that Kingdom against such
People, and refutes such as make that pass for Cruelty, which is but necessary,
and self-defence: And by all which it appears, that this murder was not
occasioned by Private resentments, but by the Principles of Naphthali, and such
as were notorious Ringleaders in that tribe, and their Conventicles.
It is likewise very observable, That the Author of that most scandalous
Narrative, has Impiously Lied, in asserting that the Bullets did not pierce the
Archbishop's Body; insinuating there by that he was hard: Whereas by a
Declaration under the Hands of a Physician and three Chyrurgions, (of which
William Borthwick to whom that Author impudently appeals, is one) is most
evident that the Archbishop's Body was pierced by one of those Shots: The,
Words of which Declaration (still remaining amongst the Warrants of the Privy
Council) are these, The first of these Wounds, being two or three Inches below
the Right Clavicle, betwixt the Second and third Rib, which was given by a Shot
not reaching the Capacity of the Breast, Captain Carstaires likewise had no
Commission from the Archbishop, but from the Privy Council, and Buily
Charmichaell had no Commission from the Privy Council, but from the Earl of
Rothes, Lord High Chancellor, and Sheriff Principal of Fiffe, by inheritance.

The Horror that attends this Fact, the dreadful Events for which it makes
way, and the Scandal that it raises upon the True Protestant Religion, cannot
but breed in all Just Men, a detestation of the Principles from whence it
flowed, and an Abhorrence of Those, who endeavor to extenuate it with false
Pretenses.

FINIS

