A True and Impartial ACCOUNT OF THE DUKE OF MONMOUTH's Being taken into
Custody, and his putting in Bail before Judge Raymond September 25. 1682.
THe following Narrative is not calculated with a design to inflame parties, or
to please the humor, or to raise the credit of one separate Interest by false
Flourishes and Insinuations, and by raising injurious Inferences and
Consequences thereupon; but an innocent endeavor to gratify the inquisitive
by a true and full Relation of the manner how his Grace the Duke of Monmouth
was taken into Custody, which has been a surprise to the minds of many, who we
know have an earnest desire to be satisfied with the particular Account of that
whole Affair.

And in the management of this Narrative, 'twill be superfluous to give the
Read^r the particular Transactions of his Grace's Progress toward the Western
parts of this Kingdom; for that may be had in most of the Intelligences: but I
shall contain my self within the Limits of relating those most eminent passages
that happened from September the 16th. the Date of the Warrant for his Graces
Apprehension, to September 25. when his Grace put in Bail.

But that the Reader may clearly understand the whole, I must remind him of
what he has read in Print of the Duke's being present at several Horse-Races
this year, and among the rest, this at Wallis in Cheshire, where he won the
Plate, and a great deal of Applause, and a great Concourse of People, as well
attending his Grace there, as following him elsewhere; Information was given in
to his Majesty of several Riotous and Tumultuous Assemblies caused by his
Grace; whereupon a Warrant was issued out from Sir L. Jenkins, one of his
Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, to Attach his Grace Duke of Monmouth,
Dated Sept. 15th. 1682. and directed to one of his Majesty's. Sergeants at
Arms; which being delivered to the said Mr. Sergeant, he applied himself with
all expedition to find his Grace, and was made acquainted that his Grace did
bend his Journey toward Newcastle under Line, whither he also steered his
Course, receiving Information that on Sunday the 17th. his Grace was at the
Earl of Maxfield's, and on Monday Sept. 18 his Grace came to Trentham, where he
supped, and also dined the next day, being Sept, 19. and the same day went to
Newcastle, where it is supposed he ^^ay that night.

And on Wednesday the 20th. his Grace came to Stafford, on his Journey toward
London; where also the same day came the Sergeant at Arms, having pursued his
Journey with all imaginable diligence; and understanding that his Grace with
his Retinue had alighted at a private House in the Heart of the Town, being a
Mercers, he went thither, and found His Grace in a very spacious Room, with
such Provisions as the House could afford, with several eminent Gentlemen of
that and other Counties, that usually attend those Recreations that are held at
such sea^ons of the year, He made up to his Grace, and delivered his Message;
who received it with that deportment as is suitable to men of his Figure in the
world. His Grace desired to see his Warrant, which was under the Hand of Sir L.
Jenkins, Knight, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and
Principal Secretary of State, and was to this effect;

WHereas His Majesty has received Information that James Duke of Monmouth has
lately appeared in several parts of this Kingdom with great Numbers of People
in a riotous and unlawful manner, to the disturbance of the Public Peace, and
to the Terror of his Majesty's good Subjects: These are therefore in His
Majesty's Name, and by his special Command, to will and require you forthwith
to repair to any place where you shall understand the said Duke of Monmouth to
be, and him forthwith to apprehend and bring in safe Custody before me or any
of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to answer to such
things as on His Majesty's behalf shall be objected to him the said Duke of
Monmouth, and for so doing this shall be your VVarrant. and all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Constables, and all others His Majesty's Officers are hereby
required to be herein aiding and assisting to you, as they will answer the
contrary at their Peril.

To John Ramsey Esquire, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Arms.

Which Warrant his Grace having read, He readily and cheerfully submitted to;
and immediately repaired toward London, and that very night Lodged at Coesell
in Warwickshire.

The next day, being Thursday September the 21. His Grace departed thence, and
came about noon to Coventry, where notwithstanding Mr. Sergeant, took all the
care possible, to prevent any disorders or tumults; but it being bruited abroad
that his Grace was under restrictions, the multitude gathered thick, and broke
out into several shouts and acclamations. They departed after a very short stay
and came that night to Tocester in Northamptonshire, where his Grace lay: But
here very late at night, a Drummer would needs entertain His Grace with a point
of War, and would not be persuaded to desist, though he was told, he disturbed
His Grace's rest, till Mr. Sergeant was forced to exert his Authority, and
commanded him to leave off, or to do the contrary at his peril.

September the 22. His Grace came to St. Albans, and there Lodged, In the mean
while Sr. Thomas Armstrong had hastened to London, and procured an Habeas
Corpus from Judge Raymond, with which he met his Grace at St. Albans: Whereupon
there arose a considerable Debate, between His Grace the Duke of Monmouth His
Council, and the Sergeant at Arms, whether the Habeas Corpus should supercede
the Warrant or not; but the Sergeant at Arms managing that Affair, with great
prudence, persuaded His Grace to appear at White Hall, which he did the 23.
instant being Saturday, before Sr. Lionel Jenkins, where he refusing to be
examined by him, was recommitted by a second Warrant to the same Sergeant at
Arms, the Substance whereof is to this purpose.

WHereas James Duke of Monmouth, now remains a Prisoner in your Custody for
several Riots by Him committed, and has been required to find Sureties, which
he has refused; You the said Sergeant are required to keep the said Duke in
custody, till he shall find Sureties to keep the Peace, till the first day of
next Michaelmas Term, or be discharged according to Law.

And so abiding in durance, Saturday, Sunday, and part of Monday, at Sergeant
Ramsey's House, in York Buildings in the Strand, where his Grace was visited by
several persons of Eminent Quallity, He was on Monday in the forenoon,
presented to Judge Raymond, where the Sergeant at Arms made this following
Return on both the Warrants, to the Writ of Habeas Corpus according to the
Statute in that case provided. The Substance whereof you have here translated
for your better understanding.

I John Ramsey Esquire one of the Sergeants of our Lord the King at Arms, Thomas
Raymond Knight, one of the Justices of our Lord the King, to a Plea before the
said King to be held, and assigned in these Writs, and the Scedule annexed are
mentioned, Humbly certifying that before the coming of these Writs to me
directed, to wit, the twentieth day of September, in the year of the Reign of
our Lord the King, Charles the Second, that now is, King of England, etc. the
thirty fourth Year, I have taken the Body of the within named James Duke of
Monmouth in the aforesaid Writs mentioned, by virtue of a certain Warrant, the
Tenor whereof you have read before.

And this is the Cause of the Taking and Detaining of the aforesaid James Duke
of Monmouth, whose Body before the said Judge Raymond, the day and place in the
aforesaid Writ mentioned, is ready to have, as by these Writs is intended, and
to me is directed.

The Judge thereupon accepted Bail, to two several Recognizances on the several
Warrants, the Duke in a Recognizance of ten thousand pound, and his five
Sureties two thousand pound each, on the first Recognizance, and three thousand
pound a piece on the second Recognizance, which Bayl, were the Earl of Clare,
Lord Russel, Lord Gray of Wark, Levison Gower Esquire and John Offsey Esquire

And thus you have the best Account that can be given of Matter of Fact, in
reference to the late Business of the Duke of Monmouth, which was the whole
design of this Paper, to inform the Readers knowledge thereabout; And let him
(if he thinks fit) draw from thence what Inferences and Conclusions he please,
which will not be decided until Michaelmas Term next.

LONDON, Printed for Alexander Johnson, 1682.


