A True Account of the Proceedings AT THE TRIAL
Held at the MARSHALSEAS, on Friday the 17th. of this instant February, 1680.
by virtue of a special Commission Granted by the King, out of the Admiralty,
for Trying of Captain Crompton Guyther, and 7 of his Men, viz. William Coals,
Joseph Bullivant, Joh. Baxter, Francis Wansell, Francis Martyn, John Gibson and
William Jones, for Piracy by them committed on a Ship belonging to the Dutch,
on the 3d. of December last, who were all taken and Pinioned together, and
brought before the King and Council, who committed them to the Marshalseas.

THere being a Debt of 151612 l. agreed on, and stated by the King and Council,
to be due to the Administrators of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar,
for Damages done unto them by the Dutch, on 2 English Ships, Trading to the
East Indies; His Majesty was graciously pleased to Grant unto Geo. Carew,
Merchant and Administrator unto the said Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul
Pyndar, Letters of Reprisals, on the 19th* of May, in the 17th. Year of His
Majesty's Reign, causing them to be made Patents, and were passed under the
Great Seal of England* to remain effectual in Law, until the Sum of 151612 l.
before agreed on, and stated by His Masty and Council, shall be reprized and
satisfied.

In the year 1667, a Peace was concluded at Breda, betwixt England and Holland,
etc. wherein was an Article incerted generally* That all Actions and
Pretensions whatsoever, on either side; should by virtue of that Peace be
obliterated, disanull'd, and made void, wherein also Letters of Mart, and
Reprizals were comprehended.

In the year 1672, a new War commenced between England and Holland, and in the
year 1674 a common Alliance was concluded, but no reparation made or allotted to
the aforesaid Mr. Carew, and others claiming under the said Sir William
Courten, and Sir Paul Pyndar. Wherefore, and in pursuance of His Majesty's
gracious Letters Patents of Reprizal, Carew, etc. did in April, 1680, fit out
to Sea* Vessels* to reprize what they could, toward satisfaction of the Debt
before mentioned; But His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council sent Orders
to the Admiralty, to stop all such Ships and Men. And His Majesty did then also
in Council, by way of Supersedeas revoke the said Letters Patents, and Issued
forth Proclamation accordingly.

Notwithstanding which, Capt. Guyther in the Ship Bona adventure, put to Sea;
and did on or about the 3 d. of December following, seize a Galliot Hoy, being
called the Love of Rotterdam, laden with Wine and Pruans, bound from Bourdeaux
to Dort. Guyther being at Anchor in Cowes Road with the Prize; Daniel Gyles,
Marshal of the Admiralty, retook the said Vessel from Captain Guyther, together
with the Commission or Deputation which he had from Mr. Carew, and brought him
with his men Pinnioned together as Pirates to London, who were on the 1 st.
Jan. following by Warrant of Council, all Committed to the Marshalseas Prison
in Southwark, from whence they were brought to Trial. Upon which Mr. Carew, and
the rest of the Proprietors Arrested the said Daniel Gyles, for taking this
Galliot Hoy from Captain Guyther in so Arbitrary a manner, and without any
Legal Warrant for his so doing: But the Judges of the King's Bench discharged
Gyles on Common Bail, and Prejudged that the Captain and his Men should be
Hanged, notwithstanding their Actings were by Virtue of the said Letters
Patents.

His Majesty was graciously pleased at the special instance and pressure of the
Dutch Ambassador, etc. to grant a special Commission out of the Admiralty to
Try the aforesaid Captain Crompton Guyther, Will.Coals, Joseph Ballivant, John
Baxter, Francis Wansel, Francis Martyn, John G^bson, and W^l. Jones, for their
Lives, both for Felony and Piracy upon the Statute of the 28th of Henry the 8
th. cap. 15. Thereby constituting about 60 Judges and accordingly on Friday the
17. Febr. were brought to their Trial at the Marsh^lseas, where were at least
20 Judges on the B^nch.

Sir Liolin Jenkins being Judge of the Admiralty opened the Cause, and did in a
very Learned Speech set forth the mischeviousness of the Fact, and how that
such Actions if suffered might involve the Nation in another War, etc. Great
were the debates whether the Prisoners should be allowed Council, which at last
was granted them. The Witnesses were produced, but they pleaded Justification,
and Mr. Carew produced his Majesty's Letters Patents of Reprizal* which though
very long and tedious was Read and proved very Ample and Circumstantial: On the
other hand his Majesty's Supersedias under the Great Seal, was produced and
read, together with his Majesty's Proclamation which did positively prohibit
and forbid the said Carew from any Actings by virtue of the said Letters of
Reprizals, as also the Articles of Alliance between his Majesty and the States
General, and particularly that particular which made null and void those
Letters of Reprisal.

Great and tedious were the Debates on both sides for it held from ten in the
Forenoon till about four in the Afternoon, and the the Matter seemed to go hard
against the Prisoners: But Judge Charlton turned the Scale by saying, That they
did it not with a Fellonious intent, but by Warrant, and after they had taken
the Ship, they treated the men thereof civilly, and set them on shore, and came
into harbor: And therefore, he thought them not guilty of the Felony and Piracy
whereof they stood indicted: And declared, That he would wash his hands from
their Blood. Many particulars there were too teadious here to insert: Upon
which the Jury withdrew, and brought them in Not Guilty both of the Felony and
Piracy. And they were discharged accordingly.

Notwithstanding which, The whole Court were of Opinion, That Mr. Carew's
Commission was Void in Law, and would therefore have taken it from him. But Sir
George Tr^by Recorder of London oppos*d the same, saying, that since they were
trying Men for Depredations, they ought not to practice it themselves. But they
bound Mr Carew to answer the same at the King's Bench Bar.

London, Printed in the Year 1681.


