A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Irregular Proceedings At GVILD-HALL, About the Swearing
the TWO Pretended SHERIFFS Mr. NORTH and Mr. RICH. September 28. 1682
THE last Night my Lord Mayor issued out Tickets to the Aldermen in these Words:

Sir; Your Worship is desired to be at a Court of Aldermen at Guild Hall on
Thursday next at nine of the Clock in the forenoon, in your violet Gown and
Cloak, being the twenty eighth of September. Accordingly several Aldermen
appeared at Guild Hall, and it being the day appointed for the Swearing of
Sheriffs, they attended Thomas Papillon and John Dubois Esquires into the
Guild Hall at the hour appointed by the Lord Mayor, which they found guarded by
Foot-Companies of the Trained-Bands (a thing expressly contrary to the English
Constitutions, which has been jealous of nothing more than the preserving
Elections free from force or terror;) Some whereof were posted at the Doors
and presented their Muskets: But yet there was no refusal of entrance, but
rather an opening of the Files, and some respect shown. So all the aforesaid
Aldermen passed into the Council Chamger, where having staid a little while,
and supposing my Lord Mayor might go up to the Hustings directly, they went
down into the Hall toward the Hustings-door, and there abode some time,
attending his Lordships coming, the Soldiers with respect giving way. But
Lieutenant Colonel Quiney who was absent at their entry, came up to them very
much concerned, and made several turns without speaking to them, but commanded
the Soldiers several times to stand to their Arms, and so withdrew. But after
a quarter of an hour he came back again and commanded the Soldiers to face
about (and so altered their Figure) and to advance so as to encompass or
imprison the Aldermen, for there was not six foot square left them to stand
upon. Whereupon Quiney said to the Aldermen, I have a command from the
Lieutenancy to keep the Hall clear, and suffer none to be here till my Lord
Mayor comes. Upon this, several Aldermen demanded to see the Order, being ready
to obey all* Legal commands; and asked him, whether he did not know that they
were Magistrates of the City; and could believe it reached them? To which he
answered, I have none, but it is with the Major of the Regiment, and I do know
you, and you must remove. Further, the Aldermen declared, they were summoned to
wait on my Lord Mayor at the Guild Hall, and there attended in all
peaceableness. Whereupon he withdrew again for some time, but returning, said,
Gentlemen You must withdraw, I have a command to require it. But being again
demanded to show his Warrant or Order, he answered in a great heat, That he
would show none, nor to none such as they. Then laying hands first on Sir P.
W's. shoulder who stood next to him, he said, Sir You must remove; and called
on his Soldiers to advance close to the Bar, so as to thrust them away; Sir P.
W. only replied to him, We are in a lawful place, and on our Duty, desiring the
other Aldermen that were present, and the Soldiers, to take notice of the
violence offered. And surely it was such as is scarcely to be Paralleled,
especially in a well-governed City; that their Civil Magistrates should be so
affronted in their own Room. But Quiney answered, he cared not for Witness, he
would justify what he did, having Orders from the Lieutenancy so to do. Then
he took hold on Sir J. L. who was leaning on the Bar, and with very great and
repeated violence pulled him from off the step, and had like to have thrown him
down; who demanded still by what Order he did it? and that he would show the
same. But he replied again, he would show none: Then he took hold of Sir J. S.
and Sir T. G. and Ald. C. who likewise demanding to see his Orders, were
answered to the same purpose as aforesaid. Hereupon all the Aldermen desiring
the Soldiers who were present to take notice of the Assaults and Misdemeanors
of the said Quiney, they withdrew into the West part of the Hall, where diverse
persons were walking, viz. Withers, Wiseman, Nicols, Steventon, etc. some of
them being of the Lieutenancy, and others not. To whom it was said, Did not you
see the Misdem^anours of Quiney? But they instead of resenting the indignities
offered to those worthy Aldermen, who had served the City to so great a degree
that the mouth of malice it self may be stopped, answered, He followed but the
Orders of the Lieutenancy. Then it was asked them (being Acquaintance) How they
came by that Freedom in the Hall, when the Aldermen were so ill treated there?
Whereunto they answered, they were of the Lieutenancy, and attended the coming
of my Lord Mayor: The which the Aldermen told them they also did, but had not
the same civil treatment.

Not long after came my Lord Mayor, to whom these Aldermen joined themselves,
and went up out of the Great Hall into the Council Chamger, and Mr. Papillon
and Mr. Dubois with them: where being entered, the first words my Lord Mayor
said, were these, viz: Gentlemen, here are fine doings, to go and Swear
Sheriffs, and I not present! Whereunto Sir J. L. answered, Whoever told your
Lordship so, misinformed your Lordship; we came very peaceably to the Hall to
perform our duty, and know well what it is to administer an Oath, and had not
the least intention of such a thing, but to lay our claim by presenting
Sheriffs.

Sir R. C. also told his Lordship, he ought to be angry with those that had
given him false Information, rather than with those he was misinformed of; and
that nothing was intended or designed contrary to his Lordships frequent and
public Declaration, which was, that the matter should be determined by Law;
and it was advised that could not be done, unless Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois
did present themselves to be sworn.

Whereupon his Lordship seemed to rest satisfied; and immediately the rest of
the Aldermen with the other Sheriffs coming in, Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois
presented themselves to his Lordship, and Mr. Papillon read a Paper the
contents whereof were as follows.

To the Right Honorable, the LORD MAYOR and Court of ALDERMEN: The humble
Declaration of Thomas Papillon Mercer, and John Dubois Weaver, Citizens of
London.
OUR Absence in the Country on Midsummer-day last, and for some time before
and since, and our being personally Strangers to, and no way appearing or
concerning our selves with any of the Transactions or Proceedings then, or
since Used in the Choice of Sheriffs for this Honorable City and County of
Middlesex for the ensuing Year, would have Excused our Attendance upon your
Lordship and this Honorable Court at this time, and upon this Occasion, had we
not been Informed by diverse, that by the Suffrages of the Majority of the
Citizens in Common Hall, We were, and stand duly Elected Sheriffs for this City
and the County of Middlesex for the Ensuing Year.

Now though our Personal Vnacquaintance with the Proceedings used in that
Affair has been such, and that we have not received any Intimation or Command
concerning the same from your Lordship or this Honorable Court, whereby we
might have had an Opportunity of declaring our selves either ready to Accept,
or desirous to be Excused from that Office, as has been usual in former Cases
of the like Nature; yet in regard of the aforesaid Information, and that the
time for such Declaration, as well as for any further Election, is now Elapsed,
and not knowing of what Consequence it may be to us, nor what Inconveniences
or hazard we might be Obnoxious, or Exposed unto, if we should continue Silent
or Passive in that Affair:

Therefore for the avoiding all Prejudices and Inconveniences, we have thought
it a Duty Incumbent on us, to appear at this time before your Lordship and this
Honorable Court, not to Debate or question any the Proceedings or Transactions
in this matter, nor Officiously to Court an Office so Chargeable in it self,
and so Inconvenient to Us; But as being Citizens of London, and so under
Obligation to Serve the King and Country, when duly Called thereto; and
desirous to Excuse our selves from all Imputation of Crime or neglect of Duty
that might be Charged upon Us; We do with all Submission hereby Declare unto
your Lordship and this Honorable Court, that we are Ready, and do now tender
our selves to take upon us the Office of Sheriffs for the City of London and
County of Middlesex for the ensuing Year, and to be Sworn and Admitted into
that Office according to our Election; And in Order thereunto, to Attend your
Lordship and the Aldermen to the Hustings or elsewhere, and either there, or in
any other proper Place and manner to take the Oaths of the said Office, and
such other Oaths as the Law requires, and further to do and perform whatsoever
the Law, or the Rights and Customs of this City Require of Us concerning the
said Office, and We humbly beg your Lordships and the Courts Answer therein.

Guild Hall, 28 September. 1682. Thomas Papillon, John Dubois.


The which having read, Mr. Papillon Presented it to my Lord Mayor, but he
refusing to take it, Mr. Papillon gave it to a Member of the Court, who
Accepted it, to prove the Tender of themselves.

And his Lordship being Pressed to take the matter into Debate, for that the
Aldermen had been Summoned to a Court, he Answered, There was no Business: To
which it was Replied, We have much to say, for the Citizens seem to be thrown
out of Possession of the Sheriffwick, which they have enjoyed so many Azes by
Free Election: We desire fairly to tender our Sheriffs, in order to have the
Business more fairly determined at Law, according to your Lordships Promise,
and Answer to the many Addresses made, that the Law should determine it; and it
is the only way left us, though Troublesome and Chargeable. And we also desire
the matter may be Debated, that an Answer may be given to the Sheriffs who have
tendered themselves.

Sir P. W. then moved that the aforesaid Paper, and his Lordship^* Refusal of
it might be Recorded; then Sir R. C. whispered to his Lordship, and told him,
that if he took a Vote of the Court, he would engage them in it, and their
averseness to it, ought to alarm him not to take it upon himself, upon which he
did Hesitate some time, but yet at length was prevailed with to go to the
Hustings without further ado, taking Mr. North, and Calling Mr. Rich to go
with him; Mr. Papillon and Mr. Dubois went along with him also, and did prepare
themselves to have spoken to his Lordship and the Court on the Hustings, and so
did several of the Aldermen, the Lord Mayor and several Aldermen having
declared in the Council Chamger, that they might say what they had to say when
they came on the Hustings; But his Lordship would not hear them when they came
thither. But the Military Guards after admitting a few Persons, closed again,
so that the Liveries attending could not come near; and then his Lordship
called Mr. North and Mr. Rich to the Book to be Sworn; Mr. Papillon being on
the H^sting^, pressed the Lord Mayor that he might be heard; but my Lord
refusing to hear him, Mr. Papillon Presented a Paper Signed by himself and Mr.
Dubois as follows, the Substance of which he designed to have spoke.

To the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR and ALDERMEN at the Court of Hustings,
in the Guild Hall, London, Assembled for the Admission and Swearing the
Sheriffs for the City of London and County of Middlesex for the ensuing Year,
this 28th of September. 1682.
WE do here present our selves, and are ready to take upon us the Office of
Sheriffs of this Honorable City of London and County of Middlesex, for the
ensuing Year, to which, as we are Informed, we are Chosen by the Majority of
the Citizens, at the Common Hall of this City; And we are here ready, and do
tender our selves to be Admitted thereunto, and to take the Oath of Office, and
such other Oaths as the Law requires, and to do and perform whatsoever the Law,
or the Rights and Customs of this City require of us, relating to that Office.

But this Paper being rejected by his Lordship with great heat, it was
delivered to Sir John Lawrence as an Evidence of their tender; Upon which Mr.
Papillon and Mr. Dubois went to the Book with Mr. North and Rich, and Mr.
Papillon laid his Hand on the Book, and continued it there for some time, until
the Lord Mayor and some of the Aldermen Commanded them To forbear, and to keep
the Peace, and be gone; which they complied with, and retired: Having before
earnestly pressed to be heard, for that they had something of Importance to
say; and some of the Aldermen said, My Lord, when we came out of the
Council Chamger, you said, what we had to say on this Subject, we might speak
on the Hustings, and therefore we claim it of Right to be heard: But he refused
all, and Ordered to Proceed in Administering the Oath to North and Rich,
whereupon the duly Elected Sheriffs and six Aldermen withdrew, Protesting
against all the Irregular and Illegal Proceedings.

Printed for John Johnson


