A true Account of what past at the Election of Knights of the Shire for the
County of BVCKS, Correcting several Falsities and Mistakes, in a late Pamphlet
entitled, A Letter from a Freeholder of Buckinghamshire, to a Friend in
London, etc. in another Letter from an assured Hand. 1679.
YOU oblige me very much in sending me the News of the Town, accompanied with
those many Pamphlets, whereof I perceive the Press (at this time without
restraint) is grown very fruitful, being now made use of, not only to give vent
to Public Discontents, but also to serve private and particular turns; of
which that Pamphlet entitled, A Letter from a Freeholder of Buckinghamshire
to a Friend in London, concerning the Election of Knights of the Shire for the
said County, is a pregnant instance; an impartial account whereof, since you
are pleased to require it from me, being an Affair at which I was present, and
privy to the whole transaction, I cannot refuse to give you.

And first, I must necessarily inform you of the occasion of this Adjournment;
the High Sheriff being a Neighbor of the Town of Buckingham, and having before
the last Parliament engaged himself to several Persons of Quality (his
Neighbors) to appoint the said Election there, being the Ancient Shire-Town,
and having laid his Commands upon the Undersheriff for that purpose;
nevertheless, contrary to his duty, he being an Inhabitant of Ailesbury, was
prevailed with to bring the said Election thither, without the privity or
consent of his High Sheriff, of which practice the High Sheriff expressed a
great resentment at the time of the said Election, and was hardly dissuaded by
the Duke of Bucks, and the rest of the Gentlemen then present, from adjourning
the same then to Buckingham, the Undersheriff also serving himself of their
Intercession to salve this matter, and promising faithfully, if the like
opportunity happened, during his Shrievalty, that he would not fail to deliver
the Writ to the High Sheriff, and observe his Commands in all things relating
thereunto; which promise he also renewed several times since the last
dissolution, at the last Assizes, and after, both by word and Letter.

Mr. Hampden the younger having obtained the Writ for this last Election,
caused the same to be delivered to the Undersheriff, who gave an account
thereof to his High Sheriff by Letter of the 6th of August, professing therein,
that if his High Sheriff had any intentions of bringing it to Bucks, he was
ready to obey him therein: whereupon he sent to him to attend him with the
Writ, but the next day, being the 7th of Aug. he received another Letter from
him, intimating, that at the Election of Ailesbury, he had been so threatened by
the Gentlemen that met upon that occasion, that both he and his High Sheriff
should be complained of in the next Parliament, in case they adjourned the
Court, that he durst not but represent the same to him, and further, in a
Postscript, said, that Pannick fear they put him into had so prevailed upon
him, that he had issued forth Precepts to give notice, that the next
County Court was to be held at Ailesbury, but no way to limit the Election to
be held there, as is falsely related in the said Pamphlet.

The High Sheriff thereupon, to prevent all unnecessary trouble to the Country,
did issue forth his Precepts immediately to all his Bailiffs of the several
Hundred of the County, to give notice to the High-Constables of each Division,
willing them to give notice to the Petty Constables of his Resolutions to
adjourn the same County Court to Buckingham, which were duly executed by all
the Bailiffs in all parts of the County, but stopped and suppressed in the hands
of the High-Constables in the three Hundreds of the Chiltren, and other parts
about Ailesbury, by the endeavors of some Gentlemen that were concerned for
Ailesbury, to whom the Country, if they received any unnecessary trouble
thereby, and not to the High Sheriff, do owe the blame; and not that the
Bailiffs did decline it upon any Illegality, as is falsely suggested.

Which Resolution the said High Sheriff had taken in favor of Sir Peter
Tyrrell, and his Party, who stood in Competition with the Lord Lattymer, and
whose Interest was Espoused at the former Election by the Duke of Bucks, in a
very strange and extraordinary manner (of which I suppose you are not ignorant)
as also at this last Election, although he was not present, as he designed to
be, whose not succeeding therein, is the true ground of all that rancour and
animosity the Duke has expressed against the Town, and Sir Richard Temple, and
of all those Libels against them, and nicknames so often mentioned in that
Pamphlet, which has been so falsely given him, of which I think it no
unnecessary digression to give you this short account.

The Town of Bucks, after the Dissolution of the Convention that brought in the
King; having severally given their words to Sir Richard Temple, and Sir William
Smith, to choose them as Burgesses for the next Parliament, and the Duke of
Bucks having engaged Sir Richard to promote his Secretary, Mr. Matthew
Clifford, Sir William Smith called in Mr. John Dormer of Lee, lately deceased,
to join against him; but finding their Interest too weak, betook themselves to
several Arts to draw off the Town from Sir Richard; amongst the rest, they
wrote a Letter to the Town, taking notice, that the Town was impoverisht much
for want of Public Meetings, and supposed the greatest cause was, the want of
a convenient Town Hall, which they were resolved to build; of which Proposition
Sir R. T. having notice, wrote a Letter to the Town from London, to this
effect, That he hoped those Gentlemen had no design to stand for Burgesses,
since such practices would make the Election illegal, and void; for which
reason, he hoped the Town did not expect, that at this time he should follow
their Example: Nevertheless, this Proposition was so pursued in his absence by
the aforesaid Gentlemen, that the Ground was viewed, and three hundred pounds
laid down by Mr. Dormer, Sir William Smith engaging to lay down the other three
hundred; whereupon a Friend of Sir R. T's. that lived in the Town, being sent
to by the Bailiff and Burgesses, the matter was pressed upon him, that these
Gent. had thought it lawful and safe to do this for the Town, and therefore Sir
R. ought not to decline doing something for them; he apprehending lest this
should cause some sudden change in them toward Sir R. told them, that though
he had no order from Sir R. yet he would venture to begin the building of one
half of it, if the other two Gentlemen would build the other half, and
immediately sent to know what Timber was in the Town, and bought it up to the
value of forty pound, and if it were safe, he said he doubted not Sir R. would
thank him for it, and go through with it; but as soon as Sir R. had advice
thereof, he writ him word that it was a thing not to be done, and he would come
down and further satisfy both him and his Friends concerning it; which he did
forthwith, and then calling the Bailiff and Burgesses together, declared that
he neither could nor would engage in this or any like matter, whether they
would choose him or no; and after this he had but six Voices, and Mr. Dormer
five, and the Competition was very hot between them who should gain the other
two, which when Sir R. T. effected, Dormer turned over all his Voices to Sir
Wi^^iam Tyrringham, with whom also he had a great Contest, who without doubt
could they have made any thing of this story, would have made use of it against
him; though it be now revived by his Enemies, upon this occasion, to color
their irregular proceeding at the former Election. But that he ever carried a
chip of this away from the Town, or brought any thither, as has been falsely
and maliciously reported, is well know to the Town and Country to be a
notorious untruth, the same having remained ever since in the Town where it was
bought, and having been long since given to the Town, to be employed as they
should think fit.

But to return to our former story; Sir Peter Tyrrel and his friends, having
the Conduct of the bringing the Election to Buckingham, accompanied the High
Sherriff to Ailesbury on Tuesday the 19. of Aug. cir^ying with him as many
Freeholders, as might make a Jury; nor was Sir R. T. called into it until the
matter was actually to be done, when the High Sherriff invited him to go along
with him to Ailesbury, but some occasions prevented him that he came after him.

The next morning was appointed for them all to meet in Court, where the
adjournment was delayed till near eight of the clock, for the Under-Sherriffs
coming; nor did the said Mr. Hambden or the Country come in till after eight,
or the Duke of Buckingham, though he came there overnight, express any
dissatisfaction to the High-Sherriff, or opposition to the adjournment, the
obligation he had to the Town of Buckingham, and concern for Sir P. T. making
the Sherriff and all others believe he came in favor of it, though it appeared
quite contrary afterward.

The Duke of Buckingham at the instigation (as is supposed) of the Tar-box
Justice Sir J. B. an upstart and great incendiary amongst his Neighbors, and a
professed enemy to Buckingham; having borrowed the Chair at the last Sessions,
to affront and abuse the Town, and reviled them at the last Assizes; for which
he was justly and publicly rebuked by the Judge, did endeavor to engage the
Country, who were come into Ailesbury, to make a halt at Winslow, and the next
morning arriving before eight of the Clock at Buckingham, prevailed with the
under Sherriff to put a further affront upon the High Sherriff, and adjourned
the Court before he came, which was not long after eight. But as for the
accident that is related of the Sherriffs encounter with a Parson, there is
nothing more notoriously false; the matter being barely thus, that the Inn
yard, to which the Court was adjourned, being very full, the Sheriff at his
entrance finding his way obstructed, and his men endeavoring to make way, he
clapped Spurs to his Horse to ride in, and by accident the Horses hind legs slipped
up and fell with him, but there was neither a crying out a Hambden or a Wharton
by the Parson, nor a whipping of him by the Sherriff, or any attempt of the
Parson upon the Sheriff, or other matters, save only that he stood in the way
accidentally next him with others; these passages being not only false but very
rediculous, the Sherriff having half a score men with him well Horsed and
Armed, who certainly would not have endured any affront to be put upon him of
this kind.

As to that Adventure of his Son, the matter was thus; The Son was sent by the
Father to the Under-Sherriff, to know, since the Election was past, where the
Indentures would be sealed; which Message the Son delivered some thing too
pleasantly, calling him Mr. High-Sherriff, to which the Under-Sherriff replied,
That he was sealing them there upon the place; he added afterward, as he
related to his Father, not the demand of a Poll; but whether any Poll had been
demanded, which he alleged he did for his Father's security, since the Return
was making, for that at his coming out of Town, the Streets being full of Free
holders, cried, a Chester, and a Verney, as it seems they had done the Night
before, not twenty or thirty Boys by order, as is related, but by Newport
three Hundreds, who came there the day before, and lodged there all night; but
we will suppose he made such demand as is related, though the Crowd that was
about him was such at the delivery of his message, and the noise, that those
that were nearest him were not able to give any true account thereof, and that
he erred in the Method of it, in not naming the person; yet having declined it,
when better informed, and rid civilly away from the Company, yet he being a
Freeholder, at present had a right to demand a Poll if he would, and might
further have insisted upon it for those Gentlemen that were cried up; therefore
there was little ground for that notorious riot then committed; which was begun
by an eminent and over-busie person, who, upon his going off, called to him to
speak with him, and when he came up to him struck him with a great Truncheon of
Oak which he brought with him into the Field, though the blow fell short of his
Head, and brushing on his Belly lighted upon his Horse, by whose Example the
Multitude were encouraged to follow him into the Town, not only with Whips, but
naked Swords, crying, kill him, prick him in the back, and several times
stopping of him in the way, and endeavoring to pull him off his Horse, and
pursued him with that violence into the Town, that he was forced to run in at a
Wicket of a Gate to save his life, where his Horse could scarce be brought out
afterward; nor were they herewith appeased, but endeavored forcibly to enter
the House, breaking the Windows, and searching the Stables for his Horse, and
affrighted the Maidservant to that degree with Swords and Pistols, that they
put her into Convulsion-Fits, and pursued their Riot, until by some of the
Sherriffs men that were left behind him, and Constables of the Town, they were
endeavored to be seized and chased back; of all which proceedings, I suppose,
there will be a further account taken according to Law. As to those reproachful
words they gave of the Burgesses that were chosen, it was begun only by Sir
Tarbox Busby, and some small party that followed him of the Rabble, and not
seconded by any person of Quality; nor did the Knights of the Shire, nor any
other that I could be informed of, declare any aversion to the Town upon the
account of the Election, but were willing enough to have staid in the Town, had
it not been for the Duke of Buckingham, and the aforesaid Sir T. B.

Thus, Sir, I have given you a just account of this matter, I shall now only
add, that it is worth the remarking, that those who gave their Voices for Sir
Peter Tyrrel, at the Election of the Town, all offered their services to the
Lord Lattymer before, and at the very morning of the Election, though they take
all ways by Libels and otherwise to reproach the Town for it, and that the
intermedling of Peers of the Realm in Elections, made by the Commons, is very
illegal, and has been frequently complained of in Parliament, as a high
Invasion of the liberty of the Subject, and may be of evil Consequence if
countenanced for the future.

Buckingham, Aug.30. 1679.
FINIS.

