A TRUE ACCOUNT, OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST John Ayloff, AND Richard Nelthorp
Esquires AT THE King's-Bench-Bar,
On the 27 th. of October, 1685. Relating to their award of Death, upon their
being Outlawed for HighTreason, in conspiring the Death of his late most
Sacred Majesty, Charles the Second of Ever Blessed Memory: Together with their
Behavior, Confession, and Manner of Execution on the 30 th. of October, in the
year aforesaid: On which day, Richard Nelthorp was executed on a Gibbet Erected
at Greys-Inn-Gate in Holbourn, and John Ayloff on a Gibbet Erected at
Chancery Lane End in Flee^^street: Both Quartered as in Case of High Treason.

SUch are the horrid crimes of Treason and Murder, that by daily experience we
see they seldom go unpunished even in this life: The Wise man gives wholesome
advice when he fore-warns men to take heed they do not curse the King, although
it be in their secret Chambers, lest the Fowls of the Air make discovery
thereof: much more ought men to Tremble at the thoughts of any undertaking
against the life of God's Vicegerent. It is a horrid murder for a private man
to compass the Death of his Father; and much more horrid the Father of his
Country; for although, men may think to flee out of one Country into another, and
secure themselves from the vengeance due to such crimes, yet Providence so
orders it, that those very methods they take for their security, commonly
brings them to Justice, as we have a fresh Example of the persons now brought
thereto.

John Ayliff and Richard Nelthorp Esquires; men whose Education is against them
and who were not Ignorant of the Law; yet having once violated the same, by
joining in the horrid Conspiracy against the life of the mercifulest of Kings,
his late Majesty of ever blessed memory, his present Majesty, the utter
subversion of the Government, etc. They were not content, by fleeing from
Justice to live in contempt of the of the Law, but to employ that time God
permitted for their Repentance, in the enterprise of fresh Treasons against his
most sacred Majesty that now is.

John Ayloff took his lot with the late Earl of Argyle setting up for one of
the Rulers of the Scotch Commonwealth, and after the design was blasted, and he
amongst others taken, the sense of his Guilt run him forthwith upon the Rock of
Despair, by laying violent hands upon himself, and with a Penknife or other
Instrument which he carried about him he rips up his own belly as far as Nature
would suffer him; but God in Mercy to his Soul, so ordered it, that he did not
Dye thereof, but after a long illness Recovered, and was with others of those
traitors brought for England, and soon after committed to Newgate, where he
remained Eight or Ten Weeks.

Rich. Nelthorp, a Person brought up to the Law, but leaving that Study engage
d in the R^e-house conspira cie and with the said Ayloff be^^^ since attainted
by Out-Lawry of High Treason, was of those who came over with the late Duke of
Monmouth^ and one of the principal Captains in that Western Rebellion. Soon
after the deseat of the Rebels, being taken and committed to some Goal in the
West Country, was from thence brought to Newgate, where his Crimes had little
better Effect (then the other in Scotland) behaving himself for sometime like a
Person destracted, and very impatient under the sufferings which his Treason
had brought upon him.

On Monday the 26 th. of October, 1685 Upon the motion of the King's Council, a
Habeas Corpus was granted, to bring up these two Criminals to the King's-
Bench-Bar at Westminster, and being accordingly on Tuesday the 27 th. Ditto,
brought up by the Keeper of Newgate to the said Bar. The Lord Chief Justice
Herbert, and the other Judges of that Court sitting on the Bench.

First, Mr. Ayloff was called to hold up his hand, and told that he had been
Indicted by the Name of John Ayloff late of London Esquire for High Treason in
conspiring the Death of his late Majesty, the subversion of the Government etc.
That he had thereupon been Out-lawed, and stood attainted of High Treason, was
therefore asked what he had to say why Judgment should not be awarded, for him
to dye according to Law.

To which Mr. Ayloff at first replied he had been out of the Land and did not
know of it, at last said, that he had seen or heard only of a printed Trial of
Captain Walcot, wherein Mr. West had made some mention of him; but he desired
to know what was sworn against him by the Witnesses.

Then the same Method being used to Mr. Nelthorp, he answered very little, only
said he had not conspired the Death of the King.

After that, the Lord Chief Justice in an Excellent Speech, declaring that it
was no hard case for Traitors to be Executed upon an Out-lawry, and how
inexcusable they of all men were, who had not only fled from Justice, deprived
themselves of a Trial, by standing in contempt of the Law, but engaged since in
other Treasons and Rebellions; his Lordship also giving them diverse Christian
admonitions to improve the short time they had left for the good of their
Immortal Souls.

In conclusion told them, that nothing remained for that Court but to award
Judgment upon the Out-lawries. And a Rule was made for their Execution on
Friday the 30th day of the said Month, as in Cases of High Treason.

Mr. Ayloff then desired he might have the liberty of his Friends coming to
him, and the same being granted, provided it was in the presence of a Keeper,
they were remanded to Newgate.

On Thursday the 29th Ditto, one of his Majesty's Council moved the Court of
Kings Bench, that whereas a Rule was made for the Execution of the said John
Ayloff and Richard Nelthorp as the next day; for a more public Example, one
of them, viz. Ayloff might be Executed over against the Temple Gate in
Fleet Street, and Nelthorp against Grayes Inn in Holborun, to which Inns of
Courts they did formerly belong when they Studied the Law; and the Court
ordered it to be done accordingly.

Pursuant to which Rules of Court on Friday the 30th Ditto about ten in the
Forenoon, first Richard Nelthorp was drawn from Newgate on a Sled, to a Gibbet
erected over against Grayes Inn Gate; he had on a Black Suit, and two in Black
Habit went by the Sled, viz. on each side one. After it followed an Elderly
Person also in Mourning, he was but a short time at the Gibbet before Executed,
he spoke to several that were near him with a seeming cheerfulness, Praying
also with great earnestness, and to appearance at this last moment of his Life
submitted with greater patience to the punishments which his Treasonable
practices had brought upon him, then he did during his Imprisonment; very
readily, addressing himself to undergo the Sentence which the Law had
pronounced. He had on a Whlte Satin Cap over a Linen one, and himself helped
to pull it down over his Face. Being turned off, he Hanged the usual time, and
then was Quartered, etc.

John Ayloff, by some called Col. Ayloff, according to the Rule of Court made
for his Execution, was delivered by the Keeper of Newgate, on the 30 th. of
October to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, between Ten and Eleven in the
Morning; when being put into a Slead; he was conveyed through the Old-Bayly and
Fleet Street to a Gibbet Erected between Chancery Lane End, and one of the
Temple Gates, where upon his arrival being in the Slead, he confessed that he
was in the Rebellion raised by Argile in Scotland, and was Conscious of the
late Conspiracy, that he suffered justly and deservedly, praying for the King,
and desiring the Prayers of all people, but more especially of those that were
spectators; after which and the like Expressions, he came out of the Slead,
again, and desired God to bless all present, lifting up his hands and Eyes
toward heaven, when looking upon the Gibbet he ascended, and in ascending,
repeated his Prayers for the People, praying to God to keep them in the right
way of Loyalty and Obedience, etc. and to preserve the Protestant Religion;
being ascended, he prayed a while to himself, and turning at the request of the
Executioner, his Back to the Ladder; he said that he was now willling to dye,
but bid the Executioner not to turn him off till he gave notice; the signal
being the lifting up his hands; when being bid to go somewhat lower on the
rounds of the Ladder, the sooner to put him out of his pain, when turned off,
he after having prayed a while, said he was ready, biding the Executioner turn
him off, which was accordingly done, when having hanged about half an hour; he
was cut down and quartered according to Sentence, and his Quarters to be
disposed of, at the pleasure of the King.

This may be Printed, R. L. S. October the 30th. 1685

LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet, 1685.


