A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS Against the Criminals, at the Assizes of
Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-delivery, at the Market-House Holden in NEW-WINDSOR
for the County of BERKS.
Which began on Monday the 27th. of July, 1685. and ended on Tuesday the 28th
of the same: Giving a Relation of the Trials of diverse Notorious Malefactors,
tried for Roberies, Felonies, Murder, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors;
together, with their Names, Number: And more particular, an Account of such as
Recieved Sentence of Death, were Burnt in the Hand, and ordered to stand in the
Pillory.
Monday, and Tuesday, the 27th. and 28th. of July, 1685. being the days
appointed, for holding the Assizes of Nisiprius, Oyer and Terminer, and
Jail-delivery for the County of Berks, at New-Windsor: On the 27th. Baron
Gregory arrived there, when after the Sermon ended and some refreshment, he
passed to the Town Hall and caused the Commission to be read; most of the
Justices in Commission of the Peace for that County being present, which ended,
Order was given to adjourn the Court till Seven the next Morning, and that all
persons who had any thing there to do, might give their Attendance at the time
aforesaid. On Tuesday the 28th. about Seven in the Morning the Court
accordingly Sat upon the Nisiprius in the Market-House; intending to try the
Criminals in the Town Hall, but that being found incommodious, by reason of its
closeness and the heat of the Weather, the Market-House was chosen, likewise
the Criminals Trials came on in the Afternoon, being tried successively by two
several Juries, sworn to try between our Sovereign Lord the King, and the
Prisoners they should have in their charge, upon the Trials of their several
Lives and Deaths, etc.

The Names of the Juriors.
Robert Lovel. Abraham Absalom. John Pointer. Richard Cottrel. William
Alexander. Richard Seaford. Robert Newbery. Thomas Twinerose. Thomas Wilks.
William Newton. Godfry Web. John Curson. George Langton. Richard Alden. William
Miles. Thomas Piggot. Thomas White. Richard West. John Tickner. Williaem
Miller. Jacob Seward. Edward Pasemore. Anthony Martin. Thomas Gerring.


The Juriors sworn, the Proceedings against the Prisones, etc. were these.

John Gowen, of the Parish of Harwell in the County of Berks, Indicted for
stealing a Gelding Value Fifty Shillings; a Mare Value Forty Shillings;
together with a Colt, valued at Twenty Shillings, from William Lidiot, on the
20th. of June last, who pleading not Guilty to the said Indictment; the
Witnesses for the King being sworn, deposed that the Gelding, Mare, and Colt
being missed out of Lediots Ground, and diligent search made after them, they
were followed by the Tracks to the Town of Harwell, where they found them in a
Stable, fast tied with Halters about their Necks, whereupon they demanding of
the people of the house to whom the Stable belonged, who brought them thither?
who discribing him, diligent search thereupon made, he about an hour or two
after was apprehended, as he endeavored to make his escape a back way: To this
he pleaded, that having been at a Fair in Wiltshire, and Riding on his own Mare
by the Grounds of Lidiot, the Gelding, Mare, and Colt, geting out of the
enclosure followed him; but it appearing to be twenty Miles distance from the
place where they first were, to the place where he had tied them up, and that
he had given the Inn*keeper charge of them; and over and above, having no body
to prove his Life and Conversation to be Honest, or by what means he subsisted,
he was found Guilty.

Daniel Holderness, a Youth about fourteen Years of Age, Indicted for stealing
between three and four Pounds in Money from Matthew Grove of Ockingham in the
County of Barks, on the 12th. of March last; upon whose Trial it appeared, that
the Prosecutor having been a Servant to William Grove, and received ten Pounds
for Wages, left a part of it in his Trunk; (upon his going away from his
Master) till he had a convenience to send for it, during which time it was
broken open, and the Prisoner living in the Nature of a servant with William
Grove at the time it was broke open, and soon after running away gave cause to
suspect him, and the rather by reason he was observed to have Monys, which they
could not otherwise concieve how he came by it: It was further alleged he had
made a kind of a confession, but he denying it in Court, and pleading what he
had said was out of fear extorted from him by threats, and no possitive proof
of the taking it apparent, he was acquitted.

John John's, and Richard Gunner jointly Indicted for stealing one Dozen of
Felt-Hats, to the Value of Forty Shillings from Edward Kidgel of the County of
Berks on the 4th. of June last; upon whose Trial, it appeared that the
Prosecutor sending a Box of Hats to a Chapman of his by a Wagon; the Number
specified, were upon the arrival of that Box missing, so that inquiries being
made into the matter, a Barge-man informed Mr. Kidgel that he saw the former of
the Prisoners have a parcel of such like Hats, upon which he was apprehended
who confessed his Companion, saying he took them out of the Box as the Wagon
stood in the street, it being in the Night time and very dark, and that Gunner
watched till he had effected it, and that seven of them were sold at
Maidenhead. This being sworn to be the confession of John's before the Justice;
upon his first being Apprehended, he notwithstanding, pleaded in the Court he
found them, but that being looked upon as a frivelous pretense, he was found
Guilty; but there being no other proof than what John's had confessed against
Gunner, he was acquitted.

William Stainy and Jsaack Stevens, Indicted for Robbing Alice Bowls, of
Marlow in the County of Berks, of Ribbon, Lace, Silks and other Goods, to the
value of Thirty pounds, on the 25 of December last: Upon the Trial, Alice
Bowls gave Evidence that she coming over Maiden-head-Thicket, was set upon by
two men, who violently threw her down and bound her Hands to one Tree and her
Legs to another and held a Pistol to her to prevent her crying out, and then
took away the Goods beforementioned with diverse others in a little Trunck
which Trunck upon search she sometime after found in Staney's House, whom she
did affirm was one of the Parties that had Robed her, and left her bound where
she must have perished, had not People came luckely by, but as for Stevens she
was not positive. To this Stany pleaded th^^ he had the Trunk and diverse goods
mentioned in the Indictment, but that he found them near one Mr. Winwoods house
in his way to Colebrook, and that no Claim in a considerable time being laid
to them, he sold them: but the Jury not believing him in that point, and he
having been otherwise suspected, they found him Guilty of the Felony and Robery
etc. But there being no positive Proof against Stevens he was acquitted.

Robert Carter, Indicted for Stealing 800 weight of Hay, and 6 Bushels of Oats,
from Henry Hubbert of Ockingham, in the County aforesaid, on the 1st of June,
upon the Trial it appeared that Carter had taken the Hay and Oats off the
Ground in Cocks in the day time, nor did he deny it in Court, but pleaded for
himself, that the Ground whereon they stood he had a claim too, and paid Rent
for it, having a Grant for a continued possession, and that he gave notice
before he took of the Goods mentioned, when in the end it appearing there had
been former difference between the Prisoner and the Prosecutor, and that this
prosecution proceeded from that Animossity it being thought rather a Tresspass
than a Felony; the Jury Acquitted Carter.

John Osbourn of N^w-Windsor, Indicted for the murder of Edward Sprag, (of the
same place) on the 25th. of July, by giving him a Wound under the right Pap, of
which he instantly dyed; upon the Trial of Osbourn it appeared that Sprag
coming out of a Victualling house where he had been to make Inquiry for
company, found Osbourn making Water against the Wall, who being a Soldier and
having a Sword by his side, Sprag began to pull at it in a jesting manner,
which occasioned them to Push each other with their Hands: so that in the end a
kind of a Scuffle passed between them, though most of the Spectators took it
not to be in Earnest, yet it so far Exasperated Sprag that in some Rage he
offered to Fight Osbourn with one Hand, and thereupon threw his Head in his
Face, which occasioned them to close; whereas Osbourn bitt Spragg by the
Forehead, and finding opportunity to disingage himself, retired a distance from
him, but Sprag finding himself hurt made after him, who drawing his Sword held
the point against him, biding him keep off, but whether he minded it not, or
that Osbourn pushed; the Spectators could not well discern, but so it happened
that he received a mortal Wound, of which after some Scuffling with Osbourn he
dyed, though many Applications were made the Wound bleeding inward; to this
Osbourn pleaded he had no Malice to the deceased, and was sorry for what he had
unhappily done, and that he began with him first, that as much as in him lay he
shunned and avoided him, knowing him to be too hard for him; that he bid him
keep off, but he pressing on run himself upon his sword he not making any push
at him, and in fine, no premeditated Malice appearing, the Jury found him
Guilty of Manslaughter only.

James Smith of Suning-Hill, in the County of Berks, tried upon to several
Indictments; the first for stealing a Horse, value four Pound, on the 10th. of
March last, from William Bartlet: The second for stealing two Mares in April
last from James Bennet; to both these Indictments he pleading not Guilty, upon
his Trial it was proved against him, that the Horse and Mares were found in the
custody of those persons to whom he had sold them, and that upon their being
questioned they produced him as their Principal, he not denying but that they
had so bought them; whereupon being demanded by the Court how he came by them,
he alleged that his Father dying left him them, and he being necessitated was
fain to sell them for ready money; but not being able to prove it or produce any
honest person to give a good Character of him; he was found Guilty upon both
Indictments.

John Higs Indicted for stealing twenty Sheep valued at 13 l. from one Mr.
Harris of the County aforesaid; upon the Trial it appeared that the Sheep being
lost out of Harris's Ground, and strict inquiry being made after them, they
were found in the custody of one Bagley, who being taxed with the Felony.
alleged that he bought them of Higs, and thereupon produced him who not being
able to deny it, was sent to Prison, yet in Court endeavored to excuse it; but
Bagley appearing against him, and being positive upon Oath that he bought them
of the Prisoner, and he not being able to give any good account of himself, he
was found Guilty.

Richard North of Finchamstead, Indicted for taking three Shillings from John
Bowyer, under pretense of being an Officer; which upon Trial appeared thus,
North meeting Bowyer upon the Road on the 20th. of January last, and having
before understood he was in trouble and fearful of an Arrest, pretending to be
an Officer, told him he had a Writ against him laying hold on him at the same
time; but told him withal, if he would give him any gratuitie he would wink at
it and let him go; whereat Bowyer being terrified under the apprehensions of an
Imprisonment, gave him three Shillings, all the Money he had about him, and so
was dismissed, but understanding afterward that North was no Officer, but had
cheated him of his Money, he brought this Indictment against him: Upon this
Evidence, North who could say little for himself, was found Guilty of cheating
Bowyer of the Money specified in the Indictment.

Thomas Luggrave of Reading, being Indicted for uttering Seditious words, on
the 27th. of June, in Favor of the late D. of Monmouth, and Rebels late in
Arms, which were proved against him, and it appearing that he had been a
Restless Factious Person he was found Guilty of the Misdemeanour.

The Proceedings having been thus far, the Court proceeded to pass Sentance on
such as were found Guilty as follows.

Three Persons Burnt in the Hand, having recieved their benefit of their Clergy
viz.

John John's, for stealing Twelve Hatts, John Higgs, for stealing Twenty Sheep,
and John Osbourn, for Manslaughter.

Two to stand in the Pillory viz.

Richard North, to stand at Ockingham from the Hours of Twelve to Two, for
Cheating John Bowyer: Thomas Luggrave to stand at Reading, for the same space
of time, for speaking Seditious words.

Three Received Sentence of Death viz.

John Gowin, for stealing a Gelding and a Colt, William Staney, for Robing
Alice Bowls on the Highway, and James Smith for Horse stealing.

And so ended this remarkable Assize, the Court riseing on Tuesday about Nine
in the Evening.

This may be Printed, August, the 1st. 1685. R. L. S.

FINIS.
London Printed by E. Mallet, in Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge, 1685.


