A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE BEHAVIOR, CONFESSIONS, AND Last Dying Words, OF Abraham
Bigs, Richard Cabourn, Jane Langworth, and Elizabet Stoaks. AT TYBURN, On
Wednesday the 21th. of December, 1684 for High Treason Murder, Felony and
Burglary, etc.
Printed by ORDER, etc.

STRANGE it is, that the Fatal and untimely Ends of such as suffer for Crimes
Notorious, should not deter others from running into the like Extravegances
thereby, to reender themselves obnoxious to the to the Law; or that the
expiring Confessions of such as have made their Exits by untimely Death, should
not be a sufficient Warning; yet not to prolong so serious a Matter, I shall
proceed to give the Reader an Impartial Account of the Behavior, and Last
Dying Speeches of the Persons Executed, etc.

Abraham Bigs, an old Offender, being tried and cast, for breaking open the
House of John Middleton, and stealing thence diverse Goods of value; as wearing
Apparel, Puter plate, and other Materials of considerable Value; and receiving
Sentence thereupon, it was observed that after he returned to Newgate, he
behaved himself with much mildness and decency, greatly bewailing his past
misspent Life, saying that he had been a grievour Sinner Guilty of many
Robberies, yet he hoped not but God, out of his infinite Mercys, though far
beyond his deserts would pardon his many Transgressions, and by giving him a
timely since of his Impieties, suffer him at least in these the latter Moments
of his Life, to lay hold on him by Faith, that so his Mercy might be sufficient
for him, that he might be saved through the meritorious Death and Passion of
his Blessed Savior and Redeemer; adding that he knew his sins too great to be
pardoned, without the commiseration of a most Gracious Savior, whose death he
confessed was a Plenary and satisfactory Sacrifice for the sins of the whole
World, saying that he had been a sinner in the suparlative degree, Guilty of
all manner of Offenses as to Robery, except, that of the High-Pad; but was not
able to make restitution for the wrong he had done, which if he had been he
would gladly have made retaliation. To such Divines as attended out of their
charitable inclination, him and his condemned Fellows, to give them Sacred
instructions relating to their Immortal welfare: He gave great attention,
never thinking himself sufficiently assured of Life and Salvation, continuing
desirous of instructions on that occasion, not only during his confinement in
Prisong but at Tyburn.

Abraham Bigs being brought to the place of Execution, and well observing that
there was no hopes of mercy in giving his life a longer date, greatly bewailed
himself praying very frequently, and desiring God of his infinite-Mercy not to
lay his manifold Transgressions to his Charge; saying that he had for his
reitterated Offenses long before deserved Death, but now offended Justice had
overtaken him: He confessed he had been Guilty of many Roberies, and for many
years subsisted by no other maintenance than what he got by his unlawful
Practices, having defrauded many and been instrumental in drawing away Youths
to Leudness as himself had been drawn away: He once, not imagining he should
have followed such a Course of life, as must inevitably undo him; but addicting
himself to bad company in his Youth, he was enticed and drawn away by his Lusts
to satisfy which, he left no wickedness that seemed pleasing in his Eyes
unattempted; desiring the Spectators to let him be an Example to them, and that
his shameful and untimely End, might deter them from Associating themselves
with Evil Company which had been his ruin, by intraping him in a snare that had
brought upon him a disgraceful Death; but he hoped through the Meritorious
Death and Passion of his merciful Redeemer he should find Mercy at the hands of
the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, desiring all present to pray for him.

Mr. Ordnary observing him very penitent, the better to know how he stood
affected as to this future State, desired him to pray audibly which he did,
rehearsing the Lords Prayer, with much fervency, desiring that others would
pray for him, and so continued extremely penitent to the last.

Richard Caborn, Tried and found Guilty for Clipping the Lawful Coin of this
Kingdom, as King Charles the First's Half Crowns, Shillings and Sixpences, he
owning the Fact receieved Sentence as in cases of High Treason; upon which
being sensible of his great and grieveus offense, he declared himself much
afflicted in mind; for leaving his more advantageous Employ, to take such
unlawful Practices in hand, which had in the End brought him to a shameful
Death, desiring those that came to visit him, that they would beware of bad
Company which had been to him a snare, drawing him into the ill conveniences
that had forfaited his Life to the Law, and for which, according to Conviction
he was to suffer; adding that he might have lived happily had he followed his
own Employment: But for his sins he said God had given him over to follow these
Extravegances that ended in his ruin. To the Sermon preached on Sunday last, he
was very attentive, desiring his fellow Convicts to give serious attention to
what concerned their Immortal Business, and so continued to the day of
Execution, not rejecting any advice tending to the Immortal welfare of his
soul.

Richard Caborn being drawn in a Sledge to the place of Execution and there put
into the Cart with Eyes and hands lifted up, besought the great God of Heaven
an Earth to have Mercy upon his poor soul which had but a few Moments respit
ever it must appear before him, and least his prayers should be Insufficient to
attoan for his manifold Transgressions, he earnestly desired the hearty Union
of the Spectators in praying with him, his Prayer to himself ended, he said he
had been well decended and brought up in Learning and such other Educations as
accomplished him to live in the World; but degenerating from his first
Principals he fell into Evil Company, who drew him into such Practices as were
unlawful; and by reitterating his Crimes he was imboldened to wade deeper and
fall into the snare that had brought him to ruin and confusion, yet he hoped
not but there was through the infinite goodness of his God, Mercy in store
(though by him undeserved) for his immortal soul, for whose Welfare he was more
so licitous than Life, yet desired all to take warning by his downfall, and that
they would out of all Love beware of Evil Company, which had brought him to
practice what had been the occasion of his shame: Himself being no ways
inclined thereto, had he not been over persuaded.

Mr. Ordnary perceiving him very ardent in his Expressions desired him to pray,
saying he would afterward pray for him; when lifting up his voice he prayed
earnestly, desiring the Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth to have mercy upon
him, and strengthen him in his sufferings, Pardoning his manifold Offenses, and
forgiving him all that was past. A while after turning to a Friend of his, he
desired him to be careful of his Body, and that he would see it decently
Buried, which he promising to do: He seemed greatly satisfied thereat, and
proceeded to declare that he had made his Confession and Discovery to Justice
Perrey, upon his being Apprehended, and once for his so doing he had some
thoughts of longer Life; but seeing his hopes failed him, he submitted to the
Law, and cast himself into the Arms of his Redeemer, wholly relying on him
through whose mercies he doubted not of Salvation.

Jane Langworth, being convicted for killing her Female Bastard Infant on the
13th. of December last, by tying a string about it is Neck to still as she
pretended it is crying, received Sentence with the rest on the 17th. Instant,
and being reconveyed to the place of Execution, began imediately to consider
her latter End; Lamenting, that to cover one shame, she had brought her self
into a greater disgrace, saying she had been well Educated by honest Parents,
and might have continued happy had she not associated her self with Leude
Persons who had tempted her to commit much wickedness, whereby she had provoked
God to punish her and bring her to shame; yet she would bear it patiently, as
knowing it was a Correction for her sins.

To such Ministers as out of their Pious Inclinations came to visit her and her
fellow Convicts: She gave great attention during the intervene, seeming ever
desirous of their Conversation, and inquisitive in matters relating to her
Eternal Welfare, being asked how she found her self as to a future State, she
said she had some doubtings, by reason of her many sins; but she hoped God for
the sake of his Dear Son, would be merciful to her and support her in her great
Tribulation, desiring all good Christians to pray for her that she might not
faint, and so continued during her remaining in Newgate.

Jane Langworth, being brought to the Place of Execution with loud Laments
bewailed her misfortune declaring that she had been a loose Liver, and a
neglecter of Gods Holly Worship, giving her mind to Profaneness, and much
delighting in Idle Company which had induced her to run into many
Extravagancies, and still proceeding in that course of Life; She at last
surrendered her Honor Unlawfully defileing her self, when proving with Child,
she used what diligence she could ^to conceal her pregnancy and so cunningly
contrived it, that it was not discovered till she was Delivered and had
Murdered her Infant. She than being Sick of the Smallpox, for which she
expr^^ed much sorrow, desiring the Prayers of the Spectators, and expressing
with a bundanee of Tears, the true Sense she had for unnaturality sheding
Inocent Blood.

Mr. Ordinary, desiring her to Pray, she did it as well as she could, though
with many abrupt stamerings the abundance of her Grief and Terror of
Approaching Death, not suffering her to express her self freely in her
Devotion, to help which, she desired the Prayers of the spectators admonishing
them with a low Voice to take warning by her unhappy end, and not to give them
selves over to Ludeness and uncleanness.

Elizabeth Stoaks, being convicted for Murdering her Male Bastard Infant on
the 28th. of December, by throwing it out at the Window in the Parish of St.
Martins in the Fields, and receiving Sentence of Death for the offense and
inhumane Breach of the Laws: She upon her being reconveyed to Negate greatly
bewailed her self, and would not for some days be comforted as being extremely
terified at the approach of a certain Death; but hearing and headfully
attending to the Prayer of diverse Eminent Divines, that out of a Christian Zeal
and Charity to those poor Wretches, came to use their Endeavors for the saving
of the Souls of those miserable Wretches: She in the End became more consolate
and cheerful; confessing she had lived many years in service and behaved her
self honestly on all occasions, till she was betrayed to yield up their
Honour-Love more than Lust inclining her thereto, hoping it would have been
requited, but finding a defect therein, and that shame for such her Leudndss
grew fast upon her: She in great confusion resolved upon the Fatal Business,
which had brought her to ruin and her latest End.

She was often observed in Prison to exhort her Fellows to a sincere
Repentance, looking often in the Scriptures, and appeared very desirous to be
instructed therein, and daily became more and more assured of Gods Mercy and
Favor extended to her poor Immortal soul; saying God was a God of
Everlastingness, and would not lay to he Charge more than he would give her
strength and patience to bear, and that she would trust in him and doubted not
but that her Iniquities would be done away, and her sins though of a Crimson Dye
blotted out, grieving at nothing more than that she should be so inhumane to
destroy the Fruits of her Womb which smiled at her as she said, when she cast
it from her Fatal Arms,

Elizabeth Stoakes, at the Place of Execution, upon consideration of her Crime,
for which she was to suffer lamented greatly, as the former had done wishing
she had never been Born to see the day, wherein she was brought to a shameful
and untimely Death, Confessing her self worthy of Death for her so unnaturally
sheading Innocent Blood, Beseeching God of his Infinite mercy to Pardon and
pass by her Offenses, that her Prayers and the Prayers of those that were put
up for her, might in some measure attoan for her Crying-sin. After which she
Prayed, and much condemned her self for falling into so great a Temptation,
seeming very desirous of a longer Life, although she confessed she had deserved
to dye, for being so cruel and unnatural to her Poor Smileing Infant which was
guilty of no Crime?

Being asked how she foundd her self as to her Immortal State, and what
assurance sha had of her Salvation, she said she for her sins had deserved no
Mercy nor could expect any, but through the Mercy and Merits of Jesus Christ
she doubted not but she should be accepted.

The Several suffering partys having thus far expressed themselves and
unburthened their laboring Souls. Mr. Ordinary prayed with them, desiring the
Almighty of his infinite Mercy to cleanse them from all their Iniquities, by
washing them in the Blood of his dear Son, and to give them a true Sense of
their Sins, that to the last Moment of their lives they might by Faith lay hold
on him, and by a full reliance on him receive Comfort to their Souls and be
Immortally Happy, etc.

The Prayer ended, as likewise the Benediction of the Church pronounced. Mr.
Ordinary proceeded to sing part of the 25. Psalm, in which the Prisoners and
Spectators joined and that ended, the Cart soon after drove away, and they with
Expressions of Praise and Thanksgiving to the last, ended this Transitory Life
in hopes of that more durable and lasting Felicity, that is prepared for such
as remain faithful till Death.

LONDON; Printed for R. Turner at the Star in Paul's Church-Yrrd, 1684.


