A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the Most CONSIDERABLE OCCURRENCES That have happened in the
WAR BETWEEN THE ENGLISH and the INDIANS IN New England, From the Fifth of
May, 1676, to the Fourth of August last; as also of the Successes it has
pleased God to give the English against them: As it has been communicated by
Letters to a Friend in London.

The most Exact Account yet Printed.

Psalm. 76.4. Thou art more glorious and excellent than the Mountains of prey.

V. 10. Surely the Wrath of Man shall praise thee: the remainder of Wrath shall
thou restrain.

Psalm. 9.15. The Heathen are sunk down into the Pit they made; in the Net they
hid, is their own foot taken.

Licensed,

October 11. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.



LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Billingsley at the Printing-Press in Cornhill,
1676.

A True Account of the most Considerable Occurrences that have happened in the
War between the English and the Indians in New England, etc.
ALthough the design of the Publication of this ensuing Narrative be to give an
Account of the Principal Occurrences that have happened in the War betwixt the
English and the Indians in New England, from the fifth of May to the fourth of
August last, yet considering that the Reader may perhaps urge the entrance upon
it a little abrupt, unless some preceding Actions be premised; as also being
assured that what has been made Public from the beginning, relating to that
Affair, has not been represented so exactly as it might have been; I shall
therefore upon a review of some Papers lying by me Collect and Communicate in a
few lines so much of that Affair as may give a fair Introduction to what in the
process of this Paper may be depended upon as true, without partiality to
either side.

After the Narogansets had involved themselves in the War of Sachem Philip, and
our English had engaged them at their chief Port the nineteenth of December,
1675, with considerable loss to us, but much more to the enemy, they withdrew
and secured themselves in the Fastnesses of the woods, having out some Parties
at times doing mischief, and ours Retaliating with them in like kind; our
Forces also retreated home, and it was near a month before they were recruited
for any further Expedition against them; it was hard service, they had endured,
in the depth of winter, though it pleased God to moderate the extremity of the
season in the month of January: about the latter end of which month the
Soldiers marched into the woods in pursuit of them, having got intelligence of
the place of their Rendezvous, but the enemy having also their Scouts abroad,
and thereby, coming to the knowledge of our March, they fled more to the
North-west: ours pursued them, but the most escaped, (except about 70 of them,
men, women and children,) which the Mohogin Indians of Vncus his Subjects our
friends and Allies slew. Our men missed very narrowly of surprising their main
body in their pursuit, but Gods time was not come for so great a mercy, and
they saved themselves from that encounter: whereupon our Forces retired home to
their several Quarters, being necessitated thereunto by the hardships of the
season, and the impossibility at that time of the year to carry provision for
any long continuance abroad. About a fortnight after we having gained
intelligence of the quarter the enemy then abode in, we sent out about 300
Horse and Foot under the conduct of Major Savage, to attacque them; but before
that could be effected, the enemy visited us, and assaulted Lancaster, a small
Town, in which the Inhabitants having retired into some fortified houses, and
deserted the rest, the Indians burnt those, and assaulted the Garrisoned
Houses, but were not able to carry any of them but one, wherein were 42
persons, 12 men, the rest women and children, of whom they slew several, and
carried the rest prisoners: the House was the Ministers, one Mr. Rowlandson,
whose wife and children they carried Captive, (which are since returned to us.)
About fourteen days after this, the enemy assaulted Medfield, and burnt about
half the Town, and slew some; and though there was a Company of Soldiers Horse
and Foot there, yet they were so quick and sudden in their mischief, that ours
could hardly get into a posture to meet them, before they were retreated.

In the beginning of March our Forces under Major Savage went toward the
enemies Head quarters but their Scouts had prevented his coming by their
vigilance, so that they fled into the woods, we having only the gleaning of
about seventeen of them that could botfly so fast as the rest.

On the 13th of March, before our Forces could return toward our Parts, the
Indian sent a strong party, and assaulted the Town of Growton, about forty
miles North-west from Boston, and burned all the deserted Houses; the
Garrisoned Houses, which were about ten, all escaped but one, which they
carried, but not the English in it; for there was but one slain, and two
wounded. Quickly after they assaulted Marlborough, and burnt the Houses the
Inhabitants had deserted, but the Garrisons defended the re^t: In that Town the
Houses were built very scatteringly, and the Enemies divided themselves into
small parties, which executed their design of Firing at once; and though there
was a Company of the Country Militia there, they could not prevent it.

March the 18th. we had Letters from Hadley, of a great party of the Enemy that
assaulted Northampton; in the preservation of which, there was an especial
Providence of God: For besides that Major Treat and Capt. Turner were quartered
there, it was so, that our forces under the Command of Major Savage, being in
want of Victuals, marched up to Hadley and the Towns adjacent upon the River,
which was ordered by the wisdom of Divine Providence, without their foresight,
to preserve that Town, although the Enemy left behind them some Remembrance of
their attempt, having killed two townsmen, and one Soldier, and wounded six,
and also left dead upon the place Eleven of themselves.

March the 26th. we had News of the Defeat of Capt. Pearse, with about forty
English, and eleven of our Indian Friends, near Secunck alias Rehoboth; who
were surrounded with a great party of the Indians, and overpowered; yet God
was pleased to rescue several of them, who made a safe escape.

The 20th. of March the Enemy burnt the deserted houses in Secunck or Rehoboth,
but the Garrisoned houses were not carried by them.

The 30th of March part of the town of Providence was also burnt.

The 6th of April, an Indian Messenger, sent to his Contrymen about the
Redemption of Captives, returned with a very insolent Letter, that as yet they
had no need to accept of Ransom for our Captives.

The 12th of April, God was pleased to give us a Success by our Contrymen to
the Southwards, against the Enemy there: Besides the slain and taken, there
fell into our hands one Quinancet, alias Miantonimo, the great and proud Sachem
of the Narrogansets, a Ring leader in this War with them, and one who had been
notoriously treacherous, both in Signing renewed Articles of Peace with us
since the beginning of the War, and Breaking the same again: He was carried by
our Forces to New London, and there Beheaded; which Execution has had a mighty
Influence into the Disorder and Confusion the Enemy has since fallen into.

Yet had we since a sad Providence that bef^ll us, God seeing it good further
to Exercise us, to our Humbling, that he may (as we hope) ^o us good in the
latter End: For upon the 21th of April, the Enemy with a very great Body (some
think they were not less than 1500.) assaulted Sudbury, and burnt several of
the deserted Houses, but prevailed against none that were Garrisoned: To
relieve which, Capt. Wadsworth, with about fifty men, issued out from
Marleborough, 10 miles distant, and with him Capt. Bracklebanke went with the
same Party, intending to march to Boston, to speak with the Council; the Enemy
being Numerous, and the English too Adventurous, were so far engaged, that most
of them were cut off: The two Captains dyed in the Service; men for Piety
Prudence and Courage eminent, and much lamented; about 15 of the Soldiers
escaped to a Garrisoned house within a mile from the place of this Tragedy. Yet
this we have to say, (as the following Successes evidence that we have great
Grounds to hope) that this last Attempt of theirs was but the Rage of an
Expiring Enemy; for the cutting off the abovementioned Quinancet, to whom the
young fighting men did adhere, did put the Indians to such a stagger, that they
have not been able to recover themselves since, so as to effect any thing
against us that is much considerable.

I am credibly informed that in that fight at Sudbury, an elderly English man
endeavoring an Escape from the Indians by running into a Swamp, was overtaken
by an Indian, and being Destitute of Weapons to Defend himself or Offend him,
the Indian insulted over him with that Blasphemous Expression [Come Lord Jesus,
save this poor English man if thou can, whom I am now about to Kill.] This (I
even Tremble to Relate it) was heard by another English man, who was Hid in a
Bush close by: Our Patient Long suffering Lord, permitted that Bloody Wretch to
Knock him down and leave him Dead. We hope the Lord is Arisen to Avenge those
Blasphemies.

Upon the 5th of May, our Forces under the Command of Captain Henchman; and
with them about 40 of the Natick or Praying Indians, discovered a Body of
Philips Indians at Hassanamastett and fought them, wherein they slew 11 of the
Enemy, and took two Prisoners, and not one of the Soldiers were slain, or
wounded. Diverse of our men had probably been slain, but that it pleased God to
send a storm of Rain which did so wet the Indians guns, that they became
unserviceable to them. Six Indians at once in that scattering encounter (for
the Enemy stood not to a fight) meeting an Englishman would have shot him, but
could not make the wetted powder fire in the pan; which seldom failed at other
times; our English by their garments and other guards for the locks of their
Muskets were better provided than the Indians, and so had the advantage and put
the Indians to a Rout and Flight.

This was the first time that our Natick Indians were employed in any such Body
by the Government here; and they proved faithful and Eminently serviceable at
that time, and successful since; and thereby they have gained much in the
Affections of the English, who have had some Jealousy about them. Nor is it to
be wondered at, considering the hurry this War has put us into; the
disappointment we have met with by the Treachery of several of that Nation, on
whose Friendship we thought we might have depended, as having deserved other
things at their hands: and that some few of the praying Indians have been
carried away with the present outrage of their Nation: I say it is not to be
wondered at, that they were under a Jealousy by us; however we have cause
thankfully to acknowledge Gods goodness in making use of them, wherein they
have done us considerable services: they serve especially for spies and scouts
to start the Sculking Enemy, and drive them out of the Swamps and VVoods, and
then the English can the better fight them, and indeed our greatest exercise
has been to Find the Enemy rather than to Fight them, unless they be very much
Superior in Numbers. But now the Indians dread our approaches with those Indian
Vancourriers, and the Lord has caused much of his Terror to fall upon them.

On the 11th of May, two of our Captives were returned by Ransom from the
Indians, who had been taken at the destruction of the Town of Lancaster; the
one of them the sister of the wife of Mr. Rowlandson, Minister of the place;
and another woman taken out of the same House.

The next day a Youth of about 11 years of Age, made his escape from the
Indians, who was taken prisoner when his Fathers house was burnt, and his
Mother murdered on the first of February last: and though the Boy knew not a
step of the way to any English Town, and was in continual danger of the
Sculking Indians in the woods, and far from the English, yet God directed him
aright and brought him to the sight of Plantane, (the Herb which the Indians
call English-foot, because it grows only amongst us, and is not found in the
Indian Plantations) whereupon he concluded he was not far from some English
Town, and accordingly following of the Plantane he arrived safe amongst us. The
18th of the same we had another of our Captives (an ancient man) returned upon
Ransom, and one very eminent for piety.

Upon the 24th of May, Captain brattle was sent forth with his Troop toward
Rehoboth, where we had Intelligence of a Body of Indians, where 12 of them were
slain, and but one of the English slain, and one slightly wounded.

Upon the same day we had News by a Post, of a fight upon Connecticot River
between Deerfield and Squakheig, there were about an hundred and sixty of our
soldiers under the command of Captain Holyoake, and Captain Turner: The
occasion of the engagement was this, The Indians having stolen and driven away
much Cattle from Hatfield and those Towns adjoining, and our men perceiving by
the track which way they went, learned at last where the Indians Rendezvous
was; and picking out of the several Garrisons, as many soldiers as could
conveniently be spared, resolved to Attaque them, it being a great Fishery
place called Deerfield Falls.

Our soldiers got thither after an hard March just about break of day, took
most of the Indians fast asleep, and put their guns even into their VVigwams,
and poured in their shot among them, whereupon the Indians that durst and were
able did get out of their VVigwams and did fight a little (in which fight one
Englishman only was slain) others of the Indians did enter the River to swim
over from the English, but many of them were shot dead in the waters, others
wounded were therein drowned, many got into Canoes to paddle away, but the
paddlers being shot, the Canoes over-set with all therein, and the stream of
the River being very violent and swift in the place near the great Falls, most
that fell over board were born by the strong current of that River, and carried
upon the Falls of Water from those exceeding high and steep Rocks, and from
thence fumbling down were broken in pieces; the English did afterward find of
their bodies, some in the River and some cast ashore, above two hundred.

But as the English were coming away with the plunder they had got, there was a
noise spread among some of them, of Sachem Phillip's coming down upon them;
with a thousand men: which not being weighed as it might have been by the
English, whether it were true or false; a fear possessed some part of the
English, whereby they fell into a disorder, and thereby Captain Turner and
several of his Soldiers were slain, and others to the number of two and
thirty. But Captain Holyoake exhorted them not to be terrifyed, saying God has
wrought hitherto for us wonderfully, let us trust in him still: and reducing
his men into close order made a safe and a valiant retreat, and preserved the
Soldiers under him; that there were but few of them slain, and the Soldiers
so cut off were surpised by a Party of the Enemy belonging to the Indians at
Deer-field-falls, who having gotten before our forces had laid an Ambush, the
chiefest execution of which was through too much fear of our Men whereby they
disordered themselves; thus God by this mixture of his Providence would hide
pride from our eyes, who perhaps might have been too much lifted up by our
success: several loads of dried fish the English found, and were forced to
consume there.

They also found and demolished the Indian Smiths Forge, which they had there
set up for the mending of their Guns. Some Indian Women (since that taken
Prisoners) do say and affirm that there were slain in that engagement with them
four hundred, of which number were seventy of the Wampangs, or Phillip Sachems
men: and that he had of his own proper Company not any great number left, and
that were it not for him and one Sachem more, the Indians would gladly yield to
any terms of Peace with the English.

Upon the 9th. of June by a post from our Forces with forty or fifty of our
friends, Indians; under the Command of Captain Henchman, we were informed of
their taking seven and twenty Indians, mostly Women and Children, and the
slaying of six Indian Men, about twelve miles from Lancaster, and not one of
our Soldiers slain or wounded: one of the six was a revolter, as also one of
the Prisoners, and another of them was the Wife of the Sagamore of Nasholah,
who was wounded at Sudbury fight, and is since dead of his wounds; in this
service our Friend Indians got very valuable plunder in Fish and Guns, and
which is also very observable, that Captain Henchman, did by one Captain
Andrews and his Indians which he Commanded, offer the Indians in their own
language Peace, and to assure them that if they would surrender themselves,
they should have no hurt from the English: which was accordingly tendered to
them, but the answer they made was a Volley of shot, whereof one bullet stroke
and broke Captain Andrews's Gun in his hand, but did no other hurt.

Upon the same 9th. of June also, we were informed of a small Party of
Connectico^ Soldiers, under the Command of Major Tullcot, who expected to join
our forces at Quaboug, that they had near to that place killed nineteen
Indians, and taken two and thirty Prisoners in one engagement with the Enemy;
and that without the loss of one Englishman: our Forces also marching to join
them, took some Prisoners, and amongst the rest on Captain Tom, a Revolter who
is a Prisoner in Boston at present, who has been one of some remark amongst
the Indians and English.

The 14th. of June we were informed of Waralancet, (the Sachem of Wagmesset and
one of old Passa-Connaway's Sons) his coming in with about an hundred Indians
with him and under him at Pascataway, submitting himself to Major Waldorn,
desiring Peace with the English, and declaring his innocence during this war,
as not having designed attempted or done any mischief against the English. He
brought in with him six English Captives a Widow and her five Children, (her
Husband having been slain in this war by them) this Sachem VVaralancet bought
them of their Indian Master, and delivered them freely to the English, as a
Testimony of his good affection and fidelity to the English, at the same time
challenging all the Indians thereabout to accuse him (if they could) of the
least wrong or plot on his part against the English, notwithstanding that he
had been urged with many solicitations unto it, and incurred the hatred of
diverse Sagamores and Indians, because he would not join with them against the
English: but not one of the Indians (whereof some were no good friends to him,)
could accuse him, he ^hen told them all: that his old Father ( Sachem
Passa-Connaway, the great Sagamore of chose Northern parts of the Country)
when he lay a dying (as he had often also before) had charged him with his
other brothers that they should never be enemies to the English; but love them
and love their God, also because the God of the English was the true God, and
greater than the Indians Gods. And this says he, I have remembered, and kept my
Fathers charge, and will do so while I live; but was willing to keep out of the
way on the Storm was over. The Council has sent him some presents by way of
Gratuity.

The 16 of the same Month, came in 3 Children of the English taken Captive by
the Indians; and were freely delivered to us by some Indians which did also
resign up themselves to the English at Norwich: this was upon Proclamation made
of receiving to mercy such as were so qualified as was therein specified: the
most of them Women and Children about 70 in number. We do hear also since, that
at that engagement at Deerfield-Falls, there were about four of the Indian
Sachems slain; which has amazed and disheartened and divided them.

On the 22d of June, was Executed at Boston Captain Tom, alias Watasocamponum,
and another with him. This Captain Tom was taken by our Indian Scouts, having
been with the Enemy this last Winter; they both dyed (as is to be hoped)
penitent, praying to God not like the manner of the Heathen.

Upon account of these Great and Undeserved Mercies of God conferred on us, the
Council ordered a Day of Public thanksgiving to be observed in the Colony of
the Matachusets, which was accordingly attended June the 29th; Which the Lord
has been pleased so to accept, as that from the time of the resolve upon it,
ever since we have experienced little else than renewed Mercies and smiles of
Providence. God himself has sent from Heaven and saved us (for we see nothing
of man, but God to be all in all) by Wasting them with Sickness, Starving them
through want of Provisions, Leaving them to their own Divisions, Taking away
their Spirits, putting the Dread of us upon them. Cutting off their Principal
men, Sachems and others. Blessed be his Great and Glorious Name.

About the time of that Thanksgiving, the Son and Daughter of that worthy
Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. Rowlandson, who had been Captives since the
Burning of Lancaster, were returned, by Ransom, He wandered with an Indian woman
from the rest of the Indian Company (by whom she had been detained) three days
in the woods, having nothing to eat all that time but green Hurtle berries;
with which she was sustained till she and the Woman arrived at our English Town
of Providence, and so got Home.

Upon the 30th of June, we had a Post from our Forces bringing News of about
28 Indians Killed and Taken by them, in their March homewards, between Quaboug
and Marle-borough: and this without the Slaughter or hurt of the Indians our
Friends; one of those that were slain, being a Chief Counselor to one of the
Sachems, and 9 of those Indian Prisoners, Women and Children, were brought down
to Boston.

July the first, Captain Brattle was sent forth with our Forces to Join with
Major Bradford of Plymouth, and the Forces under his Command in that Colony
(hearing of Sachem Phillips intent of Mischief to that Colony.) The next day
following we had News of six of the Enemy Killed, and Twenty taken Prisoners,
by our Brethren of Plimath and our Indian Friends, and none of ours slain.

The same day also we had news of the Squaa Sachem's of Seconnet's surrendering
her self and fourscore of her men to the English of Plymouth, which was upon
the day of our Thanksgiving.

Upon the 2d of July, there were about fourteen of the Enemy surrendered
themselves to the Mercy of the English in the Bay Colony, whereof was one Jumet
called a Printer, as having been employed about the work of the Press in
Cambridge: A Revolter he was, and a fellow that had done much mischief, and
staid out as long as he could, till the last day but one of a Proclamation set
forth, to encourage such Indians as had a desire to return to the English, and
another of his Comrades one Capt. Tom's Son, (whose Father was hanged at
Boston, the 22th June, having been a Revolter, and a bloody Fellow,) they had
all of them their Lives given them.

Upon this 2d of July also it was, that Major Talcott with the Connecticet
Forces near to Pautyxit, did take and slay 170 of the Enemy, without the loss
of any of our Brethren, and only three wounded.

July the 6th, an Indian Post (with a white Flag) was sent from Sagamore Sam of
Nassoway (a proud Salvage, who two months since insulted over the English, and
said, If the English would first beg Peace of him, he would let them have
Peace, but that he would never ask it of them;) This Indian was sent from him
with Letters, desiring Peace of us, and expressly praying us in the Name of
Jesus Christ, and for his sake to grant it, whose Holy Name they have so much
blasphemed. Thus does the Lord Jesus make them to bow before him, and to lick
the Dust. And having made mention of his Letter, it will not be unacceptable to
transcribe some Copies of the Letters sent by him and others on this Subject,
which take as follows. The Reader must bear with their Barbarisms, and excuse
the Omission of some Expressions in them, that can hardly admit of good English.

The First Letter, July the 6th. 1676.
MR. John Leveret, my Lord, Mr. Waban, and all the chief then our Brethren,
Praying to God: [ This Mr. Waban is a praying Indian, faithful, and a Ruler
amongst them; by their Brethren praying to God, they mean those of the same
Nation.] We beseech you all to help us; my Wife she is but one, but there be
more Prisoners, which we pray you keep well: Muttamuck his Wife, we entreat you
for her, and not only that man, but it is the Request of two Sachems, Sam
Sachem of Weshakum, and the Pakashoag Sachem.

And then that further you will consider about the making Peace: We have spoken
to the People of Nashobak (viz. Tom Dubler and Peter,) that we would agree with
you, and make a Covenant of Peace with you: We have been destroyed by your
Soldiers, but still we Remember it now, to sit still; do you consider it
again; we do earnestly entreat you, that it may be so, by Jesus Christ, O! let
it be so! Amen. Amen.

It was Signed, Muttamuck, his Mark N. Sam Sachem, his Mark -- PS. Simon
Pottoquam, Scribe. Vppanippaquem, his -- C. Pakaskoag his Mark PS.



Superscrib'd, To all Englishmen and Indians, all of you, hear Mr. Waban, Mr.
Eliott.
Second Letter.
MY Lord, Mr. Leveret at Boston, Mr. Waban, Mr. Eliott, Mr. Gooken, and
Council, hear ye. I went to Connecticott about the Captives, that I might bring
them into your hands, and when we were almost there, the English had destroyed
those Indians; when I heard it, I returned back again; then when I came home,
we were also destroyed; after we were destroyed, then Philip and Quanipun went
away into their own Country again; and I know they were much afraid, because
of our offer to join with the English, and therefore they went back into their
own Country, and I know they will make no War; therefore because when some
English men came to us, Philip and Quanapun sent to kill them; but I said, If
any kill them, I Will kill them.

Written by Simon Boshokum Scribe.
Sam Sachem.


Third Letter.
For Mr. Eliot, Mr. Gooken, and Mr. Waban.
COnsider of this I Entreat you, consider of this great business that is done;
and my wonder concerning Philip, but his name is -- Wewesawanit, he engages
all the people that were none of his Subjects: Then when I was at Penakook,
Numpho John, Alline, Sam Numpho, and others who were angry, and Numpho very
much angry that Philip did engage so many people to him; and Numpho said it
were a very good deed that I should go and kill him that joined so many to
himself without cause: in like manner I said so too. Then had you formerly said
be at peace, and if the Coucill had sent word to Kill Philip we should have
done it: then let us clearly speak, what you, and we shall do. O let it be so
speedily, and answer us clearly.

Pumkamun, Ponnak pukun, or, Jacob Muttamakoog


The answer the Council made them, was, That treacherous Persons who began the
War, and those that have been barbarously bloody, must not expect to have their
lives spared, but others that have been drawn into the War, and acting only as
Soldiers submitting, to be without Arms, and to live quietly and peaceably for
the future shall have their lives spared.

Thus could these bloody wretches plead for themselves by that Sacred name,
which they had Blasphemed, and in the blood of whose Servants they had embrued
their hands.

The 9th. of July two young Maidens Captives, wandered away from the Indians
that kept them, and got to an English Garrison at Marlebrough. The same day
also we had tidings of the good success of some of our Scouts, the most of
them of our Indian Friends, the chief of whom were William Nehawton, and John
Hunter, who near to Mondham slew seven of the Enemy; whereof one was a great
Captain of the Indians, and another was called Caleb, who had formerly been a
chief Instrument in burning Mendham, when the Indians had first shot at the
English, an English Soldier in company with our Indian friends, making haste
to Fire, had forgot to pull out a wadd of Tow which was in the pan of his gun,
which William Nahawton espying told him of, and wished him to take it out and
Fire; the Englishman told him he judged the Indian (whom he could but just
descry, by reason of the darkness of the morning, and his distance from him)
was too far to be reached by his Musket, try said Nahawton, and God shall
direct the bullet, which he immediately did, and he saw the Indian who was
running from them, tumble down; who proved to be one of their great Captains
abovementioned: afterward the Indian, Nahawton; made a very serious Prayer in
acknowledgment to God for the success.

Upon the 10th. day of July there were about 300 Indians at the Eastward, that
surrendered themselves to the English, and their Sachems with them, besides
Waralancet (who has all along this war kept himself clear) one Squardo, that
which did hasten them in, was the dread of the Mohauks who have killed several
of them in those quarters, and a rumor they had of a great party of that nation
coming down upon them.

July the 13th. we had news from Major Talcot, that in his return home from
Pautaxit, he killed and took another Party of the Indians, in number 60, and
had the plunder of all their Guns and other things, and this also without the
loss of any of our Countrymen.

July the 16th. we had news from the forces which went from us to the Southern,
parts that they have taken and killed since their march from us, about 120 of
the Enemy, with the loss only of one man of ours, who neglecting to keep up
with the rest of our forces, and being bewildred in a wood, hollowed, and was
heard by the Enemy, and was taken and slain before relief could reach him?

We since hear that Pomham, (one of the great Sachems of Narrowgancet) is one
of those that were slain, but we are not yet so certain thereof, as positively
to affirm it to be undoubtely so, but great probabilities there are of it; and
if so, the glory of that Nation is sunk with him into the same pit, (of this
circumstance, the reader will receive farther satisfaction, in the ensuing
Narrative.)

On the 17th. of July two Sachems with four Indians to wait on them, came down
to Boston from Wadjusset, where Sagamour Sam. and others are with renewed
desires of Peace, they were dismissed the next day from the Council, with this
answer to them, that we would first have our Captives out of their hands, and
then talk of a Peace. And soon after they returned with a scalpe of one of our
Enemies (which is their usual way where they kill) and a signification of
Sagamor Sams purpose to surrender himself to the mercy of the English.

The 18th. of July we had the news of fourteen more Indians taken and killed by
our forces, and one of ours also slain: and two days after of sixteen more
Indians killed or taken by them in their return home, without any loss of our
Men.

On the 29th. of July we had an account by Letters from Plymouth, that the
forces of that Colony ( viz. two and twenty of the English with twenty of our
Friend- Indians) under the Command of Livetenant Church had killed and taken 79
of the Enemy, and that without the death or wounding of any of ours. And by the
same Post that Sachem Phillip had come down to his own Country of Mount Hope,
near Dartmouth, as one that now was reduced to a few hundreds of the thousands
he began this war with, and that our forces were looking out after him, and had
considerably diminished his bloody Remnant, whose desparation had engaged their
adherence to him; and amongst the rest Quinapins brother, that succeeded
Quinancet the Sachem before mentioned, executed by us.

What I mentioned in my last about Pomham (one of the greatest Sachems of the
Narrogansets) you may take now as follows. Upon the 27th. of July it was that
about twenty Indians were slain, and thirty taken Prisoners; (we had five and
twenty English, and twenty of our Indian Friends in this exploit;) one of those
that were slain was Pomham; after he had received a deadly shot in his back, he
withdrew himself from his men, (for they were all his Relations and Subjects
that were slain and taken at this time) and thought to hide himself in a bushy
hole, but was found out by an English man, who as he went to apprehend him,
found that the stout Sachem was unwilling to fall into the hands of the
English, for he gave him a stunning blow with his hatchet which he had reserved
of all his weapons, and perhaps had slain the English man, but God ordered it
so that he had a sudden revival, and took Courage and grappled with him, and
threw him under him, and others coming into his assistance, Pomham was soon
dispatched. There was about twenty pound of Indian money found in their baskets,
which was given to our friends the Indians; the Guns, etc. the English took to
themselves, who lost not one man in this encounter.

The same day likewise there came in 160 Indians, men women and Children, who
surrendered themselves up to the mercy of the English; some of these belonged to
Sagamore Sam of Lancaster, (though he himself dare not so adventure,) but the
most of them to two Nipmag Sachems, and one Sagamore John: this Sagamore John
came down in person about fourteen days since to Boston, to surrender himself
and his men to the English, promising for the future to be faithful, declaring
that he was sorry that he had sought against the English, and promised to give
some testimonial to the English soon of this fidelity to them; and at his
return now with his men women and Children, he brought down bound with cords,
old Mattoonus and his Son Prisonrs. This Mattoonus his eldest son had been
tried at Boston and executed about 5 or six years ago, for an execrable murder
by him committed on a young Maid of the English near Wooburn, and his head
fastened to a Pole, at one end of the Gallows.

This old Mattoonus's Father had given it out that he would be avenged of us
for his Sons death, which coming to the knowledge of the Council, he was sent
for, and examined about it: and having denied it, and there not being
sufficient evidence of it, he was dismissed; having only confessed this, that
considering the death of his son, he found his heart so big hot within him, but
that he resolved to abide a faithful friend to the English, and so that
accusation ended.

But after Sachem Phillip had begun his murders in Plymouth Colony, this
Salvage first appeared an enemy to us, and slew the two first men that were
killed within the limits of our Colony, (to wit at Mendham) and in that cruel
outrageous attempt at Quabang, this old Mattoonus was the principal Ringleader,
being now brought a Prisoner to Boston, he was by the Council the same day
adjudged to be shot to death, which was executed in Boston Common, by three
Indians: and his head cut off and placed upon a Pole on the Gallows opposite to
his Sons that was there formerly hanged. His Son brought along with him,
remains still a Prisoner.

On the last of July there were about 26 Indians, most Women and Children
brought in by our Scouts, as they were ranging the Woods about Dedham, almost
sterved: We are also informed, that most of Sachem Philips men have deserted
him, and surrendered up themselves to the English of Plymouth Colony, at their
mercy, and that he himself with his Remains are gone to Dartmouth; in Chase of
whom Major Talcott with our Friend Indians are at present.

August the 3d. we hear this Morning by a Post from Bridgwater in Plymouth
Colony, that not far from that place a Party of our Soldiers met with a
Company of the Enemy, 25 in all; who though prepared to make the first shot at
the English in their march, yet when they came within shot, and were descryed
by ours, they nimbly prevented the Indians, and killed eight of them, and took
the other 17 Prisoners, with-any loss on our side. Some of the Indians
acknowledged that their Arms shook and trembled so, that they could not so
readily discharge their Guns as they would have done.

We are certainly informed, that Philip Sachem is again fled from Dartmouth in
Plymouth Colony, into ours, and that he is not far from Marleborough: We are
not without hope that he may ere long be caught; which (in probability) would
quench the remaining Coals of this War. But we desire to wait upon Gods Will,
and attend his Work in this thing, which will at last give us cause to say, How
great is his Goodness! and how great is his Beauty!

Thus has God dealt graciously with us, which I was desirous to acquaint you
with; and therefore have (for some of the latest Occurrencies) took an
Opportunity of a Ship not sailing directly for London, to give you this
Account, which is a true one, as far as the distance of times and places where
the Actions have been, will admit: every Action must have allowance with
respect to humane Infirmities, and the various Reporters, who may increase or
diminish according to their own Judgment of the matter of Fact: But otherwise
there is nothing represented, but what consists with truth: And also my great
design is, to desire you to acquaint our Christian Friends, that have prayed
for us in England, with these things. For, as we have observed, since we heard
of their instant Prayers for us, we have been much encouraged, and have
received eminent Returns of our joint Prayers; so also we beg, that they
would Praise and Magnify the Name of the Most High with us, and in our
behalfs, for we cannot sufficiently exalt him. For besides these Mercies in
reference to the Indian War, we have had many other very great and
seasonable, cast in over and above, to our great Astonishment. We had an
Epidemical Sickness, that has swept away several worthy Gentlemen amongst us,
besides many others which God has Rebuked.

We have also had a great and sore Drought, which Threatened the Spoiling of our
Harvest, and thereby an increase of the Scarcity that has been amongst us: But
this 4th of August, God has given us an abundance of Rain, Blessed be his
Name; and we have our English Corn generally Housed with us, and diverse have
gone to the Towns that were burnt down, to reap the Wheat, and what they had
there Sown last Winter: which in the last Spring they expected to have fallen
into the Enemies hand. And the Husbandman goes out with more safety than could
be imagined on his employments. Our Indian Harvest is like to be very
fruitful, that grain is now sold at two shillings six pence the Bushel;
besides the Supplies we have had from other Parts.

Yet shall we not say, the bitterness of Death is over; the Enemy has several
Sculking parties abroad, which yet do little Mischief, being disappointed by
the Providence of God through the Vigilance of our Scouts. May be God will
still go on to fulfill that promise, Isa. 62.8, 9. Surely I will no more give
thy Corn to be meat for thine Enemy, and the Sons of the Stranger shall not
drink thy Wine for the which thou have Labored; but they that have gathered it
shall eat it, and praise the Lord.

But still we beg that you would not forget to pray for us, that we may not
again provoke God by breaking his Commandments, least he be angry with us
until he have consumed us. And we shall not cease to pray for you, and all the
Churches of Christ that call upon the name of our Lord and yours, that you may
obtain the like mercy to help in time of need.

SIR, Pardon the prolixity of this Narrative from Your Affectionate Friends.

For a Close of this Narrative, I shall beg the Readers patience to peruse the
substance of some Letters which I shall contract under one, relating to be
Indians known to us here and to our Countrymen there, under the name of the
praying Indians; that is, such as call upon the Name of of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as being persuaded that there is a Concernment of Gods Glory depending
thereupon; A Vindication due to them who have been represented as Hypocrites or
Apostates, for the Generality of them; which appears to be otherwise, as I
hope the substance of the ensuing Letters communicated from persons of known
Integrity will evidence; which take as follows.

SIR,
ALthough it has Pleased God to Deprive us of several Useful Iustruments, whom
he had fitted for carrying on the Work of the Gospel amongst the Indians, by
removing them from their Labors to their Reward; which may be looked upon as a
Forerunner of the Occurrencies which have happened in the Indian War; which
has to the eyes of many, passed as it were a Sentence of Death upon the work;
yet (as I believe, I speak) that the Light of the Gospel that has shined upon
these poor Gentiles in these Parts, as it is a Real Work, so will the Lord in
due time make it more evidently appear to the Glory of his Grace by Jesus
Christ.

And in truth (to my understanding) the Gospel has gained an advantage,
rather than otherwise; for the greatest part of the Praying Indians have been
kept steady in following their Profession, and Witnessing to the Excellency of
the Gospel, by much Faith, Patience, Self denial and Courage; which I hope will
give a Conviction upon the minds of all more and more among us. I shall not
give you the Trouble of an Apology for them, nor deduce particulars how
Honestly and Faithfully they have (the most of them) acquitted themselves
during this War, though their Tentations and Trials have been great, for it
is in matter of Fact evident, that (since the English have abated of their
Fears about them, and have employed them in this War) they have had most
manifest proofs of their fidelity and valor: and withal have had the blessing
of many successes, in which the Christian Indians have had their share; though
not of Conduct, yet of great Usefullness and Serviceableness, as far as they
have been entrusted, which I could not but communicate to you, as that which I
judge is due to them; and which is more to the Glory of God, and that good
Work which he has been pleased to carry on by his Servants who have Labored
among them, and I hope will perfect still more and more to his own praise.

Your Affectionate Friend.


FINIS.

