A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS ON THE Crown-Side AT THIS LENT ASSIZE, Held
for the County of Surrey in the Borough of Southwark, before Sir Job
Charleton, Knight, one of the Judges of Assize, and other his Majesty's
Justices, etc.
Beginning on Thursday the 13th of March, 1683. and ending on Saturday the 15th
of the said Month. With the Number that received Sentence of Death, were Burnt
in the Hand, etc.
ON Thursday the 13th. of March, 1683. the Honorable, Sir Thomas Jones, Lord
Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Sir Job Charleton,
Knight, the two Judges of Assize appointed for the Home-Circuit of this
Lent-Assize, having ended at East Grinstead in Sussex, came from thence, met by
the High Sheriff of Surrey, as customarily, but it being late in the Afternoon
before they got to Southwark, they that day, for Surrey only, met, heard a
Sermon, and read the Commission, etc.

On Friday, the 14th. day, the Grand Inquest, and other Juries being called
over, and sworn, the Court proceeded to try the Prisoners as follows.

Rice Evans, of Kennington in the Parish of Lambeth, Indicted for Killing his
Wife, the said Evans keeping several Cows, and his Wife trading as a
Milk-Woman; but happening to lie in Childbed, he in a Week, or two, or before
she was in a condition to rise, forced her to go out and sell the Milk: also,
upon her selling a Calf cheaper than he thought it worth, or some other very
little Provocation, he so kicked and abused her, that by reason of his said ill
Usage, she in a few days died. The Midwife who laid her particularly deposing,
that the Blows he had given her, and unseemly forcing her to work, was the
cause of her Death; he was therefore found Guilty.

Elizabeth Tymon, of Croydon, in the County of Surrey, Indicted for the Murder
of her Daughter-in-law; whom, living in the House with her, and being a meek
Woman, one of no Spirit to defend her self, the said old Mother-in-law used
with great Unkindness, and some Weeks since, happened in her Rage to strike her
said Daughter-in-law with a Slick-stone or Smoothing-Iron upon the Head and
Face, of which Blows she languish'd, and died: She was also Indicted for
Manslaughter, upon the Coroner's Inquisition taken on the Body: many Witnesses
were produced, the Fact seeming to be strong against the Prisoner. But the Jury
acquitted her of the Murder, and found her guilty of Manslaughter, upon the
said Indictment, and also they found the like upon the Inquisition taken by the
Coroner.

Margaret Corbet of Wandsworth in the County of Surrey, Indicted for Murdering
her Infant Bastard-Child, was found guilty of the said Murder.

William Davis, Indicted for stealing Eight Pounds in Money on the 20th. of
June last, from John Walcroft of the Parish of Lambeth, to whom he was a
Servant; and being entrusted with the Keys of the House, at a time when his
Master and Mistress were absent from it, he took that Opportunity to steal the
said Money, and the next day run away from his Service, (when yet they had not
missed the Money;) of which Felony he was found Guilty.

Margaret Floyd, Indicted for stealing Four Pounds in Moneys numbered, from
William Gray of Newington Butts, on the 20th. of September last. The Proof
against her was, that being apprehended, she confessed before the Justice of
Peace, that she had forty Shillings of the said Money; but at her Trial she
denied it again: however, was found Guilty of the said Felony.

John Broman Indicted for stealing a Mare or Gelding from Daniel White, Esquire
living about Guildford, on the 20th. of January last, valued at Nine Pounds,
pleaded Guilty.

But being Indicted also for stealing a Gelding on the Third of the same Month
of January, from Edward Browning, Esquire price 5 l. he pleaded Not Guilty; and
putting himself upon his Trial, it was proved against him, that he sold the
said Horse; which with some other concurrent Evidence, satisfied the Jury, that
they found him guilty of that also.

Charles Browning Indicted for Robbing William Jennings of one Shilling and
eleven Pence in Money; the said Jennings swore very positively Browning put his
hand in his Pocket, and by Violence took the said Money from him; but it
appearing that Jennings and Browning having been Mess-mates in a Ship with a
third Person also of their Ships-Company, went in to drink, and that it was the
great Familiarity between them made Browning take so much Liberty, pretending
he had no Money, and that it should be drunk out betwixt them; he was therefore
acquitted.

Edward Matthews, a Painter, living at Epsom, was Indicted for speaking
Seditious and Dangerous Words against his Sacred Majesty; viz. Saying the King
would not live six Months, but would either dye a natural Death, be Killed, or
Poisoned; and, that if the Duke should Reign (meaning the Illustrious Prince
James Duke of York) he would be one of the first that should take up Arms
against him. Which Words, with several other Aggravations, were so fully proved
by Vrsula Morehouse, and Katharine Drury, as that it had amounted to
High Treason, but that not discovered and prosecuted within six Months, the
Words being spoken at the House of the said Mrs. Morehouse in Epsom, about two
Years since, and by her accidentally told to a very Loyal Citizen of London;
who acquainting her that it was dangerous to conceal them, or that if she
would, however, he held himself in Duty obliged to make Discovery of what she
had told him; Matthews thereupon came to be Prosecuted, and is, however, found
Guilty of Trespass and Misdemeanour, for speaking the said Seditious and
Dangerous Words.

Ralph Baldwin and Katharine Binks, were Indicted for breaking into the
Dwelling House of William Allen, in the Parish of St. Olives Southwark, on the
30th. of January last, at night, and stealing from thence one silver Tankard,
one silver Caudle Cup, one silver Beaker, six Pounds in Money, and some other
Things: but upon the Trial it appeared, that Baldwin was Prisoner in Bridewel
at the time of the Robbery, and that Katharine Binks brought the said Plate and
Money to him thither, where it was seized; she only, therefore, was found
Guilty, and Baldwin acquitted.

Edward Gibbs Indicted for stealing 56 Pound Weight of Cheese from William
Ledge of Newington Butts, on the 24th of December last, (which Cheese he valued
at ^ight Shillings,) he was found Guilty.

John Whitmore Indicted for stealing a Gelding from one Kingbut of Brumley ^n
Kent: but it appearing the said Whitmore was his Servant, or that he entrusted
him to dress and look to his Horses, he riding the said Gelding out to water
very late one Saturday Night, rid away toward London, and within two Hours was
seized upon Suspicion, by the Watch at St. George's Church. The said Whitmore
pleaded, That he had no Intent to steal his Masters Horse, but had occasion to
ride to London and see an Uncle, resolving to return the next day. Seeing also,
the Possession of the Horses was given him, and he entrusted with them, it was
not adjudged to be Felony, but he was acquitted.

Elizabeth Ford, alias Jackson, Indicted for stealing Goods to the Value of 5
l. was thereof found Guilty.

Robert Bansfield Indicted for a Felony and Burglary, but was acquitted.

John Norwood, and William Machen, Indicted for Robbery on the Highway,
committed on the 28th of September last, about Eight at Night, upon Michael
Wells, a Servant to one Rogers of Croydon, and taking from him a Tobacco-Box, a
Campaign Coat, and Sixpence in Money. Also for another, committed upon Ann
Street, taking from her a Scarf, a Forehead Cloth, and fifty Shillings in
Money. Likewise John Norwood was Indicted for attempting to Ravish the said Ann
Street at the same time when he robbed her: which two Persons swore positively
against Norwood, that he was one of three who robbed, and in such manner used
them. But Norwood himself, being a Housekeeper in Croydon, and by Trade an
Oat-meal Man, brought many of those Townsmen to prove his good Reputation;
twenty or thirty of them gave an Evidence for him, some that they see him come
riding home about Seven that Night, and that he went to Bed soon after;
another, that he having been at London, and returning about that time into the
Country when they pretended to be Robbed, he saw three Foot-Padders with long
Staffs, and that one of them was like Norwood, though not the same; and
consequently, that in the Dark the said Ann Street might mistake one Man for
another. Her own Brother gave Evidence against her, That she is a very
Contentious Woman, and that she had, a day or two before, denied to have any
Money, he having entreated her to lend him Ten Shillings: And to the
Ravishment, that she being an old Woman, it seemed very unlikely Norwood should
desire to ravish her, he himself being a likely Young Man. This Trial held two
or three Hours, and at length Norwood was found Guilty of the said Robbery, and
Machen was acquitted.

Joseph Henshe Indicted for breaking into the Dwelling House of Edward Waker in
the Nightime, about the 26th of February, and taking from thence a Box, Price
1 d. and 6 s. in Money, he was found Guilty.

John Martin Indicted for Stealing two Cocks, Value 2 s. and four Hens, Value 4
s. from one Thomas Webster, on the 17th of January last.

Likewise the said John Martin was a second time Indicted for a Burglary,
committed on the 20th. of January about Seven at Night, in the House of one
Thomas Goffe: some of the Money was found in his Pocket; however the Jury found
him guilty but to the Value of 9 d. as to the first Indictment, and acquitted
him of the latter.

James Smart of Farneham, Glover, Thomas Currel, William Hartly, and Henry
Collins, Indicted, for that they, together with one William Gibson, not taken,
killed and murdered John Lemeing of Farneham. The first Witness against them
was one Buckle, who living in the same Parish, did, on the 29th. of October
last, late at Night (hearing his Dog bark violently) go out of his House, and
saw three Greyhounds, with a Spaniel Dog, which had taken and were tearing in
pieces, one of his Sheep; and that going a little further, he saw three Men
with long Staffs, whom he blaming for suffering their Dogs to kill his Sheep,
they swear God damn them they would kill him also, striking him; at which he
crying out Murder, the deceased Lemeing rose out of his Bed, and asking what
was the matter, Buck'e answered, the Hunters (or Sheep-stealers) were abroad,
had killed one of his Sheep, and would kill him also; Lemeing said he would
come and help him, and did come immediately; that Collins cried, Knock them
down, and Smart did accordingly knock Lemeing down, giving him one mortal
Bruise upon his Head, of which Wound he the next day died: many other
Circumstances were related, which left it hard upon Collins and Smart. However,
the Jury acquitted them of the Murder, found Smart and Collins guilty of
Manslaughter, and cleared the other two.

John Martin, alias Harvey, Indicted for stealing from Thomas Harvey of
Debtford, three Dowlas Shirts, one Camblet Coat, and ten Shillings in Money. He
being Servant in the House, to Thomas Harvey, taking an Opportunity, picked the
Lock of a Chest, and stole the said things. He was found guilty of Felony, but
not of breaking the Chest.

William Davis, William Dorrington, and Joseph Boyse, Indicted for breaking the
House of Joseph Daniel, at Battle-bridge in Southwark, on the 25th of August
last, at Eight at Night, and stealing from thence two Dowlas Smocks, one Dowlas
Shirt, one piece of new Cloth, one Pinner, one silk Handkerchief, two Pewter
Dishes, half a Yard of Lace, and other things; the said Daniel being from home,
and his Wife keeping an Apple-Stall some distance from her House, had locked it
up, and whilst she was absent, the said Robbery was committed. But the
principal Witness who gave Information against them when first apprehended,
being now gone to Sea, and none produced that could positively swear them to be
the Men who committed the Burglary and Robbery, they were all acquitted.

George Slate, or Slater, a Carman, Indicted, for that he, in the Parish of Sr.
Olives Southwark, on the 26th of May last, did feloniously, wilfully, and of
his Malice before thought, etc. driving a certain Cart laden with Cheese, drawn
by a Black Horse, price 50 s. beat down one Elizabeth Padbury in the Street,
and drew the hinder Wheel of the said Cart over the Foot of her the said
Elizabeth, giving her one mortal Bruise upon the Heel, of which she languished;
and languishing until the 4th day of June following, died of the said mortal
Bruise. But the Prisoner alleging he did not see the Young Woman, that by her
own Rashness she got her Hurt, and that it was not possible for him to have
done otherwise than he did; and none being produced that he did it wilfully, he
was acquitted.

The said Prisoners being Tried, Judgment was given, as follows.

Eight received Sentence of Death, viz. Margaret Corbet, Rice Evans, Elizabeth
Tymon, Elizabeth Ford alias Jackson, Margaret Floyd; John Broman, Katharine
Binks, and John Norwood. Seven were Burnt in the Hand, viz. William Davis,
Edward Gibbs, Katharine -- James Smart, Henry Collins, Joseph Hensey, and John
Martin alias Harvey, John Martin to be Whipped.
After Judgment, two of the Women condemned to dye, pleaded their Bellies, and
that they were quick with Child, viz. Eliz. Ford alias Jackson, and Margaret
Floyd; a Jury of Women were then summoned, who being sworn, and having taken
the said two Prisoners apart to examine the matter, gave in a Verdict, That
Margaret Floyd was with quick Child, but that Eliz. Ford was not.

LONDON, Printed By George Croom, at the Blew-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's Castle, 1684.


