A True and Exact ^ELATION OF THE Most Dreadful and Remarkable Fires, ^^^e
happened since the Reign of King WILLIAM the Conqueror, to this present Year
1666. In the Cities of London and Westminster and other Parts of ENGLAND.
IN the Year 1086. being the XX Year of the Reign of K. William the Conqueror,
so great and lamentable a Fire happ^ned in London, that beginning at Aldgate, it
burnt down Houses and Churches all the way to Ludgate; together with the
stately Fabric of S. Paul's, and the strong Castle called the Palatine Tower,
which stood on the West part of the City toward the little River of Fleet, the
Stones of which Castle were afterward employed for the reedifying of S. Paul's;
in the place where that Old Fabric stood, Robert Kilwarby afterward Bishop of
Canterbury, erected that House of Dominicans called by the name of Blackfriars.

In the Reign of K. Henry the First, in several places of England, happened
many grievous Fires: For first, the City of Chichester, with the principal
Monastery (a stately Building) was wholly burnt down to the ground. Next, in
London, from Westcheap to Aldgate a long tract of Buildings was consumed with
Fire. Also Worcester and Rochester were wholly consumed even in the Kings
presence. Then Winchester, Bath, Gloucester, Lincoln, Peterborough, and other
places did also partake of this calamity; that there could be no charging the
Fire with any partiality.

In the Year 1135. the First Year of the Reign of King Stephen, a Fire began in
the house of one Ailward, near unto London-Stone, which consumed all Eastward
to Aldgate; in which Fire the Priory of the Holy Trinity was burnt; and
Westward to S. Erkenwalds Shrine in S. Paul's. Now it plainly appears by the
three foregoing Relations, that the greatest part of the City of London in the
space of Fifty Years was three times consumed by Fire: the greatest destruction
that ever happened to the said City before or since.

In the Year 1171. the whole City of Canterbury was almost burnt. Also about
the Year 1250. there happened another great Fire in the same place, which laid
level with the ground the Church of S. Mildred, with the greatest part of the
City.

In the Year 1189, the whole City of Carlisle, and the Abbey, with all the Houses
belonging to the Friars Minors was consumed by Fire.

In the Year 1293. a great part of the Town of Cambridg, with the Church of our
Lady was burnt.

In the Year 1299. by a sudden and lamentable Fire the Kings Palace at
Westminster, with all the rich Furniture and Monastery adjoining, was wholly
consumed with Fire. In the same Year the Monastery in Gloucester was likewise
burnt.

In the Year 1406. the Town of Royston in Hartfordshire, (a fair large
Market Town) was wholly burnt.

In the Year 1463. the Minster of York, one of the fairest and stateliest
Fabrics in Europe, was burnt; also Christ-Church in Norwich.

The 20. of August 1485. a great Fire happened in Breadstreet London, which
burnt down several whole Streets, and diverse Churches.

In the Year 1561. the Spire of the Cathedral Church of S. Paul's, being 520
Foot from the ground, and 260 from the square Steeple where it was placed, and
was made of wooden materials, but covered with Lead, was with Lightning burnt
down, together with the Roofs of that large Church, and that within the space
of five hours: the Roofs were afterward reedified, but not the Spire.

On Monday the 13 of February 1633. a Fire began in the house of one Mr. Briggs
(at the hither end of London-Bridg) a Needlemaker, between the hours of 11 and
12, toward midnight, which burnt down in both sides the way from S. Magnus to
the first open place: where 42 houses with the greatest part of the Wares,
Goods, and rich furniture on them, were devoured by that Raging Element before
8 a clock next morning.

On Sunday the Second of September this present Year 1666. about one a clock in
the morning, there happened a sad and deplorable Fire in Pudding-Lane near New
Fish-street, which falling out in a part of the City so close built with wooden
houses, propagated it self so far before day with such violence, that it bred
such distraction and astonishment in the Inhabitants and Neighbors, that care
was not taken to stop the further diffusion of it by pulling down houses as
ought to have been, so that this grievous Fire in a short time became too big
to be mastered by any Engines or working near it; and being fomented by the hand
of God in a violent Easterly wind, which kept it burning in such a raging
manner all Sunday and Sunday-night, spreading it self by Monday morning up
Grace Church Street to Lombard Street, and to S. Swithins Church in
Canon-street, and downwards from Canon-street to the Waterside as far as the
Three Cranes in the Vintry, and Eastward beyond Billinsgate. The greatness and
vastness of the Fire was such, that made the amazed and distracted people take
care only to preserve their own goods, and secure every man his particular
concerns, making but slender attempts to extinguish the Flame. In fine, it
continued all Monday and Tuesday with such impetuosity, that it had, at 10 of
the clock on Tuesday-night, Westward consumed Houses and Churches all the way
to S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet; at which time by the favor of God the
wind slacked, and that night by the vigilance, industry, and indefatigable
pains of His Majesty and his Royal Highness, calling upon all people, and
encouraging them by their personal assistances, a stop was put to the Fire in
Fleetstreet, the Inner Temple and Fetter-Lane, at Holborn-Bridg, Pie-Corner,
Aldersgate, Cripplegate, near the lower end of Coleman-street, at the end of
Basinghall-street, by the Postern, at the upper end of Bishopsgate-street, and
Leadenhall-street, at the Standard in Cornhill, at the Church in
Fanchurch-street, near Cloathworkers-Hall in Mincing-Lane, at the middle of
Mark-Lane, and at the Tower-Dock. But on Wednesday-night it suddenly brake out
afresh in the Inner Temple, which happened (as is supposed) by flakes of fire
falling into the gutters of the Buildings: His Royal Highness in person
fortunately watching there that night, by his care, diligence, great labor,
and seasonable commands for the blowing up with Gunpowder some of the said
Buildings, it was most happily before day extinguished, after it had laid level
with the ground, Tanfield-Court, Parsons-Court, and the Buildings in the
Churchyard, and done some little damage to the Church and Hall.

Licenced,

R. L'Estrange.

London, Printed by B.W. in Little S. Bartholomews Court in West-Smithfield.
1666.


