AN ANTIDOTE Against the Sinful Palpitation of the Heart, OR Fear of Death.
Humbly offered to men's serious Thoughts, because sadly occasioned by That
Dreadful PLAGUE, And those horrid Fears of Death, that have seized This
present Generation in England: whom either greater Sins, or weaker Graces, or
both together, have rendered more then ever, Timorous.

MADE UP OF That Singular and Sovereign Scripture, Hebrews 2.15.

-- And deliver them, who through fear of Death, were all their life time
subject to Bondage. By Robert Tatnall M. A. Sometimes Fellow of Trinity
College in Cambridge, and lately Minister of the Gospel at St. John
Evangelist's LONDON.

Isa. 9.14, 15, 16, 17. -- For all this his anger is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still.

Rev. 1.17, 18. I am the first and the last. I am he that lives and was dead;
and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of Hell and of
Death.

Psalm. 68.20. He that is our God, is the God of salvation; and unto God the
Lord belong the issues from Death.

London, Printed by J. Hayes, and are to be sold by S. Gellibrand at the gilded
Ball, and S. Thomson at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1665.

Perlegi hunc Libellum cui Titulus (An Antidote against the fears of Death) in
quo nihil reperio Doctrinae Disciplinaeve Ecclesiae Anglicanae aut bonis
Moribus contrarium.

Joh. Hall, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
July 6. 1665.
TO THE TRULY CHRISTIAN READER.
IT is not a time now (if ever) to complement with dying men and women that
poor aid which any serious Christian can endeavor to give, in such a public
Calamity, as we all now do, or should deeply lament. The unworthy Labourer in
this small Piece of Service must acknowledge so much concerning himself, only
for his Apology: That having been some time, till of late employed in London,
as a Minister, He cannot but weep over it, in some Conformity to his Great
President's weeping over Jerusalem; And lisp that tender Affection, which he
cannot express to so great a City. For it is beloved of all, and a City once
much in, and ('it is hoped) not now out of God's favor: To be sure not left out
of the hearts of some few, who as formerly, do still most affectionately pray
for her, though they can do little else.

The Plague rages amongst us. Good men as well, though I hope not as much as
bad men, are obnoxious to this visitation. The latter understand little of the
Duty or Comforts manifested in Scripture, Spiritually knowing nothing at all.
Such if they will may hear the sounding of Gods Bowels and tender Mercies to
them, as in some other instances, so not least of all in those Comprehensive,
though SHORT INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE SICK, with some other; very lately made
public by an Eminent Labourer in the Gospel, which, with his leave, may be
styled His repeated [Call to the Unconverted] in Epitome, or their (Now or
Never) indeed. The Lord make those Instructions as effectual, as they are most
opportune and importunate too with men's souls. Surely the endeavoring of
sinners conversion, especially at the brink of the Grave, must needs be a work
of Sage Prudence, and an Apostolic Spirit. But who is sufficient as for that,
so for the rest of the Labor? viz. The Edification and Building up of Souls in
their most holy Faith, when their bodies are near ruin? Truly, be that now
questions (who is?) must answer for himself, that he of all men, is not: Who
yet counts it his great Duty to deplore it, as well as to confess it: And
whilst he laments his own evident insufficiency; to rely upon that sufficiency
which is of God; both to Direct, Assist, and Bless the meanest of all his
Laborers.

As for good men and women, who are so, though they can scarce themselves think
so, yet they are Christ's flock; And the Sheep and Shepherds too, cannot but
chiefly tender their good. Now it is clear that Death is near them as well as
others; Yea some of Gods most precious Children have been sick of the Plague,
none that I know do much doubt it to be King Hezekiahs sickness unto death;
Nay, some have died of it, as a most Eminent Minister of this City not long
ago. And it is not questioned by some considerable Divines, but that many of the
converted Corinthians dyed of the Plague, as well as others of them were much
visited with it, so that many were sick, and many weak. Whereupon some may say,
there may be no peremptorily asserted ground for a good man's looking on himself
as unconcerned, and exempted in a common danger and calamity. But however it
must be remembered, that a good man has no reason to fear the fear of the
wicked, whilst he hopes not their hope: He having more reason then any wicked
persons have, to wait upon God for a special Protection; if the ninty first
Psalm be a part of his Charter, as no doubt it is. Yet notwithstanding I find a
great Terror upon this Plague even possessing Good as well as Bad men. Which I
am the more troubled at; because as good people have less cause to sink and
faint away; so Christ by their dispondency has the less Honor. Which two
inconveniences much sadder then a Plague, O that I could, as a poor
Instrument, if not remove, yet abate, at least in some: O let Saints bear up,
and stand in the Gap, or Breach: Aaron you know ran into the midst of the
visited Congregation, and stood between the Dead and the Living making
atonement for them, till the Plague was stayed, Numb. 16.47, 48. Has Christ
made his people a Royal Priesthood to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable
by Jesus Christ? and shall such run from the Congregation? I mean from their
Duty, their Calling, their Charge, their own people, yea God and all, in vain?
O let Christ be honored for the increase of whose Kingdom, by the
conscientious labors of Gods Children in their places, The world both does and
shall stand through Gods mercy remembered in all his Judgments, even till the
great and general day of the Lords Tribunal.

There are indeed no greater Motives to any good Action, or endeavor, then the
advance of Christ's Honor, and of the Holiness and Happiness of poor souls, who
may, if they be wise, become with Abraham strong in Faith, and so rewarded with
strong Consolation, that believing so, with him, they might rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory, not only after, but also before their death.
All which is plainly intended in the Subject, or Scripture here presented to
such as would be serious and safe. Which Design of God, and interest of man, if
it be sincerely espoused in the ensuing Discourse: God will I hope in mercy
pardon, and every good person pity his infirmities, who in pity prays for a
blessing of God upon this, and all other means to be used by such as are sick
of the fears of Death before they are visited. Who therefore will not surely,
when a Cordial is brought them from the God of Heaven, fling Glass and all, in
contempt at the poor Messenger; who is

(Christian Reader) Thine in the LORD heartily, R. T.

An Antidote against the Fears of Death.
Heb. 2.15. And deliver them, who through fear of death were all their life
time subject to bondage.


WHen the serious thoughts of Mortality and Eternity do awaken our spirits to
look about us, whose Bodies, when once God is angry, are but dust and ashes
under a consuming fire: When Pestilence, War, and Famine are at the doors, and
look in, yea, enter in at the Windows, closely following Poor men and women, as
Phinehas did Zimri and Cozbi into their very Tent to slay them: When Gods
Prisoners are shut up from all comfort and Company of this life: Then, surely
then, no fellowship like the fellowship of Christ's sufferings; No Sanctuary
like his Sepulcher, No Physician like him, whose blood is of infinite value and
virtue too; No Deliverer from the miseries and fears of death but this Jesus;
this Christ that dyed. For his Death affords bread broken and ready prepared to
refresh and revive both the living and dying: His blood shed is the best Weapon
salve, or Plague-water; the only Preservative of all those that have received
the Arrows of the Almighty, and the Messengers of Death; whether we consider
Famine, Wounds, or Plague of men's own hearts, or bodies. But it is comfort
against Death in general, and the fears of it, that I design for the benefit of
the Saints timorous souls, partakers with me of flesh and blood, who must
certainly, and may suddenly dye: And blessed Eternally be the Lord Jesus, it is
his Grand and special design, who because the children did partake of flesh and
blood, and too much communicate in its fears of Death, did himself take part of
the same; he lived and died: That so feeling the bitterness both of the life
and death of flesh, he might as comfort his people in all their tribulations,
so especially deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life time
subject to bondage. I need not tell you a thing so obvious, How that Christ in
his highest pre-eminence is the theme of this Epistle to the Hebrews; which
after a glorious and singular manner displaies the honor and excellency of
Christ before the eyes of all, both Jew and Gentile, who are too too prone to
have very base and low thoughts of his Incarnation and Humanity, much more of
his Death and Passion, I shall therefore more narrowly acquaint you with the
import of this Text: The which, with the preceding verse, is enough by Gods
light to give us a soul animating and transforming view of Christ. Where we may
see him triumphing with all his elect Soldiers, some worthies especially, over
Death and Hell, and the Devil too. For as much then as the Children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the Devil; and deliver them who through fear of death, were all their life time
subject to bondage. Wherein you have, as in the Coherence, not only Christ's and
the Saints death, but also their victory over it. In the Text it self you have
these two parts:

1. The Saints misery by nature, not only to dye, but before hand to labor
under the fears of death; their subjection to bondage, with the continuance
thereof; All their life time.

2. Their deliverance by Christ; And deliver them who through fear of death
were all their life time subject to bondage. Where you see their deliverance is
very comprehensive. And deliver them: Their persons are gloriously delivered;
whether you respect death it self, the power and sting of Death, or the fears
of Death, or that bondage upon the account of those fears, which renders their
life most uncomfortable. The deliverance by Christ bates none of these. Now
there are some words and passages in my Text to be opened, that I may clear my
way to the Doctrines which are to be found in this blessed Scripture; Being all
such, as highly concern all mortal men, especially in a time of great mortality.

1. Then, what Death is this? Which is brought in here as a King of fears, so
terrible, that the Devil seems to be but its Viceroy; who would never be so
dreaded, were it not for death, from which he receives power to Captivate and
tyrannize over the poor Consciences of men, that are cowed with guilt, and
enfeebled with the handwriting against them in their own breasts; who when
most carnally asleep, do notwithstanding now and then sadly dream of some
sudden reckoning and dreadful execution.

2. What are these fears? Seeing fear of Death is so natural to, and common
amongst the Saints.

3. What is meant by being subject to bondage? Are not all Saints more or less
subject to many sad fears of death? Even those that sometimes can vaunt over it
with the Apostle Paul, may sometimes also fear least at death they suffer
shipwreck, and become Castawaies.

4. What is meant by all their life time? What deliverance if all their life
time so subject?

5. What is this deliverance, wrought thus for the people of God by the power
of Christ, and the transactions of his death? To these reasonable demands,
briefly.

First, What Death is this here meant? It is unquestionably natural death; the
dissolution or departure of the soul from the body: The body one way to the
dust and grave; the soul another way, even to God that gave it. This is the
Death here spoken of; The more terrible for the certain judgment of all, and
Eternal damnation of most, immediately consequent thereupon. Now inasmuch as a
little before the Text, flesh and blood is mentioned, which most shrinks from
death, as that part of a good man's nature that suffers by death the only
damage: And in as much as Christ therefore took part of the same flesh and
blood, and so therein tasted death for every man; it is but plainly absurd to
doubt that natural death is here meant.

Secondly, What are the fears of Death here spoken of? Seeing fear of Death is
so natural to, and common amongst the Saints. The Text will answer for me; the
latter expression in the words resolves you. They are slavish fears, not
natural or filial. Such fears as when in any measure in the Saints, have a
certain tang of the spirit of bondage; Fears which do debase the ingenuity and
confidence of children; As Saints are called just before the Text, For as much
then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood: And so thereupon indeed
are naturally subject to great fears, and by sin, to much bondage too in their
sense and apprehension of Death; therefore Christ took part of their flesh,
that he might deliver those who by reason of their flesh and blood were subject
to great fears of death: That so he might recover them into the just temper,
ingenuity, and liberty of the children of God.

Thirdly, What is meant by being subject to bondage? Are not all Saints more or
less subject to very great and slavish fears of death? Yea, such as can
sometimes vauat over it with the Apostle Paul, do yet sometimes also even fear
least at death they suffer shipwreck, and become Castawaies. I answer, It is
not to be understood that any are so delivered, as to be quite rid of these
fears, or of all proneness to, and possibility of them; that they see and hear
of these enemies no more. For according to such a kind of meaning; the
deliverance could not be wrought till after death; after which Saints shall
neither sin, nor sorrow, nor fear, nor be in bondage any more. If such were the
sense, then the words of the Text should not run as they do thus, [Who were all
their life time subject to bondage,] but who were, and still are, and shall be
till death subject to bondage, yet who indeed shall after death be perfectly
delivered from the fears of Death. Truly, as the Text can by no means admit or
bear such a reading; so no reason can make clear sense of it. For to be freed
from the fears of death, declares death not past but to come, and so notes a
deliverance wrought in this life. What great purchase were it, should a man
undertake to deliver me from the fears of that evil, which I have already quite
past through? So absurd is it to imagine, that Christ's actual delivering of
Saints from the fears of Death commences not, or begins not, till both Death it
self, and the fears of it too, are all naturally together with it first past;
and quite gone. Nay, truly the wickedest man dying in his sins, may be as
properly said to be delivered from the fears of his natural death, a moment or
two after he is dead; for how can he fear what he is sure is irrecoverably
past? Job 1.14.
If a man dies, shall he live again? Nay, shall he dye again? So that if this
be all Christ's death does for the Saints, that when they be dead they should
not fear dying, or a past death; it then does but actum agere, does but what is
done to hand by every ones death it self. Well then certainly Christ's
delivering Saints from the fears of death must denote death not past, but to
come unto the delivered. And thereupon Subjection to bondage, cannot signify
any proneness to, or possibility of some evil fears of death, as that from
which the Saints are in this life delivered; But somewhat more concerning, and
indeed more miserable, plainly and Emphatically given out in that very
significant word (...), [(...).] For this word (...) which we find rendered in
the Text subject, signifies such as are bound, held fast; some rendering it,
obnoxii, some obstricti, some qui tenentur, all agree in the same notion, of
its importing as much as bound, held fast, manicled or fettered: Held fast as a
bird taken in a snare, or a Malefactor arrested by a Sergeant, or as a
condemned man manacled and fettered against the day of Execution, and so held
fast as to be in hourly or frequent fears of death; which whether it be the
constant condition of all or any of Gods people all their days, comes next to
be considered.

4. What is meant by all their life time? What deliverance if all their life
time so subject? I answer, it is plain, that by all their life time, must be
meant all that part of their life time, before they come to enjoy the benefit
of this deliverance by Christ; and is equivalent to [All their former life
time,] looking backwards to their first, not forwards to their last breath.
That the time past of their life is only here intended as the time of this
their bondage is clear in the very Text; [Who all their life time were,] not
still are or shall be: But only who could never otherwise all their life time
or before, get any true freedom from these fears, and this bondage but by Jesus
Christ, and that upon the most serious meditation and due application of the
merit and designs of his Death. So then the Saints are not all their life time,
enslaved, bound, and as it were manacled and fettered in prison; but coming to
a right understanding of Christ's death, they are wonderfully set loose and at
liberty by Christ: So as not to be held fast in the clutches of Satan; although
all their life time before, Conscience and the Devil held them fast by the
fears of Death and Judgment After which Liberty so obtained, none of Gods
people are quite taken prisoners, held and bound hand and foot, as we say, with
these fears; though alas, many times sorely assaulted. The Devil may be so bold
as to arrest them with these fears, but can never altogether captivate and
enslave them, much less carry them away as it were to the strong Hold, and
detain them under the power thereof. Where ever he finds Gods children
arresting them with these fears of death, he finds them in privtledged places,
as I may say; his Arrest is against the Law of God; the Gospel Charter. And
there is one, especially, if fled to, and called upon, that will take off the
Arrest, even Jesus Christ, the Captain of their Salvation, and powerfully
deliver them from the Devils black frightful suggestions, and all those
astonishing fears; having destroyed him himself, and already put him to his
fearing and trembling. That through death he might destroy him that had the
Power of death, that is, the Devil, and (So) deliver them, who through fear of
death, were all their life time subject to bondage.

Fifthly, What deliverance is this? Wrought for the people of God by the power
of Christ, and the transactions of his Death. It is a deliverance so described
here, (to observe the Logic of the Text,) as that it directly carries our eyes
to behold, First, The Deliverer himself, Jesus Christ. Secondly, The misery he
delivers from.

First, The Deliverer himself Jesus Christ. And therefore we are to consider:

1. That it is a deliverance designed and intended by him; That he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and (also that he
might) deliver them who through fear of death were all their life time subject
to bendage. By taking unto himself flesh and blood, By living and dying, this
was his great Design to deliver poor mortal men from the fears of Death. Great
Comfort surely! He, he, will not fail of his end. How great is he who
disappoints the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their
enterprise? And there is none that can control him, or hinder him in his
design, who ran down the Devil himself that stood in his way. He was so set on
this design of delivering his children from the fears of Death, that he
destroyed the Devil, who had the greatest power of death to oppose him.

2. As it is a Deliverance designed, so purchased by him, at the price of his
Death. He tasted death for every man, that he might deliver, etc He purchased
with his own blood the deliverance of his people from the fears of death.

3. As designed and purchased, so really and actually vouchasafed; he destroyed
the Power of the Tyrant who detained them as slaves, and set them at liberty.
As it was said of Herod; He was dead that sought the Child's life; so may it be
said of the Devil; He is destroyed that enslaved the poor Consciences of mortal
men with the horrid fears of Death Hoeprostratus est (Diabolus) ut pro nihilo
hab ndus sit, ^o si nullus fore. Calv.
And they that are in Christ are not under his power; so it may be said of them
only that they were subject to bondage, closely held to it; but now they are
loose and at liberty, to serve God without fear in righteousness and holiness
all the days of their life. But now,

Secondly, This Actual Deliverance is further described so as to lead us to the
Consideration of the misery from which Christ delivers his people, and that
under those words; Death, Fears, Bondage.

1. From Death it self, I mean the misery or curse of it. It is true all
Christ's redeemed ones dye; or, are translated: But Death is not death to them;
but rather a mere shadow; and whilst it is a sad reality to others, it is
truly but as a sleep to the Saints. It is said therefore of the best mere men,
1 Kings 2.10. 1 Kings 11.43.
they slept with their Fathers; But of the Best and Greatest God-Man Jesus
Christ, that he died; He tasted of death for every man, as you have it a little
before my Text, that is, for the good and advantage of all the children. He
tasted for them, (it is a (...),) he drank up that Cup; (...), id est, mortem
sentiret, Metaphora sampta a Propinato calice, ex scripturae more, quem etiam
servalt Christus in triplici illa sua oratione, cum ad mortem properaret, Vid.
Joh. 8.51. Quibusdam etiam placet, istud eo refer quod vere quidem mortuus
sit, Sed tamen mortem quasi degustarit duntaxat, ut qui mox resurrexerit: qua
ratione dicuntur etiam no^nulli bonum dei donum guflare, quod mox evomant,
infra, 6.4. Sed hoc non placet. Beza.
He tasted so as they never do, that they might not taste the bitterness of
Death. He tasted it for them, they only as it were kiss the Cup. Christ dyed,
they sleep. Now who will say, that sleeping is dying indeed; that it is a
misery or imperfection to fall asleep: Unless we can think Adam to be miserable
in innocence, and fallen before his wife tempted him, or was yet made of him;
for he was asleep when Eve was formed of his Rib. Sleeping then is not a
misery, no more is the Saints death, who fall asleep in the state of the best
innocence by the righteousness of Christ. There may indeed be some similitude
in the Saints death unto the imperfection, and (which sweetens the matter) unto
the necessity and refreshment of sleep, taking it at the worst, after that the
Fall had decayed men's Constitutions and Tempers. There may be, and often are
tossings and wearisom tumblings on a death bed, and sometimes, anguish,
agonies, terrible Convulsions; but these are only like the difficulty, which a
weary Traveller meets with in falling to sleep; whose sleep is nevertheless
sweet to him: Or like the terrible dreams a healthful man may have in his
sleep, which are more disturbance to his fancy than senses: For usually the
body is past sensation, or but of a very dull sense and feeling in such gasping
difficulties: Such Convulsions frighting more the Beholder than the Patient;
and are but (as I may say) the sad dreams of a dying man upon his falling to a
deep sleep: when he awakes, all is well: for he did but dream it was ill with
him. But however that soul is but little concerned in all this, which is
delivered by Christ from the proper pains and terrors of Death.

2. Christ delivers from the sting of Death, Sin, which is remarkably signified
in the word (...), in the Text, which with a Genitive, as it is here, is used
in good Greek Authors, to signify the Obligation of guilt to a due punishment
of a broken Law: And so consequents here to Death, the wages of sin, which
terrifies at distance, and enslaves the Conscience. [Subject to Bondage] that
is, by the guilt of sin, to the enthralling fears of its due punishment, Death
Beza therefore renders that part of my Text thus: Quotquot metu mortis p^r
totam vitam Damnates erant servitatis.
But from this sting of Death are Christ's children delivered, witness the
Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is the Law; but thanks be to God who gives us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Victory by Christ, or deliverance from the sting of Death, made
him sing, O Death where is thy sting? Death is but as a Serpent to be played
with, because the sting is taken out, to be scorned therefore, rather than
feared. So that you see, the safety and sweetness of this deliverance by Christ
consists in his disarming this enemy, pulling out that only bitter and mortally
wounding sting of Death, Sin.

3. Christ Delivers his children from the slavish fears of Death and the very
sad bondage of them; This indeed is the top and perfection of this deliverance;
The very express notion of the Text, and must be made out in the sequel of the
Discourse. To all which resolves may be added: That as this happy deliverance
is the real portion, and really enjoyed privilege of real Saints, (Christ
tasting death for every man, who is of that blessed Fraternity, the children of
Christ; as they are called by Christ himself a little before the Text, v. 13,
14.) So also must this deliverance be acknowledged upon the first enjoyment at
least, to be not suddenly perfect, through the weakness of believers faith, yet
notwithstanding it is sufficient through Christ to bear them out in all their
encounters, even at length unto Conquest, yea, Triumph too. Thanks be to God
who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, and makes us without
fear sing, O Death where is thy sting? For as God, even so Christ gives all his
benefits liberally, and upbraids not, and that without any difference or
respect of persons, to all that ask in faith without any wavering. His blessed
will is, That his free born children should not only have life, but have it
more abundantly; that is, comprehending naturally this instance, That they
should be more and more abundantly freed from the servile fears of death, not
only from the domineering prevalency, but the disquieting presence of them. Now
the words lying open to view, you have a most fair prospect of great and sweet
variety; which naturally springs up, out of this most fruitful field, that if
dug and searched will yield very holy meditation and discourse.

Concerning this Scripture, I may say truly in the words of the Apostle Paul,
when he was comforting timorous souls under their fears of Judgment, and so
very pertinently to my business in hand: Behold here, how our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and God even our Father, who has loved us, and given us everlasting
consolation and good hope through grace, do here comfort your hearts by the
most warm breathings of the Holy Ghost the Comforter, who indeed is then a
Comforter, when all else are but miserable ones. His Cordial here is very
singular and sovereign, the Ingredients very precious and various, and not a
little conspicuous in these following Doctrines; some of which are raised from
the fourteenth verse immediately preceding my Text; some from both verses
together; and some from the Text it self only.

1. The fourteenth verse exhibits to you these seven Doctrines.

First, That the unconceivable love of the Son of God to his dear children,
made him come down on earth and become man.

Secondly, That Christ in his humane nature is as very man as any of the Elect,
his flesh and blood not only being like ours, but part of our substance. He
also himself likewise took part of the same: So that he himself is of the same
stock of Adam and Eve as surely and verily as any of us.

Thirdly, That sinners out of Christ are under the sentence of Death, such as
are not Gods Children are under the Devil their fathers cruel severity, that
is, under the power of Death; or, That Satan has the power of Death over all
such as are not delivered by Christ from his Power.

Fourthly, That Christ has destroyed this his power, for the sole benefit of
his children, true believers.

Fifthly, That the way how Christ overcame Satan, and destroyed his power, was
by his own death. Or, Christ by his own death conquered that Tyrant the Devil.
Which destruction of the Devil by the Death of Christ, because alleged here by
the Apostle as Christ's intermediate end, in subserviency to his Grand design of
delivering his children from the fears of Death, I shall only a little pause
upon. The Devil was no sooner our enemy, but Christ was his. The Devil said to
our first Parents, Ye shall not surely dye, but Christ only made it good.
Though the Devil meant nothing less, yet Christ nothing more; see the Devil in
his colors. First, he tempts to sin, with a surely thou shall not dye, and yet
presently upon the Commission of sin, he torments with a surely thou shall dye.
He speaks his own plainly when he tempts to sin, but he speaks in appearance
Gods words when he tempts to despair. How much harder then is it to resist his
temptations to despair of pardon, than it is to resist those his temptations by
which he would bring us into a sad need of it. But he is a Liar in both. For he
spoke in his first temptation to sin against his own judgment, who verily
thought man by sin would most irrecoverably dye, and that for ever. And when he
tempts all men to despair with a surely ye shall dye, he knows he lies. For
Christ in all Ages effectually delivers all his Children. Whether Satan say,
thou shall not surely dye before sin committed, or thou shall surely dye after
sin committed, he knows he lies; in the one he lies against the truth of the
Law; in the other he lies against the true meaning of an Enacted Law; in the
other he lies against the truth of the repeal; or in the one he lies against
the truth of Gods threats, and the condemning power of the Law; in the other,
against the truth of Gods promises, and of his incomparably glorious Act of
Indemnity. He thought indeed seeing he could not be exalted above God, he
would become a petty Tyrant (as his ambition thirsted) over poor mankind, and
thereupon labored to bring man by sin under his power, the power of death; but
wherein he dealt proudly Christ was above him; Christ in man's nature dyed for
man; so that though in as much as Christ dyed the Devil bruised his heel, yet
Christ by his own death defeated his design, and bruised his Serpent-head,
which he will not be able to get healed for ever: whereas Christ only was dead,
but is alive, and lives for evermore; as before by death to vanquish him, so
eternally by the power of his Life and Reign to keep him under, in chains of
darkness; and also to deliver his children from his power of Death; who though
they sleep, yet shall wake again Eternally.

Sixthly. That Christ's death conquered the Saints death; even the power of it
lying much in the hand of the Devil, was destroyed with him. Death is our
enemy, Christ encountered it for us, in our stead; verse 9. the Apostle,
speaking of Jesus, says thus; That he by the grace of God should taste death
for every man; for him. He conquered our enemy death, by dying, by bearing, and
so breaking off from us all its malignant force, that it cannot reach us
therewith when it ruffles most. It is our last enemy, but already conquered by
Christ. Christ's death it is the Saints life in Death. Christ has given death
its deaths wound; and though at its last gasp it would lift up its self, and
grin upon a dying Saint; yet behold all its venome-teeth are dashed out by the
power of Christ; and its sting to seek. It lays only upon him a cold and
feeble hand, but cannot break a bone, as I may say, not do the least hurt. It
only rocks the body asleep, and makes way for the soul to enter into its
Masters Joy, unspeakable indeed and full of glory. As the Devil, whom Christ
rebuked in the possessed, tare and rent the body, it is true; yet durst not but
come forth and depart; and though the body was left on the ground as dead, yet
it quickly appeared to be alive. So death may tear and shake a Saints body at
its dissolution, and leave it for dead on the ground, yet it has no more to do
to touch it; the very body (as the grain sown in the earth is a springing up,
though at first flowly, with a new life;) I say the body shall in spite of
death live again gloriously at the Resurrection, and never dye; because death
is conquered and destroyed for ever by Christ's death, who was dead but is alive
for evermore, Amen. Neither is the Saints sleeping at their dissolution, a bare
piece of Rhetoric, but a most real notion: Wicked men's bodies may be said
indeed most properly to suffer death; for though they also shall rise again,
yet it is to lead a life in those raised bodies worse than death. But now
Saints bodies are, whilst in the grave, really united to Christ; which real
union of their dust to Christ, is a glorious security of their bodies blessed
life, which the former bare union of their souls and bodies together before
death could never give them.

Seventhly, That seeing Death and Devil was thus to be destroyed by Christ, it
behoved Christ to be a mortal man to dye, as well as God-man thereby to conquer
Death.

2. From the verse immediately preceding, together with my Text, these two
Doctrines:

First, That as Christ by his Death conquered the Devil and Death: So also by
the same Death of his, he delivered his children, true Believers, from the
slavish fears of their own death.

Secondly, That there is none but Christ's children can have solid and true
courage against Death. Not a free man in the world, but a true believer, all
the rest are bondslaves, fearful, the Devils prisoners. Whatever foolhardiness
there may be in the world, falsely called valor and contempt of death; yet it
is far exceeded in the same kind, by the more sinewy strength and daring
boldness of many brute beasts: And in them rather it is valor; in man madness:
The Brute dares to dye, but man more void of strength and reason, dares dye and
be damned too. But sure all such men in their natural condition are past
feeling, or Cowards only to themselves; so unreasonably dastardly, as to dare
rather to look death in the face than their own awakened Consciences. For they
that seriously meditate and know both themselves, and Death, and Devil, instead
of pretending valor, must needs yield themselves Captives to the fears of
Death: for stouter Creatures than sinful, wicked, unregenerate men; even the
Devils themselves under guilt, do fear and Tremble.

3. From my Text alone, only these three Doctrines.

First, That there is a natural fear of Death as well as of the Devil, rooted
in all men's hearts always, whilst they are out of Christ at least. I say
always, Though not always felt, yet easily awakened; as, by raging guilt, a
tempting Devil, and sore judgments inflicted on them by an angry, yet most
righteous God, visiting their Iniquities.

Secondly, That this fear puts men in bondage. So that they dare not by reason
of sensible and evident danger of distraction, meditate seriously upon death,
Gods judgments, or Hell, so clearly and confessedly deserved by themselves.

Thirdly, That Christ is the great Deliverer of his People from the slavish
fears of Death. I shall, God assisting, as it concerns me, duly eye all along
the death of Christ, by the which Death of his He does deliver his People from
the fears of their own death; yet intending to speak as briefly, and with what
advantage I can from the Scriptures to this singularly comfortable Doctrine, I
shall take the latitude, which the absolute consideration of the Text clearly
gives me, according to the Doctrine already laid down in these words.

Doctrine,
That Christ is the Great Deliverer of his people from their slavish fears of
death.

It is the will of this great King of Saints, and Prince of Peace, that all his
People should live up to their privilege and his honor: Not as sins, much
less as the Devils or Deaths slaves, but as Children. Christ is called, the
Everlasting Father; and here before my Text he himself owns, and answers to
that name; Behold, I, and the children which God has given me. Christ's great
design is to make his children, children indeed, free indeed from the servile
fears of Death. This Prince of life, as he is called, Acts 3.15. will not have
his children slaves to death; no, nor to the Prince of Death the devi^. The
Method in prosecuting this truth, shall be by the Lords concurrence, First, To
prove that the Lord Christ is such a Deliverer. Secondly, To show how he
actually manages this deliverance of his Saints from their fears of Death.
Thirdly, To Apply.

First, Then to prove that the Lord Christ is such a Deliverer: For such a
glory of our blessed Savior is highly worth the beholding; yea, men and Angels
displaying; and therefore not a needless thing to prove. It is never
sufficiently seen and admired. This considerable and comfortable part of the
Saints deliverance by Christ, is one of the fairest and rarest Jewels in the
Diadem of this King of Saints. He is the Deliverer of his people from the fears
of Death. Therefore as the Apostle says a little below my Text, Consider then
the Apostle, and High Priest of our Profession Christ Jesus; Consider well your
great Messiah; O Saints, behold your King. See then,

First, He has power enough thus to deliver. Is he not God man? And indeed
what is a Jesus, a Savior, a Deliverer without Power? But can his power
conquer his peoples Enemies, and their fears too? With Jesus all this is
possible, and more too. See the power of his Scepter, Heb. 7.25. wherefore he
is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him: Not only then
from all enemies, but from all fears in the way. To the uttermost; As, from the
misery of Death it self, so from its killing fears. Now consider a little; will
deliverance from the soul-disquieting fears of death, be looked upon and judged
a proper, real, yea, great Deliverance? And shall not Jesus be the Author and
finisher of it, who can save to the uttermost? This is not surely below or
above his power that can deliver to the uttermost. Nothing truly deserves the
name of Deliverance, but this expression (to the uttermost) comprehends it,
Luke 1.74. These you see, deliverance out of the hand of enemies, and serving
without fear go naturally together, and will Christ separate them? Now can
Christ thus deliver from the fears of death, because to the uttermost those
that come unto God by him, and yet a soul that comes unto God by him, never so
delivered? How is it possible? The Philosopher will laugh at this doubt or
denial, with his Frustra est potentia quae non producitur in actum, That power
is in vain that is never exercised. Can the Sun withhold the force of its power
to heat, from any thing it shines upon? Can a Mother forget her Child? So, can
the Everlasting Father forget his? Can Christ withhold or deny the effectual
influence of his power to deliver to the uttermost them that come unto God by
him? When once this Sun of Righteousness is risen with healing under his wings
upon any poor soul, the warmth of his continual beams, ever and anon breaking
through all clouds and overcasts, cannot but dispel and work out of that soul
all the chil fears of Death.

Secondly, As Christ has power to deliver his people from the slavish fears of
death, so also an indispensable obligation thereunto lying upon him as
Mediator. This is an invincible argument with the former: And if you consider
well in whom this power resides, you cannot have the least scruple or darkness
in this Point; Who is it then? Truly, God-man, the Son of God and of man; who
is what he is as a Christ, a Jesus, a Savior, for the real and effectual good
of all his people, who cannot, if they will, but sooner or later, in some
measure, as really partake of every virtue and benefit of Christ's death, which
they stand in need of; as ever Christ did partake with them of the same flesh
and blood. For as Mediator he is obliged to save to the uttermost, 1 Cor. 1.30.
But of him are ye in Christ Jesus; who of God is made unto us (as) Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, (so) Redemption; Christ cannot and will not deny
any real Saints that universal and full Redemption and deliverance which. God
has made over to them in and with his Son. The world out of Christ cannot
claim a comfortable interest in Gods power, whom they have perfectly
disobliged, and can by no manner of proper merit oblige him again. But now
Saints may claim an interest in Christ's power to save them to the uttermost,
because he is made of God to them Redemption, without any exception of so
considerable a Redemption, as this is, from the fears of death; or indeed
without possibility of any such exception. For if Christ be made to the Saints
Righteousness, the Law is satisfied, the sting of Death, sin; and the strength
of sin, the Law, is all quite taken away by a pardon given us through Christ's
satisfactory and meritorious righteousness. If Christ be made Sanctification to
us, the power of sin is also much subdued, so that the hearts courage is no
more so weakened by sin, nor such an enmity against, and thereupon such a
suspicion of Gods wrath maintained, as before; nor in a word, such a spirit of
bondage again to fear, as formerly. And then if Christ be made wisdom to us,
he gives us light, whereby to discover the truth and benefit of all this grand
provision for our souls peace and rest: What then can his being made Redemption
to us be more, over and above, or less? Then his rescuing our hearts and
consciences from the slavish and foolish fears of any damage by Death, that
penalty of the Law, the wages of sin, the worst that can come. Christ removing
the guilt of sin as our Righteousness, and the power of sin as our
Sanctification, and also removing our ignorance of deaths impotency in such a
case to hurt us, as our Wisdom, has left nothing to be done more, or in the
next place as our Redemption, but the removing, also the impotency of our
hearts in such unreasonable fears of Death, which he has so disarmed not only
of weapon, but of power also to hurt us. Now all this he is obliged to do for
the Saints; For how is he made all this to them, if it reach not their souls?
Separate not what God has conjoined in your Savior, one and all in some
measure is every Saints portion. They cannot ask more of each than is prepared
for them in the fullness of Christ: Nay, not more than they have clear title to,
as much now as ever any Saints had in any former ages, because Christ is made
of God to all Saints in full; Wisdom, Righteousness Sanctification, and
Redemption. Poor souls, power in God for your good you can hardly conceive,
since by reason of sin he that made you by his power, may refuse to save you by
his power; well, yet power laid up in Christ for you, may well encourage you.
God has therefore lodged power in Christ God-man, to let poor Saints,
believing in him, see their interest in it, and marriage claim to it; to let
them know, he would have his power actually deliver and save them to the
uttermost. Go to God by him, and he is not only able, but obliged to carry you
to God without fears in the way: It being his very Office; as Gods High
Chamberlain, one set over the house of God for this purpose, Heb. 10.21, 22.
But to support this with another Consideration.

Thirdly, As Christ is able and obliged, so willing and faithful; as willing as
able, and as faithful as obliged thus to deliver. Truly this with the first, I
mean his willingness, faithfulness, and his ability, (which was first
mentioned,) might easily be granted by any that consider the Person, God-man,
here spoken of; yet because it makes much to this present purpose I must show
you some Scripture, that commands us to consider this in him, as Heb. 2.17.
Wherefore it behoved him in all things to be made like unto his brethren, that
he might be a merciful, and faithful High Priest. Merciful; He took our nature,
our very flesh, that he might be more tender of, and merciful to us in our
danger, and fears of dying; which by reason of flesh and blood are incident to
us* And then faithful, that is, so sensible of every thing, tender and pitiful,
as faithfully to improve his great Ability to save and deliver to the
uttermost. As his power is large to the uttermost of our misery and fear, so
his faithfulness is as large as his power. He must then of necessity be an
actual deliverer of his people in all points, not only from their Enemies, but
from their servile fear of them: As from Deaths misery, so from the fear of it,
that they serve God without any such horrid fear, in righteousness and holiness
all their days. And the reason is cogent; for in him concur sufficient ability
to save, and an indispensable obligation thereto from the immutable purpose and
appointment, mutual agreement, and mercy, both of his father and himself, and
also particularly a great obligation from the power of his Sympathy with those
whose natures and flesh he took up; and then as sufficient ability, and
indispensable obligation; so infallible faithfulness meet gloriously in this
blessed Jesus, and speak him an Almighty Deliverer of his people from the fears
of Death. Does not all this appear? He dyed. Who could, who would so dye?

Before his death he cried; Let this cup pass: that so no Saint might fear its
approach: He at his death cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
That so no Saint might at his own death cry out fearfully, as forsaken of God.
Those his cries proceeded from mighty and meritorious pangs; Thus each peculiar
pain was appointed for our particular healing; as these mentioned, for the
curing us of the painful fears of our death; and they are also great
demonstrations of Christ's mercy and faithfulness unto us unto the last: Who
else might easily have had more than twelve Legions of Angels to have rescued
him from the rest of his Passion: but he was cruel to himself, merciful and
faithful to us.

Fourthly, Christ is a Deliverer of his people from the fears of Death; because
he cannot but be faithful as to his childrens good, so to his own glorious
design. Where Power, and Resolution, and unchangeableness meet, what can hinder
the accomplishment of a design? Christ's power of delivering from the fears of
death has been evidently proved; His design is manifest in the Text. He
assumed humane nature, THAT he might deliver his Saints from the fear of Death,
and whilst he bears about him that Humane Nature, how can he but be constant to
his design in taking it up? He that lives for ever to make intercession for his
people, has not in vain the Keys of Hell and of Death.

Fifthly, He has accomplished and achieved such things for his children that
naturally bring about this their freedom from the fears of Death. To suggest
the most weighty.

First, He died not only in their nature, but in their stead. He tasted death
for them. So that as to them it may be truly said, Mankind died in him their
representative. That formidable death which men deserve, Christ has undergone
it all. What fear of death can then be reasonably yielded to; it is Christ that
died. What reason to fear that which another has felt for us on purpose, that
we to be sure should never feel any such thing. What is truly formidable in
Death is past and gone; and no more to be feared than an escaped danger.

Secondly, Christ has by his death merited Saints freedom from the fears of
their own. He laid down his life as the price of this Privilege. What Saint
then dares fear death, that considers the unquestionable sufficiency of the
value of Christ's death, for the purchasing this great privilege for him that
he should not fear death? For a Saint to fear Death with a bondage servile
fear, is as much as to say; Christ has not bled enough to purchase this my
freedom from these fears, but I must bleed too, to raise the price. God forbid
that any Saints doubts or fears should ever be found so palpably guilty of
undervaluing the blood of Christ, and the price of their Redemption.

Thirdly, Christ by his Death has taken away the only true fundamental reason,
and occasion of the fear of Death, and that is the condemning power of the Law.
The sting of that Death, sales the Apostle, which men so dread, it is nothing
else but sin; Sin indeed unpardoned: Well, but that is pardoned in the blood of
Christ: and therefore says he; Thanks be to God who gives us the victory,
(that is, over death,) through our Lord Jesus Christ: Well, but how? The
foregoing words show it, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. The sting of death is sin; True:
But, the strength of sin is the Law; Oh! there, there is the bitterness. The
Law sharpens, and strengthens the sting of Death, sin. Oh! This condemning
power of a broken Law! This, this torments the sinners heart with the fears of
Death. Well; but observe; The strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be to God
who gives us the victory; that is, by weakening the strength of sin, and
blunting the sharpness of that sting of Death. Christ has satisfied every
demand of the broken Law; that sin or death can say or do nothing to fright one
that is by faith become Christ's child. Though the Devil lie, and so labor to
terrify a Saint, saying; Come, come away; thou have broken the Law; Its
Sentence and doom is past upon thee; Come to prison: thou must surely and
suddenly dye. Yet all this time the Law says no such thing; and yet it
flatters none, being most true and just; but it takes good notice that Christ
died, and it is fully satis fied. I will assure you the Law will not suggest
the least fear to any soul that has the least faith in Christ's blood. The Law
acknowledges such full payment by Christ's most Precious Death, that it requires
not the least farthing more, Romans 15.18. As by the offense of one, judgment
came upon all to Condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, (says the
Apostle of Christ,) the free gift came upon all unto justification of life. The
broken Law, instead of condemning a sinner, that has faith in Christ, does
rather justify him fully. The Law says to the sinner that believes in Christ;
Truly for all me thou shall live, and that eternally; for Christ has died, I
require no death of thee; and that thou at thy dissolution seem to die, it
is more to conform to thy Masters and Saviors death, and indeed to comply with
the necessity of a better and more curious fabric of thy body, and its far
sweeter life, than to satisfy any of the Laws demands. Thus Christ satisfying
the killing demands of the Law, has indeed taken away the very ground of fear,
the very strength of sin, which without that strength cannot afford Death the
least sting to wound us.

Fourthly, Christ has taken away, as the strength of sin, so the strength also
of the Devils Temptations to fear death. So that when a Saint fears death upon
the Devils temptations, he fears a lie of the Devils, and a fancy of his own.
For Christ has really broken the force of all the devils temptations to fear
death; according to the clear meaning of that expression coupled with my Text,
That he might destroy him that had the power of Death. But you will say who but
God has the power of life and Death? Does not Jesus Christ himself vindicate
it as his Prerogative Royal, Rev. 1.18. speaking of himself, I am he that
lives and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the
keys of Hell and Death. What power of death then has the Devil? But little
now; blessed be Christ. The Devil cannot bring death at his pleasure to our
doors. Jobs life was not committed to his cruel mercy, he had no power to kill
him. Truly, wicked men have power, when God permits, to kill the body, and what
has the Devil more? By the Power of Death here attributed to the Devil, is
meant only his forcible temptations, by which he conveys many ugly forms and
shapes of Death, and so also many sad apprehensions and fears thereof into men's
distressed Consciences; the Devil has leave of God to fright guilty sinners,
and he has of himself malice, power, and wit enough to bring death near; and
to lay its rough hand upon the sore place of a sinners wounded Conscience. Yea,
he has besides, even all that power and strength of Deaths sting in his hand;
which Death received from the Condemning Law. But now though the wicked are
often laid open to the Devils cruel mercy; yet little it is that he can do
against Christ's People, because Christ has destroyed the Devil, and this his
Power. Christ's blood has cancelled his Commission, or so contracted and
lessened it, that when ever he assaults a believer with the fears of Death, he
knows he must flee upon resistance. Resist the Devil (says the Apostle) and he
will flee from you: He knows he must; having no Commission to stay after such
resistance, as Christ enables his people to make. And then as to that strength
of his Temptations which is derived and urged from a pretense of the
Condemnation and penalty of the Law. It is but little, or indeed nothing he can
say to a believer. Here the Saint has advantage of ground given him against
the Devil. For never was the Law more broken than Christ's life fulfilled it;
and never can the penalty thereof be so fully suffered, as it was by Christ's
Death, that paid the uttermost farthing: which the damned's torments shall
never be able to do.

Sixthly, Christ is the Deliverer of his People from the fears of Death; in as
much as he works mightily in them as well as for them, and so wonderfully
strengthens them in the inner man against those servile fears of Death. But in
what manner, and by what graces or comforts, I have determined to show in the
second part of my Method. I shall therefore now only add; That Christ
administers a mighty virtue and power to the spirits of his people; by his
gracious Pardons, encouraging Commands, and comfortable, yea, suitable Promises.
All which wonderfully serve to animate Believers against the fears of Death.

First, By Gracious Pardons. The Son of man had power on earth to forgive sin;
sure he has not lost that power now he is exalted in heaven. You know he
exercised that power on earth; and so he does still. For whilst on earth, how
often said he? Thy sins are forgiven thee. Upon his departure from the earth,
near his dying; Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you, not as the
world gives, give I unto you let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be
afraid, Joh. 14.27. After his Resurrection, Peace be unto you, Joh. 20.21.
After his Ascension into heaven you know the Salutations in his Letters
Credential by his Ambassadors and Ministers, I mean the Salutations you find in
the front to many of the Epistles in the New Testament: Grace, Mercy, and Peace
from God our Father, (first,) and (then) from our Lord Jesus Christ, as the
very next hand. This Prince of Peace speaks Peace to his Saints, and what enemy
first or last (as death is) dare or can speak War? As Christ by his own mouth
spoke peace on earth to his people; so now as verily and really by his own
spirit, by his infallible Word, and true Ministers, he sares to the poor
Consciences of his Saints, Your sins are forgiven you; and if Sin sting not,
Death cannot. Guilt's fears are blasted with that sweet peace which Christ
gives, and which the world by a thousand Deaths cannot take away; fears cannot
dwell where Christ's words of eternal life take place. So that a pardoned
Conscience sings before this enemy Death; O Death where is thy sting?

Secondly, By encouraging Commands, does his Excellency the Lord Jesus hearten
his People and Soldiers that they fear neither Death, nor Devil, which
expressions of Christ are not to be considered only as beseeching persuasions,
but rather as most rouzing and Authoritative incitements unto courage and
valor, as these are: Fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure
to give you the Kingdom, (Luke 12.32.) which indeed is won and fully possessed by
Death. And, Be of good cheer, and let not your heart be troubled, neither let
it be afraid, etc. So still does Christ, as a Lord of Hosts, go on speaking
courageously to us by his Word, by his Spirit, and by his field Officers, Isa
35.4.
I mean his Apostles and Ministers; and that in such words as these pressed and
charged home; Let your Conversation be as BECOMES the GOSPEL, and that
especially in your being nothing TERRIFIED by your adversaries, Phil. 2.27, 28.
And put on the whole Armor of God, etc. That ye may be able to stand in the
evil day, and having done all to stand. Christ as a good Captain and great
General heartens his people not to fear their last encounter in the evil day,
the hour of danger, or of sudden Death; he secretly whispers such courage into
his peoples hearts: And for him to say fear not, (who by a word created all
things in heaven and earth) it is enough to embolden the faintest Christian
Soldier unto Conquest What a Captain of Salvation is this? That at once says,
be of good courage, and makes of good courage. Oh labor to hear the voice of
the Son of God, and thou shall live in spite of Death; and truly there is no
such difficulty to hear him, for he uses to speak Peace to his Saints that
diligently seek him.

Thirdly, By comfortable and suitable Promises, does the Lord Jesus animate his
people against all evil fear of Death; to instance in some, I will not leave
you comfortless. I will send you the Comforter. Verily, verily I say unto you,
ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, Joh. 16.20,
22. Your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you: no not Devil
nor Death, for if these could, it would be all one as if man could, for then
they should not keep it. But although one of Christ's Apostles confessed of
himself that he was in deaths often; yet that Promise bore him our, and all the
rest too of Christ's Disciples; even so as that they sang in prison, and made
ready not to be bound only, but to dye at Jerusalem, or any where else, for the
name of the Lord Jesus. It is very remarkable, that when Jesus Christ had given
his Disciples many comfortable Promises, Joh. 16. to hearten them up, he summed
up all in the end of the Chapter, thus; These things have I spoken unto you,
(that is, these Promises,) that in me ye might have peace, in the world ye
shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer I have overcome the world; yea,
whatsoever is the worlds properly; as misery and death are. All the Promises of
God are in Christ, yea, and in him Amen. Promises are Gods and Christ's words,
upon which they cause their people to hope; according to that of David;
Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope. And
the Apostle teaches, that through patience and comfort of the Scriptures Saints
have hope: which hope in the Promises prevails against nothing more than sin, 2
Cor. 7.1. and 1 John 3.3. and particularly against sinful fears of death. For
what can more naturally destroy fear, than that which mightily enlivens hope?
Such are Christ's Promises, which words of eternal life therefore are most
powerful against Death. Shall Saints then fear, though a little flock, when
those young Lions, wicked men, and those old Lions, the Devil and Death set
upon them, when as they have such a Promise as this to bear them up? That it is
your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Death may be dreadful to
those, that by it lose Crowns, but certainly desirable to those, that by it are
sure to win Crowns.

Seventhly. I produce the great Examples, and instances, which testify of
Christ that he is such a deliverer of his people from the fears of Death, as
first Job: Though God should slay him, yet no fear but hope: he would trust in
him, for he knew his Redeemer lived. David though he walked in the valley of
the shadow of death, would fear no ill, for God was with him, even Christ his
great shepherd. The three Children feared Death neither before they were cast
into the fiery furnace, nor after; because a fourth was with them in form like
the Son of God. The Apostle Paul was persuaded, that neither Death nor life, no
not death could separate him from the love of God in Christ Jesus; and
thereupon manifested such freedom from fear, that he says of himself and many
others, In all these things (amongst which were manifold deaths,) we are more
than Conquerours through him that loved us; yea, and for this purpose gave
Christ for us, Romans 8.37. even we, though killed all the day long, and
accounted as sheep for the slaughter, v. 36. yet we, in this condition, (that
multiplies other men's fears,) are more than Conquerours. Therefore, O Saints,
see the valor of your fellow soldiers, who have no other Captain; or weapons,
than you have. Christ is no respecter of persons, but able and willing to save
you, as well as them from the fears of Death. But to come to the second part of
my Method.

Secondly, I am now to proceed to another most pleasing and satisfactory
account, and to discover how Christ does so dwell, reign, and rule in the
Saints hearts, as to eject thence these potent, enslaving fears, the fears of
Death; how he works them out of his childrens hearts, and rids them of such
troublesome Guests; that when they are found in unregenerate men, do as it were
lay violent hands on them. For the fears of Death in many are one sort of
Deaths executioners, or at least as Sergeants to arrest them for the Grave; and
that with such a clap and damp, that makes uncontrolable way for death, and
quite overthrows them. Now how does Christ cast and bar out these killing fears
of death? Many ways.

First, By Faith; a gift flowing as all other grace from Christ's fullness, of
which we receive grace for grace. Christians see your strength, 1 John 5.4.
This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. The world
comprehending the miseries arising from a dying life, and from death it self,
yea, Devil too: for these are the enemies and forces the world breeds,
maintains, and fights us with, whilst we are in it. But faith is our victory;
and surely if it makes us Conquerours, it makes us not to fear. This excellent
grace of Faith has so great a stroke in the Saints conquering, that it is
called the conquest and victory it self. Nay farther; Saints in this life are
said to be kept by the power of God through FAITH unto Salvation; because what
ever is done by Gods and Christ's power for our Salvation or Redemption from
any, or all our miseries, first and last, is accomplished not without our
faith. Thus Christ applies and conveys to us the merit, virtue, and power of
his conquering death. Christ has shed his blood: but by faith he warms our
hearts with it against the cold fears of death. This was that which made the
Apostle Paul so crow over Death. He was persuaded that as not life, so neither
death could separate him from the love of God in Christ Jesus. This persuasion
was his faith, that made him triumph over death without fears of it, come when
it would. Thus is Christ the Author and finisher of our faith unto this
particular conquest and victory over Death, and over all its horrid fears: For
Christ is not contented himself thus to conquer, unless he makes all his
Servants, (not only that eminent Apostle Paul, but also) all Believers, his
Seconds in the encounter; that they should conquer as well as he: Nay, in
respect of any expected Death be more than Conquerours. Oh! Faith in Christ's
blood gives Saints a noble courage against Death. I shall urge this with the
citation of a truly Heroic and spiritual expression dictated by a most learned
and pious Divine of our Protestant Religion, which is this: Siquis animum
pacare non possit mortis contemptu, is sciat parum se adhuc profecisse in
Christi fide; that is, says he; If a man cannot quiet his soul, (or still that
turbulent passion of fear,) with the contempt of Death; Let that man know he
has made but little proficiency in the faith of Christ. Thus he, concerning a
Professor too fearful of Death. To such an one I think also it may be truly
and justly said with a smart rebuke, O thou of little faith. To this purpose I
shall propose a Scripture-passage, most worthy of special notice: It is that of
Christ himself concerning the Apostle Peter, Luke 22.31, 32. Simon, Satan has
desired (says Christ) to have you, that he may fifth you, as wheat, but I have
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not: How did Satan sift and shake him?
Truly, with fears of suffering death, of faring like his Master; so that for
fear he denied him, and swore to boot. Thus Satan shook him with strong blasts
of Temptations to fear death; he blew him like a shaking leaf with his fears.
Well, how did he recover? I have prayed (says the Lord) that thy faith fail
not. That was his Case, this his cure; fear of death cured by faith in him whom
he forsook when Death was near. Says Luther, Quanto major fides est, tanto
mors est imbecillior: Quanto autem fides minor, tanto mors est acerbior: That
is, The greater Faith is, the weaker is Death: The less Faith is, the bitterer
is Death. Have then a strong faith in Christ, and your hearts shall not be
troubled with any disquieting fears of Death; for these will certainly be too
weak to hold your spirits in bondage, if your hearts be kept by the power of
God through Faith unto Salvation.

Secondly, Christ by putting into, and maintaining in our hearts that divine
and mighty principle of love; a love in our souls for himself, does thereby
banish the fears of Death, and garrison them out. Perfect love, says the
Apostle John, casts out fear, Joh. 4.18. There is a very eminent Divine of
our English Nation, that gives us a very rational and remarkable account of the
occasion, upon which this Apostle writ this whole Epistle, or at least, that
Expression: yet truly I conceive the former not hard to imagine, inasmuch as
the Gnostics (whom that Person says this Apostle here confuted) did hold,
that Christians in danger, to save their lives, might under fears of Death,
deny Christ outwardly, so they owned him in their hearts; a devilish Notion;
like that, (Ye shall not surely dye) Therefore the Apostle most pertinently
deals with these Gnostics in many close touches; and therefore he speaks so
highly of believing in Christ, that is, professing, or confessing openly that
Jesus is the Son of God; and particularly, that whosoever believes that Jesus
is the Christ, is born of God, Joh. 5.1. Now we are apt to think that many who
do so much, and cry Lord, Lord; Lord have mercy on us; yet are not thereupon to
be judged in so good a condition, and in an unquestionable state of Salvation.
Therefore I conceive a right understanding of such expressions may be got by
taking notice of holy John's palpable intent, and the drift of his speech upon
the forementioned occasion; the Apostle therefore for the better understanding
of such mistaken spirits, asserts in sum thus much; that indeed those only
that confess Jesus to be the Son of God, and will not deny him in fear of
Death, or Torment, are to be taken for true Christians, and happy souls indeed.
Upon the same account he asserts also; That Perfect love casts out fear; that
is, the tormenting fear of death, or danger, as Tertullian evinces in his
Scorpiacum or Antidote against the Gnostics, speaking thus: Johannes negat
timorem esse in dilectione, quem timorem intelligi praestat; nisi, negationi^
authorem? i.e. John denies fear to be in love: what fear can be better
understood? then such as is the Author and cause of denying Christ; even as the
Apostle Peter did for fear of death or suffering. He that loves Christ but
tolerably aright, will not be loath to dye for Christ; or to dye and go to
Christ. That Spouse who is truly sick of love for Christ, thinks no Cure of
that sickness like Death, even to depart and to be with Christ; to be ever with
the Lord, her blessed Bridegroom.

Thirdly, Christ by giving his people that excellent grace of hope kills the
fear of death, 2 These. 2.16. There it is plain, that good hope through his
grace is not only his gift, but therewith also, or thereby everlasting
Consolation; which therefore is neither to be interrupted by the fears of
Death, or discontinued by Death it self; yea, the same Consolation springing
from this grace of hope, ( Heb. 6.18, 19.) is there called strong Consolation:
Indeed stronger then Death, or the terriblest fears of Death. For Christ giving
this hope, is there said to comfort and establish Saints: so that no fear of
death, (as in that place of judgment day,) can either sadden whom he so
comforts, or shake and disturb the minds he so establishes, for their hearts
thus become fixed, trusting in the Lord. The Saints grace of hope gets beyond
Death before hand and enters into heaven. As this Apostle to the Hebrews
represents it, as entering into that within the vail; and by it Saints on earth
fit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Now you know hope's nature is
contrary to fear. He who hopes for eternal life, and for the Adoption, to wit,
the Redemption of the body, (as it is spoken of Saints hope, Romans 8 23, 24,
25.) He that has such a saving hope whereby as an Anchor sure and steadfast he
hopes for life, can never be tossed, like a wave, with any slavish fears of
Death. Oh, then still thy soul by hope in God. The Apostle Peter calls the
Saints, the childrens hope a lively hope; Who has (says he) begotten us unto
a lively hope. Lively hope destroys the exanimating killing fears of Death;
Puts us beyond death as to fear, before it come at us, as to feeling; for he
that has this lively hope as an Anchor sure and steadfast cannot much fear,
that he shall at death become a Castaway; though he be careful with the Apostle
Paul. It is Hells pit that is bottomless or fathomless, so that the despairing
Damned are always tormented with Eternal pains and frights; But alas! Come the
worst of it to the Saints of God; this they know, that the Graves pit is not
bottomless; there is enough for their hope to bottom and anchor upon surely and
steadfastly; The Grave to the wicked is indeed bottomless, and though it detains
a while the body, yet it lets the soul slip into Hell, and the body too not
long after. But Christ's Death and burial has so sanctified every of the Saints
Graves, that at worst their graves will be by so much happier to them then that
Grave was to the dead man, whom Elisha's buried bones revived; even by how much
Lazarus his second, was or will be better than his first Resurrection. Christ's
Death and Burial has left somewhat in every Saints grave sufficient at the
lowest for his hope to bottom on, so that his body (when there) may be truly
said to rest in hope, and therefore having this grace of hope he need not,
unless he will, be disquieted with fears before Death.

Fourthly, Christ by giving his people on earth some real foretasts of heaven,
and of eternal life, does thereby effectually destroy their fears of Death. And
therefore the Apostle Paul, (who was, next to his Lord and Master, the greatest
conqueror and triumpher over Death we read of,) after that he had been Rapt up
into the third heaven, as he stories it himself, in the second Epistle to the
Corinthians, was ever after most undaunted under the seriousest thoughts of
death; as is most evident in his other Epistles which were written after those
to the Corinthians; particularly in that to the Romans, where he tells us how
little he fears death, or a thousand deaths, though killed as it were all the
day long, yet more then Conqueror. He had before so sweet a sight of heaven,
that Death could not fright him; so sweet a taste of heavens pleasures, that he
could never after taste any bitterness in death. And thereupon justly longing
to be there again, he feared not death the only passage into so much bliss. Let
every true Saint consider this; I say, every soul that conscionably walks with
God, and labors to have Communion with God in his holy ways and Ordinances;
that walks in some measure as that blessed Apostle Paul, who lived in all good
conscience before God; that, with holy David, tastes and sees that the Lord is
gracious; that tastes in deed and truth savingly of the heavenly gift, the good
Word of God, and the powers of the World to come. O precious Saint, do thou
so live? How is it possible but thou must long to be filled with these heavenly
joys? How can thou fear that Death, that will put thee into actual
possession of thy Masters Joy? According to that in Romans 8.28. And not only
they, viz. the Creatures, but we our selves also, which have the first fruits
of the Spirit do groan within our selves waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the
Redemption of our body. See here; that a taste of the first fruits of the
heavenly Canaan which Gods Spirit from above fetches for, and feeds a Saint
with, makes him not to groan under the fears of dying, but rather under fears
of not dying. O you that taste and relish heavenly things in Divine
Ordinances, and have much of the presence of Christ with you in them, are you
afraid to dye, and to be with Christ for ever? Is not this better then to live?

There are three things deservedly to be called first fruits of the Spirit and
of Heaven, which do render Death to those that taste them more desirable than
formidable. The first is:

First, Communion with Christ. That of it which Saints have in this world is
very sensible and sweet. Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ. You know it is the holy boast of a holy man, the Apostle
John, concerning himself and other real Saints: and it is sweet Communion, as
in the next words; These things write we unto you, that your joy might be full;
Thus true joy comes into the heart, even unparalled gladness, by Gods lifting
up the light of his Countenance. The wicked whore cries, Let us take our fills
of love in unclean Communion; but Christ's Spouse's design is, that her joy
might be full in holy Communion with God and Christ. The first misses joy
altogether, meets with only vanity and vexation of Spirit; but the other loses
her dumpish sorrow, and never enjoys that Communion with Christ much, but she
meets also with joy unspeakable and full of glory; and yet in this world never
enough. Therefore they that taste it most do most earnestly long to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, as the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.23. Having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ. He professes indeed, that he had his
Conversation in heaven, as to real foretasts thereof, (which were enough to set
him a longing; not fully to satisfy;) and therefore he confesses, that whilst
in the body he was in great measure absent from the Lord. And would he not be
present? Yes; even with all his heart; and farewell body till the Resurrection;
that he might kiss his sweet Jesus his feet, that he might be ever with the
Lord. This, this was the Apostle Paul's holy passion. Oh! Then (sincere
Christians) for two or three of you to be with Christ, and he with you in
prayer according to his promise, and in other Ordinances; yea, in any divine
exercises of grace! This, this must needs make your souls long to depart and to
be with Christ. This notion you must know flows not from a doubtful or
pretended experience, but from positive express Gospel Doctrine, 1 These. 4.17,
18. And so shall we be ever with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with
these words. It is mighty comfort against death (and judgment, there spoken of)
to consider the happiness of being ever with the Lord. If it was the joy and
boast of the enamoured Spouse ( Cant. 2.9.) to view Christ showing himself
through the Lattess; how can she but long to see him with open face, to see him
as he is in glory? Surely that soul, that by faith and love cleaves to Christ,
can never much fear death, which it knows will never separate such lovers as
Christ and a believing soul are, but rather indeed bring it into heaven; and
force it only to be more happy; in a more intimate, close, yea, constant Vision
and fruition of Christ.

Secondly, Freedom from sin, though but in some tolerable manner attained,
gives us a sweet foretaste of heaven; where all just men's souls do enter, but
no unclean thing with them. So much freedom from sin, is so much heaven upon
earth; but the relics of sin, still pestering us till death, make us (if true
Saints) the more eagerly long for perfect freedom from it in heaven; which huge
longing is an holy ecstasy, I confess, and found only I think in those whose
Consciences do not reproach them whilst they live: They of all men, even they
that labor to the utmost to subdue sin, do long to get rid of it altogether;
though it be by death. Therefore the Apostle Paul expresses himself after this
manner: And not only they, Rem. 8.23.
but we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit,
the Redemption of the body; reckoning upon, not much mattering, yea, quite
overlooking death, having the eye on a sweet deliverance of soul and body from
sin at the Resurrection, since in this life both of them are most sadly infected
therewith. Therefore says he we groan; but how? Even as the Creature to be
delivered from the bondage of Corruption. And which is very remarkable, We our
selves, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, etc. What are they? The
thirteenth verse a little before will clear that, in these words; If ye through
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Blessed souls are
they, and they shall be blessed, who have received the first fruits of the
Spirit in the mortification of sin; for they groan within themselves, till that
happy time come after death, when soul and body shall no more sin. They that
have tasted how sweet the life-bloud of one sturdy lusty sin is, can never be
satiated till they have the blood of all the rest, the dam and all; original
sin: insatiably crying out, O when shall we be delivered from the body of this
Death? which indeed is far more dreadful than natural death. But O how sweet is
it for a Saint to see, Necis artificem art perire sua; sin killing it self
with its own murthering-piece; killing its enemy and it self with one blow. How
joyfully do Saints see the death of all their sins approach, full as fast as
the death of their bodies; Well, then the Saints, with Sampson, would gladly
dye, that so all their sins, and therefore to be sure more might be utterly
destroyed at their death, than ever they could slay all their life time. A true
and thorough Saint fears to sin more than to dye; therefore he fears not so
much to dye and sin no more, as to live yet, and sin. O thou that have
faithfully mortified any lust, and art sure of it, Death cannot wound, nor
astonish thee: for certainly more comfort arises to the Saints from the
mortality of sin, then terror from the mortality of the body.

Thirdly, The blessed graces of the Spirit of God; the possession of which is
our participation of the Divine nature; the exercise of which is our
Conversation in heaven; These Graces of the Spirit of God are indeed the very
first fruits of heaven, and cannot well be at rest till they have carried the
soul into their own Element, Heaven it self; for from above it is whence every
good and perfect gift does descend, and would as naturally carry the soul
endued therewith up thither, as the fire mounts upwards. So that those Divine
souls whose vigorous graces do make them hunger and thirst after righteousness
will not stick to venture at Gods call a bodily life to satisfy that thirst in
heaven.

The Apostle Paul was very desirous to attain to the Resurrection of the Dead,
Phil. 3.11. compared with ver. 21. Oh! how he longed to be more holy here in
this world, and to be quickly in the number of the dead in the Lord? He cared
not how soon. Perfect he says he was not yet, nor likely to be perfect here
below, but yet he contended hard, running to the Grave as I may say, if that he
might be perfect indeed, and attain to the Resurrection of the Dead. Perfect
holiness is so desirable to holy men, that they desire death for its sake,
aiming more at the complete holiness of soul and body after death at the
Resurrection, then the continuance of an unsatisfactory life of flesh and blood
in a state of imperfection. Certainly the Paths of wisdom are such pleasantness
and peace; that men who walk therein are not afraid to meet death in those
ways everlasting; they press forward, toward death, upon it, through it, to
attain to the Resurrection of the Dead. Thus Christ giving his people his own
fellowship, Mortification of sin by his own Spirit, and the graces and fruits
of righteousness, which are by himself derived to us, as so many foretastes of
heavens bliss; Thus I say does Christ render death far more desirable than
terrible to the Saints. To all which I might well refer the inward joys and
comforts of the holy Spirit of Christ; which are special and palpable
foretastes of heaven, and the chief of the first fruits of the Spirit. But it
is plain that these swallow up the fears of Death, and make men groan within
themselves, rather fearing they shall not dye, then that they shall. When a
Saint (with Reverens Mr Bolton) can say, he is as full of Christ as ever he can
hold, there is not a crevess for one poor small fear of death to enter in at. I
might, but shall not, discourse to you more particulars to demonstrate how
Christ destroys in his childrens hearts the slavish fears of death, as, by his
giving to them the Spirit of Adoption; by convincing them of the great gain by
death; as the Apostle expresses of himself, For me to live, is Christ, and to
dye, gain: and having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far
better. When Saints cast up their accounts, and consider what they shall get by
living, even more remptations to sin, more advantages and opportunities to
express the naughtiness of their hearts; more thorns in the flesh, and
messengers of Satan to buffet; more fore chastisements and sad desertions of
the Almighty; and more of the evil which is to come upon a wicked world; Then,
then they truly judge it their advantage to dye; As that Father Cyprian,
strangely, yet truly; Nihil utilius Christiano quans mori velocissime: Nothing
more advantageous to a Christian, then to dye very betimes. Good men indeed
therefore have dreaded more the sad Consequents of a preserved life, than the
worst Concomitants of Death it self; which to the Saints has no other
Consequence, but the souls happy entrance into the Masters joy. For before
their bodies can be well laid in the Grave, their souls are laid in Abraham's
besome, or which is all one, their souls are taken from an acquitting Bench, to
the blessed Mansions or Palaces that Christ has prepared for them in his
Fathers Court of Heaven. But I leave you to that preaching, whereby men preach
to themselves, even according to the further enlargement of their own sweet
Meditations on such Theams as these, partly treated on, and partly hinted unto
you. Now that I may more boldly and effectually apply this great Doctrine which
is always seasonable whilst Death is to come; But then especially when it is
near; I shall only speak to an Objection, levelled particularly at an Argument
that I well used to prove Christ a deliverer of his people from the fears of
Death, which was this; Such and such Scripture Saints (and no doubt many
others) Christ has so delivered; therefore he is such a Deliveter. Against
which this is the Objection.

Do not we read of Hezekiah, an eminent and great Saint, that he chattered at
the Tidings of Death? And of David, that he played the Mad man in jeopardy of
his life? How can Christ be such a Captain of Salvation, such a Lord General
over his People and Soldiers as to deliver them from the fears of Death? If
most sad fears of Death be found prevailing over two such Worthies; two such
eminent godly Kings; and the later of them mentioned, one of the stoutest
warriors recorded in Sacred Story, that was in the world; for profane partial
Historians relate an Alexander's, a Caesar's prowess: But the God of truth
affirms of David, That he was as a man after Gods heart, so a valiant man also;
who got the highest preferment that ever was in the world, even to be the first
and best fully allowed King of Gods own people; I say, who got this singular
preferment, through Gods Blessing, by his valor: Yet he, even he in danger did
what a mean Saint would scarce do in the greatest fears of Death; even played
the fool and madman to save his life; Where was David's Lord then, who, as you
say, delivers from the fears of Death? To Answer.

1. I say not, That Christ delivers all Saints, so exceeding remarkably. 2. No.
nor the same person always, at every nick and point of time; whom he may
deliver most. And yet neither one or the other to be reflected upon him, but
upon themselves, that leave him, not he them. And yet for all this what is more
obvious? Then that his Ability in delivering some, yea, many, yea, most, more
or less, may well and clearly denominate him such a Deliverer. First then,

1. I will give you, and oppose to the Objection as great an Instance, nay,
unparalled for the proof of Christ's power in delivering his Saints from the
fears of Death; Moses, yea, Aaron also; both in the same condition as to Death.
But Moses only I set before your eyes as enough to fill them; for he was the
greatest Captain or Lord General, that ever had the Conduct of an Army; and
whole Nation. For it is not the Title, but usefulness of a man, and the
Presence of God with a Person, that makes him truly renowned and famous. Of
Moses it is said, Deuteronomy. 34.10. There arose not a Prophet since in Israel like
unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face. Well, God himself brought to this
man the message of Death, and told him he should dye, and not lead his
Conquering Army into the Land of Canaan: No; though it was never so desirable
to him. And God moreover dreadfully spoke on, and told him, (oh sad and
bitter!) that his very death at that time was a punishment for such a sin,
mentioned Deuteronomy. 32.51. Well; Moses has not a word, but dies: Nay, Moses died
in an hour when his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7.
So that he who buried him, the Lord himself, took him away in his full strength
as a punishment of his great Sin: and and yet behold no fear, but after that
God told him peremptorily he should dye, he presently with a most sweet sedate
mind blessed the people, his dear charge; went from them and died. His case
might be in some measure thus illustrated to you, take an eminent servant of
Christ now in this City of London, one that has done God the most service, an
upright man, none like him, as it was said of Job; one fearing God and
eschewing evil, that has been much in prayer, possibly and in preaching too;
one truly, frequently, nay, continually rapt up into great and close Communion
with God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ; one highly instrumental in
converting and edifying souls, walking with God in his Closet, and in his house
in a perfect way; and yet more; one that has been a great Conduct to reduce
erring sheep. Now suppose that for some sin God should bring the Plague to his
body, (as once God did to a great and good King, Hezekiah, and of late to a
right Eminent Pious Divine of our own, of which Plague he died.) Now I say,
suppose that for some sin God should bring the Plague to such an one's body in
his perfect health with an evident Symptom of Death; and besides, (oh sad and
bitter!) fully persuade him, that he is visited with the Plague for such a
particular sin that he has committed, and therefore that he shall not recover,
but dye suddenly. Now if this (...) fears not, is not dismayed upon hope in
Gods mercy (...) ^is sin is pardoned, however thus (...)

(...) after life was but (...) or fifteen years. And we find that fifteen
years (...) past (...) gives but little comfort, when we have but five days to
live. So what comfort against Death could Hezekiah's fifteen years administer
to him, when he committed such sins in the Prime of those years, which at death
he should leave behind him, to ruin his Posterity and Kingdom withal, and
when he quickly had but five days to live of his fifteen years, nay, but five
hours of them, nay, but five minutes, could his past reprieve then Antidote his
fears? For no doubt when the message of his reprieve came by the Prophet Isaiah
to him, even that hour fifteen years exactly his life expired. And no doubt
also that not only God himself, but Hezekiah too numbered his days, and kept
good reckoning: So that one might think, if we measure him by our own foolish,
and melancholy, yet usual musings, he might be affrighting himself ever and
anon with such sad reckonings as these: Now, oh now I have but one poor year of
my fifteen to come, and again, but a little longer, and it is now alas! but one
Month; the next sad thought might be, now my last Sabbath is gone; by and by a
sad sob and crying out, now my last night, or my last day is quite past, and
now my last hour; yea, as quick as thought, now my last minute. Which appaling
thoughts, one, whose death is not precisely foretold, cannot multiply to his
own terror, though in the weakest condition, because the weakest do often
recover. And hereupon those who are to be executed at a sixth hour, are more
liable to be struck with fear, because of the certain and sudden approach of
Death, and that in their perfect strength. Yet though this be the truly
aggravated Case of Hezekiah fourteen years and an half more or less after his
great recovery: And when Death comes with the experience of its former success
in frighting him; yea, and comes effectually indeed to him, yet, hark! No
chattering. So the Objection of Hezekiah a good man, that had a good heart and
a good life, having done that which is good in Gods sight; I say, the objection
of his fearing death is sufficiently answered with his not fearing death when
he came to dye in good earnest; which though it be not recorded, is not to be
scrupled, because it must be concluded, that all who dye in the Lord, do dye,
though not so comfortably, yet solidly; not overcome by, but overcoming their
fears at last. And that it was rather needful to record his chattering fears at
the likely approach of his death, in as much as that seemed a strange thing,
and a most unusual condition of eminent Saints when they come to dye. Or put
case instances may be produced of greater confidence in some Saints some
considerable time before, then at Death; truly it would make but little
appearance against the Doctrine. For I discourse of the constant, or most usual
temper of Christ's redeemed ones all along their life time; who know indeed it
is not long before they must certainly dye, yet have no certain news told them,
when. The courage of the Saints life is that which proves and honors our
Redeemers effectual power of Redemption; and him also that made him Redemption
to the Saints. Now if the Saints being redeemed by Christ, do serve God without
fear all the days of their life; though at the last hour there may be some
little surprise of fear: yet what is that to object against such a Doctrine?
Alas! who knows not, but that sharp sickness and tedious Death enfeebles the
spirits, so that whatever the patients heart be; yet his trembling voice may
but wrong his inward spiritual heartiness. Alas! then grace, reason, or sense
it self have but little space, room, or breath to think or do much. Yet I am
confident, that as great extraordinary joys accompany but few Saints just at
their departure out of this world; so also am I as sure, that great fears at
that nick or point of Death do accompany none of them: Fears may assault them,
but not possess them. Saints dye at least resisting them; which is even then to
be actually delivered from their captivating power. But because fear of Death
after all that can be said, seems to be the common temper of Gods children, as
well as the Devils slaves: I shall labor to show some sufficient difference in
their fearing death, or any Calamity, in these following particulars.

First, Saints may as sinful men fear, but not as Saints. When grace is low,
and corruption occasionally strengthened and advantaged either by security,
temptation, or at length by the Commission of some more than ordinary sin; then
it is easy for an approaching evil, much more death it self, to run them down.
But observe it, when a Saint lives as a Saint, has Communion with God,
exercises grace, baffles a Temptation, maintains a wise fear of God, then let a
thousand approaching miseries trumpet evil tidings; or let death it self beat
an Alarm to judgment, the Saints fear not, Psalm. 23.3, 4. He restores my
soul, he leads me in the paths of righteousness; then, then, though I walk in
the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil; no evil punishment, no
evil tidings, no Death: I will fear no evil; for thou art with me.

Secondly, Saints may too as natural men fear, that is, as evil and misery
crosses natures inbred lawful rules of self preservation, so flesh and blood
may fear; and that without imputation of sin: But as the worst evils conduce
to, and work together for the Saints good, and Gods glory; all is welcomed with
joy; as it was by those who counted it an honor to suffer for Christ's name,
stocks, stripes, and imprisonments, yea, miserable Deaths. Their noble eye,
piercing into Eternity, immortality, and glory, could read a meaning in that
Text, Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse Temptations, yea, when into the
Grave and Pit it self, Heb. 10.34. And ye took joyfully the spoiling of your
goods, as knowing in your selves that ye have in heaven a better, and an
enduring substance: Into a full possession of which, Death at worst could but
put them. So that the Saints spiritual courage will quickly swallow up their
natural fears. The Case is evident enough in those Worthies recorded in that
Gospel-Chronicle, or rather little book of Martyrs, Heb. 11. whose natures
abhorred Death, as much as any of ours, yet whose spirits would not ACCEPT of
deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection.

Thirdly, The Saints may be, and are more than others, wisely sensible of Gods
hand; do humble themselves under it; mourn and grieve; and yet fear not this
slavish fear. Were the Saints as stocks and stones without sense; they would
not only be wanting to their duty of fearing God; but truly in such a case
would there be no spiritual courage or valor in enduring. To say they are
Stoics and unsensible of misery, were to deny the power of Christ in upholding
his Saints and Martyrs of all Ages in their suffering great evils. The Lord
Jesus, the greatest Sufferer and Conflicter with Death, had his sense of evil,
or acute pain, in crying out, (My God!) but he feared none of this fear; the
distracting fear, that divides or alienates the soul from God: For he said (My
God, my God,) that twice; but once only, Why have thou forsaken me? Which
evidently shows his fear was no other than filial, upon confidence of his sure
interest in Gods love, as his God and Father; and also that it was less than
his pain: For his pain was excessive; his fear not so, but moderated with the
highest fortitude and courage. And so Christ, in that he himself suffered being
Tempted, is able to succor them that are tempted. True Saints are anointed
with the very same Unction wherewith Christ was anointed. And as he had some of
their sense of Pain; so they likewise have some of his Courage under it.

Fourthly, Saints may fear God in an affliction, though not an affliction it
self; God at, or in death, but not death it self. Be it known to the worst and
greatest enemies of Christ and Christians, it is not the frown of a Tyrant, or
the black visage of Death that chils and damps a Saints heart; but rather his
doubtful and dark apprehensions of God in afflictions are they that weaken his
heart. Oh! that is a sad Sob, Psalm. 90.7. We are consumed by thine anger, and
by thy wrath are we troubled. If God smile, the Saints fear not Prisons,
Stocks, spoiling of goods; Death it self occasions little fear. If Gods favor
set them a singing, and his countenance glad their hearts, what can sadden? It
is Gods anger in judgments that makes the Saints fear; whilst others reckon
only on Gods hatred, the Saints not daring to do so, do yet judge that it is
but rational and safe to conclude of Gods anger and displeasure in judgments;
which seldom proclaim any thing more. How often have you in the Scriptures this
proved? Sometimes that the wrath of the Lord was enkindled, as naturally
evident in Plagues and judgments; and at the end of many sad descriptions of
Gods judgments by the Prophets; the sum of each dreadful visitation is this;
For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
Now though the Saints through faith in Christ, do not suffer their hearts to be
troubled with fears of Gods hatred, yet they are troubled at his anger and
displeasure. A Child, when his Fathers anger is legible indeed in stripes,
concludes not that his Father hates him; yet trembles at his anger. And indeed
it is no valor in the world, not to fear Gods consuming anger. To this I might
add, That Saints may fear some sin visited by a mortal sickness, and the like,
which they might never sufficiently know, was a sin; or themselves guilty of
it, if indeed they did know it to be a sin: or, that they have not duly
repented of it; or fully forsaken it: Or, they may fear their own
unpreparedness for, weakness and insufficiency to grapple with affliction,
pain, and Death it self. And all this is not to fear the power of any mortal
calamity, or of Death it self. But I dare scarce take any occasion though of
pertinent enlargements; hoping that God will supply all my defect in your
serious Meditations.

Fifthly, Will you have a distinction betwixt the wicked hypocrites and the
Saints fears? Be pleased to take it: Saints fear not with an utter despair at
the worst; but so does every wicked man. The wicked either altogether presume
in Prosperity, or in great adversity altogether despair. Just as it was with
Nabal, his heart over night was huge merry within him at a Kingly Feast; but
the next morning when his wine was gone out of him, (says the Scripture,) and
but at the report of a past danger, his heart died within him as a stone. So
many men in their Cups have a courage springing from the Tap, who drown their
cares and fears in the Hogshead: whilst Saints drown theirs in Christ's blood.
Alas! what spirit have wicked men when their Wine is gone out of them? The
Saints hearts may quake and be shaken a little, but yet they are at Anchor:
when as the very first evil tidings of vengeance from God, and of a dreadful
mortality, drive the wicked's fearful hearts, as Chaff before the wind, or as a
poor tattered Ship, without Anchor, before a Tempest. Bring the Saints to their
worst fears, so that they sin to escape, and make a supply of weak faith with a
foolish carnal stratagem; yet still their fears are not the fears of the
wicked; for,

First, Saints have even then some hope in God; which lays real hold on God
though but little, and God accepts, yea, fails not that little. Therefore God
was good to David, and delivered him from Achish, and made him not ashamed,
though his hope in God was little, and his sin great. Says David at that very
time, Psalm. 34.4. I sought the Lord, (there is some hope necessarily implied,)
and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. Many fears, little hope,
yet some he had, for he sought God. But yet it is very remarkable in Scripture,
how God has in the utmost extremity of his people even eminently prospered
their sins of little hope and great fears for their escape, though afterward he
punished them forely for both.

Secondly, Whereas the wickeds fears increase with their dangers and
calamities, and the nearer approach of their unavoydable ruin; yet the grace
of Gods Children in such extremities recovers it self again, and their fears
decrease, the more their miseries multiply. Wicked men are like the Amorites,
whose hearts melted, the nearer Isreal's Host came, neither was there spirit in
them any more, Josh 5.1. Their fear had quite consumed their spirits. Hence it
is that despair carries away so many of them at last. But it is quite contrary
with those that are in Christ, following him in all the difficulties of the
Regeneration, and deadly troubles of this life; their Courage increases with
their dangers. At the first commonly some smart, and some fear; in greater
pain, none at all: At the first they may be somewhat afraid of evil Tidings;
but not long, or not long so much; It may be there is upon further certainty
and feeling of what they heard and feared before, nay, there is indeed
frequently greater quiet and composure of mind under Gods fatherly hand. A soul
that has true grace, though but weak, feeling it self almost quite gone in
despair, stirs up all its strength as its last gasp, and stretch, just as the
spirit is failing before the Lord; and behold it revives: when as in such a
case the wicked man's spirit, like a Nabals, sinks as a stone within him. See
how the Saints dying hope, as I may call it, revives in an utmost extremity:
For when the hypocrites hope perishes, and is like the giving up of the Ghost:
The Saints hope is like the Resurrection from the Dead; as you have it in a
place of Scripture truly singular and notable, Lam. 3.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Thou
have removed my soul far off from peace, I forgot prosperity. Verse. 18. And I
said my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. Verse. 19. Remembering
mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall. Verse 20. My soul has
them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me. Verse. 21. This I recall to my
mind, therefore have I hope. Oh! most wonderful! It is first said, My strength
and my hope is perished; then, This I sadly think on; what is next? Therefore
have I hope! What says learned Calvin? that sagacious man in spiritual cases.
What? Does despair cause hope? Says he excellently, Incomprehensi, bili atque
admirabili Dei beneficio spes ex Desperatione. By an unconceivable and most
admirable working of God, the Saints hope springs out of despair. So it was
with David, sometimes even at first encounter disquieted, quite amort;
afterward he rowzes himself and trusts in God: Therefore he confesses the
whole matter, saying, At what time I am afraid I will trust in thee, Psalm.
56.3. This is a Saints most constant use, and a certain Remedy is taken by this
course; nothing cures fear like hope. Though a Saint be surprised at first with
fear, yet hope in God will recover him e're it be too late. As it did that
reverend Martyr, who recanted for fear. For he mastered his fears soon after,
and burnt them with the same hand that drew back before: having in a greater
pain least fear. So it is in general or in common with Gods people; it may be
at first, some fear, but through Christ, victory over it at last. Thus did the
terrible army of Martyrs win the field and Crown of glory; and even so do all
by Christ more or less conquer their fears of Death. Take then a good man as a
good man, a child of God, (my Text speaking of such an one,) one that is
gracious and serious, that walks with God, and there is no dispute, no room for
an objection; If, I say, he be eminently righteous, constant in holiness,
watchful and careful, closely walking with God; one whose soul Christ his great
Shepherd has restored and leads in the paths of Righteousness, Christ still
conducting him, he is not afraid; though he walk in the valley of the shadow
of Death. Thus it is with the Saints, Christ's Soldiers conflicting with their
enemies from Deaths first Alarm in other Calamities, to its last onset on the
Graves brink. The Saints may truly make Sampson's Riddle, their Song, Judges
14.14. Out of the eater comes forth meat, and out of the strong comes forth
sweetness; even so, at worst, out of the fearfullest Death, the liveliest Hope.
And now I think the Objection will not in the least disturb my Application or
the USE.

And because I have no design to tire the Press, or any ones patience, but to
make the Comforts of the Scriptures go down both as quickly and as pleasantly
as may be. I shall only add a few words of Information, and then of Exhortation
with Direction. And first of Information in two things.

First, See how Precious Christ is! who is such a Deliverer as has not only
purchased heaven for us, but given us the first fruits to taste. He not only
frees altogether from Eternal Death, but from the fears of Temporal and bodily
Death. Therefore this being a great benefit we have by Christ, is particularly
extolled by the Apostle Paul, who preached up the glory of his Dear Jesus, with
what singular advantage he could take, as 1 Cor. 15.56. Thanks be to God (says
he) who has given us the victory, that is, over Death and its power; through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Oh there is the Emphasis; there is his Selah, as I may
say; Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Oh! How dear should this Jesus, this
Deliverer be to us? Who makes us poor Creatures so dear to himself; as that,
since we must dye, yet the fears of Death should not molest and vex us the
remaining part of our life.

Secondly, See the Possibility of attaining this Temper of not fearing Death,
nay, also the Necessity of it, Be not prejudiced ignorantly against Christ's
design and your own duty, yea, attainable happiness. Do not say, you cannot
attain it; it requires assurance; and assurance rarely, if ever, enjoyed by
Saints in this life. Do not jumble mistakes together; you have seen what is
required to it; and how Christ works the fears of death out of his peoples
hearts. Come, come, say O Saint, hereafter with the Apostle Paul, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me: Say with David, Though I walk in the
valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no ill, for thou art with me. Follow
Job's and others their courage in the expectation of death. Is God any
respecter of persons? Is not a child's portion a child's portion? You expect
heaven as well as those eminent Saints, and the same Crown of glory: And why
should you not fight as manfully as they, who could dare death it self? But
still this Information is clouded with some kind of exceptions; And there are
that say; Indeed Christ has delivered Scripture Saints, and some others it may
be from the fear of death, and can do as much for us; But yet is any thing in
so great an attainment our duty? Or to us possible? Few or none attain a full
assurance of faith, without which can any attain to freedom from the fears of
death? What you answer is of Eminent Saints, Paul, Job, David, who had this
rare thing assurance, and so by Gods grace and the power of Christ, they might
conquer the fears of Death. And it is evident, though God is no respecter of
persons, yet all Gods Children have not equal seize herein. Well, I know
it, and for the most part, nay, I might safely say, always long of themselves;
either they resist God more, or seek him less than other Saints; or are
foolishly and idly ignorant of his good will, and their own duty and happiness.
Alas! alas! Is it not sad to see how Protestants by a simple distinction, or at
least simple use of it, are in this even turned Papists? There is say they,
Certitudo objecti, not subjecti; A certainty of Saints salvation, but not of
its evidence to them, as if indeed in this valley of tears, the Saints eyes be
always so bleared that they cannot see (one of a thousand) such a mystery and
secret. The white stone it is true, has a new name written in it, which none
can read indeed but him that has it; What? nor he neither scarce at all; is it
written in such very small Letters as cannot be seen by the ordinary
illumination of Gods people? Such say Saints salvation no doubt is certain in
it self; but seldom or never clearly evident to them; to this purpose or effect
too many wrong God and themselves too. Well, listen to this too much, and run
this dark black notion down into its blind consequences and palpable
inconveniences, (which will scarce be avoided, error in this world multiplying
much faster than truth.) This I I tell you will be one said Consequence, the
Devil comes on you, and if God permits him, (as such a strange misunderstanding
of the Gospel provokes him to it,) then I assure you he will shake you sorely
with the fears of death. But pray you now consider at length; Is making of
Calling and Election sure, making it sure in it self, or to our selves secure
and evident? is it our duty sufficient to draw near unto God with faith, or
rather also with the full assurance of it? Is indeed God bound in his Covenant
to give the Saints more and more grace, but no comfort at all? Surely, as well
not one, as not the other; and the same hinders one, as well as the other, even
our ignorance and unwillingness: who as we often refuse to return to the Lord, so
also much oftener do we refuse to be comforted. How come we to be commanded to
rejoice in the Lord always? Yea, to count it all joy when we fall into diverse
Temptations? If no promise of ability from God to enable us to rejoice. Has
not God confirmed his Covenant by an Oath, that we should have strong
consolation as well as strong graces Heb. 6.17, 18. Is not joy one of the
fruits of Christ's Spirit? Does not the Kingdom of Christ and government of our
hearts consist in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost? Does not an
Apostle use his Authority thus? Rejoice in the Lord always, Romans 14.17.
and again I say rejoice. Who dares then preach Gods Word otherwise? And clip
the Scripture language, and tell people it is enough, or that it is pretty
well, if a Saint can say thus, I desire to be Gods child, though I cannot call
God Father, Alas! there can be but poor joy in thy desires of being Gods child,
if thou know not but God is thy enemy. Will this be a comfort to thee, that
thou desire to be Gods child, whilst thou know that thou neglectest a
strict command of rejoicing in the Lord always, flatly rebelling against a
Conscience binding Gospel-Law, and putting God off with a Complement, that such
Commands are too good for thee: I am sure they are too good to be disobeyed.
But to return, Do thou desire to be Gods Child? Let thy desires be like a
child's desires; obedient desires. Do thou desire to be a dutiful Child? Then
rejoice in thy Father always, and again, I say, rejoice. Whether is ground of
comfort think thou, thy disobedient desires, or Gods free pardoning love?
Truly, I question whether there be not a dream in such kind of fancies; fancies
I call them, if taken for comforts and rested in. For how can thou say, if
thou know what thou say, that thou love God as a Child; if thou have no
evidence that God loves thee as a Father? This is to give the Apostle John the
lie, who says plainly, that we love him because he first loved us. Some may
think it modesty for a Saint to say, I desire to be Gods child, but dare not
call God Father. Modesty! for a child not to own his true Father! and his real
evident love, the sensiblest thing that is felt of God in the world, for God is
love. This I know, that something like it, is but ignorance, pride, and
sloathful resting in miserable seize, all sadly put together; not that I
am any the least friend to a rash, peremptory, constant, and sudden assertion,
My God and my Father: But such an one I contend for, as springs from a serious
meditation of Gods unspeakable love revealed in the Covenant of grace; and from
the due exercise of Grace, especially in the actual worshipping of God; wherein
most Scripture Saints have expressed their highest confidence in God as a Father,
even at their Devotions. And also such an assertion I plead for of a Saints
interest in God as a Father, which together with all the rest, arises from a
peculiar operating presence of the witnessing Spirit, whereby a Saint is
enabled to cry, Abba, Father: Which Spirit dwelling in the Saints, and enabling
them in all Acts of Worship, yea, of their life more or less, cannot but give
them a sweet sense all along always in their hearts of Gods being their
Father; unless they have so sinned as David, driven away the Comforter, and so
need to pray with him; Restore O Lord the Joys of thy salvation, and uphold me
with thy free Spirit. Therefore let Ministers especially, and all those who
ought to comfort one another; let Gods Heralds, I say, and Preachers of Gospel
glad Tidings abhor to be like the Devils Goalers, to feed the Saints with weak
cold comforts, like bread and water of affliction, that will certainly betray
them to the power of the Devil, and the fears of Death. What? Comfort and
bolster up a Communicant, one that having many years professed true
Christianity may now be called within an hour to heaven; What? I say, to
comfort such an one with his ABC, his rudiments; that it is a matter of content
and rest to him, that he desires to be Gods Child, though he cannot call God
Father? We may shut up our Bibles, and cease preaching comfort, if this be
enough. Every the least Saint may quickly attain to this, for it is the least
that true grace can do; it may be as quickly done as said by a true Saint. But
surely there is something more in drawing near to God, in following on to seek
the Lord; even full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.22. And truly to comfort Saints
Consciences with their attaining less then this (except in singular cases and
conditions of great relapses and sore desertions,) is to comfort them with
their reproach; O ye of little faith. Is this to lead sad Saints into paths of
pleasantness and peace? Or rather to hoodwinck them, and so leave them in the
dark unto the Devil, to fright them? Is this to comfort and cure Saints weak
hearts? Or rather to keep them weak and valetudinary? Or is it not to play the
Mountebanks with them? And by indulging their fears and doubts to take a course
to have them always visiting us for our weak Physic; when as Christ has left
us, and all his, mighty strong Consolations and Cordials; and that with a
Probatum est thereupon, the probation and experience of every New Testament
Saint. But I will show you Scripture Divinity, and not sparingly neither, for
what I plead, 1 John 1.3. And truly our fellowship is with the Father and his
Son Jesus Christ. Verse. 4. And these things write we to you, that your joy
might be full. Chap. 2.5. Hereby know we, that we are in him. Chap. 3.2.
Beloved, now we are the Sons of God. Verse. 14. We know that we have passed from
death unto life because we love the Brethren. Verse. 19. And hereby we know that
we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. Verse. 24. And
hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us.
Chap. 4.13. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has
given us of his Spirit. Verse. 16. And we have known and believed the love that
God has to us. Chap. 5.13. These things have I written unto you that believe
on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know, that ye have Eternal life.
Verse. 14. And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hears us. Verse. 15. And if we know that he
hears us, whatsoever we ask we know, that we have the Petitions that we
desired of him. Verse. 19. And we know that we are of God, and the whole world
lies in wickedness. Verse. 20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and
has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true: And we are
in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and
Eternal life.

Here is the right description of a New Testament, Gospel-Saint, and the nature
of his confidence; which he holds to the end, maugre all the terrors of Death
or Devil. Upon all which let me say thus much, (for I am laboring to have the
Axe laid at the root of all horrid fears of Death,) do but consider it
seriously; and then judge whether to comfort souls with puny, lazy, and easy
reflections on that which is sadly short of what those Scriptures speak to be
the attainment of Gods Children, whether I say it be not, to keep souls fully
as unholy as truly comfortless: for so it is, if Ephesians. 3.17, 18.19 do hold out
these Doctrines, which you will find they do; as first, That great faith is
necessary to the working of a great and an awakened affection in our hearts for
God and Christ. Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith roots us and grounds us
in a sincere and powerful love of God. Secondly, That such a mighty affection
in us for God is necessary to the begetting in us a larger assurance of his
love to us; For love thinks no ill, but expects much good, especially from God.
That ye, says the Apostle, being rooted and grounded in love, might even
thereby be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height, and know the love of Christ; even as all eminent Saints
have known it, that is, his love to us in particular; as the Apostle Paul
phrases it, Gal. 2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me. Thirdly, That great assurance of Gods love to us is
needful unto our perfecting of holiness; if so be we would be filled with all
the fullness of God. Now who that have any fear of God, or pity to souls, dare
use any other method of comforting, then God uses? Oh let none comfort others,
or themselves, with poor weak tokens of being in a good state, and by never
urging home an absolute necessity of the full assurance of faith, even leave
them under perpetual guilt, and so unto those fears which make them walk
unworthy of the state, hope, or name of Christians. Surely he that delivers
from the fears of Death, leaves not poor souls to be torn and tossed with extreme
doubtings of his love to them. Well, I leave this particular Information;
Behold the possibility of attaining this freedom from the fears of Death with
all that appertains to it; being clear from the necessity of our duty, it being
required of us; and from the many examples of Saints so freed, to encourage us.
For with Christ, the great Deliverer, this is possible; and it is every child's
portion, ready purchased, and it may be had for going for, to him. He is both
able, willing, and ready to save to the uttermost them that come unto God by
him.

First, Let every poor soul look to it, to get grace, to be in the number of
real Saints, for whom Christ intercedes, as before my Text, saying, Behold I
and the children which thou have given me. This Text speaks no comfort to any
carnal wicked persons. In the time of Pestilence, and an hour of sudden Death,
they have no fence against the Devils fiery darts, and the flashes of hell; no
Antidote against the killing fears of Death. But let them flee penitently and
believingly to Christ for refuge, yea, to Christ, first for grace, for
repentance unto life, and for faith in his blood, and then for safety; and if
the Son make you Sons, and so free, ye shall be free indeed.

Secondly, I beseech you that are Saints, Gods children, though but a little
flock, little children, yet do not you dread Death. I do not say, Do not think
of Death; Alas! who can but think of it? I do not say neither, Be not seriously
sensible of it. But I beseech you for the sake of Jesus Christ, for his honor
sake who is your King, and your own, who are his Soldiers, I say, quit your
selves like men, stand to it stoutly, sink not under the fears of Death. Alas!
you are not to fear your last encounter, if God has given you any victory over
your greatest, and truly mortal enemies the World, Flesh, and Devil. Saints at
last should be like experienced Soldiers, used to encounters, and warrisht
with spiritual Combats, so that they should rather scorn, then fear the last
and harmlessest enemy, Death. But I shall only add; That this freedom from the
fears of Death is a privilege Christ has purchased for this present state,
for this life. NOw what Saint can find in his heart to lose so great a Legacy
left by Christ; so great a purchase and benefit of his Death? So great a
Deliverance? And foolishly multiply to himself self-willed fears, or which is
worse, self-willed grounds of fear; as lust, passion, worldly encumbrances, or
worldly mindedness, idleness, vain, frothy, foolish actions and carriage; or if
not so, then it may be, ignorant suspicions of Gods mercy: All these things do
but arm Death, and thine own Conscience to wound thee; oh look to thy self,
make haste, for Death hastens apace. O! what true Child of God but would so
long to be rid of this disingenuous temper of fearing Death, as to be even
hourly on his knees begging of Christ this benefit of his gloriously conquering
death; which if a Child of God receives not in this short, and now if ever,
uncertain life, he will altogether miss that which is so goodly a part of the
Saints Portion; which is proper to, and fitted for this present life; even
before Death comes to encounter us. Well, abandon these fears with the grounds
of them, and then though Death come quickly, yet through Christ you will
grapple well enough with it. And oh that men were wise to get from Christ by
all constant importunity, some of this blessed deliverance from the fears of
Death; and oh that by a continual carelessness, because not presently seized by
the Plague, or any other mortal sickness, they would not desperately venture
it, and so sadly abandon themselves to the frights of the Devil in an hour of
sudden death. Now if any be awakened, either by Gods Word or Providence, to
look after this great benefit of Christ's death; which is, to be delivered from
the servile fears of their own; then let such consider this Counsel which the
Scripture gives in the Case.

First, Have a care of harboring one moment any known or knowable guilt; For
it receives from the condemning Law strength to arm Death with. I wonder not
that those Saints who have at any time much guilt upon their spirits, do then
fear Death. If sin be not examined and found out, which is not done by many
Saints; who even justify themselves in some sins, not judging them to be sins,
nor much caring to examine lest they should prove sins, and so to be parted
with, contrary to a dear humor; and so calling good evil; and evil good; no
wonder in such a case that the Woe belonging to such, when executed, as well as
threatened, frights them. If Saints for want of due consideration and examining
themselves, do not only commit, but continue in sin unrepented of, as the
Plagued Corinthians; no wonder that they are surprised, not only with the fears
of death, but with sudden death it self. Oh! shake your Consciences, rouse them
up to discharge their office faithfully; let your heart smite you for the least
sin, or evil thought; and oh harbor not guilt, let it not lodge with you one
night, no not an hour; for so long you will be liable to horrid fears of dying.
It is so, and the very truth of many Saints condition. Therefore find out that
which troubles your peace, and provokes God to leave you to the fears of Death;
finding it out, labor for the assistance of Christ's Spirit, for one look from
Christ, for one manifestation of Gods love that may break your hearts, and make
you weep bitterly, repent and grieve thoroughly: thus shall not sin come upon
you with an afterclap, with a repentance to be repented of. Weep for sin
according to the demand of the Gospel, which requires not a little grief,
though less then sin deserves, for it deserves hells weeping and wailing and
gnashing of teeth. Do this, Believe and Repent, Repent and Believe; and then
you will find in your hearts little or no fears of Death. For peace of
Conscience will thus become firm, and will cast and keep them out; yea, defend
the heart through Christ. I say, therefore daily, yea, hourly exercise faith,
together with repentance, that is to say, a vigorous faith; which is never
forlorn or forsaken of good works; and such a faith in Christ will be your
victory over all base fears of Death. Be not then, O souls, too hasty in your
exercise of faith. Believe again and again, really and truly presenting to your
selves the severity of the last and solemn judgment of God. Believe not only
till some ease come, but till you be willing to dye, if the Lord will,
presently. For did you arraign your selves in bitter Confession of sin as
before Gods Tribunal indeed: No less faith would serve your turn, then such as
would carry you boldly from your knees through Death to Judgment; for you may
so examine and judge your selves, as to be confident in Christ that you shall
never be judged of the Lord.

Secondly, Resist the Devil; I mean these his temptations to fear death; resist
both him, and all his temptations; as, those to sin, to despair of its pardon,
and to fear its wages Death. Have an (It is written) for him, if not to wound
him, yet to gag him; If nothing be readier; dart this Text into his foul mouth
to stop it; this Text, managed with faith, will fright the Devil more than he
can fright you. This Text is in this case like Goliahs Sword, none like it.
Take Gods Word; for it will wound him, and make him run too, by the power of
the Spirit of Christ. Well, thus resist the Devil; fear him not, he is a
conquered enemy. Christ has destroyed him that has the power of death, says
the Apostle. And therefore I desire you to resist him for two reasons.

First, Because your Captain has done it. It is fit for Soldiers to fight
against such as their General Charges; It is not fit for you to yield to the
Devils temptations to fear Death, when as Christ, the Captain of your
salvation, has overcome him, as his, and your Enemy, destroying him that had
the power of Death. This were to raise arms with the Devil, and to strengthen
him against Christ and your own lives too. But,

Secondly, I advise this, because it is the way of Christ, his Method of
ridding his children from fear. He first destroyed him that had the power of
Death, that is, the Devil; and all this that he might deliver his people from
fear of dying. So do you; follow Christ's Methods of war. Would you be delivered
indeed by Christ from the bondage fears of Death? Then do as Christ, resist him
that has the power of Death. The Promise you know encourages this stoutness.
Resist the Devil and he will flee from you; which when he does, your fears of
Death will flee after him; because it is he only that has this power of Death.
As one says, Timor attrahit ad se Daemonas, Fear or Cowardice invites the
Devil to come to us; the Cowards trick indeed, who never fights but when he
thinks his enemy fears to resist him. So I may to be sure say on the contrary,
that as to fear the Devil draws him upon us; so not to fear him keeps him off
on's. Courage in resistance will put him to flight; for he is an absolute
Coward to Christ and stout Christians. If this be not done, I mean, if the
Devil be not fully resisted, all is in vain; that man will scarce ever keep his
Conscience quiet that tamely suffers the Devil to play the merciless Soldier,
Sophister, Jailer, or Executioner with it; Master the Devil, and then having
made thy peace with God, thou have only thy Conscience still to pacify from
time to time with that blood that has pacified God. Well then, take this
course; do as Christ did in his fighting; and you will without doubt fight a
good fight of faith, and finish your course with joy.

Thirdly, Love not the world, or any thing in it that is of it; Love not your
life too much; exercise self denial. Did we love God and our selves aright, we
should not fear Death. Perfect love casts out the fear of Death; But
imperfect love, love divided; the love of God, and of the world too, I mean,
the comforts, pleasures of this life, sweet Relations, or the like; oh this
imperfect love, instead of casting out, does but hatch and harbor the fears of
Death. Fear then to love much any thing of this world, though never so lawful
an enjoyment, would you not fear Death. There is more in this than Christians
will be aware of. But doubtless, the inordinate love of worldly comforts, and
the imperfect love of God, makes men afraid to dye. To this I may add, Prize
spiritual things above worldly; place your sensible daily, yea, hourly
happiness in spiritual things; count them not only your food, but feast; yea,
recreation too; always reckoning thus to be merry. My Meditation of God shall
be sweet, says David, and I will be glad in the Lord. Let the comfort of your
lives, your choice, constant delight and treasure be heavenly things; then you
will never fear death. For as it is a comfort when an house is on fire to save
all the goods, especially all the treasure. So though the Plague or any death
fire the body, this our tabernacle of clay; yet will it not be a quering
comfort that our Treasure is safe? And that we have a better house to go to,
not made with hands, in the highest heavens?

Fourthly, Watch. It is Christ's direction. The uncertainty of the time of death
and judgment, has this Use of Exhortation annexed to it by a greater
Ecclesiastes then Solomon, Christ himself, who preached as never man did, and
spoke as never man spoke; says he, What I say unto you, I say unto all, watch,
Mar. 13.37. Job knowing his Redeemer lived, knew both his protection, and his
duty; waited all the days of his appointed time till his change came. He was
every day at watch, looking for his last enemy, Death, and therefore little
feared what he could do; therefore he had not so much fear of Death, as hope in
God though he should slay him. Oh! watch, watch; For you know those that watch
in an Army are less affrighted at the approach of an enemy, then those that are
alarmed out of their sleep: So it is as to the fears of Death, we therefore
fear it so much, because we so little think of it, or expect it, putting the
evil day far from us; and so, suspecting it not to be near, fall to sleep, keep
no watch; and then if on a sudden this last enemy Death approach, and seem to
be very near us; we being alarmed out of our foolish sleep are affrighted.
Therefore Solomon deals wisely with the young man, Eccles. 12. who thinks death
farthest off, I say, he presents the young man with a most lively and
unparalled description of his latter end; puts him in mind betimes of his
latter days; that so meditating and expecting such an end of his days, he
might not be affrighted at death, nor unprepared for judgment. Oh! watch,
watch; for certainly, Christians, familiar thoughts of death, if according to
Gods Word, would breed in us the contempt of Death.

Fifthly, Be faithful in celebrating all Gospel Ordinances of Gods Worship;
Communion with Christ in them raises a man's ambition above his Cowardice, and
makes him covet to be with Christ, though it be by Death. Remember that of
David, Psalm. 24.4. Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no ill, for thou art with me. In the next verse but one he shows where God
and he met, ver. 6. I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Communion
with his shepherd, especially in holy Worship, made him fear no evil that death
could affront him with. Two Ordinances of the Worship of God, and for Communion
with him, I only hint as expedient to this present purpose, because one of them
I must speak more to in the Conclusion, they are Prayer and the Lords Supper.

First, Prayer, The end of all things is at hand, be sober and watch unto
Prayer, 1 Pet. 4.7 Thy end to be sure is at hand, watch and pray. Watching is
of little avail without Prayer. If you be wise pray much in faith. O, Saints,
have you never found in prayer heavens gate opened to your knocking? Do but
prevail once in prayer with God himself, as Princes, and Israelites indeed, and
you will easily overcome his Sergeant death it self, much more its fears. They
that use in Prayer to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus cannot much
fear that Death should at last make them miss their good old way to heaven.

Secondly, Receive the Lords Supper as often, and as worthily as you can; Many
quiet their Consciences by receiving that Sacrament upon the point of Death.
But truly, solid joys, and the best preparations for death, are the result of
a godly remembrance of Christ's death, all along in our life time. What quiet
can any have from such a practice? That is, to neglect the Ordinance and duty
of remembering Christ's death all their life; and to remember it only at their
death? Oh! seeing fears of death, are sad associates and Companions of our
life; even all your days remember Christ's death; by virtue whereof you are to
be delivered from such troublesome Company; as it is clear in the preceding
verse to my Text, That through DEATH, says the Apostle, he might destroy him
that had the power of Death; and deliver them who through fear of death were
all their life time subject to bondage. This is a deliverance you see wrought
through Christ's death. O Saint study it, eye it in faith, till thou feel the
virtue of it in thy heart, easing thee of thy fears of Death. Thus Christ
undertook thy Deliverance even by his own Death. Thus then do thou manage this
thy deliverance by due remembrance of thy Saviors death; which remembrance in
the use of the Lords Supper (if it be the highest Gospel Ordinance, as none
doubt it so to be,) is the most effectual means to subdue, as all sin, so all
fears of death. The death of Christ kills sin, guilt, death, and Devil; and
will it not by faith destroy the fears of Death? Surely it will. Only take heed
to thy self in receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; for else thy remedy
may prove thy poison. An unbecoming remembrance at that Ordinance of Christ's
death, may cost thee thy life, and bring the Plague to thy body, as many good
Divines are of the opinion that the Plague raged amongst those unworthy
Communicants of the Corinthians that were even many of them weak and sickly,
yea, many fallen asleep. A Plague sure; because many fick and many dead.

Sixthly, Maintain a very exact and holy Conversation; walk with God in thy
Closet, and in thy house in a perfect way. Who was it that had a desire to be
dissolved? Who was it? That by all means labored to attain to the resurrection
of the dead? To enjoy by death the perfection of glory, and that without the
least fears of Death? Was it not that holy man the Apostle Paul? who as you
find in the same place, Phil. 3.13. counted not himself to be already perfect;
forgetting those things which were behind, reaching forth to those things which
were before, and pressing toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. He pressed forward, yea, would have pressed too through Death
gladly, that he might attain to the Resurrection of the Dead. He that has a
Conversation in heaven, will least fear his passage thither by Death, having in
his life time been much used to be above. Those that set their minds on things
above can look much beyond death, and see all clear. A holy conversation in
heaven is a conversation beyond Death. Certainly, none fear death more than
wicked men, whose Consciences are somewhat awakened; and none, next to them,
fear death more than careless Saints. Strict livers are not only fearless of
Death, but desirous of it. The Apostle Peter speaking of sufferings, counsels
thus, 1 Pet. 4.19. Let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the
keeping of their souls to him in well doing as unto a faithful Creator. Truly,
for Saints not only to suffer, but to dye as well as others is the appointed
will of God. Let them then commit the keeping of their souls to God in death,
or under the expectation of it, in well doing as unto a faithful Creator; for
then they can no more fear Death reasonably, then they can Gods faithfulness.

Seventhly, Make a good improvement of all afflictions. Conquer them by faith
and patience, and you will better deal with Death. The Apostle Paul triumph't
over Death, (as you have heard) because more then Conqueror over tribulations,
persecutions, and the like sorrows. Truly, overcoming these afflictions he bids
a defiance to Death it self, let it do its worst; he is persuaded that neither
life nor death, neither the troubles of life, nor the pains of Death, if not
the first, sure not the later, can separate him from his happiness, the love of
God in Christ Jesus. Therefore you find a remarkable passage in Phil. 1.13, 23.
near together in the same Chapter; first he mentions his bonds in Christ, or
for his sake in Caesar's Palace, then quickly mentions his desire to dye, to
depart this miserable world. This is the unspeakable happiness of afflictions
when improved; they make us not only weary of this life, and desirous of the
Saints everlasting rest; but they harden us, and animate us to go on to conquer
the remains of death at the last hour. None live or dye more courageously then
the most exercised Saints, trained up in great afflictions and sufferings for
righteousness sake.

Eighthly, Study the great Examples of this Deliverance; Scripture Saints and
others that have not feared death; though subject to the like passions and
infirmities that we are; as Job, David, the Apostle Paul, and others. Example
is cogent; and their courage as well as patience was recorded for our
imitation. Now this is the great advantage we have by such examples: A poor
soul is encouraged to expect the same deliverance by Christ that such Saints
before obtained freely, seeing as God, so Christ is no respecter of persons;
especially no partial Father to his own children, who have all an equal
interest in the Common Savior and Deliverer. Consider that seriously and take
courage. Remember once and again that Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the
uttermost them that come unto God by him; them, that is, whosoever come, them
as well as the Apostle Paul himself; Stephen and Apollo's as well as the great
Apostles Peter and Paul; and the Apostle John's little children as well as
himself, so long as they be children of God, and come to God by Christ. As the
Apostle Peter speaks; God (says he) making no difference between them and us,
even all one in Christ, as to the benefits of his death. I beseech you consider
also your living and dying Saints, whose eminent lives are fresh in your
memories; confider and trace in them the evident footsteps of this glorious
deliverance from the fears of Death. The great instruction that the life and
death of truly Christian friends do teach us, is to dye well and comfortably.
And their evident victory over Death should animate the following files of
Christian Soldiers to fall on; and that with more courage upon death, then
death can upon them.

Ninthly, Trust in God; Believe in God, believe also in Christ; we find in
Scripture that nothing we can do is a more present remedy against disquiets and
fears, then a present exercising this heavenly grace of trusting in, and
cleaving closer to God even when trouble is nigh, very nigh, Why art thou
disquieted O my soul; hope in God. Again, What time I am afraid I will trust
in thee, and many such instances. Well, the Devil fights thy soul with the
fears of Death: Do thou charge him again with thy hope in God. Take this armor
of God. Hope is a proper weapon to fight against fear; and the longer weapon
too I will assure you. It is a proper match for fear, and much more valiant
through Christ, then the fears of Death can pretend to be, for and through the
Devil. Therefore to promote this grace, so highly conducing to the design of
Christ in delivering his people from the fears of Death, or of any dismal
misery that can usher in Death to us; I shall conclude with a discovery of some
things that make for us all, many ways; as well as for the due Complexion of
this needful grace of hope, which, I confess, may blush, but never grow pale
and wan upon the nearest approach, or roughest touch of Death, we will leave
that dull complexion to the lumpish fears of Death. Well, to get this healthful
lively grace of hope.

First, Labor to know well God and Christ, with the design, merit, and power
of his death. There is nothing knowable of God, as the truth is in Jesus, but
it conduces to a Saints confidence; labor therefore to know as much of God as
thou can, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name will put their trust in thee.
And indeed who will trust a stranger that he knows not? See further, Prove.
22.17, 18, 19. Bow down thine ear and hear the words of the wise, and apply
thine heart unto my knowledge. Verse. 18. For it is a pleasant thing if thou
keep them within thee, they shall withal be fitted in thy lips. Verse. 19. That
thy trust may be in the Lord I have made known to thee this day, even to thee.
Verse. 20. Have I not written to thee excellent things in Counsels and
knowledge? And all this excellent instruction from Christ is to this very
purpose; that thy trust may be in God. Read Gods word much, labor to
understand his blessed pregnant promises, his wisdom, power, and faithfulness,
especially his love; to comprehend with all Saints the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height of it. Know God much, and you will trust him the more, as
Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name will put their trust in thee: For thou Lord
have not forsaken them that seek thee. Thy faithfulness, O Lord, is so
experienced, who that knows in, but must trust in thee. How came Job to trust
God though he should slay him, to be so fearless of any death? Truly, he had
excellent knowledge of God, yea, and of Christ too; He knew his Redeemer lived.
But let thy knowledge of God and Christ be such as includes Eternal life; for
the Devils know God, they believe and tremble; Let not thy knowledge be like the
knowledge of the filthy Devils, but like the knowledge of the pure God, let it
shine and sparkle in all holiness of heart and life. Be good, and do good, as
well as know good; be like God, and do like God. Get a renewed heart, and a
reformed life, that so beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, you may
be changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. Oh continue beholding Christ's glory as in a glass, till
you see your selves somewhat like him, and then you cannot see any thing to
fright you; for as you have it, Psalm. 64.10. The RIGHTEOUS shall be glad in the
Lord, and shall trust in him, and all the UPRIGHT in heart shall glory. Now
surely Death and its fears shall not for bid it, and make this Scripture a lie.

Secondly, Use thy self to it, to trust in God. Exercise thy self
extraordinarily unto this part of Godliness; so no changes will put thee out;
no, not thy last change. Job could trust God in one sad condition after
another, though sadder and sadder. And then at length he could do so as well,
even at death; though God himself too should slay him, he could not be put by
his good use and holy custom of trusting in God, Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him at
all times. And if thou do, I will assure thee, thou will at no time much fear
death, or ought else but God. But,

Thirdly, Especially in times of danger; as when War, Plague, Famine is begun,
or any other mortal Calamity. When thou art in the valley of the shadow of
death, then it is high time to trust much in God, and to pluck up thy heart,
Psalm 2.12. When his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that
put their trust in him: That take warning betime, and return to him that smites
them, that cling to him, and kiss the Rod at the first sight, or the first lash
at least. Oh that men did but know the things which do belong to their peace,
to their speedy averting of Gods dreadful judgments. Oh that men would trust in
God and cleave unto him, yea, to his feet, humbling themselves under his mighty
hand, when he begins to plague them; that so he may not be provoked to chasten
in his hot displeasure. This David earnestly prayed against, and as earnestly
labored always to prevent: For the very enkindling of Gods anger is dreadful,
but its waxing hot most lamentable, desolating, and full of horror; who can
dwell with everlasting burnings? Oh therefore says a wise David, that had felt
Gods anger, when his anger is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that
put their trust in him.

Fourthly, Trust in God when thou find thy heart most fearful; That is the
very nick of time, that makes thy duty of trusting God most seasonable and
advantageous to thee; and therefore an hour, wherein thou may expect the
assistance of Gods Spirit to bear thee up, according to David's confidence,
grounded on good experience, Psalm. 56.3. What time I am afraid I will trust in
thee; Why art thou disquieted O my soul? Hope in God. And again, This I call to
mind; What? Truly that my strength and hope was perished from the Lord; yet
therefore have I hope. As God, so a gracious soul will be seen in the mount.
God helps in extremity, lest the Spirit he has made should fail before him, as
the Prophet admirably; therefore let thy trust in God be at work, when to be
sure Gods power is at work too; and that is in extremity; set in with God, and
thy Spirit shall be sustained. When the fear of near approaching Death charges
thee home, and thy heart sinks within thee, O let it not sink like a stone, as
Nabals, but pluck it up and charge it again with a more lively hope in God.
This do, master thy fears and conquer. For it is often found that Cowards when
they can master themselves and their own fears, turn most valiant and daring
against their enemies.

Fifthly, Clear up thy interest in God and in Christ. A Child trusts his Father
best, a Loyal Subject his good Lord and King. To trust in such a relation is an
easy, because a genuine and natural work, Psalm. 7.1. O Lord my God, in thee do
I put my trust. Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? What is the matter? The matter! alas! War, Pestilence is
at the door! Peace, O soul hope in God. Alas! but how shall I? Away, away, how
shall thou not? Do thou not know that God is the health of thy Countenance
and thy God? Yet this very David could cry out sometimes as forsaken of God, as
if cut off from Gods eyes. Oh that Gods People now a days would not imitate
Scripture Saints only in their complaints, and weeping, but also in their
rejoicing, and singing; not follow them only in their diffidence, but in their
confidence also; and not only in their dark paths, but in their Lucidis
intervallis, as Isaiah phrases it, Walking with them in the light of the Lord.
O be not like Scripture Saints in their spiritual swooning away, but in their
coming again to themselves; be like them, not only in their desertions, or
dejections, but their more usual assurance of Gods love. Oh labor to speak the
Dialect of Gods Children with David, either in the phrase of Psalm. 3.7. or
119.94. either thus, Save me, O MY God: Or thus, I AM THINE, save me.

Sixthly, Rely on nothing else. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and
lean not to thine own understanding, Pro. 3.5. That is, to the devices of thy
heart for security, refuge, help, preservation in danger. Some trust in horses,
says the Psalmist, and some, I may say, in Country houses and air; Go to them
in time of Pestilence they may, but only in case duty and necessary business
bind them not to the contrary. He that flees the Plague and runs from his Duty,
may most likely but rush into the Plague, as I may say, or worse; whatever he
now thinks. Some trust to their invention of Antidotes against the Plague, to
their own, or other men's devices for help, and succor in time of danger; use
them they may, but trust to them, and their danger is a hundred times the
greater; for cursed is man that trusts in man, much more that trusts in
himself, that leans to his own understanding; for he that does so, would if he
prospered, (which it is pity therefore he should,) I say, he would sacrifice to
his own net, as well as lean to his own understanding.

Seventhly, Praise God much; even with thy soul, and all that is within thee,
under the greatest Judgments; It is a duty most of all seasonable, necessary,
and advantageous to thee. Art thou alive? Praise God, as the living; the living
should do; especially, I say, in time of danger. Therefore Jacob in his time of
danger and fears, began his prevalent and successful prayer for deliverance
with (Less then the least of all Gods mercies.) For a thankful and cheerful
acknowledgment feeds faith and hope with former good experience; and dispels
fear of evil to come with a joy in the Lord, who is the presentest and the
greatest good. Be careful for nothing, says the Apostle; How so? What remedy
against disquieting care and fean? Truly, Prayer and Supplication with
Thanksgiving. In dangers and troubles I judge it very fitting to begin our
Prayers with Thanksgivings, thanking God for what we have, when all seems to be
a going; and we our selves too; who are less then the least of all Gods
mercies. But especially because by Praises in the beginning of our Prayers we
sing out our fears, and tune our hearts to pray in faith. But seeing both
Praise and Prayer are so useful to increase faith, and blast fear, I will never
contend for the priority of either, e'n put them together, let them never go
asunder. To conclude then.

Oh pray much. The admirablest way under heaven by Christ's blessing to conjure
all base fears quite out of the heart. For if ever faith be emboldened, it is
in prayer. Prayer it is the improver, as of all grace, so especially of faith,
Psalm 62.8. Trust in the Lord at all times: But how shall we do that? It
follows; Ye people pour out your heart before him; then he adds, God is a
Refuge for us. That is certain, as the Prophet thinks. Oh the confidence in God
that they arrive to, who in danger can pour out their hearts before him! Faith
when we pray aright does in every Petition get faster and faster hold of God.
Thus the soul in Prayer works it self even into Gods arms of mercy, and Christ's
bosom of love. Thus in danger we nestle closer into the Clefts of our blessed
Rock till the indignation be overpast. You know that excellent Counsel, Isa.
26.20. Come, my people, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about
thee: hide thy self as is were for a moment, until the indignation be
overpast. Would thou be so safe? Then as Christ counsels, Mat. 6.6. Do thou,
when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door pray
to thy Father which sees in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret,
shall reward thee openly. There is to this purpose a very edifying inference
may be easily gathered from 1 Timothy 5.5. Where you have the Apostle's good widow
mentioned; and that she trusted in God; but that is not all; It is not a poor
rash flourish, (I trust in God, and I hope in the Lord Jesus,) which is but a
dream, nay, a vain and empty breath, the poor ignorant profane perfons hope,
which quickly gives up the Ghost. But says the Apostle, The good widow she
trusts in God, and continues in supplications and prayers, night and day;
Thus she upholds her Confidence in God both day and night; Woe be to those that
say, they trust in God day and night, and yet scarce pray at all in good
earnest, day nor night. The Apostle says indeed that this good widow is
desolate, has none to help her; but yet to facilitate her faith, you know God
has especially revealed his tender care of widows, yet their, even their trust
in God (if they will make any thing on it) must be raised and enlivened through
continual supplications night and day: So must every one of us do, who make God
our refuge in times of danger. I think every one of our hearts tells us without
asking, what need we have to trust in God under this sad Visitation, and sore
Judgment of the Plague; we may quickly sit in our Families, as a desolate
widow; yea, how quickly may we be shut up in them, as many are at this time.
Well, if we would approve our Consciences to God in this duty of trusting in
him, which is our wisest and safest practice, let us be exceeding fervent, yea,
constant too in our supplications and prayers day and night. It is the use, you
sadly know, (as of old) when a poor forlorn Family is shut up for the Plague,
to make upon the door a Red Cross, and to write over, or by it, ( Lord have
mercy, etc.) But as you love your lives both before and after infection,
instead of that Red Cross, have faith in the blood of Jesus; get your souls
well sprinkled with it; And that which effectually cures the Plague of the
heart, can more easily and quickly cure the Plague of the body: And so Christ
may be your Passover indeed; the destroying Angel may pass over you, and not
touch those that are careful by faith to get their hearts well sprinkled with
the blood of this immaculate Lamb of God. And then instead of that short [Lord
have Mercy] do you pour out your souls before the Lord, who poured out his
heart blood for poor sinners.

And to encourage you in the whole; even in all your labors to attain such a
faith and confidence in Christ, as may by his power work out of your hearts the
slavish fears of Death: Take that excellent place of Scripture, Nahum 1.7. The
Lord is good: A strong hold in the day of trouble; AND HE KNOWS THEM THAT
TRUST IN HIM; to be sure that trust in him, like Job, though he stay them. Be
assured of it, your Father which sees in secret, (in the secret Closet, nay,
in the secret Chamber and house shut up; he that sees in secret) will reward
you openly. So that if you do indeed firmly believe in God, and believe also in
Christ, you shall be able to say, and that from some sweet and great
experience, that in very deed, When his Wrath is kindled but a little, blessed
(YEA, THRICE BLESSED) are all they that put their trust in him.

FINIS.

