A True ACCOUNT of the BEHAVIOR, CONFESSION, AND Last Dying SPEECHES Of the
Six Criminals that were Executed at TYBURN, On Friday the 12th of September,
1690.
AT the Sessions in the Old Bailey, on the 5th. of September, 1690. an eleven
persons received the Sentence of Death, six Men and five Women, of which three
were Quick with Child.

On the next Day, being Saturday, the Ordinary visited the condemned Criminal,
praying with them, and earnestly exhorting them to look back on the the Vicious
Course of their Life, and to consider for what secret Sins, not repented of,
God had justly suffered them to commit the Crimes for which they were under the
Sentence of Death.

They were not then so sensible of their sinful and deplorable Condition;
therefore Exhortation to Repentance was renewed, is also to prepare for the
solemn Duties of the Sabbath.

On the Lord's Day, in the Forenoon, the Text was in the 5th of S. Matthew's
Gospel and the 8th Verse, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

In the Afternoon a Sermon was preached on the 59 and 60th Verses of the 119th
Psalm. I considered my ways and turned my feet into thy testimonies. I made
haste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

From the former part of which Words were stated the sincere signs of a
penitential Reflection on a sinful Life.

The Divine Law casts down all proud Thoughts, in a sincere Convict, so that he
submits to the searching Power thereof, that he may thoroughly understand his
deceitful Heart. He loves the Law of God, because it is very pure and strict,
as disturbing false Peace in the Conscience.

Where there is a Horror and Conviction there will be an unfeigned Grief for
offending God's Holy Spirit, and an universal Hatred of all Sin as Sin, more as
it pollutes than damns, put therefore your selves to Grief and Shame, chiefly
for perverting the Long-suffering of God, who has waited so long to be
gracious to you: you have already, in excess, turned away your Hearts from God
to the indulging of your Lusts: It is high Time to abandon Satan's Service.
When Sin by Custom: becomes rooted, the Power and Kingdom of Satan is more
confirmed. Resolve therefore immediately to convert to God, late Repentance is
not so acceptable, because herein the Lord is less glorified. It is not so
profitable to others, who lose much Edification, by not setting early good
Example before them. It is not so comfortable to your selves, not only because
you wrestle with more difficulties, as the Heart is grown more obdurately
stubborn, but because you cannot so fully clear up your syncerity in turning
your Feet unto God's Testimonies.

There is little trial of the Truth of Repentance, when we are forced in to God
by sharp Afflictions or Agonies of Terror, at the Approach of Death. As soon as
you resolve to change your evil Course, all your endeavors will have
Acceptance with God, he will be ready to help you, if you pursue your
Advantages, the Work will grow easier, so that after a while you shall be
enabled to run the raths of God's Commandments with pleasure and delight: Let
us therefore cast away the Sin which so easily besets us, let us speedily and
resolutely run the race of Obedience set before us, looking unto Jesus the
Author and finish, or of our Faith; so shall we triumph in our very Conflicts.
What unspeakable Joy will this Testimony of our Conscience produce, that we
have so seriously considered our Ways as seriously to turn our Feet into God's
Testimonies.

I now proceed to give an Account of the condemned Prisoners Behavior, what
course of Life they led, and whilst penitential Dispositions were in them to
fit them for their Death.

I. Franck Osborne, Condemned for robbing on the Highway: He was a Goldsmith,
by Trade, in Cannon-street above 7. Years. He confessed the Crime to the
Ordinary, though he denied it at his Trial. He said that it much troubled his
Conscience that he drew on the other Accomplices to the said Robbery, but would
not declare their Names. He confessed that for his many secret Sins, in which he
lived without any Remorse, and for keeping bad Company, God had now brought him
to public Shame: That he neglected praying and other Duties of Religion,
otherwise the Lord had kept him from robbing; but affirmed that this was the
first Falt of that nature. He was very compliant with the Advice which I gave
him to prepare for his Death.

II. G -- W -- condemned for robbing on the Highway. He confessed the Crime, I
asked him what Employment he had been bred up to; he said that he had served the
late King James as a Trooper, and had served our present King William, but some
difference arising 'twixt him and his superior Officer, he quitted the Service
about a quarter of the Year since, which he much blames himself for, because an
idle Life had exposed him to robbing on the Highway. He was not so sensible at
the first, yet afterward lamented the ill Course of his Life, and that he had
given bad counsel and example to others.

III. Thomas Yarrold, condemned for healing a Gelding: He confessed the Fact. He
had exercised Husbandry, in the Service of a Minister, for three Years. He
says, It repents him that he did not follow the good Counsel of his religious
Master, but left him and went to Sea, afterward being desirous of an easy
Life, he quitted that Employment and joined with bad Company, till he brake the
Sabbath: He seldom prayed that God would keep him from the Wickedness of his
own Heart, so he grew more dissolute.

IV. John Daynter, condemned for breaking the House of one Mr. Joseph Yates, in
the Daytime. He was formerly a Shoemaker, set up for himself, but neglected
his Trade and joined himself to merry Company, as himself expressed it, they
spent freely and bore his share most what. He said, That he had sinned against
the clear and strong Convictions of his Conscience, had made many Vows to God
of Reforming his Life, but had broken them: Yet in this Concession, though he
wept, he acknowledged that his Tears and utmost Repentance could not cleanse
away the Guilt and Pollution of his Sins. He said that he durst not trust his
own Heart, his relenting for Sin is so late and slight, and prays to God, that
his sorrow, may not be more for the Fear of Death, than that he has offended a
Gracious and long suffering God. I hope he was penitent.

V. James Smith, condemned for robbing in the High way, with G -- W --; when he
was eyed up, in order to receive the Sentence of Death, he exceedingly
misbehaved himself: The Ordinary laid this very much to his Conscience, so that
he desired him, to publish his deep Sorrow for it, and that he begs the Pardon
of the Court for his mad and wicked Carriage. He confesses the Crime, and that
his Friends bred him up to no Employment, so he has been exposed to many
Temptations of Robbing, and has several Times used such a wicked Course, to
furnish himself with Meny for his Excesses. He solemnly affirmed, that he never
killed any Man: That the is very sensible how he has drawn on others to
sinning. He said that he had been very disobedient to his Parents, and
therefore God justly brought him to this untimely and shameful of Death: That
he despised strictness of Life, was guilty of Swearing, Intemperance, breaking
of the Sabbath, and living like an Athist; but now his Conscience is wounded in
the remembrance of all his Impieties, yet he hopes, through God's Mercy, that
he shall be daily more contrite in Heart, and prepared for his Death.

VI. Thomas Cox, condemned for robbing Thomas Boucher on Hounslow heath: He
denied the Crime as his Trial, but confessed it since to the Ordinary. After
several Visits and earnest Exhortations to repent, he confessed that he had
been in Newgate about four Years since, and was condemned for killing a Man. I
told him, That had he taken warning from his narrow escaping the Sentence of
Death then, or had he been truly penitent for shedding Innocent Blood, which
cries loud to Heaven for Vengeance, he would not have contracted another faral
Crime. He only acknowledged in general terms, That he had been a great sinner,
that he had led an idle Life, which betrayed him to many sinful Excesses. He
gave me just cause to fear he was bred up a Papist, or had turned such for
worldly Interest: Therefore I used many Arguments to convince him, how
dangerous it is to die in a false Religion, or in not living up to the Purity
and Power of the Protestant. When I visited him in the Evening before his
Death, I asked him whether he were a Papist, he so little regarded what I prayed
or exhorted him unto, he made me no answer, and seemed not much concerned,
therefore I said at parting; the Lord undeceive you as to any false Hopes of
Heaven.

(...) Yates and Mary Jones were very penitent, and are reprieved.

This is the whole Account which I can give of this Session.

Dated this 12th of Septem. 1690. Samuel Smith Ordinary.

On Friday about 10 a Clock they were all 6 conveyed in 2 Carts to the Place of
Execution, where being all fastened to the Tree, they were (in good order)
exhorted to renew their Repentance, and to prepare themselves for their so
sudden Change by Death, Mr. Ordinary taking great Pains in Prayer to God for
their Souls Salvation, using several cogent Arguments to prepare them to a free
Confession unto Almighty God of all their former misspent Lives; to which they
all readily attended except Cox and W -- who were very impertinent in their
Behavior, and undecently and irreverently reslected upon the Government; for
which the Ordinary gave them a sudden and a severe Check, and would not suffer
them to proceed.

James Smith carried himself more moderate, and confessed, That he was Guilty
of the Crime for which he died, but that he never committed any Murder,
desiring all the Spectators to take Warning by his untimely End; and that they
would be obedient to Parents, for that Sin was the beginning of his Ruin.

John Daynter was exceeding penitent: He was a young Man, yet it is to be hoped
that God has had Mercy on his Soul, for he freely confessed, That he had been
guilty of very great Sins, as Sabbath breaking, Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness,
and a great Whoremonger: But withal he declared before God and the World, That
he never wronged any Man before this Time. He cried mightily to God for Mercy,
and begged all young Men to take speedy Warning by his untimely End; earnestly
desiring all Men present to pray for him: He very penitently and humbly joined
in the Prayers of the Church, as also was very desirious to be instructed in
any thing that might contribute to his Salvation, and very meekly submitted to
the stroke of so sudden a Death But not without acknowledging, That he was
indebted to several persons in diverse Sums of Money, but saying, He was now
altogether incapable of making Restitution; he hoped that they would remit him,
etc.

Tho. Yarrold said, That he offered to sell a Horse to one Mr. Ball, but said
he did not steal it, before he was brought to Tyburn; but there he confessed
(...) but he said he did not know the Owners Name, b^^ desired the Horse might
be returned to Flitton, nea^ Ampthill Town in Bedfordshire, And said he was
very sorry he had done so much wrong, etc. acknowledging withal, That he had
married an honest Wife, but had some time since put her away; and had been of
late in Adultery. He desired the people to pray for him, and take warning by
him.

Francis Osborne was very sorry that he had disgraced so good and ingenious a
profession as his was; declaring that this Crime was the first that ever he did
of that nature, but would not freely acknowledge, nor give any account of the
other two, who were concerned with him in the Robbery.

After this Mr. Ordinary prayed with them, and sang a Psalm of Penitency; to
which Daynter, Yarrold, Osborn, and Smith gave an attentive Ear. After Mr.
Ordinary taking his final leave of them, and recommending them all to God's
Grace and Mercy, they were all fix immediately turned off.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
There is now Published, The Politics of Europe, or, A Rational Journal
concerning the present Affairs of the Time, giving an Account of the present,
State of Europe, with regard to its Two most Active Powers, William the Third,
and Lewis the Fourteenth, price 6d. The Continuation of which Journal will be
now published every Saturday in a single Sheet. Sold by Langley Curtiss, at Sir
Edmondbury Godfry's Head, near Fleet bridge.

These are to give Notice, That if any person has occasion to sell any
Library, or parcel of Books, either in large or small Quantities, they may
receive ready Money for them, upon View thereof, by Langley Curtiss at Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey's Head near Fleet-bridge.

These are to give Notice to all Persons, for the Benefit of the Public, That
Mr. Elmy, Professor of Physic, and Operator, of known Integrity, and above 25
Years practice, Lives at the Blue Ball in Whale-Bone Court, at the Lower End
of Bartholomew-lane by the Royal Exchange, who most safely and expeditiously
Cures Deafness and Noise in the Ears in any of what Age soever, (if Curable)
and at first Sight, by Inspection, Resolves the Patient if so or not, as most
Eminent Persons of Quality in this City can Testify. He has likewise a most
excellent Gargarism or Mouth-Water, which will make black or yellow Teeth as
white as Ivory, in a few times using; and it will certainly cure the Scurvy,
and all other Diseases incident to the Mouth, Teeth and Gums, which in many
persons causes a stinking Breath, which (by the Blessing of God, and the use
of this Water) I dare affirm you will be freed from those Maladies
beforementioned, with Directions. His Pills only prepared for the French
Disease, and the Running of the Reins, may be had in Boxes of several prices,
with other Venereal Arcana's, as occasion serves.

London Printed for Langley Curtis at Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Head near
Fleet-Bridg 1690


