A True ACCOUNT of the BEHAVIOR, CONFEESION, AND Last Dying SPEECHES Of the
Seven Criminals that were Executed at TYBURN, On Friday the Ninth of May, 1690.
ON the Lord's Day the Ordinary preached twice, on the 3d Verse of the 147th
Psalm, viz. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds. Whence was
observed, That Sin makes deep and deadly wounds in all the Souls Faculties,
especially in the Conscience. It is a spreading and a deceitful, destructive
wound, because most men suffer it to rank and fester.

Then were laid down the Recital of such Sins which do most wound the
Conscience, and grieve the Spirit of God; and for what Reasons Sinners must be
sensible of their sinful state, before they will apply themselves to Christ for
healing and renewing Grace.

On Monday the Ordinary inquired how their hearts were affected. They did one
by one give some account, that they were sensible of their sin and misery. To
which was replied, that there are many deceitful pretenses on which most men
build their hopes of Future Happiness, Therefore I stated the whole method of
Salvation as clearly as I could to their mean Understandings, and found, that
as they obtained more knowledge, they grew more sensible of their sinful state,
and more fit for the healing comforts of Gospel promises.

On Tuesday I required an Account, whether they did clearly apprehend the
requisite indispensible Qualifications for Salvation: But finding that they did
not, I stared the Nature of Evangelical Contrition, or true brokenness of Heart
for and from Sin, how this differs from mere legal Attrition in the convictions
only of Conscience without any change of corrupt Nature. Also I stated what are
the Impediments of healing and renewing Grace, and urged on them many Arguments
to come to Christ, for the binding up and healing their wounds in Conscience. I
laid down the Characters of true Faith and Repentance, that they might not be
deceived with false hopes of Heaven. After much Discourse with them severally,
they were dismissed with Prayer, and the singing of a penitential Psalm. I
visited them every day till their Execution, and most days twice.

Now I proceed to give an Account of their former course of Life, and or what
Hopes they had for a blessed Eternity.

Robert Hilgrave, condemned last Sessions, and now ordered to be Executed. He
confessed that he knew the design of making a Mutiny in the Prison, that they
might quarrel with their Keepers, and make a forcible Escape. Mr. Goodman, and
one Saxton, with other Officers, coming to quiet them, the foremost is since
dead of his wounds. Hilgrave also acknowledged that he had been a great Sinner
in slighting the Admonitions of God's Ministers, for which he is now heartily
sorry. He said that he repents he did not abhor and watch against Sin; and that
though he sometimes prayed, yet he did not shun bad Company, which brought him to
this untimely End. He said he hoped God would show him Mercy upon his
Repentance. I asked him what true Faith is? He replied, It is the Gift of God,
to enable a Sinner to rely only on Christ, and his Righteousness, for Eternal
Life. I told him that the Heart is very deceitful. He said, that upon his
search of it, he finds that he abhors himself for the neglect of his Duty to
God, in not harkening to his frequent Cills of turning to him: And that if he
might be spared, he would endeavor to amend his Life. These words were a good
profession, but for the sincerity of his heart, I must leave that to God's
determination.

John Wilson, Condemned for a Burglary with one Elderkin, aged 32 years, bred a
Clothworker, in Penny stone Parish in Yorkshire. He kept a Victualling-House in
Kent street. He said he had many ways sinned against God. I asked him wherein?
But he did not declare expressly in what Particulars, I told him, though he hoped
Christ dyed for his Sins, yet he would not wash away the guilt and defilement
of any Sin, where it is not an heavy burden on the Conscience. If it were so,
he would take the shame of them, and acknowledge his Vileness in a more free
and ingenuous manner. At last he said, that he had been very disobedient to his
Parents, and that he had wasted their Estate to their great Damage and Grief:
But that he will endeavor, to the utmost of his knowledge, to beg of God
renewing Grace, and to settle his Soul-state, that his Convictions may tend to
a through Conversion in hating every evil work.

William Mawn, condemned for stealing a Bay Gelding, was very penitent.

William Column, condemned for breaking open the House of one Thomas Baker of
St. Mary le Bone, was likewise penitent.

Jonas Ratcliffe Condemned for the same Crime, Aged 21 Years, Born in
Cripplegate-Parish, bred up to the Trade of a Butcher. He served out his
Apprenticeship, and lately Listed himself for a Soldier; he has been Twelve
Months in that Service. He freely acknowledged, that he did not Pray that God
would keep him from Temptations to Sin, and bad Company. He kept not the
Sabbath, but was led aside at first by one Christopher Jones, and others, till
he fell into this Crime. He did at times Drink to excess. But now he said, he
is sorry for all his Sins, and begs of God a change of his Heart.

Philip Macqueere Condemned for Twice Robbing on the Highway, Aged 24 Years,
Born in Ireland, bred to the Trade of a Watch-maker; he set up for himself, and
followed the said Employment for Three Years, then he became acquainted with
another Highway Man, who solicited him to an Idle and Expensive way of
Living. He said, that the Person's Name was Barnet. That he had been a great
Sinner. That he seldom Prayed, and less Watched, against the Temptations of the
World, and the Evil Inclinations of his own Heart. But now being sensible of
his ill Life, it grieves him that he has offended God, and transgrest the
Laws. Yet he hopes, that upon his Repentance, the Lord will fit him for his
Death, and make it a means to save his Soul.

George Crawford. Aged 36 Years, Born in Scotland. He Lived with his Father 12,
or 13 Years, and since had been Employed in Military Affairs. He said, that
though he hated Quarrelling, and Intemperance, yet he had sinned in other
respects; for which God might justly be Angry with him, to suffer him to fall
under the Sentence of Death. But now, he said, that he was sensible of the Evil
Inclinations of his Heart, and the Miscarriages of his Life: so that he is Vile
in his own Eyes, and Abhors all manner of Sin. He Wished, that his Humiliation
may tend and work to a thorough sincere Conversion to God, and then he shall
not count Death terrible.

Andrew Brown Condemned for Felony and Burglary, he is Aged 30 Years, was Born
in Shrop shire, and bred a Carpenter. He followed that Employment Three Years
in Red-Lyon-Fields. But leaving his Trade, and taking to an Idle Life, he fell
into Evil Company, and thereby Committed the foresaid Crime. He said, that he
had been guilty of Swearing, and excessive Drinking, of which he now Repents;
chiefly for offending God, so that he hopes, through Christ's Merits, he shall
make his Peace with God.

William Rolph Condemned for the same Burglary, Aged 23 Years, Born in
Gloucestershire, bred up to Husbandry. He acknowledged, that he broke the
Sabbath, and was guilty of Swearing; but now he Repents that he led a dissolute
Life, and sinned so long against God. That he will endeavor to the utmost so
to spend his short Life, that he may get the hope of being happy after his
Death.

William Bristow Condemned for the same Felony and Burglary, Aged 23 Years,
Born in Wilt-shire, a Farryer by Trade, but lately has been a Soldier. He
said, it was his hard Fortune to tall into bad Company. I replied, that it was
his own Corrupt Heart which led him aside to commit the Crime. Had he resolved
in God's strength to have departed from all Iniquity, sinning could not so
easily, upon inticement, prevailed with him. He said, that God was Angry with
him for many Secret Sins, which have brought him to open Shame and Punishment.
Yet he was not afraid to Dye, if his peace be made with God.

John Thompson Condemned for Robbing a Wagon on the High way, Aged about 20
Years, was Born in Ireland, but came over to England in Service with a
Gentleman who fled hither for the safety of his Person, being a Protestant. He
said, he is sorry that he left the Gentleman's Service, about a Year since. So
falling into bad Company he committed this Crime. He acknowledged the Just Hand
of God upon him, for that he has been guilty of most Sins excepting Murder. I
hope he was Penitent, as willing to take Shame to himself for his Lewd Life.

William Elderkin Condemned for Felony and Burglary, Aged 24 Years, was Born in
the Ifle of Ely, a Wool Comber by Employment. After his Father Dyed he came to
London, and was a Soldier under the Lord Brunkard; whilst his Father and Mother
lived he kept the Sabbath, but grew loose afterward, notwithstanding his Good
Education. He said, he did too often Swear, and was guilty of other Sins. That
he hopes he now Repents, but said he, It is not Crying Lord, Lord, have Mercy
on my Soul, such only obtain this, who do the will of their Heavenly Father.

In Charity, I think several of them were Penitent, but the Truth of Repentance
requires some time of Trial, in bringing forth mere Fruits thereof. For it is
difficult to break off a a Custom in Sinning, so that a late Repentance is most
what slight and false, as being more for fear of Death, than out of any true
Love to God, or Hatred of Sin. But I must leave them to the Judgment of Him who
only knows the sincerity of Men's Hearts.

On Friday the 9th Instant, there were Eight of them put into Three Carts, in
order to be Conveyed to the place of Execution, but being ascended Holborn
Hill, or higher, there was a Reprieve over-took them, laying Claim to the Body
of Philip Macqucer, High-way-Man, which was returned to Newgate, William Mawn
being Reprieved in Newgate before Execution, who was put into the Dead Warrant
the Day before, the other Seven being come to Tyburn, (viz.) John Williams,
William Column, James Chambers, Jonas Ratcliffe, John Thompson, William
Elderkin, and Robert Hillgrave, and the Ropes being placed about their Necks,
Mr. Ordinary began to give them some kind and heavenly Exhortations, in order
to their better and more safer passage to another world, desiring them freely
to acknowledge their former Misdemeanors, (and Cruel, yea Desperate Adventures,)
in a continued Race of Wickedness and Debaucheries. To which, Ratcliffe,
Thompson, Elderkin, and Hillgrave, seemed with an Unanimous Consent to adhere,
the Four latter were very Penitent, especially Hilgrave, who Cried out, Gods
Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven, Come Lord and Receive thy Servant,
who is ready to Depart, and willing to Dye. After this he gave a Paper to Mr.
Ordinary, the Contents of which was, A Cordial Letter of Good Advice, and
Heavenly Counsel, from the Minister of Chiswick, sent him to Newgate, which he
said, did mightily affect his Soul, hoping God would have Mercy on him, for
that he had wronged the aforesaid Minister, by standing by his Bed side, whilst
others of his Gang Robbed him: but Confessed withal, that he did not Injure him
any way. He begged of the People to Pray for him, saying, that he was heartily
sorrowful for all the Evil he had done.

Jonas Ratcliffe was likewise very penitent, desiring all the Spectators to
take warning by him, dying in the Communion of the Church of England.

William Elderkin, who stood Mute at first upon his Arraignment, was penitent,
and died a Protestant.

John Thompson, for Robbing John Rothwel's Wagon, joined with Hilgrave,
Ratcliffe, and Elderkin in the Prayers and Exhortations of the Ordinary.

Now remains somewhat to be spoken as to the other three condemned Prisoners,
viz. John Williams, James Chambers, and William Column, who all appeared at the
time of their Execution to be Papists, though visited often by the Ordinary.
Williams spoke particularly, saying, That he dyed a Papist, and was always true
to the Interest of the Late King James, denying the Fact for which he was
condemned. The other two said little, but continued praying to themselves, by
turning their Faces from the other Four before mentioned. Yet one thing may be
Noted, whilst the Ordinary was praying with the other Four, Column seemed to
attend devoutly, which Williams and Chambers checked him for.

Afterward the Penitential Psalm being sung, they were all turned off.

Let every True Hearted and Unprejudiced Protestant, of what Rank and Quality
soever, see now what kind of Instruments, and Dubbed Utensils, the late King
James has to work withal, no better than House-breakers, and Common Thieves,
who have been fairly Convicted by our English Laws: Yea such Laws that King
James himself must needs have made use of, for the Conviction of such Cruel
Miscreants as these were; if he had been Seated in the Royal Throne, (which God
forbid.) These, and such like, are the Men, that even when the Ropes are about
their Necks, and just ready to be turned off, they will spit their Venom
against the Face of the Government, and if it were possible Stone to Death all
the Spectators. Yea the very Civil Officers who are ordered by Law to attend
their Execution were affronted, the Prisoners Dying (as it were) like Mad men,
putting a bold Face upon it, as if there were no Heaven to Condemn, nor no Hell
to Torment, trusting only to the deluding Vanities of a vain hoped for
Purgatory. Which the laborious and never wearied Jesuits, and untir'd Popish
Priests do always Buz in their Ignorant Ears, till they have them so fast, that
they can never be unlinked, from the Cunning Devices, and Devilish Stratagems,
of that Whore of Babylon, who has always been striving to make the Nations
Drunk with the Blood of her Fornications, by joining their Gog and Magogs
together, to undo, yea, (and if it were possible,) to deceive, the very Elect,
which such silly Earthworms as those will not be sensible of till they come to
feel the dreadful effects of it, (in another World,) to their sinal and
everlasting Destruction and Misery, from which dismal Sentence they can never
be Redeemed.

This is the whole Account which I can give of this Session, though I visited
them every day till their Execution.

Samuel Smith Ordinary.
Dated this 9th of MAY, 1690.
Advertisements.
The Privileges of the Citizens of London, contained in the Charters granted
them by several Kings of this Realm, and confirmed by sundry Parliaments.
Formerly published for general Information, upon the occasion of the Quo
Warranto brought against the said City, and now Reprinted, upon the account of
Reversing that Judgment, and Restoring the Charter, with all its ancient Rights
and Privileges, under our Gracious Sovereign Lord and Lady King William and
Queen Mary. Printed for Langley Curtiss.

These are to give Notice, That if any person has occasion to sell any
Library, or parcel of Books, either in large or small Quantities, they may
receive ready Money for them, upon View thereof, by Langley Curtiss at Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey's Head near Fleetbridge.

These are to give Notice to all Persons, for the Benefit of the Public, That
Mr. Elmy, Professor of Physic, and Operator, of known Integrity, and above 25
Years practice, Lives at the Blue Ball in Whale-Bone Court, at the Lower End
of Bartholomew-lane by the Royal Exchange, who most safely and expeditiously
Cures Deafness and Noise in the Ears in any of what Age soever, (if Curable)
and at first Sight, by Inspection, Resolves the Patient if so or not, as most
Eminent Persons of Quality in this City can Testify. He has likewise a most
excellent Gargarism or Mouth-Water, which will make black or yellow Teeth as
white as Ivory, in a few times using; and it will certainly cure the Scurvy,
and all other Diseases incident to the Mouth, Teeth and Gums, which in many
persons causes a stinking Breath, which (by the Blessing of God, and the use
of this Water) I dare affirm you will be freed from those Maladies
beforementioned, with Directions.

London, Printed for L. Curtiss at the Sign of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Head
near Fleet-Bridg. 1690.


