A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE BEHAVIOR, Last Dying Words, AND EXECUTION OF John
Hutchins, THE SOLICITOR: WHO Was Executed on a Gibbet erected in Fleet Street,
for the Murder of John Sparks, a Water-Man, on Wednesday the 17th. of
December, 1684.
Printed by Order, etc.

IT IS sad and doleful to consider, how rashly men run upon pointed ruin, and
court as it were their own destruction, Anticipating the stroke of Death by
Nature due to Adams sinful Progeny, by compelling Gods offended Justice to cut
them off before their time, for their Inormous Crimes, but among many Examples
of this dismal Nature, a Bolder Murder has not of late been done than this,
for which the Person before mentioned Suffered, wherefore not to detain the
Reader on a long Preamble, I shall Impartially proceed to the Relation.

John Hutchins the Party Executed, was descended of honest and Industrious
Parents etc. being left in the possession of a considerable competency, but
betaking himself to Lewdness and Debauchery, he soon waisted his Patrimony, and
reduced himself to poverty, whereupon he betook himself to Service, living with
diverse Persons of Quality; and note, but growing weary of that employ, and
lying at his own Hands, he Listed himself a Soldier, in the former Campaign,
and was some time after drawn out for Flanders, where he behaved himself with
much bravery and resolution, but Peace putting a conclusion to those Wars, he
came over with the rest of his Comrades, and being a Man of a prompt Genius
fell, into the way of Soliciting business in matters of Law, having a
considerable employment on that occasion, especially amongst inferior People:
But not leaving his former Vices, he easily suffered himself to be led away by
bad Company; and addicted himself to the society of Lewd Women, on whose
occasion he suffered, for being on the third of December last, at the Green
Dragon Tavern in Fleet Street, with Elizabeth Sturt and another common
Prostetute, and drinking somewhat hard, he undertook to see them home, though
fatal to his Life, for coming near Ram-Ally, Three Watermen, who had likewise
been drinking, meeting his Doxies, viz. John Sparks deceased stroaked one of
them upon the Apron, whereat she cried, how now you saucy Fellow, but he to
excuse himself upon the frolic; replied, why Mistress I hope it is no harm; yet
Hutchins being behind, and observing what had passed, in much fury came up, and
after many opprobrious words, struck him on the Head with his Cane, whereupon,
Sparks making into him, he retreated, and drew his Sword, and without further
speaking, run him into the right Thigh near the Belly, and went off; but Sparks
being carried into a Shop, and there soon dying, overruling Providence so
ordered it, that Hutchins came back to look for his Sword lost in the Crowd,
whereupon, he was seized as the Murderer, and Committed; notwithstanding upon
his Trial he denied the Fact, yet so faintly, that he was found Guilty of
willful Murder, the proof being plain against him, but Sturt who was Tried
with him as Accessory to the said Murder, appearing to be so drunk, that she
was not capable of Aiding, Abetting or Assisting, she was Acquitted, yet not
seeming pleased with her Acquittal, she desired to dye with her Gallant,
although she had a Husband of her own: Sentence being pasled upon Hutchins, he
was carried to the Goal, where he behaved himself meekly and with much
Penetency, for the many sins he had committed, greatly bewailing his former
extravagancies, although he would not confess he was Guilty of the Murder, for
which he was Sentenced, yet owned his being in the Scuffle, and wished he had
been in the remoatest part of Europe at that time, but seeing he was Condemned
by Law, and to suffer for the Fact, and the certain date of his Life Limited,
he betook himself to Pious Meditations, as deeply conscious of his many
offenses under the Load of which he labored, confessing that he had been all
along a debauched Person, and misimployed his time in the vanities of the
World, but above all he was Guilty of Sabbath breaking, Profaneness, and
keeping Company with Lewd Women, and that for those, and his other inormities,
God had suffered him to be Accused and Condemned for a Murder, he said he was
Innocent off; at the Sermons Preached on Sunday last, he appeared very devout,
giving extraordinary attention to the Pious admonitions there delivered, often
sighing and casting up his Eyes toward Heaven; as likewise, praying to himself,
nor afterward was his Penitence less, as appeared by his frequent retiring, to
Places of as much secrecy as the Prison would allow; and his attention to such
Ministers, as came to administer sacred consolation to him, and his Condemned
Fellows, his Eyes being many times bedewed with Tears, which plainly showed a
sad Remors, for the many miscarriages of his misspent Life, he being above Fifty
years of Age.

Upon the Reflections he made on the Witnesses, being reproved, he said he
believed they were mistaken, he not being capable of a resolute denial;
whereupon Mr. Ordinary Instanced, the obstenacy of Gowr who Killed his Wife,
and refused to confess it till the latest moment of his Life; as likewise of
Kirk, who for some time likewise denied the Murder of his Wife, and afterward
with much penitence confessed it; whereupon he acknowledged he had been a great
Sinner, and had made many rash Vows, which he had broken, and amongst others,
wished that Gods Vengeance might light upon him, if he came into the Company of
a Person with which he was at variance, into whose Company he soon after came
at the instance of Friends, yet during his Imprisonment, neither persuasions,
nor Scripture proofs could prevail with him to confess his Guilt, through Dr.
Stillingfleet Dean of St. Paul's, who labored to bring him to a free
confession, and obliged the Ordinary to urge him on that occasion.

Execution day being come, he was put into a Cart, and Guarded by the Sheriffs
Officers, to the place where the Gibbet was Erected, viz. between Ram-ally and
Searjeants-Inn-gate, as near as possible, to the Fatal place where the Murder
was Committed: at what time Mr. Ordinary came into the Cart to him, and urged
him to a free and Ingenious Confession; telling him, the danger he was in, if
he denied it, or refused to discover a Guilt he was concious off, begging him
for the sake and welfare of his poor Immortal Soul, that he would be plain and
free with him in the matter, and not go about to stifle the truth, seeing he
was overtaken by Justice, and had but a few moments to live, upon which and the
like persuasions, he answered, that he had been an early Sinner, and Committed
many heinous Offenses and Wickednesses, for which he believed God was highly
displeased with him, and had suffered him to be brought to the pass he was at,
he having been Guilty of most known sins, but as to the Crime for which he was
to suffer, he was altogether ignorant, alleging his Accusers were mistaken,
yet he forgave them, and was willing to submit to the Punishment, etc.

Upon this Mr. Ordinary Prayed with him, desiring God to give him a true sense
of his sins, that although he must dye a shameful Death, yet that he might not
perish everlastingly, but that his poor Soul might find comfort, and that he
would in mercy incline him to confess his Sins, and above all, that for which
he was to Suffer, etc.

The Prayer ended, he again Examined him, urging a second time the danger of
concealment, telling him, that God beheld the secret of the heart, and nothing
could be hid from him, and that a free Confession would be to Gods Glory, in
the justness of the punishment; notwithstanding; he disowned the Murder,
desiring God of his Infinite mercy to forgive his Accusers, whom he believed
swore against him rather out of mistake than Malice, for as he remembered he
knew not any of them, nor ever see them till the day the Mischief was done, and
then being in the Crowd he lost his Sword, and coming to inquire about it and
it happening that a Man was unfortunately Killed he was charged with the
Killing him and hurried away, etc.

Being urged to confess his Sins, and beg pardon of the Great God of Heaven,
before whose Tribunal he was shortly to appear, and with much devotion he
kneeled and prayed, desiring the Almighty, that he would not lay his Sins to
his charge, but out of his infinite mercy, pardon, and forgive the great and
grievous transgressions, whereby he had so highly offended him, and pull this
Judgment on his head, earnestly beseeching him in this his great extremity, to
take pity on him, and not shut the Gates of his mercy against his Soul, but
that it might find rest and comfort after Death.

The Prayer ended, and he rising up, Mr. Ordinary Prayed with him again very
fervently, he likewise joining with him in his Prayer repeated his devotion
with a cheerful voice, and then such as were in the Cart, urged him to confess
if he was Guilty, and not to dye with a falsity in his Mouth, and thereby
hazard his Salvation, to which he answered, he had declared his Innocence, as
to the Murder he was to Suffer for, and submitted to Justice being ready to
undergo the Punishment his Sins had brought upon him, for he verily believed
the hand of God was in it, and thereupon he asked for his Brother, to whose use
he delivered his Hat and an Orange, the Psalm sung (he bearing a part thereof)
then came upon the Ladder, and being Mounted a stander by desired him to
confess if he was Guilty, to whom he answered, that he had many sins, but as to
the Murder he was Innocent, and being demanded what became then of his Sword,
he said, he lost it in the Crowd, and had not since heard of it, and desiring
earnestly the Prayers of such as were present, forgiving all Men, and placing
himself to the best advantage, he was turned off by the Executioner, and within
less than an hour cut down, and the Body conveyed thence, in order to its
Interment.

FINIS.
London, Printed by E.R. for R. Turner at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1684.


