A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the whole PROCEEDINGS Betwixt his Grace JAMES Duke of
ORMOND, And the Right Honor. ARTHUR Earl of ANGLESEY LATE Lord PRIVY SEAL,
Before the KING and COUNCIL, and the said Earls Letter of the second of August
to His Majesty on that Occasion.

WITH A Letter of the now Lord Bishop of Winchester's to the said Earl, of the
means to keep out Popery, and the only effectual expedient to hinder the growth
thereof, and to secure both the Church of England and the Presbiterian party.

London, Printed for Thomas Fox at the Angel and Star in Westminster Hall. 1682.

TO THE READER.
THat there has been a Controversy between the Duke of Ormond and the Earl of
Anglsey (the immediate consequence of which has been the removal of the Earl
from a Place of great Honor and Trust under his Majesty, for which he was in
every respect extraordinarily well qualified perhaps no man questions. And many
may be likely to say, that the more fatal such quarrels amongst great
Personages are to either side, the more instructive they commonly prove to the
rest of Mankind, who are thereby let into a Prospect of those things which were
thought too sacred for the view of the profane Vulgar.

As every inferior Soldier may learn Skill and Address, by seeing two Generals
engage in the sight of their Armies, so certainly this Paper Battle between
these Great ones may be of use to all sorts of men that have the lest Grain of
that commendable Ambition, to propound to themselves the greatest Examples.
Wherefore I conceive no man, of which side soever Fortune or Choice has placed
him, can blame me for procuring and exposing to public view authentic
transcripts of what has passed in this Affair.

The bare curiosity to know how such men write, were almost enough to tempt any
one to peruse these papers, but then when they relate to the History of
unmovable Affairs, of which eitherof the parties may say, Quorum pars magna
fui. --

And when they were so great men in themselves, and their Parts in the History
so great that they may be compared to Caesar writing the Commentaries of his
own Enterprises; I should think him very dull that need be courted to be a
Reader

But these Papers carry in them what I hope will further recommend and endear
them to the greater part of this Nation; most of them being in defense of the
poor English Protestants in Ireland, to some of which the Earl of Anglesey
has most generously asserted the glory of their Martyrdom, and to others, the
unblemished honor of preventing the utter ruin and extirpation of the rest.

The Earl of Castlehaven, who had been too too fortunate an Head to the
RomanCatholick Rebels in Ireland, had not only in Print justified his own
engagement with E, Castlehav. Memoirs, p. 12.
that bloody Party, butwould make that chiefly a Defensive War, which was
certainly the effect of an universal conspiracy amongst the Papists there. Nor
is it to be doubted but there were Encouragers in England. This engaged the
Earl of Anglesey, amidst his many avocations, to ward off the second blow
against them who had suffered almost beyond all Example before: and his
interposition extracted from the Earl of Castlehaven a Confession, that he
himself Pref. to the Memoirs.
acted as a Rebel, and that all the Water in the Sea cannot wash that Rebellion
off that Nation, which was begun most bloodily on the English in that Kingdom
in a time of a settled Peace, without the least occasion given.

I must confess there are several passages in the Letter to the Earl of
Castlehaven, wherein the Duke of Ormond seems concerned to vindicate his own
actions. How far the Charge or the Defense is made good, it is not for me to
judge: nor shall I in the least enter into the merits of it.

I am sure the Earl of Anglesey made a most noble Declaration, fit to be
written in Letters of Gold; Truth, says he, being the greatest and best Friend,
I had rather one or several P. 51.
Persons and Families should lie under the consequence of its impartiality,
than that the English Nation and Protestant Religion should suffer by a
timorous unworthy concealing or withholding any part of it.

This being the said Earlsavowed Principle, methinks he ought to be
importunedby a public Address, that what he has meditated and has been
preparing from Records and authentic unquestionable Relations and P. 33.
Transactions of that bloody Tragedy and matchless defection from the Crown and
very Nation of English men, may soon see the light.

To the KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.
The Duke of Ormond, Your Majesty's Lieutenant of Ireland, and Steward of Your
Majesty's Household, most humbly represents:
THat the Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy Seal, in the Year 1681. caused a Book to
be Printed (whereof he has acknowledged himself to be the Author) entitled A
Letter from a Person of Honor in the Country, written to the Earl of
Castlehaven, being Observations and Reflections upon his Lordships Memoirs
concerning the Wars of Ireland.

That in the said Book there are diverse passages and expressions which are not
only untrue, but reflecting in a high degree upon His Late Majesty's
Government, and particularly in Relation to the Rebellion and War in Ireland,
and to the several Cessations and Peaces made by His, and Your Majesty's
Authority and Command.

That in the said Book the Lord Privy Seal has Maliciously endeavored to
Calumniate and Asperse the Duke of Ormond, by calling in question his
Faithfulness and Loyalty to His Late Majesty, the Sincerity of his Profession
in point of Religion, and insinuating that the Cessations and Peaces
(destructive as he says to the English and Protestants) were advised and
procured by him the said Duke, out of his Affection to the Irish Popish
Rebels, because he was Allied to many of them in Blood and by Marriages.

That the Lord Privy Seal in the course of above Twenty Years free and friendly
Acquaintance and Correspondence with the Duke of Ormond, never thought fit to
give him any intimation of his Lordships Intention to write a History of the
Wars of Ireland, and other transactions there, wherein both the Duke and his
Lordship (though of opposite Parties) had a great part, but chose rather to seek
for information from the Earl of Castlehaven, and to publish his Observations
on the Earl of Castlehaven' s Memoirs, in a Conjuncture when his Reflections in
his Book and his Letter of the Seventh of December, 1681. to the Duke of
Ormond, might not only do most mischief to him, but to the Government. The Duke
of Ormond humbly conceives that at least, while the Lord Privy Seal and he have
the honor to be of your Majesty's Privy Council, and in the stations they are,
it will not be fit for him to publish such an Answer to the Lord Privy-Seal's
Book and Letter, as might otherwise be necessary in Vindication of Truth, His
Late Majesty's Justice and Honor, and his own Integrity.

It is therefore most humbly proposed, That Your Majesty would be pleased to
appoint a Committee of your Privy Council to look over the Lord Privy-Seal's
Book, and to call his Lordship and the Duke of Ormond before them, and if upon
Report from them, it shall appear to your Majesty that the Earl of Anglesey has
fallen into the Mistakes and Errors herein laid to his Charge, That then Your
Majesty would be pleased to Consider of the best and most Authentic means how
Reparation may be made to all that are injured by the Earl of Anglesey's Book
and Letter, and to prevent the Credit his great Place, supposed Knowledge
(especially in the Affairs of Ireland) and his pretended Candor and
Impartiality may give to his Writings, in these and future times.

ORMOND.
A True Copy.

John Nicholas.



At the Court at Hampton Court, June, 17. 1682.
By the KING'S Most Excellent Majesty, AND The Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
THE annexed Representation of his Grace the Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, etc. being this day presented and read to His Majesty in Council. His
Majesty taking the contents thereof into His Royal Consideration as a matter of
very great Importance, was pleased to Declare That he would hear the matter
thereof in Council. And did order That a Copy of the said Representation be
delivered to the Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy Seal, And that his Lordship do
attend His Majesty in Council on Friday next, at Three of the Clock in the
Afternoon at White Hall, when His Majesty has appointed to take that Business
into further Consideration.

John Nicholas.


The Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy Seal, being by the said Order of His Majesty
in Council, of June 17. appointed to be at Council at White Hall, June 23.
being not able to stand by reason of the Gout, yet got out of his Bed, and was
carried thither; where when the King came, he spoke to His Majesty (as I am
well informed) to this effect.

SIR,
I Am in the first place to beg Your Majesty's Pardon for my Obedience to Your
Order for appearing here this day, being in no condition of health to have left
my Bed, and altogether unfit for the presence of the King.

And indeed I expected that the Duke of Ormond would rather have Complained and
Printed against the Earl of Castlehaven his Memoirs; which Aspersed and
Scandalized Your Royal Father's Government, and represented the Protestants of
Ireland as Rebels, and the Confederate Irish Papists as Loyal Subjects, then
against me, who had Vindicated His Majesty's Government, and his Protestant
Faithful Subjects so Effectually in my Letter to the said Earl, That his
Lordship in an Epistle to the Reader which he after added to his Memoirs,
confessed himself and the Irish Confederates the Rebels: And that all the
Water in the Sea would not wash that Rebellion off that Nation.

This is the first quarrel I ever had with any man, and Your Majesty sees how
it is brought upon me, and cannot but believe it very unwelcome to me from one
who has so many Years professed Friendship to me. But that which troubles me
in it is, That it is pretended to be upon account of my failing in Duty to His
Late Majesty and Your Self, whereas if I can pretend to Merit in any thing, it
is for Exemplary and Considerable Faithfulness and Service to You both.

SIR, That I may not trouble You with much Discourse, I have reduced the
Vindication of my Innocence to Writing, which I present for my Answer to the
Duke of Ormond' s Accusation, and to which I shall add no more but my desire,
That though the Duke of Ormond has thought fit to Attaque me thus causelessly,
all the Contention hereafter between him and me may be who shall serve Your
Majesty best, and cost You least.


In the next place all the Papers Written and Printed, that had passed between
the Duke and the Lord Privy Seal, were read as they lay in order, and both the
Lords discoursed and bandied the matter fully, which the King heard with great
Patience: The Duke of Ormond notwithstanding doing that right to the Lord
Privy Seal, as to Acknowledge that none had been more Active and Instrumental
in his Majesty's Happy Restoration, or carried it on with more Success in
great Dangers and Difficulties, than his Lordship. In conclusion the Duke was
Ordered to charge the Lord Privy Seal by particulars in Writing, that he might
know what to Answer, generals not being sufficient, and so that business was
left at that time.

Now follows the Lord Privy-Seal's Answer to the Duke of Ormonds Representation
or Complaint against him.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
The Earl of Anglesey Keeper of your Majesty's Privy Seal, (mistead by an ill
President admitted) most humbly represents.
THat having this Eighteenth day of June, received in Bed, where he had
continued for above a Month last past, very much afflicted with the Gout, and
deprived of the use of Hands and Legs, and by reason of Pains and Sicknesses
getting little rest, which he has reason to believe was well known to the Duke
of Ormond; your Majesty's Order in Council of the Seventeenth, with a Copy of
the Representation of the said Duke annexed, and Command to attend your Majesty
in Council on Friday next, at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon at
White Hall, which he resolves by Gods Blessing to do if he shall be in a
Capacity of Health and Strength to be carried thither, without Peril of his
Life; which he does not believe that the Duke himself thinks, after a year and
halfs concerning himself in this Controversy, is to be adventured to gratify
a hasty proposal, upon his changing his way of proceeding.

In the mean time, That your Majesty may not be under the least prepossession
by what the Duke has represented with heat, and sharpnels against the said
Earl, he does humbly offer to Consideration, That though the Duke appear before
your Majesty, as a Representer, the said Earl cannot but look upon him as a
Petitioner, the Title by which all Subjects that complain, Address to your
Majesty, and for want of which he has observed many Suitors rejected with
their Requests.

And therefore your Majesty is desired to be informed in the first place by a
deduction of all that has passed between the Duke and the Earl in this Affair,
which is as follows.

The Book complained of was written about two years ago by mere Accident of the
Earl of Castlehaven's sending his Printed Memoirs, to the Earl then at
Blethington in Oxfordshire, where having read the same, and conceiving the
English, and Protestants to be unjustly dealt with therein, and the Irish foul
Cause professedly justified, though the most Execrable Rebellion that ever was
in the World; the Earl could not digest the same, but upon a bare Old Memory
without help of Writings or Notes, immediately put pen to paper and the Eighth
of July wrote a Letter to the said Earl of Castlehaven, which he believes his
Lordship has yet to show, though when it appeared afterward in print, about
October, 1680. one was sent to his Lordship taking Notice thereof, and asking
him what he had done with the said Letter, who then Confessed he had lent it to
a Friend, but he would recover it again. The Letter being thus Printed, the
Duke of Ormond had soon sight of it, for in his Letter to the Earl of Anglesey
of November the 12th. 1681. he takes Notice that he had seen it a Year before,
and writes his Pleasure of it so Satirically, that the said Earl returned his
Answer of the 7th. of October following, which the said Duke takes Notice of in
his said Representation, though he never before acknowledged the Receipt
thereof, nor was pleased to make any Reply to it, though it gave him sufficient
occasion: thus (when the said Earl expected a Reply) things stood till the said
Complaint made to your Majesty, which he humbly submits whether it be fit to be
received or proceeded upon in Council, after so open a litigation thereof in
Print, wherein the said Duke had appealed to the People, and accused the Earl
with as much Acrimony as it was possible for the Duke's sharp Pen to do, it
being as the said Earl conceives, below the dignity of Your Majesty and the
Board, after the Duke has proceeded so far in a private Quarrel of his own
making, without Success, (and that those the Duke had appealed to seemed
generally satisfied that the Earl had fully Vindicated himself from the
Aspersions laid upon him by the Duke's said Letter) for your Majesty to be
Addressed to so late, and in a Cause so concluded; wherein the Earl had
justified himself in the method the Duke himself lead him, and is ready to
proceed further so to do, if the Duke shall please to Reply in maintenance of
his Printed Charge.

However the Earl not knowing what course in this Affair will be pursued, or
directed, says that he does not disown the Book mentioned in the Duke's
Representation, so far as he has acknowledged the same in a Letter written by
him to the said Duke.

But denies that in the said Book or Letter, there are diverse, or any passages
and expressions which are not only untrue, but reflecting in a lugh degree upon
his Late Majesty's Government, and particularly in Relation to the Rebellion
and War in Ireland, and to the several Cessations and Peaces made by his, and
your Majesty's Authority and Command, which the said Earl has formerly
intimated in writing to the said Duke in Answer to a Letter of his insinuating
the same thing, and urging for particulars which the said Earl could never yet
obtain.

The said Earl is no further charged with maliciously calumniating and
aspersing the said Duke, and insinuating several particulars to that purpose,
but the passages in the said Books of that import are still reserved, and not
thought fit by the said Duke, to be expressed so as the Earl may know what, or
how to Answer.

And the said Duke is not ignorant that malicious Calumny or Scandal against so
great a Person as the Duke of Ormond, is severely punishable by Law.

What to say more herein the said Earl knows not, till the Duke gives more
clear and particular occasion.

Whosever shall take Notice of what the Duke Asserts of his and the Earls free
Converse and Friendship for above twenty years, and which the Earl adds (and
the Duke cannot forget) the real and adventurous friendship with the Earl, has
engaged in with and for the Duke, he cannot but wonder as others do, that they
are so easily cancelled and turned into rancor and ill returns, without
demonstrating a change in the Earl, which may satisfy inquiring men the Duke
has a Cause.

For else it seems wonderful and past belief to intelligent men, that the Earl
who professes that he bears Malice to no Person living, nor ever had quarrel
with any man, that counts it his great misfortune in his Old Age, when he was
preparing to go to his Grave in Peace and in perfect Charity with all men, he
should be Attacqued by one who has professed friendship to him above these
twenty years, and as he finds by Letters and otherwise was intimatly a friend
to his Father: As it is miraculous to the same degree, that the Earl in his
circumstances should willingly be drawn into controversy with so great and
fortunate a man, and so ancient a friend as the Duke of Ormond.

But since it has been the Dukes pleasure or humor so violently, and so many
ways to assault the Earl, he must not take it ill that he cannot bear wounds
patiently, and without just resentment.

The Duke complains further, that in the course of above twenty years free and
friendly acquaintance and correspondence with him, the Earl never thought fit
to give him any intimation of his intent to write a History of the Wars of
Ireland, and other Transactions there.

The said Earl cannot recollect with certainty whether he did or no, but he
very well remembers that many years ago he acquainted Sir George Lane then the
Duke's Secretary, and now Viscount of Lanesborrow (and who told him he had the
custody of all the Duke's Papers and Writings of public Affairs) with his
intended History of Ireland, who promised him the assistance of them, but he
could never yet obtain any from him: Nor from the Duke himself since he made a
free offer and promise of them by his Letter of the 12th. of November,
threatening to appeal from the Earl as a partially engaged, and unfaithful
Historian if he accepted them not, he being as he wrote, more desirous to
prevent than rectify Errors and mistakes. The Earl having this noble
encouragement from so great a person, (and who was to make so great a part of
it) to proceed in his History by his Letter of the Seventh of October,
acknowledged and accepted the Duke's favor, expecting the performance thereof,
but never heard since from the Duke till by his Representation to your Majesty,
wherein he seems to forget or retract all that had passed, though the Earl had
given him all the Assurance a man of honor could do, that he would be exactly
faithful and impartial in the History, and now shows that he is unwilling any
History should be written by the Earl, whose candor and impartiality he will
yet allow to be but pretended, and therefore proposes that your Majesty will
prevent the Credit which they, his great place, and supposed knowledge
(especially in the Affair of Ireland) may give to his Writings in these and
future times, never considering that himself has greater Places. Yet the Earl
does not apprehend their giving Credit to any thing the Duke has or shall
write against the Truth, which the Earl is resolved to tie himself strictly and
authentically to, if he be suffered to go on, and not discouraged in his Design
with which he intended to close his Labors in this Life, for the good of
England, and the Safety of that poor Kingdom of Ireland, harrassed by
Rebellions and Massacres, and which must expect and undergo more (still
preparing) unless prevented by wise Councils here, upon the warnings that a
true Account of former times and failings may give us.

And since the Earl has been versed above forty years in public Affairs,
without blemish or dishonor, and intends by your Majesty's permission, to
Dedicate his History to your Self, which sure he would not be so weak as to
offer, if any thing were to be in it of the nature the Duke presageth, the Earl
therefore hopes the Duke may at least trust your Majesty's wisdom with the
publishing of what you shall have the perusal of if you shall judge it worth
your reading before it go to the Press, being intended both for the Honor of
the Late King and of your Majesty, and not to gratisie any private humor or
party, or to disguise or cover the Errors or Miscarriages of any Subject
whatsoever.

As to the Duke's Reflection, that the Earl chose rather to seek for
Information from the Earl of Castlehaven than from him, the contrary does
appear ever since the Earl had any hopes given him of the Duke's Assistance,
with such Authentic instruments and writings as may contribute to the History,
which the Earl cannot but yet expect and he never desired other informations
from the said Earl of Castlehaven, than in the Military Actions wherein the
Duke employed him as a General, and never thought of making other use of them
than as they concurred with, cleared and confirmed the true Account the Earl was
possessed of in those Affairs before.

As to the Duke's insinuating (where he mentions the War of Ireland and other
Transactions there, wherein they had both a great part) that they were of
opposite Parties, since he accounts it serviceable to his design of aggravating
to the utmost against the Earl, the occasion is willingly embraced to give your
Majesty a brief and true Information of the part the Earl had both in Ireland
and England, in the late unhappy Time.

The Earl was (under the Authority his Late Majesty had entrusted both Houses
of Parliament with for Ordering and Governing the Affairs in Ireland, after the
horrid Rebellion begun) instrumental there to preserve the British and
Protestant Interest, Countries and Garrisons, from being swallowed up by Owen
Oneill's Barbarous Army, or falling into the Bloody Irish Hands. He also held
Correspondence with, and offered Assistance to the then Marquess of Ormond, to
Preserve the English and save the City of Dublin, and other English Garrisons
and Quarters from the Treacherous Irish, who broke all Faith with the Marquess.

He likewise sent to the Marquess the Late King's Majesty's positive
Prohibition in Writing, against making any Peace, or having at all further
dealing with the Irish, and used his most earnest persuasions herein,
foreseeing it would be destructive to the English, and mischievous to the Late
King; and still offered Assistance to the Marquess to encourage him in vigorous
opposing the Irish, and to enable him to disappoint their Treachery, and the
Consequence of their Faith-breaking.

The said Earl after the Peace notwithstanding made with the Irish Confederate
Rebels, and their Shameful and Treacherous Breach of it, with design and
endeavor to Surprise the Marquess and all the English Garrisons in Lemster, and
after they had so handled their business as to get the Commissioners of
Parliament, (which were Arrived at Dublin by the Marquesses invitation, to
receive the City of Dublin, and all other Garrisons and Strengths under his
Command, and secure them against the Irish, for which end they had brought
Forces, Shipping, Provisions, and Ammunition of all sorts with them) to be
rejected and sent away by the Marquess.

He upon a second Invitation of the Marquess to the Parliament, (upon the Irish
Rebels continued Breaches and Treacheries) went again for Ireland, after he
had used all his Interest to persuade them to send again, though they were very
unwilling, and it was much opposed by reason of the former unexpected
disappointment.

And was the chief employed in Commission from the Parliament with an Army of
Horse and Foot, furnished with all things necessary to deliver the Marquess and
English from the Irish Treacheries and Designs, and to receive the City of
Dublin and other Garrisons, into the Parliaments Custody, who were trusted, and
able to preserve the same for the Crown, if we could agree upon Articles for
that purpose, which by the Blessing of God the Earl did to the Marquess and the
late Lord Chancellor Eustace, (whom the Marquess chiefly Trusted therein) to
their great Satisfaction, as well as his own and the English and Protestants;
and after He and the rest of the Commissioners had received the City of Dublin
and other Garrisons, and Conveyed the Marquess with the Honor due to his
Quality, to the Sea side to take Shipping for England, as the Articles gave
Leave; and had spent some time to lay the Foundations which after happily
succeeded, for the total Reduction of the Irish, and breaking their Cursed
Confederacy and Power for Treachery, and Final Subduing them to the Crown of
England, with the Forfeiture of all their Estates, for the Satisfaction of
Adventurers and Soldiers, and the vast Increase of the Revenue of the Crown.

The Earl returned for England as he had Leave to do, before he went, where by
his Interest in Parliament he secured to the Marquess the Thirteen Thousand
Pounds, etc. Agreed by the Articles for the Surrender of Dublin, etc. to be
paid to him, though much endeavor was used by the Lady Vicountess Moore and
others; upon legal pretenses to deprive him of it; So that he lost not one
Penny of it, and then the said Marquess thought, and held the said Earl his
Real Friend, and a punctual Performer of Public Faith.

In England the Earl's part was as follows:

To preserve the Church in its Legal Establishment to the last, to desend the
King and the Laws, against Usurpation and Arbitrary Government, to adventure
his Estate and Life to save His from Execrable Murder, and never to sit still
till he and his Friends, His Late Majesty's and Your Faithful Subjects, had
compassed Your Majesty's Happy Restoration, with the apparent and imminent
hazard of their Lives, whereof the said Duke had vast benefits without danger.

Now if the Duke will give the Earl information of his part, as an opposite
Party in the said Transactions, he promises they shall not want their due
place and regard in History, when all done by both shall be truly and exactly
Recorded.

The Earl does not know what the Duke means by saying, That at least while the
Lord Privy Seal and he have the Honor to be of your Majesty's Privy Council,
and in the Stations they are, it will not be fit for him to publish such an
Answer to the Lord Privy-Seal's Book and Letter, as might otherwise be
necessary in Vindication of Truth: unless he would insinuate it fit for the
Earl to be displaced to make room for that long threatened Answer, that so he
might have the more home and fuller stroke at the Earl before your Majesty,
when he has endeavored but cannot hurt him before your People.

And it appears that it is but a New Fancy and Consideration taken up by the
Duke, for when he was pleased not only to Write but, Print his Virulent Letter
of the Twelfth of November, against the Earl, it had not it seems affected his
Thoughts as of any import, and this also shows, That it is too late and
dishonorable an appeal to be made to your Majesty, after the Duke has done it,
without Success in Print to the People, and would never in probability have
been attempted, but that he thinks he has arrived in a more happy conjuncture,
or has entertained some groundless hopes of Favor by the Earls depression,
which he will never in the least apprehend from a just Master that he has
faithfully served so long.

And therefore the Earl conceiving that the Duke has already in Print charged
him with all he has to say, and more than he can make good; and there being an
Obligation of Honor lying upon him to publish any answer to the Lord Privy
Seals Book which (without difference or respect to him) would be necessary in
Vindication of Truth, and the said Earl no ways apprehending the dint of such
an Answer; humbly beseeches your Majesty that the Duke may be at liberty and
encouraged in his worthy design for vindication of Truth by his Answer without
regard to the Earl, who is ready and willing to be trampled upon for the Truths
sake, and dreads much more what the Duke may with vain hopes whisper or
insinuate to your Majesty, than any thing he can or shall think sit to publish
for that End.

The Earl though he acknowledges your Majesty's Favor in the Office he enjoys,
it being a Testimony of your Gracious Acceptance of his long Faithful and
Unblemished Service; Yet for the Duke (who has partaken more deeply of your
Royal Bounty and Favor, than any other Subject (to say no more) to go out of
his way after he had deciphered the Earl sufficiently by his Title of Honor and
Name of Office, to mention his great Place seems to be rather in undervaluing
than with intention to allow your Majesty's poor Officer what his Predecessors,
though some of them were of inferior quality to his, have enjoyed without Envy
or Scorn, from the greatest Subjects.

And I can truly say, that I have not paid my Debts incurred in your Majesty's
Service, nor preferred my many Children, nor grown Rich by my Service and great
Place, though my Ancestors and I have received Titles of Honor, and Marks of
Favor from your Majesty and Predecessors, for diverse Generations.

As to the Duke's proposal, That your Majesty will be pleased to Appoint a
Committee of your Privy Council, to look over the Lord Privy-Seal's Book, and
to call the said Earl, and Duke of Ormond, before them, and to Report to your
Majesty how reparation may be made to all that are injured by the Earl's
Mistakes and Errors, in his said Book and Letter.

The Earl says, That the Duke seems to conceive that your Majesty and Council
have more Leisure than the Earl dares presume, and the Earl hopes the Duke may
content himself by your Majesty's Favor to Govern one Kingdom under you,
without involving this in his Concerns, or offering to impose his Dictates upon
your Majesty and Council of England, who have Wisdom to appoint Committees, or
take other course for business (properly before them) without the direction of
the Parties concerned, which most men in modesty forbear to give.

And though the Duke seems in great have to have Mistakes and Errors fixed upon
the Earl, he on the contrary (and though time will show that all that are, will
appear to be on the Duke's part) presumes not to give your Majesty trouble
herein, or to pursue the Duke for what is common to mankind.

And he conceives it an Employment below your Majesty and Council, to be set
upon an Essay to find matter to justify what the Duke has injuriously
published against the Earl, which course being his first choice, he may freely
pursue if he please.

As to the Duke's Objection, That the Earl says the Cessations and Peaces were
destructive to the English and Protestants, he believes the Duke will not say
the Earl was the first that said so by above thirty years, for it has been
Printed long ago, and the Truth of History and public acts will evince it,
must the Earl only be restrained from saying what he thinks, and the Duke knows
he thought near Forty years ago, and endeavored to prevent as much as he could,
and believes he can make good that time, was, when the Duke was much of the
same Opinion.

It was indeed an unhappiness to conclude Cessations and Peaces, that neither
the Irish nor English were satisfied with, and my unhappiness is not small to
be the only English man Reproached for an Opinion they generally had, and felt
by sad and dismal Effects.

If the Earl has dealt more plainly with the Duke than his Nature averse to
Contention (and who has had quarrels with none in the whole course of his
Life) inclines him to, he hopes your Majesty will Consider that to be taxed of
Untruth and Reflection on his Late Majesty's Honor and Justice, and branded as
a Malicious Calumniator, a close concealed and disguised Enemy to your Majesty,
a designer of Mischief to the Duke and the Government, and one who chose the
most effectual Conjuncture for those things, with pretense only of Candor and
impartiality, are Provocations unusual and not easily born by Persons of Honor,
and might the better have been forborne, because after all this loud noise and
criminal Charge, the Duke himself dwindles it into bare Mistakes and Errors,
which who Lives that is not guilty of, and the Earl conceives, is a Task very
improper to be laid upon your Majesty to Examine, especially in Cases of
Controversy thereupon between your Majesty's Subjects.

Thus the Earl though he had reason first to complain, if he could have thought
it decent to trouble your Majesty with private disputes (after the Duke had
Scandalized him in Print, for which he prays and hopes Reparation) in obedience
to your Majesty's Order has represented what he conceived expedient upon this
occasion wherewith if the Duke be not satisfied.

It is desired that he would in due form of Law, and by legal and certain
Articles charge the said Earl with particulars, to which he may Answer by
Advice of Council, and if he Vindicates not himself, let him be exposed to the
Censure of this present Age and Posterity, and incur your Majesty's
displeasure, less than which cannot be aimed at by the Duke, who to satisfy
his unjust and causeless Animosity, makes use of his Power to alienate from the
Earl your Majesty's favor, good opinion and confidence, after above three and
twenty years faithful and diligent Service, wherein the said Earl has almost
worn out his Strength and Life, without Conviction of any failure or
transgression, which surely the said Duke would never do (after he had
privately quarreled the Earl, and exposed him the worst he could in Print, and
this Affair having taking a circuit of almost two years) unless he conceived he
had met with some extraordinary juncture to bear down the Earl, nor trouble
your Majesty and Council, when so great Affairs are before them, with such
private concerns and complaints, after so long a run, and using other ways
unsuccessfully, to Vindicate himself from what was never intended as a Charge
against him.

I conclude Praying (as I have heartily endeavored) for the Glory and
Prosperity of your Majesty's Government, to be equal to the greatest of your
Royal Predecessors, wishing your Majesty many such Subjects as I have been and
am, whom the Duke of Ormond seems so Earnest to rid your Majesty of; or leave
under a black Character, and misrepresentation in your Service which he shall
never be able to compass.

ANGLESEY.

At the Court at White Hall, this 13th. day of July, 1682.
By the King's Most Excellent Majesty, AND The Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
UPon Reading this day at the Board, a Paper delivered in by his Grace the Duke
of Ormond. His Majesty in Council was pleased to Order, That a Copy of the said
Paper be sent to the Right Honorable the Earl of Anglesey, Lord Keeper of the
Privy Seal, (which is accordingly hereunto annexed) who is to return an Answer
thereunto, to His Majesty in Council upon Thursday the 20th, instant, at
Hampton Court, at Nine in the Morning.

Phil. Loyd.


I. THE Cessations and Peaces Dishonorable to the Crown of England. Page 27.

II. Of Advantage only to the Irish. ibid.

III. Destructive to the English Protestants. ibid.

IV. That therefore the Lords Justices and Council, were from the beginning
averse to them. Page 60.

V. That for the same reasons the chief, and most of the English Nobility in
Ireland, and the generality of the English, Scotch and Irish Protestants, of
all Qualities and Degrees, sooner or later opposed both the Cessations and
Peaces. Page 65.

VI. That amongst them were found the Earls of Kildare, Thomond, etc. Ibid.

VII. And that the two first Peaces were against Law, and several Acts of
Parliament in both Kingdoms. Page 64.

The Council not sitting the 20th. of July, though the Lord Privy Seal who
received the 13th. the particular Charges of the Duke of Ormond against him
then delivered in, Answered them the 14th. yet gave not in his Answer till the
next Council held at Hampton Court the 27th. of July, which was as follows:

July the 14th. 1682.
The Answer of Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal, to the Paper delivered
by the Duke of Ormond at Council, July, 13. 1682. as a Charge of particulars
against him.
SAving still the benefit of his former Answer delivered in the 23d. of June,
and what was then done at Council, the said Earl further says:

That it is to be considered that all the said particulars were passages in a
private Letter to a Friend, not designed for public view. That the Earl of
Castlehaven to whom it was written being convinced thereby, as appears by a
Second Epistle to the Reader added to his Memoirs, wherein he says that his
acting as a Confederate Catholic was in plain English as a Rebel, That he does
not excuse the Rebellion, for all the Water of the Sea cannot wash it off that
Nation, it having been begun most bloodily on the English in that Kingdom, in a
time of settled Peace, without the least occasion given. A Noble and Remarkable
Confession of one who had been long of the Supreme Council of the Confederate
Irish. And which makes it the more wonderful, that the Duke of Ormond should be
so severe a Censor on a Letter which had so good an effect on him it was
written to.

In the next place the said Earl says, That since the Duke of Ormond thought
it fit to concern himself in a Letter not written to him, he should have been
so impartial as to have taken Notice of this Passage therein, Page 61. Your
Lordship having been privy to all the Cabals and Secret Councils against the
English and Protestants, will I hope if you find any thing written by me,
questionable or doubtful in your Opinion, favor me with your severest
Reflections thereupon, for, as I design nothing but exact Truth wherever it
light, so if by any inadvertancy or want of full information, I should Err or
come short in the least, your Lordship shall find me ready to retract or
supply, but never to persist in it, whereby it appears, that the Earl of
Anglesey had no Intention to Injure any man as he is not Conscious he has.

These things premised, the said Earl gives this short Answer or rather
Justification to the said particular Charges,

First, to that Marked No. 1. 2. 3. which are all but one Clause in the letter
Page 27 (viz.) that the Cessations and Peaces were of advantage only to the
Irish, and highly dishonorable to the Crown of England, and destructive to the
English and Protestants.

Answer.
The said Earl passing by the Irish and Papists, being the Chief promoters of
them, the English and Protestants sent Agents to Oxford, purposely to oppose
and divert the Influence thereof, and to hinder agreements with the Irish,
which they foresaw would be destructive to the English and Protestants, the
whole passages of the proceedings herein, were published in 1644. in a Book
Entitled, the False and Scandalous Remonstrance of the Inhumane, and Bloody
Rebels of Ireland, together with an Answer thereunto on the behalf of the
Protestants of Ireland; the perusal whereof will fully Justify the Earl in what
he has written, besides the Two Houses of Parliament, their Declarations and
Reasons against both Cessations and Peaces: But to put it past dispute, the
Earl Refers to His Majesty's Declaration, and the Act for the Settlement of
Ireland in which the Duke of Ormond himself, had a great hand and gave the
Royal Assent pa. 10. etc.

By which his Majesty that now is in full Parliament, Declares, that his Royal
Father had been forced to the Cessation and Peace which he had made with the
Irish, and that, he was thereby Compelled to give them a full pardon, in the
same Act His Majesty also declares, that he himself was necessitated to make
the second Peace with the Irish upon difficult Conditions.

If all this do not prove the Cessations and Peaces dishonorable to the Crown
of England, of advantage only to the Irish and destructive to the English and
Protestants, I submit to Judgment.

And why else were the Peaces upon hearing all Parties laid aside, and the
Irish their Estates divided among the English?

2d. Charge.
That therefore the Lords Justices and Council were from the beginning averse
to them page, 60.

Answer.
To prove that the Justices and Council were from the beginning averse to the
Cessations and Peaces, I Refer to their many Letters, which I have ready to
produce, in some whereof the Duke of Ormond, then Earl Joined, by which they
Declare the Horridness and Universality of the Rebellion, and the Design of the
Irish to Extirpate the English, and to Cast off the English Government, and
that there was no way of Recovering that Kingdom to the Crown of England, but
by a vigorous and total Reducing them to obedience.

But when other Councils were taken up, one of the Lords Justices, and diverse
of the Chief Officers and Counselors of greatest Experience in that Kingdom,
and who best understood how to deal with that People were displaced, and
affairs put into other hands; the grounds and proceedings and success whereof,
the Duke of Ormond can better Relate than I.

Charge 3d.
Concerning the Protestants of all degrees sooner or later opposing both the
Cessations and Peaces, and the Nobility named that did so page 65.

Answer.
This is matter of Fact unquestionable, and without which and their subduing
the Irish to the Crown of England (who were sheltered and protected by the
Cessations and Peaces) their Estates could never have been granted to the
English and Protestants as they are, if there were any mistake in the
enumeration of the Nobility, (which is possible) the Letter being written by
memory and far from Books and Papers, it will not be great or material, and is
easily amendable without varying the Case.

Charge 4th.
That the two first peaces were against Law, and several Acts of Parliament in
both Kingdoms, page 64.

Answer.
They are not only against the whole Scope of the Laws in Ireland and England,
for Establishing the Protestant Religion and Suppression of Poperty, but
against these particular Acts of Parliament (viz.) 2 Eliz. Cap 1. 2 in Ireland
and 28. H. 8 Cap. 13 etc. And in England the Statutes of the 17 Caroli 1. Cap.
34. 35. 36. 37. in one of which it is provided, that all pardons granted to any
of the Rebels of Ireland, without assent of Parliament shall be void, and yet
by the Cessations they were Reprieved, and by both the Peaces fully pardoned.

And in the same Act, it is also enacted, that whosoever shall make any promise
or agreement, to Introduce or bring unto the Realm of Ireland the Authority of
the Sea of Rome in any Case whatsoever, or to defend or maintain the same,
shall forfeit all his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Goods and Chattells.

After some Debate of the said Charges and Answers at Council, the Lords
Concerned being withdrawn, this Resolution passed by the Lords on the Lord
Privy-Seals Letter to the Earl of Castlehaven (viz.) that it was a scandalous
Libell against His late Majesty, against His now Majesty, and against the
Government; but no particular Clauses were mentioned to ground that Censure
upon, and when the parties were Called in again, the Lord Chancellor only told
the Lord Privy Seal, that the King Conceived him faulty in the Clause page 32.
of the said Letter to the Earl of Castlehaven, wherein the Committees of the
Parliament of Ireland were mentioned, as having been in at the Intrigues of the
Popish Faction at Court, but that the Council had appointed his Lordship to be
heard next Council day Aug. 3d. when he was to produce the vouchers Mentioned
in his Answer, as appears, by the order following.

At the Court at Hampton Court, This 27th, day of July 1682.
By the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords of His Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council.
It was this day ordered by His Majesty in Council, that the Right honorable
the Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy Seal, do on Thursday next being the third of
August produce to His Majesty in Council, appointed at Hampton Court, at Nine
in the Morning the Vouchers mentioned by his Lordship in his Answer this day
read at the Board to the Paper delivered in the 13th. Instant by his Grace the
Duke of Ormond.

Phi. Lloyd.

The Lord Privy Seal Continuing Extreme ill of the Gout, and finding himself
prejudged by the Lords the said 27th. day of July, Aug. 2. wrote the following
Letter to His Majesty, and sent it enclosed to the Lord President to be
presented, which was done Accordingly.

May it please your Majesty,
Having Received your Majesty's order in Council of the 27th of July, to
produce the third of Aug. next at Hampton Court, to your Majesty in Council,
the Vouchers mentioned by me in my Answer to the Paper delivered, in the 13th
Instant by the Duke of Ormond, and the increase of my fit of the Gout,
occasioned by my last Attendance incapacitating me personally to obey the said
Order, I hold it my duty to yield the obedience I am able by this humble
address to your Majesty.

I find by the entry of the last Council days proceedings, that beyond what the
Lord Chancellor declared to me, at the board of your Majesty's Judgment of a
Clause, in the 32 page of my Letter to the Earl of Castlehaven, which was not
so much as mentioned in the Duke of Ormonds said paper; A Resolve passed by the
Council on that Letter, to this effect; that it was a scandalous Libel against
your Majesty's Royal Father, against your Majesty, and against the Government,
but I find no Clauses, whereon such Judgment, is grounded, your Majesty may
Imagine with what Amazement, as well as trouble this came to my knowledge, I
should with less Concern, have seen a dagger at my old faithful heart, then to
have Received the wound I have from your Royal hand, after Three and Twenty
years faithful and diligent service under great Trusts.

I do not know, by what Right or Authority the Council Table, who are limited
by Laws in their Jurisdiction, take upon them the Trial of a Peer for
pretended Libelling, though I shall be glad to see their zeal against real
Libelling, which is the Dangerous and Countenanced sin of the Age.

I am supported at present under my misfortune in this, that your Majesty, who
has so often declared to your People, that you will Govern according to Law,
will not deny your old Servant a fair and Legal Trial, in some one of your
Courts of Justice, upon the points, whereof the Duke of Ormond has accused me,
before they take any Impression on your Majesty to my prejudice, and then, I no
ways doubt by a due Administration of the Laws, I shall by Jurors legally
Impanel'd and untamper'd with, which is the Right of every Subject, be
represented to your Majesty in this affair, under a Charracter more suitable to
that unblemished and honor, with which, I am arrived at old age. But if the
Duke of Ormond upon his prosecution of me, before those Judges who have power
to hear and determine, shall by supplying his defect of proofs in Council,
Convict me for a Libeller, in any one point of his Charge, I shall not only
deserve your Majesty's Censure, but the utmost severity of the Law in my
punishment, which may Gratify the Ambition of some who promote, and wait for
my supplanting.

The only passage that I yet know of, which your Majesty seems to take offense
at, being that in page the 32. of the Irish Committees, being in at the
Intrigue of the Popish faction at Court etc. since it was suddenly and
unexpectedly urged against me at Council, not being one of the particulars, I
was ordered to Answer that day, I could then only Answer what occurred to me on
that surprise, without so much as my reading the Clause (viz.) that first
negatively, by those words was not meant His late Majesty or his Council, but
the Popish faction then haunting the Court, like Locusts against the Laws,
which prohibit their approach to it, and as many as will be owned then Papists
at Court, and were capable of Intriguing, I do not scruple to say, I intended
them, and such there were of my Knowledge at that time, who may be justly
suspected, to have laid the design of all the Calamities of this Kingdom and
Ireland that ensued.

And as long as any such shall dare to come to Court, and by their Faction
spread Libells to the scandal of all legal proceedings, and the exasperating
your People daily in affront, of the wise provision the Laws of the Land have
made against them, neither your Majesty nor your Kingdoms can be safe, but the
seeds of sedition will grow up to Confusion.

And for your Majesty's further satisfaction, of my harmless intention in that
expression, now I have perused it at Leisure, I find that in that Clause, I
assert nothing positively, but when with disjunctive particles, I had mentioned
diverse particulars, which were in that Juncture the Jealousy and discourse of
the times, and even the boast of the Irish themselves.

I Conclude, that I would not take upon me to determine any thing, but that
soon after the said Committees return for Ireland, brake out that Execrable and
unparrallel'd Rebellion of the Papists.

By this time your Majesty and the Council will I hope, see cause to think,
that a Summons for me to produce Vouchers, after they have given so terrible a
Judgment against me comes too late, and that if I were in a Condition to attend
at the day appointed, it would be no Contempt to decline making of further
defense before the Lords, who have prejudged me, and Condemned me as Guilty,
before the hearing of the Cause be Concluded, which I hope no other Court will
do, and was never that I know done by them till now in my Case, nor do I hear,
that the Duke of Ormond is censured for the scandalous Pamphlet, which he owned
at Council, to have published against me, whereof I Complained: I must
therefore hope, that what I have delivered in Council already, will be better
and more impartially considered, without my giving your Majesty further trouble
therein.

And as I have spent the best of my days in your Service without Reproach, so I
hope still to stand Justified to all the world, what I Resolve, whilst I live
to be

Your Majesty's Most Obedient and Most Faithful devoted Subject and Servant.
Anglesey.
London Aug. 2d. 1682.

The said Letter was Read at Council Aug. 3d. but nothing appears entered to be
done thereupon, but the Earl of Castlehaven was called in several times and
questioned, about his Printed Memoirs answered by the Earl of Anglesey Lord
Privy Seal, which he acknowledged to be his, and in Conclusion his Book was by
His Majesty and Council, Judged to be a scandalous Libel against the
Government, but no further proceeding, was had against his Lordship.

But Aug the 9th. 1682. the following Warrant of the King, was brought by Sir
Lionel Jenkins Secretary of State, to the Lord Privy Seal in the Evening, being
then at his Lordships House in Drury Lane.

Charles R.
To our Right Trusty, and Right well beloved Cousin and Councellor, Arthur Earl
of Anglesey Keeper of our Privy Seal.
Our will and pleasure is, that Immediately upon sight hereof you deliver up our
Privy Seal, appointed by our Letters Patents, to remain during our pleasure in
your Custody, into the hands of our Right Trusty, and well beloved Councellor
Sir Lionel Jenkins Knight, our Principal Secretary of State, and for so doing,
this shall be your Warrant, given at our Court at Windsor the 8th. day of
August 1682. in the 34 year of our Reign, By His Majesty's Command

Conway.

What passed between the Lord Privy Seal, and Mr. Secretary appears not,
further, then what follows under the laid Secretaries hand and Seal, but it is
said the Lord Privy Seal with his duty to the King, desired the Secretary
(which he promised to let His Majesty know that at the signification of His
Majesty's pleasure, he delivered the Seal more joyfully than ever he Received
it.

Anglesey house on Wednesday the 9th. of Aug. 1682.
In pursuance of His Majesty's W^rrant bearing Date Yesterday, being the 8th.
day of this present Month of Aug. which Warrant was in these words (viz.)

CHARLES R.

Our will and pleasure is, that Immediately upon sight hereof you deliver up our
Privy Seal, appointed by our Letters Patents, to Remain during our Pleasure in
your Custody, into the hands of our Right Trusty and well-beloved Coun ellor,
Sir Leoline Jenkins Knight, our Principal Secretary of State, and for so doing
this shall be your Warrant, given at our Court at Windsor the 8th. day of
August, 1682. In the 34 year of our Reign

To Our Right Trusty and Right wellbeloved Cousin and Counceller Arthur Earl of
Anglesey Keeper of our Privy Seal. By His Majesty's Command CONWAY

The Right honorable the said Earl of Anglesey, delivered into my hands His
Majesty's Privy Seal, sealed up with his Lordships Seal at Arms, being put
into the Purse, given by His Majesty for Carrying the said Privy Seal, which
said Privy Seal, I Received at Eight a Clock in the Evening of the said ninth
of August, witness my hand and Seal

L. Jenkins.


FINIS.
Now to show, that Dr. Morley the Learned Bishop of Winchester, is of the same
opinion with the Earl of Anglesey, for the keeping out of Popery, now it seems
to be flowing in upon us, it has been thought fit, to fill up this last sheet
with the following Letter of the said Bishop, written to the said Earl above
ten years ago, when the Papists Warmly set upon their Design to introduce
Popery, and many years before their Desperate Plot since Discovered (for which
so many have suffered by the hand of Justice) was ripe for Execution.

Which Letter was Received by the said Earl from the said Bishop, July the 9th.
1672. by the hands of the Lord Cornbury, now Earl of Clarendon.

My Lord,
Yours by my Lord of Cornbury, I Received this Morning from his own hands, and
this is to Return you my humble thanks, for the favorable opinion of me you are
pleased to express in it, which as to the Zeal I have for the Protestant
Religion, I hope I may without vanity, own to be true, but must acknowledge I
want these abilities to defend it, which you seem to think I have, but thanks
be to God, our Church wants not those that have, and can, and will Answer all
that has been, or is, or can be objected against her, or any of the Doctrines,
which in opposition to the Church of Rome are professed by her; neither do I
know any one Book or any one Argument, (worth the taking notice of) written or
urged by any Romanist, for them, or against us, in any material point of
Difference betwixt us, that has not been clearly and fully Answered over and
over again, by some or other of our own Church of England, to say nothing of
those Eminently Learned and Pious Divines of the other Reformed Protestant
Churches beyond the Seas, so that to Answer every impertinent Pamphlet that
comes forth, which has nothing but what has been so often Answered before in
it, is but Actum agere and stultus labor ineptiarum, and therefore the Wiseman
that bids us, for bids us too; to Answer a Fool in his folly, his meaning is,
that after we have Answered him once, we should Answer him no more, especially
such Kind of fools, quos non persuadebis etiamsi persua^eris, and such are all
those who contend for Interest and not for truth: Demetrius will hold his
Conclusion, that Diana is a Goddess, as long as he has nothing to live by, but
the making of Shrines, but is there then nothing to be done will you say to
keep out Popery, now it seems to be flowing in upon us? yes no doubt there is,
and I hope there will be, when His Majesty shall see a Convenient time for it,
but it will not be done, when it is done by writing, or answering of Books pro
and con, of which there will never be an end. But how is it to be done then? I
answer, viderint illi qui ad Clavum sedent, let them look to it, who sit at the
helm. I am ready to obey, whatsoever I shall be Commanded to that purpose, as
far as my Conscience will permit, and I thank God I have done so both formerly,
and in my late visitation of my whole Diocese, which perhaps you may have heard
of, little to my Credit if the Pseudo-Catholicks have informed you of it, but I
care not what they or any other Heretics, or Schismatics do, or can say of
me; as long as I do that and no more then what my Duty to God and the King, and
the Place I hold in the Church requires of me.

You know what I was for in the late Sessions of Parliament, (I mean not a
comprehension,) but a Coalition or Incorporation of the Presbiterian Party,
into the Church as it is by Law Established, and I am still of the same
opinion, that it is the one only effectual Expedient, to hinder the growth of
Popery, and to secure both parties, and I am very Confident, that there are no
Presbiterians in the World (the Scotch only Excepted) that would not Conform to
all that is Required by our Church, especially in such a Juncture of time as
this is, which is all I have to say as to that particular at this distance.

My Lord the visit your Son made me, I took for a great Honor and favor from
him, especially considering how much good I have heard of him, which I hope
will Increase every day more and more in him, that the succeeding age may be
the better for him. My Lord I am

Your Lordships very humble Servant Geor. Winton.
Farnham Castle July 4th 1672. Directed. For the Right honorable the Earl of
Anglesey.

FINIS.
The Reader is desired to amend or pass by the Errors of the Press.


