A True and Faithful ACCOUNT OF THE SEVERAL INFORMATIONS EXHIBITED To the
Honorable Committee appointed by the PARLIAMENT To Inquire into the Late
Dreadful Burning Of the City of London. TOGETHER With other INFORMATIONS
touching the Insolency of POPISH PRIESTS and JESUITS; and the INCREASE of
POPERY, brought to the Honorable Committee appointed by the Parliament for
that purpose.

Printed in the Year 1667.

LONDONS Consumption by FIRE.
UPon the second of September 1666. the Fire began in London, at one Farryners
House, a Baker in Pudding-Lane, between the hours of one and two in the
Morning, and continued burning until the sixth of September following;
consuming, as by the Surveyors appears in Print, three hundred seventy three
Acres within the Walls of the City of London, and sixty three Acres three Roods
without the Walls. There remains seventy five Acres three Roods yet standing
within the Walls unburnt. Eighty nine Parish Churches, besides Chapels burnt.
Eleven Parishes within the Walls yet standing. Houses burnt, thirteen thousand
two hundred.

Per
Jonas Moore, Ralph Gatrix. Surveyors.
Upon the eighteenth of September 1666. the Parliament came together: And upon
the 25th of the same month, the House of Commons appointed a Committee to
enquire into the Causes of the late Fire, before whom the following
Informations were given in; and proved before the Committee; as by their Report
will more clearly appear, bearing date the two and twentieth of January 66. and
upon the eighth of February following, the Parliament was Prorogued, before
they came to give their Judgment thereupon.

Die Martis 25 Septembris 1666. 18 Car. 2.
Resolved, etc.
THat a Committee be appointed to inquire into the Causes of the late Fire, and
that it be referred to.

Sir Charles Harbord Mr. Sandys. Col. Birch. Sir Robert Brook. Sir Tho.
Littleton. Mr. Prin Mr. Jones. Sir Solom. Swale Sir Tho. Tomlins. Mr. Seymour.
Mr. Finch. Lord Herbert. Sir John Heath. Mr. Millward. Sir Richard Ford. Mr.
Rob. Milward. Sir William Lowther. Sir Richard Vatley. Sir Rowland Beckley. Sir
Tho. Allen. Mr. Whorwood. Mr. Coventry. Serj. Maynard. Sir Jo. Talbot. Mr.
Morley. Mr. Garraway. Sir Fran. Goodrick Col. Strangways. Sir Edward Massey.
Sir Ed^. Walpool. Sir Robert Atkins. Sir Thomas Gower. Mr. Trevor. Sir Thomas
Clifford. Sir Hen. Caesar. Sir John Monson. Sir John Charlton. Lord Ancram. Mr.
Pepis. Sir Richard Everard. Mr. Crouch. Mr. Merrel. Sir Will. Hickman. Sir
Richard Brown. Mr. Maynard.
And they are to meet to morrow at two of the Clock in the afternoon, in the
Speakers Chamber; and to send for Persons, Papers, and Records.

Will. Goldsbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

October 9. 1666.
Ordered, That these Members following be added to the Committee appointed to
enquire into the Causes of the late Fire, Viz. Sir John Pelham, Mr. Hugh
Buseowen, Mr. Giles Hungerford* Sir William Lewis, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir
John Brampstone* Mr. Milward, Mr. Buscowen; and all the Members that serve for
the City of London.

Will. Goldesbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

October 16. 1666.
Ordered, That Mr. Davies, Sir Thomas Higgons, Mr. St. John Sir Richard
Franklin, Sir Thomas Tomkins, Mr. Devereux, Mr. Millard, Mr. Lewis, Mr.
Dowdswell, Sir James Thyn, Sir Edm. Pierse, Mr. Coleman, Sir Tho. Allen, Mr.
Giles Hungerford, Mr. Churchill, be added to the Committee appointed to enquire
into the Causes of the late Fire.

Will. Goldesbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

THe Honorable Committee, according to the forementioned Orders of the House,
did meet in the Speakers Chamber, and having chosen Sir Robert Brook for their
Chairman, proceeded to receive many considerable Informations from diverse
credible Persons, about the matter wherewith they were entrusted, and thereupon
did at last agree that Sir Robert Brook should make the ensuing Report to the
Honorable House of Commons.

The Report of Sir Robert Brook, Chairman to the Committee that was appointed
by the House of Commons to enquire into the Firing of the City of London; made
the Two and Twentieth of January, 1666.
IN a Letter from Alanson of the 23d of August* 1666, New Style, written from
one Dural to a Gentleman lodging in the House of one of the Ministers of the
French Church in London, called Monsieur Hera^^^* there were these expressions:

Pray (...) with the truth of certain News which is common in this Country*
(...) a Fire from Heaven is fallen upon a City called Belke, situated on the
side of the River of Thames, where a world of People have been killed and
burnt, and Houses also consumed* Which seemed a word of Cabal, cast out by some
that were knowing, and others that might be ignorant of the signification of
it.

Mris Elizabeth Styles informs, That in April last, in an eager discourse she
had with a French Servant of Sir Vere Fan, he hastily replied, You English
Maids will like the Frenchmen better, when there is not a House left between
Temple Bar and London Bridge. To which she answered, I hope your eyes will
never see that. He replied, This will come to pass between June and October.

William Tisdale informs, That he being about the beginning of July at the
Greyhound in St. Martins, with one Fitz-Harris an Irish Papist, heard him say,
There would be a sad Desolation in September, in November a worse, in December
all would be united into one. Whereupon he asked him, Where this Desolation
would be? He answered, In London.

Mr. Light of Ratcliff, having some discourse with Mr. Longhorn of the
Middle Temple, Barrister, (reputed a zealous Papist) about February 65 last,
after some discourse in disputation about Religion, he took him by the hand,
and said to him, You expect great things in Sixty Six, and think that Rome will
be destroyed, but what if it be London?

Mr. Kitley of Barkin in Essex, in forms, That one Mris. Yazly, a Papist, of
Ilford in the said County, came unto his House, August the 13th, and being in
discourse with his Mother, said, They say the next Thursday will be the hottest
day that ever was in England. She replied, I hope the hottest season of the
year is now past. To which she answered, I know not whether it be the hottest
for Weather or for Action. This Mris. Yazly coming to the same House the Week
after the Fire, Mr. Kitly said to her with some trouble, I have often thought
of your Hot Thursday: To which she replied, It was not indeed upon the
Thursday, but it happened upon the Sunday was sennight after. Mris. Yazly
hearing this Evidence produced against her, endeavored to avoid the words,
saying, That upon the 13th of August she did tell Mris Kitly, That they say the
next Thursday will be the darkest Thursday that ever was in England, but not
otherwise; which she affirms to have received from one Finchman, an old Woman
of Ilford; who being examined by a Justice of* Peace to discover the truth
thereof, denied that ever she said any such words to Mris. Yazly, or that she
had discoursed with her about any such matter. And as to the subsequent words,
she says Mris Yazly denies ever to have spoken them: But Mr. Kitly* offered in
her presence (if it should be demanded) to bring his Mother and Wife to
testify the same.

William Ducket Esquire a Member of the House, informs, That one Henry Baker of
Chippenham in the County of Wilts, coming from Market with one John Woodman of
Kelloway in the same County, the Thursday before the Fire began in London, they
had some discourse about the buying of a yoke of fat Bullocks, wherein they
differed, because VVoodman who was to sell them was desired to keep them a
while in his hands; But the said VVoodman denied so to do, for that as he
alleged, he could not stay in the Country till that time which Baker would
have them delivered to him in, and being asked whither he was going, he refused
to tell, Asking what he had to do to make that question; But riding a little
further, the said Woodman expressed these words, You are brave Blades at
Chippenham, you made Bonfires lately for beating the Dutch; But since you
delight in Bonfires, you shall have your Bellies full of them ere it be long:
Adding, that if he lived one week longer, he should see London as sad a London
as ever it was since the World began. And in some short time after, he should
see as bloody a time as ever was, since England was England. This discourse was
not much taken notice of at that time it was spoken, But when the City of
London was Burnt, the said Henry Baker gave this Information to the said Mr.
Ducket, and whereupon he issued out his Warrant to apprehend Woodman, but he
was gone out of the Country, and cannot be heard of since.

Robert Hubert of Roan in Normandy, who acknowledged that he was one of those
that Fired the House of Mr. Farryner a Baker in Pudding-Lane, from whence the
Fire had its beginning, confessed, that he came out of France with one Stephen
Piedloe about four months before the Fire, and went into Sweden with him, where
he also staid with him as his Companion four months, and then they came
together into England in a Swedish Ship called the Skipper, where he staid on
board with the said Piedloe till that Saturday night, in which the Fire brake
out. When Peidloe taking him out of the Ship, carried him into Pudding-Lane,
and he being earnest to know whither he would carry him? he would not satisfy
him till he had brought him to the place, and then he told him, that he had
brought three Balls, and gave him one of them to throw into the house. And he
would have been further satisfied in the design, as he said, before he would
execute it: But Peidloe was so impatient that he would not hear him, and then
he did the Fact, which was, That he put a Fire-Ball at the end of a long Pole,
and lighting it with a piece of Match, he put it in at a Window, and staid till
he saw the House in a flame. He confessed that there were Three and Twenty
Accomplices, whereof Peidloe was the Chief.

Mr. Graves a French Merchant living in St. Mary Axe, Informed this Committee,
that he had known Hubert ever since he was four years old, and has ever
observed him to be a person of a mischievous inclination, and therefore fit for
any villainous enterprise; And because of his knowledge he had of him, he went
to visit him in Prison, where when he saw him, he could not but commiserate the
condition whereinto he had brought himself. And for his better discovery of the
Fact, he told him the said Hubert, that he did not believe he had done that of
which he confessed himself guilty. To which Hubert replied, Yes Sir, I am
guilty of it, and have been brought to it by the instigation of Monsieur
Peidloe; but not out of any malice to the English Nation, but from a desire of
Reward which he promised me upon my Return into France.

It is observable, that this miserable creature who confessed himself to the
Committee to be a Protestant, was a Papist, and dyed so. And as for the
aforesaid Peidloe, the said Mr. Graves informed, that he had had a full
knowledge of him, and knew him to be a very Deboist Person, and apt to any
Wicked Design. Moreover, for a clear conviction of the Guilt of the aforesaid
Hubert, Mr. Lowman, the Keeper of the VVhite-Lion Prison, was appointed to set
him upon a horse, and to go with him, and see if he could find out the place
where he threw the Fire-Ball. Upon which, Hubert with more readiness than those
that were well acquainted with the place, went to Pudding-lane, unto the very
place where the house that was first fired stood, saying, here stood the house.
The Jailer endeavored to draw him from that belief, and put him upon seeking
for some other place: But he positively persisted in what he had first said;
and affirmed that to have been the said House. It being intimated to the
Committee, That notwithstanding the Confession of the said Hubert, it was
confidently reported the Fire in the forementioned Farryners house began by
accident. The Committee therefore sent for him the said Farryner before them,
who being examined, said, That it was impossible any Fire should happen in his
House by accident; for he had after Twelve of the Clock that night gone through
every Room thereof, and found no Fire, but in one Chimney, where the Room was
paved with Bricks, which Fire he diligently raked up in Embers. He was then
asked, whether no Window or Door might let in wind to disturb those Coals? He
affirmed there was no possibility for any wind to disturb them: and that it was
absolutely set on fire of purpose.

Dawes Weymansel Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, informed, That
he saw a man apprehended in the time of the Fire, near the Temple, with his
Pockets stuffed with combustible matter, made of Flax, Tow, and suchlike
materials.

Doctor John Packer informs, That he saw a Person in the time of the Fire,
throw some combustible matter into a Shop in the Old Bayley, which he thinks
was the Shop of an Apothecary; and that immediately thereupon he saw a great
smoke, and smelt a smell of Brimstone. The Person that did this, immediately
ran away; but upon the outcry of the People he was taken by the Guards.

Mr. Randal, Mr. Haslem, and Mr. Humphry Bowyer, do all agree, That they saw a
person flinging something into a House near St. Antholines Church; and that
thereupon the House was on fire, and the smoke thereof infested the adjacent
Houses. And when this was done, there was No fire near the place.

Mr. Michael March, an Officer in the Trained Bands in a Company of Sir Richard
Browns, apprehended a Walloon in the time of the Fire, at the Nags-Head in
Leaden-hall-Street, with an Instrument like a dark Lanthorn, made (as is
conceived) to lay a Train of Powder, and it was filled with Gunpowder. There
were two more of the same Nation in his company. They being asked to what use
they employed the same Instrument, would give no Account thereof.

Newton Killingworth Esquire informed, That he apprehended a person during the
fire, about whom he found much combustible matter, and certain black things, of
a long figure, which he could not endure to hold in his hand, by reason of
their extreme heat. This Person was so surprised at first, that he would not
answer to any question; But being on his way to White Hall, he acted the part
of a Madman, and so continued while he was with him.

Sir John Maynard, a Member of this House, affirms, That he had some of that
combustible matter in his hands; and though it were in its natural substance,
and unfired, yet the heat of it was scarcely to be endured by the touch.

Mr. Freeman of Southwark Brewer, (whose House was lately fired) informs, That
on the day his House was fired* (about a quarter of an hour before that
happened) a Paper with a Ball of Wildfire, containing near a pound weight
wrapped in it, was found in the Nave of a Wheel, in a Wheelers-yard, where lay
a great quantity of Timber. How his House was fired he knows not; but this he
affirmed to the Committee, That it could not be by accident, because there had
not been any Candle or Fire in the House where the Hay lay, that whole day; and
that the Hay being laid in very dry, and before Midsummer, could not possibly
be set on fire within it self. Moreover he said, That the Hay-loft was on fire
on the top of the House, and that the Fire spread from the one end of the Roof
to another in an instant.

Mr. Richard Harwood informs, That being near the Feathers Tavern by St. Paul's,
upon the fourth of September, he saw something through a Grate in a Celler,
like Wildfire, by the sparkling and spitting of it he could judge it to be no
other; Whereupon he gave notice of it to some Soldiers that were near the
place, who caused it to be quenched.

I had order from the Committee to acquaint you, That we traced several Persons
apprehended upon strong suspicion (during the Fire) to the Guards, but could
not make further discovery of them.

Thus far was the Report: What follows was given in to the Committee, but not
by them Reported to the House at that time..

IN obedience to an Order directed to me, from the Honorable Committee of the
House of Commons, then sitting in the Speakers Chamber, of the second of
October, 1666. I did carry Robert Hubert to St. Katherines Tower by Water, to
let me know the place where the Swedish Ship lay, that brought him and other
Frenchmen from Stockholm, and he brought me to the Dock over against Mr.
Corsellis his Brew House, and did then verify to me, and Mr. Corsellis, That
the Ship lay there, until such time as he with Mr. Peidloe and others did go
and set fire to a House. And this Hubert did then further say, That Mr. Peidloe
did fix two Fireballs to a long Pole, and put them into a Window; and that he
the said Robert Hubert did fire one in the same manner, and put it in at the
same Window. But with all the inquiry and diligence that I could use, I could
neither find nor hear of any such Vessel. And from thence I carried the said
Robert Hubert to Tower Hill, and did then desire him to show me the House that
they did fire, and he said, That it was near the Bridge. So we went along
Thames Street toward the Bridge; but before we came to the Bridge, the said
Robert Hubert said, That the House was up there (pointing with his hand up
Pudding-lane:) So I bid him go to the place, and he went along the Bricks and
Rubbish, and made a stand. Then did I ask one Robert Penny, a Wine-Porter,
which was the Bakers House? and he told me, That was the House where the
aforesaid Robert Hubert stood. So I went to Robert Hubert and stood by him, and
turned my back toward the Bakers House, and demanded of him, which House it
was that he fired, (directing to other Houses contrary to that House) But he
turning himself about said, This was the House (pointing to the Bakers House)
that was first fired. Then by reason of his lameness I set him on a Horse, and
carried him to several other places, but no other place he would acknowledge;
but rode back again to the Bakers House, and said again, That that was the
House (pointing at the Bakers House) And this I do humbly certify to this
Honorable Committee.

By me John Lowman, Keeper of his Majesty's County-Goal for Surry.

SIR,
HEaring that you are Chairman to the Committee for examining the Firing of
London, I thought good to acquaint you with this Information that I have
received.

William Champneys, a Hatband-maker, now living upon Horsly-Down, was upon
Tuesday-morning, September the fourth 1666. in Shoe-Lane, and there met with a
Constable who had apprehended a Frenchman whom he took firing a House there
with Fireballs, and charged the said Champneys to assist him, who carried the
said Frenchman to Salisbury Court, hoping there to have found a Justice; but
finding that Place burning down, returned into Fleet Street, who was presently
called upon by the Commander of the Lifeguard, to know what the matter was:
The Constable told him, he had apprehended a Frenchman firing a House in
Shoe-Lane; he examined the person and committed him to the Guard, and told the
Constable he would secure him, and carried him along with him. The Constable
asked him whether he should go along with him to give in his Evidence: He
replied, That he had done enough, and might go home. But what became of the
Frenchman he knows not.

Your humble Servant, S. G.

In a Letter from Ipswich, directed, For the Honorable Sir Robert Brook, it is
intimated, That about the 30th of August 1666, one of the Constables of Cotton
in Hartsmer Hundred, being about the survey of that Town about Hearth-money,
was told by one Mr. William Thompsan, a Roman Catholic in that Town, That
though times were like to be sad, yet if he found any cause to change his
Religion, he would see he should not want: And further said to him, What will
you say if you hear that London is Burnt?

The Affidavits touching a Frenchman that said, There were Three hundred of
them engaged in Firing the City.
The Informations of Richard Bound of St. Giles in the Fields, Ironmonger;
William Cotes, Samuel Page, Francis Cogny, Edmond Dakins, and Richard Pardoe,
taken the 8th day of September* 1666 by Sir Justinian Lewen, Knight, one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, upon Oath, as
follows.
RIchard Bound says, That upon Tuesday night last about twelve or one of the
clock there was a Frenchman brought by the Watch to this Informants Father's
house, being at the sign of the VVhite-Hart in King Street, taken as a
suspicious person; The said person being questioned by them, Whether he was not
one of those that Fired the City, or had a hand therein, or any privity or
knowledge of any that had designed the same; or words to that effect: The said
person answered a great while in a perverse manner, quite different from the
question. But being further pressed to tell the truth; and being told, that if
he were guilty, it would be the only way to save his Life: He did at first
obstinately deny, that he knew any thing of any Plot. Whereupon a Young man
took the Prisoner aside to the end of the Room, and after some private
discourse between them; they both returned to this Informant and the rest of
the Company, and the said Young man spoke openly to us, in the hearing of the
Prisoner, That the said Frenchman and Prisoner had confessed, there were Three
hundred Frenchmen that were in a Plot or Conspiracy to fire the City. Upon
which this Informant and others spoke to the said Frenchman in these words, or
to the same effect: Well Monsieur, you have done very well to confess what you
have done, and no doubt but you may have your Pardon, if you will confess all
you know of this Plot: And thereupon further asked him, Are there no more than
three hundred persons in the said Plot? He answered, There are no more than
three hundred Persons. Then we inquired who they were, and how he came to know
they were Three huudred? To which he would give no direct Answer, but put it
off with other extravagant discourse. And being asked why he came to St. Giles
Parish (where he was apprehended?) He told a story, that he came from
Islington-Fields, where his Masters Goods were; But the Goods were now removed,
but he could not tell whither; and that his Master bid him go up and down the
Fields, but would not declare upon what occasion, or for what end he was so to
do: And being asked whether there were three hundred persons engaged in this
Design or Plot? He replied, that there were Three hundred engaged in it.

The several Informations of William Cotes of Cow-lane of London Painter; of
Samuel Page of St. Giles in the Fields Weaver, of Edmund Dakins of St. Giles
aforesaid, Bookseller; of Francis Cockney of St. Andrews Holborn; of Richard
Pardoe Victualler, taken upon Oath, etc. tend to the Confirmation of the
foregoing Relation*
An Extract of a Letter from Heydleburgh, in the Palatinate, September the
29th. 1666.
SIR,
YOurs of the sixth current came on Wednesday to me, and brought the ill
tidings of the Burning of London, constantly expected and discoursed of amongst
the Jesuits to my knowledge* for these fi^teen years last past, as to Happen
this Year. In which they do also promise to themselves and others the
Introduction of the public exercise of the Catholic Religion. This Letter was
sent* to Mr. Alton, who lives in New-Gravel-Lane* in Shadwel, who negotiates
the business of the Palatinate, and will produce the Original if there be
occasion.

The Information of John Chishul Schoolmaster in Enfield.
UPon Friday, Aug. 31. Mris. St. George, and her eldest daughter Susanna St.
George, both Popish Recusants, came to visit Mris. Rebecka Eves Widow, at her
house in Enfield; where speaking concerning the Session of Parliament drawing
nigh, Mris St. George told her, That some would hereafter* be called to an
account for a Plot. Being asked for what? She told her in her ear, For Burning
the City. Mris Eves afterward hearing of the firing of London, (and going to a
place where she might behold it) met with Mris. Susanna St George, and (amongst
other discourse) told her how much her Mothers Words, which she spoke the
Friday before, did run in her thoughts; which she repeated to her Daughter, who
made this Reply, That her Mother was very apt to talk, and that she had been
fain to keep her Mother within doors during the Fire, fearing lest she should
talk.

After this (during the Fire) Mris Eves met with Mris Cook, another Popish
Recusant, and of the same Family, to whom she also related Mris St George her
words; who made this return, That she was a worthy woman to keep Counsel.

Also the Lady St. George at Enfield in the Lord of Lincolns house, declared to
Mris Rebecca Eves of the said Town, That within a few days the City of London
would be laid in Ashes. This was spoken about two days before the Fire
happened.

Mris Eves of Enfield her Examination before Mr. Jolliff and Mr. Marvel,
December. 20. 1666. concerning Mris St. George.
MRis Rebecca Eves of Enfield, three or four days or within a week before the
Fire, receiving a Visit in her own house from Mris St George (amongst other
discourses) Mris St. George asked her what News the heard? and, if she knew when
the Parliament sat? Mris Eves replied, she thought shortly. The other asked,
If she heard of any that were to be called in question before the Parliament?
Mris Eves said, About what? Mris St. George said, About a Plot. Mris Eves
asked, what Plot? Mris St. George answered, About Firing the City. Mris Eves
said, I hope God will preserve the City; but people use not to be questioned
before the fact be committed. So the discourse was waved for that time.

At the time of the Fire, Mris Eves went out to look toward the Fire, and
mentioning Mris. St. George; one in the Company replied behind her (but she
cannot certainly fix the person) A prime Woman to keep counsel! After the Fire,
Mris St George her daughter came to Mris Eves, who asked her if she remembered
what her Mother had said? She said, My Mother is such a Woman she will speak
what she thinks. Afterward she said, That she had much ado to keep her Mother
in at the time of the Fire, lest she should speak some things she should be
questioned for.

At the first discourse Mris Eves, her Daughter, and others of her Family were
present. Mr. St. George, his Wife and Family have since left Enfield. They are
all great Papists, and there are many more in the Neighborhood.

A Letter directed and sent by the Post to Mr. Samuel Thurlton in
Leicestershire, from a person unknown, as follows,
Dated October 16. 1666. My Friend,
YOur Presence is now more necessary at London, than where you are, that you
may determine how to dispose of your Estate in Southwark; For it is determined
by Humane Counsel (if not frustrated by Divine Power) that the Suburbs will
shortly be destroyed. Your capacity is large enough to understand. Proceed as
your Genius shall instruct you.

Cave, Cave. Fuge. Vale.
SAturday the first of September 1666, the day before the Fire in London, came
one Vrmstraw from Ireland, with a Letter from thence to one Esquire Holcroft at
East-Ham in Essex (being related to that Family by Marriage) where he supped.
After which he asked the Esquire, if he had heard any thing of the Firing of
London? who answered, No. But Urmstraw said, he would shortly, For it was, or
would be so that night. The Esquire answered, If it were, he hoped it might be
quenched again, as it had been many a time. But Urmstraw answered, No, it would
not be quenched; For it should be said of it, as of Troy, repeating a Latin
Verse, Nunc Seges est ubi Troja fuit, That Now Corn grows where Troy stood.
This discourse was managed pleasantly by him, after which, they went to their
beds. And in the morning this Urmstraw inquires earnestly, Whether they had
heard of the Firing of London that Night? They answered, No: But he prayed them
to send one of the Family out to enquire, and doubtless they would hear of it;
Upon which a messenger was sent, who brought in Word from a man that traveled
upon the Road, that it was on Fire indeed. After Dinner this Urmstraw desires
his horse to be sadled, that he might be gone. The Esquire entreats him to stay
till next morning; But he answered, If I should stay, I should sleep no more
this night than I did the last: Therefore I would go see London before it is
quite burned, For I shall never see it more.

Sunday morning the Fire being begun in London, a person coming from Dep^ford,
when he came to Barnaby-street-end in Southwark, hears a Woman cry out against
a Frenchman for throwing Fireballs, he runs after him, and lays hold of him.
He asked him what Commission he had for so doing? He answered, that his
Commission was in his Chest. The People coming in, they searched him, and found
Fireballs in his pockets. He was delivered to the Guard in Southwark, but heard
of no more.

A Citizen being fired out of his House, had hired a Lodging in Queens street
in Covent Garden; and going up Holborn (there being a Crowd of people) steps in
amongst them, and hears a Woman say, that she had a hand in Firing the City.
The People asked her, whether she were an Anabaptist? She said No: Are you an
Independent? She said No: Are you a Presbyterian? She said No: Are you a Roman
Catholic? to which she would give no answer. The Citizen asked her, but
Mistress had you a hand in Burning the City? She answered, what would you have
me to say? I have confessed it already, and do deserve to Dye for it: this she
said with great trembling, and seemed to be much troubled. The Citizen enquires
for a Constable, the People reply, there was one gone for, But a Gallant comes,
and takes her by the Arm, and leads her away, saying he would have her
examined, and forthwith another Gallant closes with him, and they both carried
her to the Griffin Tavern in Holborn. The Citizen follows them, to see the
result of the business. But, they, with the Master of the House, shut out the
Company (all but the Citizen, supposing him to be one of their own Company) but
asking one the other concerning him, and finding him not of them, put him out
again. Whereupon he goes to the next Company of Soldiers, and inquires for
their Captain, who replied, he was not there, but told him, Yonder is my Lord
Craven, unto whom the Citizen repaired, and acquainted his Lordship, That there
was a Woman apprehended (and rescued by a couple of Gallants) that had
Confessed she had a hand in Burning the City, and was at such a Tavern.
Whereupon the Lord Craven called to a Captain in the street, and ordered him to
go with that Man and apprehend the Woman that he should direct him to;
Whereupon he goes with the Citizen, and takes her with the first Gallant, who
stood up highly in her defense, and carries them both to an Alehouse on the
other side of the way. The Citizen perceiving that nothing would be done with
her, leaves his name with the Captain, and where he might be found, but was
never called for to Justify the words spoken by her.

A Woman standing in White-Chappel with a Company about her, was asked what the
matter was? She said, that she met two young men in that place, and asked them
how it was with the Fire: They answered, Its now almost out, if it can be kept
so, but the Rogues renew it with their Fireballs. Ay says another Woman, Young
men, if you have a heart to it, you may be hired to throw Fireballs too; For I
know where twenty were hired yesterday to throw them. It was asked her, what was
become of the Woman that spoke thus? She answered, That she had apprehended her
and delivered her to the under Beadle of White-Cappel-Parish. The Woman falling
under the accusation (not being able to deny it) there being many Witnesses at
that time that heard it: She was delivered to Sir John Robinson, but heard of
no more.

One from France writes to his Correspondent in London, to know the truth of
what was muttered in Paris, Whether London were laid in Ashes or no. The
Letter being dated a week before the Fire began.

Form Surrey in or near Darkin, a Person in ordinary habit (who was yet
observed to take place of all the Nobility and Gentry among the Papists, seeing
the People of Darkin mourn for the Burning of the City, he spoke slightingly of
it, telling them, They should have something else to trouble themselves for,
and that shortly Darkin should be laid as low as London. VVhereupon the People
made at him, and one Mr. Howard a great Papist rescues him, and sends him away
in his Coach to London. This was desposed before Sir Adam Brown, a Justice of
Peace and a Member of Parliament.

These following Relations (for substance) were delivered to Sir Robert Brooks,
Chairman of the Committee, a little before the Prorogation of the Parliament.
A True Relation made by one of the Grand Jury, at Hicks Hall, at a general
Quarter Sessions, presently after the Fire in London, who was upon Trial of
some of those that fired the City.
THat near West-Smithfield in Cheek-Lane, there was a man taken in the very Act
of firing a House, by the Inhabitants and Neighbors; and carrying him away
through Smithfield, to have him before a Justice for the fact committed, The
Kings Lifeguard perceiving it, made up unto them, and demanded their Prisoner
from them; but they refused to let him go. The Lifeguard men told them, That
he was one of the Kings Servants, and said, We will have him; and thereupon
they drew out their Swords and Pistols, and rescued him out of the peoples
hands by force of Arms.

A Bill of Indictment was brought against him, and two or three Witnesses did
swear unto it, and the Bill was found by the Grand Jury, who did carry it to
the Old Baily, and presented it to the Lord Chief Justice; but it came to no
further Trial, nor was ever seen after at the Old Bailey, so far as this person
upon his best enquiry could ever hear or learn.

Concerning a Housekeeper at So-ho, who fired his own Dwelling House.
FIrst he secured all his Goods in his Garden, and then went in and fired his
House; which when he had done, he endeavored to get away out at his Fore-Door.
A Neighbor demanded of him who had fired his House? He answered, The Devil.
Upon that, his Neighbor bid him stand, or he would run his Halbert into his
guts. His answer was, If you do, there are enough left behind me to do the
Work. Whereupon he was secured, and a Bill of Indictment brought against him,
and about three Witnesses did swear to it, and his Son came-in as a Witness
against him, who was demanded by the Foreman, What he could say as to the
firing of his Fathers House? He said, that his Father did fire it with a
Fire-ball. It was demanded of him, Whether he did fire it above stairs, or
below? He answered, Above stairs. The Bill was likewise found; but the
Petty-Jury being too much influenced and overawed by the L. C. J. K. did not
find him guilty.

A Maid was taken in the Street with two Fireballs in her lap; Some did demand
of her, Where she had them? She said, One of the Kings Lifeguard threw them
into her Lap: She was asked why she had not caused him to be apprehended? She
said, That she knew not what they were. She was indicted for this, and the Bill
found against her, and turned over to the Old-Bayly, but no prosecution upon it.

In the time of the Fire, a Constable took a Frenchman firing a House, seized
on him, and going to a Magistrate with him, met His Royal Highness the Duke of
York, who asked the reason of the tumult: One told him that a Frenchman was
taken firing a House; his Highness called for the man, who speak to him in
French. The Duke asked, Who would attest it? The Constable said, I took him in
the Act, and I will attest it. The Duke took him into his costody, and said, I
will secure him. But he was heard of no more.

On Monday the third of September, there was a Frenchman taken firing a House;
and upon searching of him, Fireballs were found about him. At which time four
of the Lifeguard rescued the Frenchman, and took him away from the People,
after their usual manner in the whole time of the Fire.

One Mr. Belland a Frenchman, living at Maribone, who bought great store of
Pastboard for a considerable time before the fire in the City of London, to the
quantity of twenty gross in one Shop, and much more elsewhere, was asked by a
Citizen, What he did with all that Pastboard? He answered, that he made
Fireworks for the Kings pleasure. The Citizen asked him, What does the King
give you? He replied, Nothing, only I have Respects at Court: The Citizen
said, Take heed, Mr. Belland, you do not expend your estate, and then lose your
Respects at Court, for you are at a great charge. Belland answered, Sir, do you
think this a great matter? I use all this my self; But if you did see all the
great quantities I have made elsewhere, in three several places, three, four,
and five miles off, you would say something. Another time, the Stationer with
whom he dealt for the Pastboard, being at his House in Maribone, and wondering
at the many thousands of Fireworks that lay piled up of several sorts, he
said, Sir, do you wonder at this? if you should see the quantity that I have
made elsewhere by other men, you would WONDER INDEED.

The Sunday before the Fire began, this Belland came to the Shop where he was
wont to buy his Pastboard, but the Stationer being not there, he desired a
Citizen (the Stationers Neighbor) to speak to him, and to let him know that he
had much wronged him in disappointing him of the four gross of Pastbord which
he should have had of him, and said that he should not do his work by the time;
and that if he had it not by Tuesday night, it would come too late, he should
have no occasion for it after that (which was the Tuesday night before the
Fire) Mr. Belland (said the Citizen) what is the reason of your have? Have you
any Show suddenly before the King? At which he blushed, and would give no
answer. Says the Citizen, What kind of Fireworks do you make, only such as
will crack and run? Belland answered, I make of all sorts; some that will burn
and make no crack at all, but will fly up in a pure Body of flame, higher then
the top of Paul's, and Waver in the Air. Says the Citizen, Mr. Belland, when
you make your Show, shall I see it? Yes, said Belland, I promise you, and gave
him his hand upon it. Which Citizen in the time of the Fire, being upon the
Thames in a Boat, saw, to his great amazement, sundry bodies of Fire, burning
above the Fire of the Houses as high again as Paul's, Wavering in the Air,
directly according to Bellands description.

And after the Burning of the City, the Stationer and the other Citizen agreed
to go to Maribone, to speak with this Belland; and by the way met with his two
Maids* and his Boy: And having some knowledge of them, asked for young Mr.
Belland, who told them, he was not at home, neither knew they where he was. But
the Citisens observing that they carried with them Rabbets and Capons ready
dressed, concluded, they were going to him, and told them so. Whereat, they were
surly and bad them go look him, for they would not tell them where he was. Upon
that, the Citizens resolved to follow them, and did, till they came to
Whitehall. The Servants went up stairs and down stairs, on purpose to have lost
them, but could not, for they kept close to them. And at last, one of the Maids
went to a door and knocked, Crying out, They were dogged by two men, that they
could not be rid of; With that young Mr. Belland opened the door saying to one
of the Citizens, Sir your Servant, how do you do? One of them answered, Both I
and many Thousand Families more are the worse for you; for you under pretense
of making Fireworks for the King, have Destroyed a Famous City, and Ruined a
Noble People. To which Belland replies, I make nothing but Innocent Things,
that will do no harm; for which I have a Pattent from the King. But the Citizen
answered, If the King gave you a Patent, it was but for your self: Who
answered, No. Said the Citizen, What made you then to employ so many men, in so
many places? No, said Belland, I set no man to work, neither know I any Man
that makes of them, but my self; though he had often before said otherwise.
While they were thus discoursing, Old Belland looks from under the Hanging,
Sir, said he, I hear you charge my Son with Suspicion of Burning the City, I
pray you speak lower (casting his Eyes about, fearing the Ladies passing by
might hear) and said, My Son does nothing but what he has a Pattent from the
King for, and shall have an Order to Sue any man, that shall accuse him. And he
said, My Son is no Prisoner, but Lodged here to prevent him from the Rage of
the Common People. Well, said the Citizens, You must give an Account for what
you have done. And so they shut the Door upon them. The Citizens went and
enquired whose Lodgings they were* and were told, they belonged to the Lady
Killegrew.

The Information of Thomas Middleton Chyrurgeon, late Inhabitant of St. Brides,
London.
I The said Thomas Middleton do hereby certify, that upon the Sunday in the
afternoon (the day wherein the dreadful fire brake out in Pudding-Lane which
consumed the City) hearing the general outcry, that the City was fired by
Papists and French, I repaired to the top of a Church Steeple near the Three
Cranes in the Vintrey, where my self and several others observed the motion of
the Fire for two or three hours together, and we all took notice, that the Fire
did break forth out of several houses, when the houses which were then burning
were at a good distance from them every way, and more particularly, I saw the
fire break out from the inside of Lawrence-Pountney Steeple, when there was no
fire near it. These and such like Observations begat in me a Persuasion, that
the Fire was maintained by design. Upon Monday I repaired again into the City,
and found as the day before, that the Fire did break forth in fresh houses at a
great distance one from another. And as I was returning home, passing through
Watling-Street by a Tobacco Merchants house, I saw the Master of the house come
down stairs, driving a young fellow before him, saying to him, You Rogue, do
you come to Rob me? what did you do in my Garret? or words to that purpose, and
pushed him out of doors: All which I observed, and he seemed to be a Frenchman:
He was a short black fellow of about 22 years of Age: and as soon as he was out
of the house, he having a loose coat on, in a way of Privacy, Shuffles
something under his Coat, whereupon I laid hold of him, and said, Sirrah, what
have you there? The fellow replied, What is that to you, the Master of the
House knows me: Upon that I asked the Mr. of the House whether he knew the
fellow, he answered, he knew him not. Whereupon I searched the fellow, and
found a horn of powder about him, and as soon as the powder was discovered, he
fell a rubbing his hands, they being all black with powder: He had also about
him, a Book entitled, The Jewish Government. I charged him that he was a
Frenchman, because he spoke broken English; but he denied it, and did much
Vaunt himself. There coming a Constable by with his Staff, I Required him to
carry him to Prison, and I would assist him; So we conveyed him to Old
Bridewel, and by the way, the People were ready to kill him, calling him
French-Rascal. I prayed them to forbear, for Justice would give him his Reward.
I told the fellow he would be hanged; he made slight of it, saying, If I dye my
Soul shall be Saved, but yours shall be Damned. And when he was put into
Bridewel, I desired that he might be secured and none suffered to speak with
him, till he were Examined before a Magistrate, because the Tobacco-Merchants
House was presently Burned upon it. But so it happned on the next day that the
fire came on, and consumed my House and Goods, so that I was forced with my
Family to fly into the Country, and what became of the Fellow I know not, Old
Bridewel being burnt also. And understanding that the Parliament has appointed
a Committee to enquire after the Actors in, and Fomenters of that Terrible
Fire, I thought good to inform the Honorable Committee thereof, that they may
send for the Keeper of the said Bridewel, to know what became of the Fellow,
that he might receive Justice according to his demerit. Thus much I thought my
self obliged to do, as in Duty bound to God and my Country. All which I am
ready to affirm upon Oath, when I shall be thereunto called.

Tho. Midleton.

IN the time of the Fire, near Bridewell, there was a man sadly bemoaning the
great Loss he was like to sustain (the Fire then being within five or six
houses of him) did beseech the people for Gods sake, they having no Goods of
their own in danger, to come in and help him to throw out Trunks, Chests, Beds,
etc. out at a window, having procured two Carts or Wagons to carry them away.
Whereupon I ran into his House with several others, broke down his Windows,
threw out his Goods, and loaded the Carts; and there being some interval of
time before the return of the Carts, and seeing a Room wherein were many Books
and loose Papers (which seemed to be a Library) I went in and took down a Book,
which proved to be Ovids Metamorphosis, and while I was looking upon it, there
came into the same Room an Old Man of low stature, with a white Frock, who
looked also on the Book as it was in my hand; I took him in my mind to be some
Groom come out of a Stable, and thought him to be presumptuously foolish,
supposing such a mean-like old man ignorant of that language in which the Book
was written, it being Latin, but I spoke not to him: In the mean time, there
brake forth a Fire amongst the Papers which were behind us, there being none in
the Room but he and I* Whereupon the rest of the people coming in, cried out,
we had set the Room on fire, and rushing in upon us, put out the fire with
their feet: whereupon I took hold of the Old Man by the buttons under the
throat, and said, How now Father, it must either be you or I must fire these
Papers. There was a small thing of a Black matter, which looked like a piece of
a Link, burning, which questionless set fire on the Papers, but it was
immediately trod out. A multitude of people thronged in; and when I said, How
now Father, and took hold of him, he said, Parce mihi Domine: The people which
did not understand it, cried out, He is a Frenchman, kill him, and with pulling
of him, his Perriwig fell off; then appeared a bald Skull, and under his Frock
he had black Clothes, I think of Bishops Satin, whereupon he seemed to be a
grave Ecclesiastic Person. I had much ado to save him from the people, but at
last brought him before the Duke of York: we found in his pocket a bundle of
Papers closed up with Wax like a Packet, which was delivered to the Duke of
York. I know not what was written in them, neither do I know what Countryman
he was; but methoughts he looked something Jesuitical-like. This I am certain
of, that when I went into the Room there was no fire in it, and it was fired
when there was none but he and I in it, yet I cannot say I saw him do it,
though I cannot but suspect he did it, and the rather, because there were
several houses untouched betwixt this house, and where the fire was coming on,
when the Papers in the Library were thus on fire as I have related. What became
of this fellow after we had delivered him to his Royal Highness the Duke of
York, I have not heard.

John Stewartt.

Thus for concerning the Report and Informations about the Fire: Now follow a
true account of what was represented to another Committee of Parliament,
touching the Insolency of Popish Priests and Jesuits, and the increase of
Popery, etc.

At the Committee appointed to certify Informations touching the Insolency of
Popish Priests and Jesuits, and the Increase of Popery.
Ordered, That these several Informations proceeded on, in pursuance of the
said Power of the Committee, be Reported to the House, in reference to the
Insolency of the Popish Priests and Jesuits, and the increase of Popery.

AS to the Increase of Popery, Mr. Hancock Minister of Chilmoth in Wilts,
Informs, That meeting with one Mr. Thompson, about a month since, coming from
Mass out of Somerset House Chapel, and discoursing to him about his Religion,
asked him if there were many lately turned to it? Thompson answered, Thousands.
And being demanded what encouragement there was to it? Replied, There would be
a Change suddenly.

Report his Carriage at the Committee.
Mr. Thompson being summoned before the Committee, did behave himself very
insolently: They have commanded me to report it. Being asked, Whether he had
not a Shop in Somerset House, where Popish Books and Popish Knacks were sold?
He said, He had; and that his Man sold such Books and Beads, and other things*
And said, there was one Crucifix, no Relics, but wished he had some good
ones. He said that he was a Roman Catholic, and thanks God for it. He said he
was no Priest, but wished he were in a capacity to be one. he said he had not
taken the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, nor would do it. He said he would
take any Oath that any Christian Prince should require, but not the Oath of
Allegiance, intimating some mixture in it. He said he had taken the Oath of
Allegiance to the King of Spain, and was a Subject to the King of Spain.

One Mr. Ash a Minister, late of Capel in Surrey, Informed, That being at
Caufield in Lancashire this last Summer, he saw great resort on Sundays to
Caufield House, the house of a Papist; and asking some that were going thither,
what the occasion was of their resort thither, they told him they were going to
Mass, and that one Mr. Robinson a Priest did say Mass.

Mr. Ash did likewise Inform, That he thought the number of those that went to
Mass to that House on Sundays, was as great as the Protestants that went to the
Parish Church.

One Mr. Welden Deputy Ordinary for Middlesex, did Inform, That in his
accustomed attendance on the Prisoners at Newgate, about the times of
Execution, Romish Priests, and particularly one Mr. Harvy a Jesuit, has
constantly used to resort to the Prison at those times; and does persuade the
Prisoners to become Papists; and that diverse have been altered in their
Religion by them, and turned to Popery.

Mr. Wooton Informs, That on the 16th of October, he went to Newgate, and
meeting with one Howard an Under-Keeper at the door, desired to speak with Mr.
Hubert the Frenchman, who was then condemned. Howard told him that he could not
speak with him yet, for Mr. Harvy the Queen-Mothers Confessor was in private
with him, and said this Harvy used frequently to come to the Prison after
Condemnation; and that where one Prisoner dyed a Protestant, many died Papists.
Mr. Wootton said, that after some stay he saw Mr. Harvy come out from Mr.
Hubert, and then he was admitted to have speech with him.

Mr. Cawdry, Keeper of Newgate, did Inform, That Mr. Harvy the Jesuit did
frequent the Prison at Newgate about the times of Execution, upon the pretense
of the Queens Charity, and did spend much time with the Prisoners in private,
and particularly, did so before the last Execution, night after night. Mr.
Cawdry said likewise of the nine that suffered, eight died Papists, whereof
some he knew were Protestants when they came into the Prison.

It appeared upon several Informations, that Mr. Harvy and other Priests, did
not only resort to Newgate at times of Execution, but likewise to the
White-Lyon in Southwark, and other Places in the Country, and used their
endeavors to pervert Dying Prisoners.

Thomas Barnet, late a Papist, Informed, That when he was a Papist, and
resorted to Gentlemen's Houses in Barkshire that were Papists, there was almost
in every Gentleman's house a Priest, and instanced in diverse private Gentlemen
in that County. Others did inform the like in Surrey.

Mr. Cotman did Inform, That one Mr. Carpenter, late a Preacher at
Colledge-Hill, did in discourse tell Cotman, That the Judgments of God upon
this Kingdom, by the Plague last year, and lately by the Fire in London, were
come upon this Land and People for their forsaking the true Roman Catholic
Religion, and casting off obedience to the Pope. And that if they would return
to the Church of Rome, the Pope would re-build this City at his own charge.
Carpenter said likewise to the said Cotman, That if he would come and hear him
preach the next Sunday at his house in Queen Street, he would give twenty
Reasons to prove, that the Roman Catholic was the true Religion, and his
false; and that our Bible had a thousand falsities in it, And that there was no
true Scripture but at Rome and their Church.

Carpenter at the Committee confessed, That he had formerly taken Orders from
the Church of Rome, to be a Priest, but said he had Renounced that Church and
taken Orders in England.

The next thing is the Information of their Insolency, and I shall begin with
their Scorning and Despising the Bible.

One Thomas Williams an Officer in Sir William Bowyers Regiment Informed, That
one Ashley a Papist, seeing a Woman reading in a Bible, asked her why she read
in that Damnable Presbyterian Bible, and said, a Play Book was as good.

Thomas Barnet of Bynfield in Barkeshire Informed, That being at one Mr. Youngs
house in Bynfield at Batholomew tide last, Mr. Young said to the Brother of
this Thomas, in his hearing, That within two years there should not be a
Protestant in England. Thomas Barnet informed further, That being at Mr.
Doncasters house in Bynfield, One Mr. Thural, Son-in-law to Mr. Doncaster (and
both Papists) said to this Informer (who was then likewise a Papist) The People
take me for a poor fellow, But I shall find a thousand or two thousand pounds,
to raise a party of Horse to make Mr. Hathorns and Mr. Bulcocks fat Guts lie on
the Ground. For it is no more to kill an Heretic, than to kill a Grasshopper:
And that it was happy for him, that he was a Catholic, for by that means, he
shall be one that shall be mounted.

Mr. Linwood a Scrivener in White-Chappel Informed, That about the 20th of
October last, meeting with one Mr. Binks a Papist, and discoursing with him,
Binks told him, That there was amongst the Papists as great a design as ever
was in England; and he thought it would be executed speedily. Being asked how
many Papists there might be about London, he answered, about seven thousand;
and in England, a hundred thousand were Armed.

Mr. Oaks a Physician, dwelling in Shadwel, Informed, That a little after the
Burning of London, one Mr. Carpenter a Minister, came to his house on
Tower-Wharf, and spoke to him to this purpose: I will not say that I am a
Papist; but this I will say, that I had rather dye the death of a Papist, and
that my Soul should be raised with their Resurrection, Than either to be
Presbyterian, Independent or Anabaptist. And I tell you, the Papists have
hitherto been his Majesty's best Fortification. For when Presbyterian,
Independent, and Anabaptists opposed him, then they stood by him and helped
him. And he is now resolved to commit himself into their hands. And take it
upon my word, in a short time, the Papists will lay you as low as that house;
pointing to a house that was demolished; For they are able to raise Forty
thousand men. And I believe the next work will be cutting of Throats. This was
sworn by Mr. Oaks before Sir John Frederick a Member of the House.

Mirian Pilkington being present when the words were spoken does affirm them
all, save only those, That the King is resolved to commit himself into the
Papists hands. Those she does not remember.

Henry Young a Distiller of hot-waters, Informed, That about April, 1661. being
in the Jesuits College in Anwerp, one Powel, an English Jesuit, persuaded
him to turn Roman Catholic; and said, If he intended to save his Life and
Estate he had best to turn so, for within seven years he should see all England
of that Religion. Young replied, That the City of London would never endure it.
Powel answered, That within five or six years they would break the power and
strength of London in pieces; and that they had been contriving it these twenty
years; and that if Young did live, he should see it done. The said Young did
likewise Inform, That shortly after his coming into England, one Thompson and
Copervel, both Papists, did several times say to him, That within five or six
years at the furthest, The Roman Catholic Religion should be all over this
Kingdom.

Jasper Goodwin of Darkin in the County of Surry, Informed, That about a month
since, One Edward Complyn, a Papist, said to him, You must all be Papists
shortly; and that now he was not ashamed to own himself a Roman Catholic, and
to own his Priests; naming two that lived in Darkin, in the Houses of two
Papists. And likewise said, That in twenty four hours Warning, the Roman
Catholics could raise Thirty Thousand Men, as well armed as any Men in
Christendom.

William Warner of Darkin, Informed, That the said Edward Complyn did tell him,
That the Roman Catholics in England could in twenty four hours raise Thirty
thousand Horse and Arms: And upon saying so, pulled out his Crucifix and Beads;
and said, He was not ashamed of his Religion.

John Granger of Darkin, Informed, That about a year since, being in his House
reading the Bible, one Thomas Collins, a Papist, said to him, Are you still a
Church-goer? Had you not better turn Roman Catholic? If you stay till you are
forced, none will abide you. He said further, That there was a Man Beyond Sea
had prophesied, That in Sixty Six, if the King did not settle the Romish
Religion in England, he would be banished out of the Kingdom, and all his
Posterity. And Collins further said, That he being lately turned a Roman
Catholic, would not be a Protestant again for all the World. He wished
Granger again, in the hearing of his Wife (which she affirmed to the Committee)
To turn to his Religion; for all the said Prophecy would come to pass in Sixty
Six.

Robert Holloway of Darkin aforesaid, Informed, That one Stephen Griffen a
Papist said to him, That all the Blood that had been shed in the late Civil
Wars, was nothing to that which would be shed this year in England. Holloway
demanding a Reason for these words (in regard the Kingdom was in Peace and no
likelihood of Trouble) and said, Do you Papists mean to Rise and Cut our
Throats when we are asleep? Griffin answered, That Is no matter, If you live,
you shall See it.

Ferdinando de Massido, a Portugal, and some few years since a Romish Priest,
but turning Protestant, Informed, That one Father Taffe a Jesuit, did the last
year tell him at Paris, That if all England did not return to the Church of
Rome, they should all be destroyed the next year.

Mr. Samuel Cotman of the Middle Temple, Barrister, informed, That about two
years since, one Mr. Jeviston a Popish Priest, and called by the name of Father
Garret, did persuade him to turn Papist, and he should want neither profit nor
preferment. Mr. Cotman objected, That he intended to practice the Law, which he
could not do, if he turned Papist, because he must take the Oath of Supremacy
at his being called to the Bar: and if he were a Papist, he must not take it.
Mr. Jeviston replied, Why not take the Oath? It is an unlawful Oath, and void
ipso facto; and after some pause, said further, First take the Oath, and then I
will Convert you. He said further, The King will not own himself to be Head of
the Church. And said further, You of England that set up the Dutch to destroy
our Religion, shall find that they shall be made use of to pull down Yours, and
consequently their Own at last.

Man Stanley, an Officer to the Duke of Ormond in Ireland, informed, That
coming out of Ireland with one Oriell (who owned himself of the Order of the
Jesuits, and Commissioned from the Pope to be Lord Primate of Ireland and
Archbishop of Armaugh) and falling into some discorse with him, he told him
that there had been a difference betwixt him and some other of the Jesuits in
Ireland, and that part of the occasion was, That one Father Welsh and some
other of the Jesuits there, did dispense with the Papists in Ireland to take
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, by virtue of a Standing Commission from
the Pope which he had to do it, During this Kings Life, and Oriel thought they
ought not to do it by virtue of the Standing Commission, but should take a New
Commission from the Pope every Year to do it. And likewise that he brought
eight Boys out of Ireland, whom he intended to carry for Flanders, to breed up
in some of the Colleges there. And at his taking Shipping to go for Flanders,
He shaked his Foot toward England, terming it Egypt, and said, He would not
return to England, till he came with Fifty Thousand Men at his heels.

A French Merchant, being a Papist, living in St. Michaels-Lane London, writes
in a Letter to his Friend, That a great Number of Men and Arms were ready here,
if those he wrote to were ready there. He being, upon the intercepting of this
Letter, searched, Forty Firelocks were found in his House, ready laden; which
were carried to Fishmongars-Hall, a month or more before the Fire, and he
committed to Prison, but since Released.

A poor Woman retaining to one Belsons house, a Papist, about Darkin in Surry,
was solicited, that she and her Husband would turn Roman Catholics; which if
they did voluntarily Now, they would be accepted of; but if they staid a little
longer, they would be forced whether they would or no; and then they would not
be esteemed. This was deposed before Sir Adam Brown, a Member of Parliament.

A Complaint being made against a Sugar-baker at Fox-Hall; his House was
searched by Lieut. Col. Luntly, who found there several Guns, with such Locks,
as no Englishman (who was at the taking of them) could discharge; together with
Brass-Blunderbusses and Fireworks, of a very furious and burning nature. Trial
being made of a small part of them, the materials were discerned to be Sulphur,
Aquavitae and Gunpowder, whatever else.

In a Letter to Sir John Frederick and Mr. Nathaniel Heron, from Horsham in
Sussex, the 8th of September 1666. Subscribed Henry Chowne. Wherein is
mentioned, that the said Henry Chowne had thoughts to come to London that week,
but that they were in Distraction there concerning the Papists, fearing they
would show themselves all that day: And that he had been to search a Papists
House within six miles of that place. He with another Justice of Peace met the
Gentleman's Brother (who is a Priest) going to London, whom they searched* and
found a Letter about him which he had received that morning from his Sister
twenty miles off from him, Wherein is expressed, That a great Business is in
hand, not to be committed to Paper, as the Times be.

Your Committee have thought fit to give no Opinion upon these Informations;
but leave the matter of Fact to your Judgments.

I am commanded to tell you, That your Committee have several other things of
this nature under their Inquiry.

AS a further Instance of the Audacious and Insolent behavior of these Popish
Recusants, take the following Copy of Verses, made, and then scattered abroad
by some of their Party, in Westminster Hall, and several other places about the
City, and elsewhere in the Kingdom.

COver la feu, ye Hugonots, I E 7 5


That have so branded us with Plots,
And henceforth no more Bonfires make,
Till ye arrive the Stygean Lake.
For down ye must ye Heretics,
For all your hopes in Sixty Six.
The hand against you is so steady,
Your Bsbylon is fallen already.
And if you will avoid that happ,
Return into your Mothers lap;
The Devil a Mercy is for those,
That Holy Mother Church oppose.
Let not your Clergy you betray;
Great eyes are open, and see the way.
Return in time, if you will save
Your Souls, your Lives, or ought you have.
And if you live till Sixty Seven,
Confess you had fair Warning given.
Then see in time, or ay be blind,
Short time will show you what is behind.
Dated the 5th day of November, in the year 1666. and the first year of the
Restoration of the Church of Rome in England.
NOt long after the Burning of London, Mr. Brook Bridges, a young Gentleman of
the Temple, as he was going to attend Divine Service in the Temple-Church, in a
Pew there found this following Paper, which immediately, either by himself or a
Relation of his, was delivered to Sir William Morris, one of his Majesty's
principal Secretaries of State; the Contents of the Paper are as follows.

A Warning to Protestants.
I* Who have been a Papist from my infancy, till of late; and in Zeal for their
horrid Principles, had too great a share in the Firing of the City; And did
intend to do further mischief to the Protestants (of which I am now, and ever
shall be a Member) do upon abhorrency of that Villainy, and Religion that has
moved me to it, declare to all Protestants the Approach of their Sudden Ruin,
that it may be prevented, if it be not too late.

When I, together with other Papists, both French, Irish and English, fired the
City; others were employed to massacre the Protestants, we thinking thereby to
destroy the Heads of your Religion; but the Massacre was disappointed by the
Fear of him who was the chief Agent in this Villainy. And the Fire not having
done all its Work, they have often endeavored to fire the remaining part. They
intend likewise to land the French upon you: To whose Assistance they all
intend to come, and for that purpose are stored with Arms: And have so far
deceived the King, that they have the Command of most part of the Army and the
Seaports. The French intend to land at Dover, that Garrison being most Papists:
And the Papists in England have express Command from Rome, to hasten their
business before the next Parliament, and to dispatch. Therefore as you love
your Lives and Fortunes, prevent your Ruin, by removing all the Papists in
England, especially Colonel Leg from the Tower, and the Lord Douglass, and all
his Adherents and Soldiers, from Dover, and by Disarming all Papists. I have
such an abhorrency, that I would willingly undergo any Punishment for it, and
declare my self openly, were I not assured that I could do you more good in
concealing my Name for the present. Delay not from following these Directions
as you love your Lives; And be not deceived by any Pretenses whatsoever.

FINIS.

