A True and Exact ACCOUNT Of all the Ceremonies observed by the Church of Rome,
At the opening, during the Progress, and at the Conclusion of the next
Approaching JUBILEE, In the Year 1700.
Taken and Translated into English from the Latin Original. Printed at ROME, by
Order from the Pope.

AT the approach of the Jubilee, the Popes of Rome cause the Bull of the
Jubilee to be published with a great deal of Pomp and Magnificence. This
Ceremony is always performed on Ascension-day, in the Great Portal of St.
Peter's Church, in the Vatican; where for this purpose are placed two Rich
Chairs, from whence the Ministers chosen by his Holiness, read with a very loud
and distinct Voice, the Brief or Bull of the Jubilee in Italian: After this
Publication four several Copies of the said Bull are affixed to the East,
South, West and North Corners of the City of Rome; as it was practiced in Pope
Urban VIII. time, who in the year 1624, upon Ascension-day, which then fell
upon the 16 May, appeared in Person in the Church of St. Peter's, and commanded
Signior Don Austin Durando to read the beforementioned Brief in the presence of
some of the Clerks of the Apostolic Chamber, and some other Officers, but
neither any of the Cardinals nor of the Canons of St. Peter assisted at the
Ceremony. The Sunday next following the said Bull was likewise published in the
same manner in the other Churches, where, according to Ancient Custom, they are
used to open the Holy Gate.

This being done, Briefs or Letters are dispatched to all the Patriarchs,
Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, and other Superiors, of all the Provinces and
Kingdoms, to notify the Celebration of the Jubilee, and to exhort the Prelates
to be more than ordinary Zealous in their Duty to instruct, either themselves
or by their Ministers, the Flocks committed to their Care, by which, means they
may qualify themselves to obtain the happy effects of the appoaching Jubilee;
Just as the Jubilee instituted by Moses, according to Gods order, was published
before the seventh Month under the sound of Trumpets.

The Solemnity of the Jubilee it self begins upon Christmass-Eve, just before
the Vespers, by a Ceremony, which deserves particularly to be taken Notice of,
which is the opening of the Holy Gate. For the better understanding of which,
it is to be known, that this Holy Gate is one of the Gates of St. Peter's
Church in the Vatican, which is always shut, nay even brick'd up during the
interval betwixt the Jubilees, which always begins by the opening of this Gate.

On the 24 day therefore of December, which is the Eve of the Nativity of
Christ, all the Gates of these four Churches, where there are any Holy Gates,
are shut up by his Holiness's order, so that no body can pass through, till such
time they are opened with the accustomed Ceremonies.

After dinner, about the time of the Vespers of this great Eve, a most Solemn
Procession is made; at which assist the Ambassadors of Foreign Princes, then
residing in Rome, the Magistrates of the City, all the Penitentiaries and
Prelates abiding at Rome all the Chapters, Fraternities, the Roman Clergy, the
College of Cardinals, and the Sovereign Pontife in person; each according to
his Rank and Quality. Thus they go in procession with a great Cross before
them, to the Chapel of the Apostolic Palace, where the whole Company being
entered, the Holy Father, with all there present, fall upon their Knees before
the Sacrament; In the mean time that many Officers are employed in lighting
flambeaus for the Cardinals to hold, as a sign of Joy. Then the Pope throws
some Incense upon a Chaving-dish, with a most profound Reverence before the
Altar; after which, he begins the Hymn; Veni Creator Spiritus, which is
continued to the end by a Consort of Music, and Sung distinctly, to represent
the Holy Fathers in Limbo. From thence, this Procession goes on in the same
Order as before, to St Peter's Church, being followed by the Holy Father in
person, who is carried in a Chair to the Holy Gate, which, as well as all the
rest, is kept close shut up. Every body having taken his place, the Holy Father
gets out of his Chair, and with a lighted Wax-taper in his hand, walks up three
steps to another Chair, placed for that purpose, just by the Holy Gate. After
he has reposed a little, he arises, and turning himself toward the Holy Gate,
he knocks with a Silver Hammer on the Holy Gate, which is to be opened, and
Sings likewise three several times, the following Verses, unto which the
Musicians, who Compose the Chorus, answer at each time.

V. Aperite mihi portas Justitiae.


V. Open unto me the Gates of Justice.


R. Ingressus in eas confitebor Domino.


R. When I am entered I will praise the Lord.


V. Introibo in Domum tuam Domine.


V. I will enter, O Lord, into the House.


R. Adorabo ad Templum Sanctum tuum, in timore tuo.


R. I will adore thee in the fear in the Temple.


V. Aperite portas, quoniam nobiscum Deus.


V Open the Gates, because the Lord is with us.


R. Quia fecit Viriutem in Israel.


R. Because he has made known his strength in Israel.




Then the Pope sits down in his Chair again; and says:

V. Domine exaudi orationem meam.


V. Lord, hear me Prayer.


R. Et Clamor meus ad te veniat.


R. Let my cry reach the Ears, O. Lord.




At the same instant that the Pope goes from the Holy Gate toward his Chair,
the Masons begin to demolish the Wall wherewith the Holy Gate had been brick'd
up, and as they are carrying off the Materials, the Pope goes on thus;

V. Dominus vobiscum.


V. The Lord be with us.


R. Et cum Spirim tuo.


R. And with his Holy Spirit.




OREMUS. Actiones nostras quod sumus Domine, etc.

This Prayer being done, the Chorus Sings the Psalm; Jubilate Deo omnis terra,
servite Deo in laetitia, etc.

During which time, the People which crowd up as near as they can to the
Railes, and the Penitentiaries in their Sacerdotal Vestments, wash the Head
piece, Posts, and the Threshold; and in short, the whole Holy Gate with Holy
Water: Which being done, the Pope, as he is approaching to enter the Holy Gate,
says the following Verses, and is answered by the Chorus.

V. Huic dies quam fecit Dominus.


V. This is the day the Lord has given us.


R. Exultemus, and letemur in ea.


R. Let us rejoice in it.


V. Beatus populus tuus, Domine.


V. Happy is thy People, O Lord.


R. Quid facit Jubilationem.


R. Which enjoys this Jublee.


V. Huc est porta Domini.


V. This is the Gate of the Lord.


R. Justi intrabunt per eam.


R. The righteous are to Enter it.


V. Domine exaudi orationem meam.


V. O Lord hear my Prayer.


R. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.


R. And set out cres reach thy Ear.


V. Dominus vobiscum;


V. The Lord be with you.


R. Et cum Spiritu tuo.


R. And with the Spirit.




Let us Pray.

O Lord, who by thy Servant Moses, did institute among the Children of Israel
the Jubilee and year of Remission: grant through thy Goodness, to us who have the
honor to be called thy Servants, to commence, happily this present Jubilee,
ordained by thy Authority; and in which it has been thy will to set open to thy
People in a most solemn manner this Gate, through which to enter into thy Temple,
to Offer their Prayers in the presence of thy Divine Majesty; that thereby
having obtained plenary and absolute Remission of all our Sins, we may, at the
day of our departure out of this World, be conducted through thy Mercy, to the
enjoyment of the Heavenly Glory. Through Jesus Christ. Amen.

This Prayer being ended, a Cross is given into the Popes hand, who kneeling
down in the Holy Gate, Sings the Te Deum Laudamus, etc. And afterward, as he
is entering through the Gate, the Chorus go on singing, Te Dominum. He is no
sooner entered through the Gate into the Body of the Church, but the Chair-men
Clothed in Red, attending for that purpose, take him up in a Chair, and carry
him streight-ways to the Great Altar of the Church of St. Peter; where being
set down, he arises out of the Chair, and after some time spent in Prayers
before the Holy Sacrament, he mounts a Throne, erected on purpose for this use,
and begins the Vespers, which according to custom are Sung for the Feast of the
Nativity of our Savior.

On the same day, and at the same hour, His Holiness deputes three Cardinal
Legates, to go and open the other Holy Gates of the Churches, to wit: That of
St. Paul, that of St John de Lateran, and of St. Maria Majori, which is
performed with the same Ceremonies and Prayers as has been mentioned just now.
This Choice falls commonly upon two Archbishops and the Dean, who go from
thence with a most Magnificent Cavalcade, to perform this Function, which is
like a Proclamation to all the Christian World, That the Treasure of the Church
is set open, and distinguishes the true Catholics from the Heretics and Jews.
It must be confessed that the first Origin, as well as the true Creation which
gave birth to this solemn Ceremony, is some what obscure; but out of the Bull
of Pope Alexander VI. which begins Inter Curas, etc. it is evident, that the
same has been practiced for many Ages passed in the Church, and which has been
mentioned by St. Anthony in his Chronicle, as a very Ancient Ceremony. Some
derive this opening of the Holy Gate from a Custom practiced in the primitive
Church, where those who had incurred the Censure of the Church, by reason of
some Enormous Crimes and Scandals, were enjoined to perform certain public
Penances, and were excluded from the entrance of the Church on Shrove-Tuesday,
by shutting the doors upon them; but on the Holy-Thursday, after a General
Absolution given to all the penitent Sinners there, by opening of the Gates,
readmitted and received into the Bosom of the Church; if they had accomplished
the enjoined penance; if not, the door was shut against them again till the
next following year, and sometimes for their whole lifetime, The Church Oil
therefore, having from Ancient Times been the place assigned to those who
underwent the Church Penance during the time of the Chuch Office, this has
introduced the Custom of opening the Holy Gate at the beginning of the Jubilee.

But there being four several Churches, which each have a Holy Gate, this has
occasioned some dispute, which of them ought to have the precedence in the
performance of this Ceremony. The Church of St. John de Leteran, is both the
first in Rank, and enjoys some prerogatives before all the other Churches in
the City of Rome, as appears by the Constitutions of Pope Gregory XI. and Pope
Pius V. However when any of these Pontifical Functions, which have a more
strict Relation to the Popes Authority, Dignity and Majesty, are to be
performed with the utmost Splendour; such as the Canonization of Saints, the
Coronations and Benedictions of Kings, the Church of St. Peter has always had
the preference given her before all the rest. And it is upon the same score,
that this Church claims the preference in this most just, Ceremony, both as to
the time and other Circumstances; The Holy Gate of St. Peter's Church being the
first that is opened by the Popes own hands. It has also been called in
question by some, whether any other Person besides the Pope himself has any
Authority to open the Holy Gate; where it is to be observed, that in Case the
Jubilee has already been published before by the deceased Pope, and the
Cardinals are not entered into the Conclave in order to proceed to the Election
of a new Pope, it belongs to the Cardinal d' Ostia, Dean of the Church, to open
the first Holy Gate in the Popes stead, as then their Cardinals represent the
Popes Person when they open the Holy Gates of the other three Churches; The
reason is, that, because this Ceremony is not Essential, but only an accidental
Part of the Jubilee, which might be Celebrated without it, the same is not
thought fit to be omitted, for fear of giving scandal to some, who might
perhaps look upon the Jubilee as imperfect without it. But many are of opinion,
that if thee Jubilee be not promulgated before the Death of the Sovereign
Pontife, the same cannot be published, and consequently the Holy Gate is not to
be opened; The Authority of giving plenary Indulgence to the whole Church,
belonging only to the Pope and the General Councils. However, it is to be
observed, that this Jubilee being established every XXV Years, by many
preceding Popes, especially by Paul II. Sixtus IV. Alexander VI. Julius III.
Gregory XIII. and Clement VIII. this plenary Indulgence, I say, being so often
published, confirmed, approved and renewed by their Authority, there is no
question, but that the Cardinals, in Case of a vacancy of the Chair may supply
the Popes place, and consequently also open the Holy Gate; and the Dean of the
Church may send his circular Matters throughout Christendom, to notify that the
Jubilee, Established and Confirmed by the Authority of so many preceding Popes,
being near at hand, they ought to pepare themselves to receive the Benefit of
it, and to invite them to undertake this Holy Pilgrimage, this being not to be
accounted a new grant of Indulgences, but only a publication of what was
granted before by a Legal Authority. Thus Pope Julius III. in his constitution;
si Pastores. etc. declares, that without any further publication, the Jubilee
begins with the Feast of the Nativity of Christ in the Holy Year: And, whereas
his Exaltation to the Papal Dignity, did not happen till after Advent, in the
Year 1549, when the Holy Year was actually begun, he published a Bull, dated
the 23 day of February 1650, in the first year of his Pontificate, in which he
declares, that the Jubilee had actually commenced with the next preceding Feast
of the Nativity of our Savior.

But having entertained you sufficiently with the Holy Gates, and the
Ceremonies belonging to them, we must also take a short view of those
Transactions which are performed in the City of Rome, to obtain the happy end
of the Jubilee. As those who hope to reap the fruits of a plenary Indulgence,
must qualify themselves for it by many acts of Charity, a true penitence and
other Good Works, so, I must needs tire the Readers Patience, if I should
pretend to give an exact account of those who flock from all Parts to Rome, to
make their Confessions, and appear before the highest Tribunal of Penitence; It
will suffice to say, that both day and night all the Churches of that great
City, are filled up with Innumerable Multitude of People, who offer up their
Prayers in the presence of God Almighty. I may say it without Vanity, that
there is no Street, no not as much as a By-Lane in this vast City, which being
formerly the Capital Empire of the World, is now the Capital of Gods Kingdom
upon Earth, where you may not see most evident Marks of an unfeigned Piety;
Here you meet those, who make it their whole business to give Alms to the Poor,
with so much Profession, that you cannot imagine otherwise, but that they are
giving away all they have, the better to follow Christ; Others you may observe
to bestow most of their time and substance in giving a good reception to those
Pilgrims, who come from all the Corners of Christendom, to partake of the happy
Effects of the Jubilee. You will meet as well in the Streets as in the Churches
vast numbers of both Sexes, who touched with remorse for their past Crimes,
appear in miserable Dress, and a most abjected Posture; Some are clad in long
course Gowns, others covered only with Sackcloth, some cover their Hands and
Faces with Ashes, others knock their Breasts with their Fists; Many there are
who tear the Flesh all over their Bodies by the violence of the Discipline; and
to be short, there is scarce any kind of Mortification invented to give
Satisfaction to, and appease Gods Anger, which you see not put in Practice at
that time. Neither must you Imagine, that those Exercises are performed by
private Persons only; No, you will see whole Fraternities and Congregations,
composed of a considerable Number, who all animated by the same Spirit, strive
to excite one another to the Performance of them, by their mutual Examples.
Thus you may behold entire Chapters and Colleges of Canons, and other
Societies, enter in procession the City of Rome; nay whose Parishes, with their
Curates at the Head of them, who leave their Habitations to pay their Adoration
to the Lord and His Son Jesus Christ in that Church, where, as it may be said,
God has erected his Tabernacle, and honored it with his particular protection,
and which claims a prerogative before others by the death of the Chief of the
Apostles and his Fellow Sufferer. With this kind of People you see all the
Streets and other public Places of this vast City crowded, going in Procession
from one Church to the other, some singing, others fighting and shedding Tears.
For whilst some are busy in singing the Litanies and Psalms appointed for that
purpose, others offer their Prayers with their Eyes fastened to the Ground, and
when they Approach the Churches, especially that of St. Peter, you may see many
of them crawling upon the Ground to the foot of the Altar, where they continue
for a considerable time in saying their Prayers.

These and such like Devotions are practiced at Rome throughout the course of
the whole Jubilee; when a few days before Christmas-Eve, (the last day of the
Holy Year) Proclamation is made, that upon the next Eve of the Nativity of
Christ, His Holiness intends to shut up the Holy Gate of the Church of the
Vatican; which day being come, a Procession is made from the Apostolic
Palace, to St. Peter's Church in the same manner, as has been mentioned
before; and, after some time spent in Prayers before the Holy Sacrament, the
Vespers are Sung, and three Cardinals deputed to shut up the Holy Gates of the
three other Churches. No sooner have these three Prelates and their Company
received the Benediction from His Holiness, and are Marching in a most splendid
Cavalcade to perform this Function, but the Pope and Cardinals, who assist at
the Ceremony, being Presented with lighted Wax Candles, they March in good
Order, with the Cross before them, toward the Holy Gate, which is to be shut
up; the Pope being carried after them in a Chair under a Canopy, and as they
pass by their Chapel where the Holy Sacrament of the Altar is deposited, he
offers up his Thanks to God for the happy Conclusion of the Holy Year; Which
done, the Holy Pontife begins the Anthem, cum Jucunditate; Whilst the Chorus is
singing this Anthem or Psalm, nisi Dominus edisicaverit domum, the Procession
moves from and toward the Holy Gate, where, after some Prayers, the Pope
standing under his Canopy, turns his face to the Holy Gate, without his Mitre,
and a Wax Candle in his Hand, and thus imparts his Benediction to the
Materials, which are ready at hand to close up the Holy Gate, in the following
Words:

V. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.


V. Our help is in the Lord.


R. Qui fecit calum and terram.


R. Who has made Heaven and Earth.


V. Sit nomen Domini benedictum.


V. The name of the Lord be praised.


R. Ex hoc nunc, and usque in seculum.


R. Now and for ever.


V. Lapidem quem reprobaverunt artifices.


V. The stone which was refused by the artificers.


R. Hic factus est in caput anguli.


R. Is now become the Corner Stone.


V. Domine exaudi orationem meum.


V. O Lord hear my Prayer.


R. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.


R. And let my Cries reach thy Ear.


V. Dominus vobiscum.


V. The Lord be with you.


R. Et cum spiritu tuo.


R. And with thy Spirit.




Let us Pray.

Great God, who protects the highest, that is in the middle and the lowest, who
Sanctifiest thy Creatures, bless those thy Creatures, the Stones, the Mortar
and Sand; Through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

After which, the High Pontife, the Clergy, and all the rest that assist at the
Ceremony, come out through the Holy Gate, just before it is going to be closed
up; and the Holy Father besprinckles the Materials with Holy Water and some
Incense, and putting again his Mitre upon his Head, with Linen Cloth round his
middle, he gives thereby to understand, that he professes himself to be the
Servant of the true Servants of God, and, that after the Example of our Lord
Jesus Christ, he is not exalted to the Papal Dignity, and put in St. Peter's
Chair to be served, but to serve others. In this Posture the Grand Penitentiary
presents to him a Silver Trowel guilt, wherewith he takes up three several
times some Mortar out of a Basket carried by the Master of the Ceremonies,
which Mortar he spreads and Plasters all along the lower part, upon the
Threshold of the Holy Gate; according to the Vision of the Prophet Amos, which
saw the Lord with a Masons Trowel in his hands. The Threshold being thus
covered all over with the Mortar, the Pope throws upon it both to the right and
the left, as well as in the middle, several Medals of Gold and Silver,
representing the Triumphant Jerusalem, The Walls of which are described,
Apocal, c. 21. to be built of Precious Stones. The Pope after this covers the
Mortar and Medals with three Square Stones, and whilst he is busy in
performing this Function, says, with a low but intilligible Voice, these
following words.

In fide and virtute Jesu Christi Dei vivi, qui Apostolorum Principi dixit; Tu
es Petrus, and per hanc Petram edificabo Exclesiam meam, ca^^^amas lapidem
primarium, ad Claudendam ad buc portam sanctam ipso tantum modo, Jubilei anno
referandam, In nomine Patris, etc. In the Faith and by the Authority of Jesus
Christ, the only Son of the living God, who did say to the Chief of the
Apostles, thou be Peter, and up in this Rock I will found my Church, we lay
this last Stone toward the closing of the Holy Gate, which is not to be opened
again till the next Jubilee. In the Name of God the Father, etc.

After the Pope has fastened these three Square Stones with Mortar, and the
Master Mason has drawn his Line, the Grand Penetentiary with a Trowel in his
hand, lays likewise a Stone upon those laid before by the Pope, being assisted
by the other Penitentiaries there present, to convince the World that they are
the Popes Co-adjutors, in the Administration of the Sacrament of Penitence. For
each of them in his due order, lays hand to the Work, under the direction of
his Holiness, and raise the Wall, which is to close up the Holy Gate, to a
considerable height, whilst the Chorus Sings the Hymn: Coelestis urbs
Jerusalem, etc. Which being ended, the Sovereign Pontife washes his hands, and
says these following words.

V. Salvum fac populum tuum Domine.


V. Lord save the People.


R. Et benedic haereditati tua.


R. And bless thy inheritance.


V. Fiat misericordia tua Domine super nos.


V. Let thy Mercy appear unto us.


R. Quem admodum speravimus in te.


R. According as we have put our hoped in thee.


V. Mitte nobis Domine auxilium de Sancto.


V. Lord send us thy help from thy Sanctuary.


R. Et de Sion tuerenos.


R. And defend us from Sion.


V. Domine exaudi orationem meam.


V. O Lord hear my Prayer.


R. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.


R. And let my cry reach thy Ears.


V. Dominus vobiscum.


V. The Lord be with you.


R. Et cum spiritu tuo.


R. And with the Holy Spirit.




OREMUS.

Deus qui in omni loco dominationis tua clemens and benignus existi exaudi nos
quae sumus, and praesta, ut inviolabilis per maneat hujus loci sanctificatio,
and beneficia tui muneris in hoc Jubileo Anno, Vniversitas fidelium, impetresse
litetur; Per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, etc.

Let us Pray.

Great God, who at all times and at all places gives us innumerable Proofs of
thy Mercy and Goodness; hearken unto our Prayers, and grant that this Place may
always be Sanctified before thee, and that all faithful Christians may rejoice
in having been partakers of thy Mercies in this Jubilee. Through our Lord Jesus
Christ, etc.

This Prayer being ended, the Holy Father sets himself upon the Throne, and
whilst twelve Bricklars. to wit; Six on the Right, and as many on the Left
hand, are busy in closing up, and raising the Wall to the top of the Holy
Gate, the Chorus Sings: Lauda Jerusalem Dominum Laetatus sum in his, etc. and
other such like Psalms. The Wall being finished by the Masons, the High Pontife
concludes the whole Ceremony by imparting his Benediction, with a Plenary
Indulgence of the Jubilee to all there present, who are not sparing on their
side in their Acclamations of Joy, and making ten thousand Vows for the
Prosperity and Preservation of His Holiness. Which being done, the Te Deum is
Sung for a Thanksgiving for the many Mercies received by the People in this
Jubilee, who thus well satisfied and filled with Spiritual Joy, return to their
respective homes, as the Holy Father retreats to the Apostolic Palace.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by D. Edwards in Fetter-Lans. 1699.

Price two pence.


