A True and Faithful ACCOUNT Of an Entire and Absolute VICTORY OVER The French
FLEET IN THE WEST INDIES, BY Two East India Ships, And other VESSELS, at
BARBADOS, Made into MEN of WAR. WITH The Number of those Taken and Sunk in the
Engagement, together with the Taking, Sacking, and Burning several of the
French Plantations in those parts.
YEsterdays Post gives Advice from Bristol, that two days before there was
arrived a small Vessel which came directly from the Island of Nevis in the
West Indies, leaving the same the beginning of the last Month, and Informs,
That about 12 or 14 Sail of French Vessels, formed into Men of War, had,
besides the taking of St. Christophers, Infested the Coast greatly, obstructing
the Traffic and Commerce of the English Plantations, Alarming all the Islands
with making a Descent, whereby they were forced ^o stand continually upon their
Guards, and in several places beat them off upon their Attempts.

'Twas greatly feared that they would have performed some considerabl^
Detriment upon Nevis, and several other lesser Islands, before Assistanc^ could
come to them from England: But it so Fortunately happened that ^ w^ of the
East India Company's Ships, Charles II. and the London, Vessels o^ considerable
Burden, being at Sancta Hellena, in their Return to England from India, and
there hearing of the War between England and France, and therefore considering
how dangerous it might be to make a safe passage t^ London, since they also
understood that the Kingdom of Ireland, by which they usually Sailed, was in
possession of the French, they took a Resolution to make to the Island of
Barbados, where they were joyfully received, i^ hopes to find a Convoy there,
or stay till some of His Majesty's Ships arrived to accompany them to England.

In the Interim, the Noise of the French continuing on the Coast, the Assembly
of the Island met, and Representing to Captain Andrews, and the other Commander
of the East India Ships, how serviceable it would be both to King and Country,
to unlade their Effects, converting their Ships into Men of War, and stand
after the French, promising at the same time, that they would afford all
possible Assistance of Men, and other Shipping; That they would make it their
utmost Endeavor so to represent the Matter t^ the King, and Company, that they
doubted not but that they should applau^ and confirm the Undertaking.

Accordingly the two Captains were prevailed upon to Unfreight their Ships, and
become Men of War; and being joined by Seven other smalle^ Vessels, Equipped
out by the Plantations, they put to Sea with 2300 Land men on Board, went in
search after the French Fleet, whom they found nea^ St. Christophers, and
Attacked them, being about the like Number, and in less than two hours time
Boarded, and took their Admiral, a Ship of 3^ Guns, and another of 30, sinking
two others of the Fleet: And had undoubtedly destroyed the whole, had they not
run under the Cannon of the Fort.

After which, our Fleet made a Descent upon St. Christophers, which the French
lately took from the English, drove all the People to the Woods, killing those
that made Resistance, sacked and destroyed the greatest pa^ thereof, and after
three days returned to their Ships, laden with great Plunder and Riches.

The same Account adds, That this Victorious Fleet of Barbadians, t^ the great
Honor and Reputation of the Island, being flushed with Success was resolved to
make Efforts on other the French Plantations, the like o^ which they did to
Martinico, Guadalupa, etc. And it is said they have acquired near 100000 l. of
Merchandises, and Things of Value from their En^ my, returning to Barbados,
laden with Victory and Spoil, to the great Encouragement and Preservation of
all the English Plantations, and Terro^ and Afrightment to the French.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for J. C. near Fleet-Bridg. 1690.


