A True and Faithful Account of the Present State and Condition Of the KINGDOM
of IRELAND:
Together with the in^ire Defeat of a Body of Irish under the Command of
Colonel Sarsfield, by a detached Party of 1200 Horse and 300 Dragoons, by
Lieut. Genesis Scravenmore, within 14 Miles of the City of Cork.

HIs Majesty, King William, having as well by his Sage as Valorous Conduct of
Affairs, in the Kingdom of Ireland, reduced his Rebellious Subjects and Gallick
Enemies to such a Degree and low Estate of Fortune, as that his Royal Presence
was not any longer indispensiblly necessary to remain in that Kingdom, having
put the Military and Civil Government in such Loyal and Experienced Hands, as
it is not to be doubted would complete the Conquest of the remainder Part of
that Country, came for England, where he was received with the loud and
inexpressible Acclamations and Rejoyceings of his People, for his Safe and
Happy Return; which were in a manner no sooner ended, but a succession of Glad
Tidings from Ireland reverberates and echoes a fresh the continued Success of
his Majesty's Arms in all Quarters where they approach.

The Brave Col. Woosley, with his unbeaten Inn is killing Troops, has
signalized in diverse Places of late against the Irish Raperies, in all which
Rencounters he has given them a Defeat, killing a great many on the Spot,
executing some of the Ringleaders whom he has made Prisoners, that the very
Terror of his Name is now sufficient to drive them out of all those Parts,
without making any farther Pursuit after them; which the last Letters, bearing
date the 16th and 19th of this instant September signifies; which among other
things assures: That this Valient and Bugbearing Colonel advanced, without the
least Molestation or Impediment by the Irish, under the very Walls of Athlone,
driving away all the Cattle the Garrison had got under their Shelter, without
having any thing of Courage to sally out to obstruct his Design.

(...) The Right Honorable the Lord Sidney and Thomas Conisby Esquire had been
sworn Lords Justices of, and entered upon the Administration of the Government;
whereupon the Castle was sitting up for their Reception: And that they had
already published two Proclamations, the one against impressing of Seamen, the
other against Carriage-Horses, by reason it obstructed the Country from
bringing Provision to the Markets. And that they had caused the Prisoners to be
removed from Dublin to Drogheda.

And we are assured by some Persons that have deserted Limerick and Gallway,
That the French in both these Garrisons; dispairing of Success, have
precipitately lest and abandoned those Defenses, making their Way on the 5th
Instant on Board of some Vessels for France: And that Monsieur Boisteau the
late Governor of Limerick with the Count de Lazune, the Dukes of Berwick and
Tyrcennell followed some Days after, leaving one Thomas Hamilton Governor of
Limerick, with only some remains of Irish Forces; Who finding themselves in a
manner deserted, and destitute of Money, Clothes, Shoes, and many other
Necessaries, have deputed an Officer, clubing about for some Money to bear his
Charges, to repair to the French Court, and to signify to that King the
extreme Want they must undergo, it being impossible for them to make any
farther Resistance unless powerfully assisted by his Most Christian Majesty;
especially since they have been advertised, That they are like suddenly to be
attaqued by Sea and Land.

And further more the Letters give an Account, That the Lord Scravenmore, being
detached from his Majesty's Camp at Tipperary with 1200 Horse, 300 Dragoons,
and 2 Companies of Danish Foot, into the County of Cork, whether to favor the
Descent of the English Forces on Board the Grand Fleet, or to suppress the
great Body of Raperies in those Parts, who under the Lord Cle^carty has made
great Devastations and Burnings, is not certainly known, but so it happened, that
Colonel Sarsfield being buoyed up and flushed with his late Attempt of seizing
the Cannon, and thinking to have performed a second Exploit, gathered all his
Forces together, amounting to the Number of 3000. Horse, marched with all
possible celerity, thinking to surprise and cut off the Lord Scravenmore with
his Detachment; but our General being advertised of his Advancing, drew near
and sell upon the Colonel at some Disadvantage, and entirely defeated and cut
to Pieces the whole Body of Irish: And if we may give any Credit to Fame,
Sarsfield with only 5 of his Party escaped in the Fight; which if the Letters
come confirm, We have sufficiently given him a Rowland for his Oliver.

LONDON, Printed for L.C. 1690.


