A True and Perfect Description of the Strange and Wonderful SHE ELEPHANT, Sent
from the INDIES, which arrived at LONDON, August 1. 1683. With the True
Portraicture of That Wonder in Nature.
depiction of elephant The Elephant that was brought over: 1683 and is to be
seen in London August.


THat mighty Creature, called the Elephant, exceeds all other beasts in the
World; both in its vast proportion of Body, and wonderful Dispotision of Mind:
there has been but one of them before in England. Before the Macedonians made
incursion into Asia, no People of the World except the Indians and Africans,
had ever seen them.

In India they are often Nine or Ten Cubits high, that is, about Fourteen or
Fifteen Foot of our measure, and proportionable in breadth; their Head is very
big, and the head of a man may easily enter into their mouth; its eyes are but
small and like the eyes of a Swine, but very red; it has Teeth, on either side
four, with which it grinds it meat like meal; it has also two others which hang
forth beyond the residue, and with them they fight, and root up Plants and
Trees (when they are wild) for their food; it has a Trunk called Proboscis,
which is a large hollow thing, hanging from his Nose like skin to the
ground-ward; it has two passages, one into his head, whereby he breaths, and
the other into his mouth whereby he receives his meat: It Is a vulgar Error that
an Elephant has no Joints, which when he pleases he can use, bend and move; his
ankles are very low, and he bends his hinder legs like a man when he sits: They
live upon the Fruit of Plants and Roots, and with their Trunks (such is their
incredible strength) overthrow Trees and eat the Boughs; they are naturally
chaste or continent, taking their Venereal Couplements, the Male but thrice, the
Female twice in all their days, for which purpose they seek out the most
obscure places they can meet with.

They are reputed to go with Young 3 years, bring forth but one at a time, her
young one is then about the bigness of a Two Yearling, or a Steer of two years
old, which she nourishes 6 or 7 years. As soon as it is calved, it sees, goes
and sucks, but not with its Trunk but its Mouth, and so grows on by degrees to
to the prodigious stature before mentioned; by his ready obedience to be
managed by his Riders and his strength, and is seldom seen shape, he often
disordereth and ruins whole Armies.

They take them in Africa in great ditches or pit-falls, and there tame them by
Famine, but the Indians have a nearer device, they in such Ditches put such
meat as they know the Elephant loves, who winding of it, to get it, falls in;
then comes one and beats him greivously for some time, till another chides him
for so doing, and makes him go away, but he returns and falls a beating the
Elephant again; whereupon the other likewise comes back and fights with him,
and so they do several times, till at the last the Elephant knows him that
takes his part (and the other being gone) he under pretense of kindness helps
him out which they (...) that purpose, out of the Pit, and the Elephant will go
along with him, and be led by him as gentle as a Lamb.

King Bochus Condemned Thirty men to be torn and trod in pieces by Elephants,
and casting them amongst thirty Elephants, his servants by all their skill
could not provoke them to touch one man. Antipater supposes they have a kind
of Divine Instinct of Law and Equity.

At Rome an Elephant having slain both the Adulterer and Adulteress, covered
them with the Bed Clothes until the Keeper came home, and then by signs drew
him to his Lodging to discover them, and showed his bloody Tooth wherewith he
had taken Revenge upon them both.

An Indian who had brought up a white Elephant from a Foal, the King hearing of
this white Elephant sends for it, the man denies the King, the Kings sends
messengers after to bring back the Elephant and the man to receive punishment.

At the place both the man and the Elephant defended themselves; at last they
got near to the Indian, and cast him down a steep place. The Elephant slew some
of them, and defended his Master, and put them to flight, and then took up his
Master with his Trunk and carried him safe to his lodging.

They take great care to bury and cover the dead Carcases of their Companions,
by casting dust and earth upon them, and also green boughs.

Besides when they grow old they can neither gather meat nor sight for
themselves; the younger feed, nourish and defend them, yea and raise them out
of Ditches and Trenches into which they are fallen, and interpose their own
bodies for their protection.

These Elephants are said to discern betwixt Kings and common persons, for
they, adore and bend unto them, pointting to their Crowns.

Aleager or Chaumigren King of Pegu began a cruel War with an Army of a Million
of Martial Men, two Hundred Thousand Horse, Five Thousand Elephants, and Three
Thousand Camels, against the King of Syam; the City of Syam is judged twice as
big as Paris, lying distant from Pegu 65 days Journey by Camels, only for a
white Camel to put into his Park at Pegu.

Their chief food is Rice boiled in milk made up in balls, and they have daily
50 pound to their portions; besides they are turned into the Fields, and feed
upon Sycamore leaves, and other pleasing leaves.

They love Coolness and Bath in ponds, Heat is very troublesome to them; when
the waters are not high enough to cover them, they lie down and tumble therein.

When the Elephants go to War, they wear only the Skin with Bars of Steel over
their Trunks, and they are richly trapped upon their Festivals.

A mighty big Elephant being presented to the King of Pegu, by Syam his
Tributary, the King immediately commanded meat to be brought him to know his
Breeding, he that brought him gave him water in a foul Vessel, the Elephant
disdainfully putting his Trunk into his mouth, spouted a great quantity of
stinking water on his Keepers head, his Keeper returning him a blow upon the
head with a staff, the Elephant immediately killed him with his Trunk. The King
admiring his prudence, caused water to brought in a clean Silver Vessel, and
bought him Harness most rich and Magnificient; they are sometime served in
Vessels of Gold, and with great respect, otherwise they will kill their Keepers
for the least offense.

Learned Mr. Caryl' s description of the Elephant.
He eats Grass like an Ox.

His food is as the food of an Ox.

He gathers up the grass with his Trunk by reason of the shortof his Neck, and
then puts it into his mouth.

By reason of the littlness of his tongue such is his Nature, he will not hurt
any beast.

He is so gentle and harmless, that he will take meat out of a man's hand like a
Dog.

His strength is in his Loins.

The Elephant is mighty in strength.

His Trunk is very great, yet he easily turns it as he lists at pleasure.

He Is wholly compacted of Sinews strongly twisted together.

His Bones are strong as Brass or Bars of Iron.

He is the chief of rarities of God.

An English Mastiff conquers an Elephant fastening upon his (...)

Elephants trained for the Mogul, and each carry an Iron Gun five foot long
upon a strong frame of wood fastened to a thick board, to be put on his back,
with a Panel and broad Girths.

Some Elephants the Kings keep to execue Malefactors, and some for state, and
others to carry Burdens.

The Elephants are ruled with a small Rod of Steel about two pound a yard, made
sharp at the lower end, and a Hook turned like a fish-hook very sharp, by which
they pull them back that Ride them.

The Elephant a stranger with us, are common in India.

It is the greatest of all land Creatures. Their Teeth have been seen 14 spans
long, and 4 spans thick.

Authors write of their endowments things incredible.

It Is said in the Kingdom of Malabar, they talk together, and speak with man's
Voice. Lipsius writes this in his own words, and it is the direct opinion of
Elian.

Plutarch and Pliny say, That an Elephant that was something dull, and was
often beat for not learning well, was found acting his part by Moonlight.

Others say that they will learn to write and read.

Pliny says Plainly from Mucianus, That one of them Learned the Greek Letters,
and did write in the same Tongue these Words, I my self Writ this, And I
Offered the Celtick Spoils.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Randolph Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1683.


