A True and Impartial NARATION Of the REMARKABLE Providence Of the Living God
of Heaven and Earth, appearing for Us his oppressed Servants called, QUAKERS.

Nicholas Lucas, Henry Marshall, Jermiah Hearn, John Blendall, Francis Pryor,
Samuel Trahern, and Henry Feast, Who most unrighteously were at Hertford
sentenced to be Transported beyond the Seas from our dear Wives, Children,
Parents, and Relations, for inoffensively meeting to wait upon the Lord our
Maker.

And also may serve for an utter refutation of a Lying Paper published under
the hand of one Edward Maning.

Is he not God of the Seas? and do not the Winds obey him? behold ye despispers
and perish, for a work is wrought in your day, of, or, concerning which, your
whole Magicians, or Soothsayers cannot inform you.

Printed in the Year. 1664.

HAving seen a scurrilous Pamphlet subscribed by one Edward Maning (entitled
the masked Devil, or Quaker, neither fearing God, nor reverencing man, etc.)
the which being so full of nonsense, lies and contradictions does in a great
measure confound it self, and refute its malicious Author, but least it should
have ought of influence upon any reasonable creature, or that Maning should by
his impudent and often affirming untruths against the innocent, at last have a
will formed in him to believe his own lies: We shall in the fear of the Lord,
simply, nakedly, and impartially declare the Providence of the living God as
in mercy through his outstretched arm they appeared to and for us, and so
leave it to the righteous witness of God in every conscience to judge who is
the masked [lying] Devil, neither fearing God, nor reverencing man, the Author
of the Paper subscribed by Edward Maning, or the oppresseh people of God called
Quakers.

We N. Lucas, H. Marshall, Jer. Hearn, John Blendall, Francis Pryor, Sam.
Trahern, and Hen. Feast were sentenced for transportation the 13. of the sixth
month 1664. And in order to the execution of that sentence the Sheriff gave
William Edmonds Jailer of Hartford (as he the said Jailer affirmed) power to
treat with some Ship-master for that our transportation, which he accordingly
did with one Thomas May, Master of the Ship called the Anne of London, and
agreed with him for five pound a head to the Barbados, and six pound to
J^maica (which were the two places, to which the sentence appointed us to be
banished) withal telling him that we were free men, and six of us would carry
goods with us, etc.

In order hereunto, the first day of the seventh month, the said Jailer brought
us up to London, and put us into the Bull Inn in Bishops-gate street, and in
less than half an hours space the said Thomas May came into us (the Jailer
being with him) and asked us whether we were willing to go to sea for the
Barbados and Jamaica? We answered him with one consent we were not willing,
but were forced for conscience sake, by virtue of the late Act; Then said he, I
will carry no man against his will, withal telling the Jailer (then present)
that he had told him that we were all free men, and would also carry Goods with
us, etc. Well, well, said the Jailer, I know my bargain, and so presently both
departed from us, leaving an under Jailer to keep us fast locked up in a room.

The next day in the morning, being the second day of the month aforesaid, we
were brought out of the Inn, and put into two Coaches by the order of the
Jailer, and were carried down to Billings-gate, and hurried into Boats, and
rowed to the Ship side, when we were come thither, the Jailer asked for the
Master Thomas May, his Mate answered, he was not a Board, then he asked for the
Boatswaine who was not aboard neither, said he then to the Mate, have you not
order to take in seven passengers? the Mate answered he had order not to take
them in. The Jailer asked from whom he had that Order? the Mate said, from the
Master, who said the Jailer had you order not to take in? the Mate answered,
the Quakers.

Then the Jailer was in a great rage, and brought us back again, and wished
that he were rid of us, but one of us told him, he would not be clear of us in
this world, nor in that to come, except he repented; then he carried us to the
dark house near Billings-gate, and locked us up in a room there that day,
setting his two men to be our Keepers, telling us he must go to his Lord Chief
Justice, to know what he should do with us: He also went to the Kings
Secretary, and swore that he contracted with the said Thomas May for us as
convicted persons, by the late Act, and had acquainted the Master fully what we
were, whereupon Thomas May was sent for by the Kings Order, Who went, taking
two witnesses with him to prove that he contracted with William Edmonds (not
knowing he was a Jailer, but thinking he had been a Merchant) to carry seven
men that were free, and willing to go. But the Secretary told him, Oath was
given in for the King, and that his witnesses would do him no good. At night
the Jailer returned to us, and putting us into two Coaches, carried us back to
the Bull Inn in Bishops-gate street again, and locked us up in a room, saying,
he had order that none should come at us.

There we were kept close Prisoners, many of our Friends being denied so much
as to see or speak to us, one of our friends also was much abused by the
Jailer, because he earnestly desired to see us; here we continued till the
fourteenth day, on which day William Edmonds, the Jailer came to us, and told
us we must go aboard. One of us asked him if he had an Order? he answered he
had order from the Sheriff, but being asked to see it, he said it was a private
order, and that the Sheriff would come himself also, but the Sheriff came not,
then he brought us out, and put us into two Coaches, carrying us in great have
down to Ratcliff, but driving the privatest and farthest way about, that people
might not meet, nor follow us to take notice that we were banished for
conscience sake; (as they did when we were carried from the Bull Inn to
Billings-gate) Yet some of our friends hearing of our being carried away, hired
Coaches and followed to see what would become of us. At which the Goalers were
angry, and threatened to Pistol and cut the Coach-men if they followed so close;
and as soon as we were brought to Ratcliff, men (which he had provided) stood
ready to drag us into a house (much like to one called a spirits house) and
brought us into a private room, and kept us there about half an hour, not
suffering our wives, children or friends to come at us. Afterward they caused
us to go down into a dark Cellar, from whence they forced us down a Ladder into
Boats, which the Jailer had also provided, and from thence rowing us away to
the Ship and compelled us aboard.

The Master, Thomas May being not aboard, Edward Maning (whose horrid lies and
wickedness we shall make manifest in this true, short, and faithful Relation)
probably by the appointment of the Jailer then aboard received us, and
discharged the Jailer of us, though he had nothing to do to undertake the
charge of us, or so to concern himself with us. The said Maning would also at
the same time have given us leave to have gone a shore again, but we being
informed by the Seamen, that Maning had no command in, nor nothing to do with
the Ship that they knew of, we did not, nor would not accept of his offered
deceitful kindness: but soon after the Master coming aboard, seemed much
discontented that we were brought into his ship, and said, that if this Edmonds
had not perfidiously sworn falsely, he had not been thus troubled. And
commanding us out of his Ship again, he bid us go home, giving us also a
Certificate under his hand to secure us from any trouble a shore, in this
following form.

September. 14. 1664.
These are to give notice to whom it may concern, That whereas seven men were
delivered aboard my Ship called the Anne of London, to be transported, viz.
Nicholas Lucas, Henry Feast, Henry Mashall, Francis Pryor, Jeremy Herne, John
Blendall, and Samuel Traherne; That by my permission and leave they have
liberty to go on shore, and to come aboard again when I shall require them.

Given under my hand. Thomas May.
Witness, John Clements, William Wilson, William Looker.


But we were so far from flying from our holy cause, or being at all weary,
afraid or unable to endure tribulation, pass through the fire, or sing in the
stocks, as that wretched Author would insinuate in page 15. that several of us
did not find freedom in our Spirits to go at Thomas May's command though real
Master, whereupon he forced us out, and tumbled our Goods out of the Ship into
the Boat, himself helping to row the Boat a shore, where we were at liberty as
we judged, according to the Certificate* in which time we went to visit our
wives, children, friends and relations, (being not secured in houses on Tower
hill, as is falsely said in the sixth page of that lying Pamphlet) neither did
Samuel Traherne make any slip or escape as is falsely suggested, but went to see
his aged Father and Mother once more with intentions to return again, according
to the contents of the said Certificate, and whereas that lying author says,
that in opposition to the Magistrates and Officers of the Town, he rode about
like another Nayler, giving God thanks that he was delivered out of their
hands, and that now they had done their worst, and that when Francis Butler,
called Justice, sent for him by his man to come to him, he replied, if Francis
Batler had any thing to say to him, he should come himself, all which is
exceeding false, and a very forged lie; for he came all the way from London on
foot, and so went through the Town to his parents house, being three miles from
Hertford, and came not upon a horses back till Francis Butler came into his
Fathers house and laid violent hands on him, carrying him to his own house, and
from thence committed him as a fugitive and Fellon to the County Goal, causing
him to be set on horseback, and his legs to be tied under the horses belly,
and with a guard of four men brought him in that manner, and delivered him to
the Jailer; where he remained Prisoner 17 days, through or by reason of some
blood thirsty men in power, who exercise gteater cruelty then the greatest
severity the late Act requires.

But as in this case, so in all the proceeds against us since the late Act came
in force, we have been unjustly dealt withal, matter of Fact according to the
express reason and Letter of the late Act, being never proved against us, as
has been already published.

Samuel Trahern was after seventeen days imprisonment released by information
and request from Thomas May, Master of the Ship showing to the Magistrates of
Hertford that he gave him leave, etc. although we do not deny that Edward
Maning officiously went down to Hertford, even intruding himself upon us, we
being passive in that matter otherwise then bearing his charges.

(...), on the first day of the eighth month we were by the Master, Thomas May,
commanded aboard, and when we were in the Ship they weighed Anchor, and set
sail, and sailed near to the red house at Deptford; but mark and behold the
hand of the Lord, the wind on a sudden brought the Ship back again to
Lime-house, where casting Anchor they lost Cable and Anchor both for the
present, the Master being struck down with the end of the Cable, and his shirt
torn off his arm, but was not much hurt: The Ship also was very like to run a
shore, but by casting out another Anchor, it was prevented, then Thomas May
ordered us to go a shore again.

Upon the sixth day of the same month we were again commanded aboard, and they
having a fair wind and tide (which carried many Ships by us) weighed Anchor,
and spread the Sails, but they could not get the Ship far from the place; for
although they laid forth all the endeavors that men could, yet could they not
get the Ship to sail, at which the Seamen were troubled, and said they should
not go out of England as long as these men (meaning us) were aboard.

Also one of them not regarding nor perceiving the hand of the Lord, said they
were bewitched, so they cast Anchor again, being not able to move scarce a
stones cast from the place they had weighed Anchor, Although many other ships
with the same Wind, Tide, and Time sailed by us quite away down the River.
This sign surely is to be minded by all that acknowledge and know the true and
living God, whom the Winds and the Seas obey, and we cannot but confess that
his immediate hand was in this matter, notwithstanding the ignorant and
unbelieving are blind, and attribute these and such like things to accidents,
common chance, etc. then were we again set a shore.

And on the eigth day we were sent for aboard the fourth time when they again
weighed Anchor and hoised up their sails. And when they had sailed from
Lime-house to Greenwich which is about two miles, a sudden storm arose, they
being forced to cast Anchor to secure their Ship, and so we were put to shore
again.

Upon the tenth day of the same month we were commanded aboard the fifth time;
and they once more weighed Anchor, and set their sails to the wind, then was
the Ship very like to run a ground. Its Bolt-split one time reaching over the
bank. Then were we about Black-wall set a (...) The Ship went well down the
same Tide to Graves-end.

On the twelfth day we were ordered by a Messenger in the name of the Master,
Thomas May, to come down with our things after the Ship, so we immediately
according to this verbal Order, pretended to be from Thomas May, took boats,
and went down to the Ship, and put our things aboard, telling the Mate and
Seamen (who were unwilling to receive us or our goods) that we were ordered in
the name of the Master, Thomas May, to come and bring our things aboard, they
then told us that their Master was at the sign of the Hen and Chickens at
Graves-end, upon which we went a shore and found him out; When he saw us, he
asked what we did there? We answered We were come according to his Order, to
which he replied, He gave no such Order; This, said he, is Mannings doings.
Then he charged us not to come nor stir at any time, except he sent a Note
under his own hand (which he said we knew) or came himself. And he being then
coming to London, bid us go back again that evening to London also, and stay
there till he sent for us, saying; He would give order to have our things
brought a shore again, and safely secured the which he did: so some of us came
back to London, and some stayed at Gravesend till the twenty eighth day of the
same Month, and on which day, about the first hour, we were commanded aboard
by Thomas May Master, and Sailed that night to Lee Road, there they cast Anchor
by reason of the night, and before morning the Wind turned full against them,
and blew violent and strong which caused them to lie there two days and three
nights.

Upon the 31 day they set Sail thence, and Sailed to a place called the
North-foreland, where they cast Anchor again, and remained till the next day;
at night we were again set a shore by Thomas May's order at a place called
Peter's: and on the next day; being the second of the eighth Month, we
traveled to Deal according to the Masters order, where we all seven remained
till the tenth day of the same Month, where we all being in a room together,
Thomas May, Master of the Ship came in, and declared before several witnesses,
That though we had followed and attended his Ship so long, yet he was resolved
not to carry us: and then and there gave us a Certificate of Discharge, and
read it over himself to us in the presence of the Witnesses whose names are
thereunto subscribed. The copy whereof verbatim follows:

Whereas there was seven men, called Quakers; brought on board my Ship called
the Ann of London, by William Edmonds Jailer of Hertford (to wit) Nicholas
Lucas, Henry Feast, Henry Marshall, Francis Pryor, John Blendall, Jeremiah
Herne, and Samuel Traherne, all which have continued waiting upon my Ship from
London to Deal from the 14th day of September last, till this day: And I seeing
Providence has much crossed me hitherto, whereby I perceive that the hand of
the Lord is against me, that I dare not proceed in my Voyage to carry them,
they being Innocent persons, and no Crime signified against them worthy of
Banishment; and that there is a Law in force, that no English man shall be
carried out of his Native Country against his will, and also my men refuse to
go the Voyage if I carry them, which will be much to my hinderance, men being
very scarce by reason of the long continued Press. For these Reasons therefore,
and many more, I will not carry them. These are therefore to Certify any
person or persons that shall Question them, or any of them, That they did not
make an escape, but I put them on shore again to go whether they please.

All this is Certified under my own hand this Tenth day of November, 1664.
Thomas May.
Witness hereunto,

John Banckes. Humphrey Biglestone John Clements. Thomas Hollyman.




If these are the words of a Drunken man (as that unclean Author ignorantly
affirms in his bundle of Lies, page 12*) let all that are sober judge.

After we were thus discharged and left by the Master of the Ship, some of us
went from Deal, and some of us stayed there till the 27th of the ninth Month
on which day Edward Manning commanded us to go abord, we told him, He had
nothing to do with us, we having the Masters order not to regard him, nor to
mind his Command, as some persons in Deal and elsewhere can witness: Moreover,
that we had a Discharge from the Master, and therefore refused to obey him.
Then he hasted away to the Deputy of the Town (for so the Chief Magistrate is
called) and declared to him that we were Fellons, who came to us with his
assistants to know what the matter was; and after he understood fully and
plainly our case, and saw the Masters Discharge, the Deputy said he would have
nothing to do with us, but said if the Master owned tha^ Certificate it was
sufficient, and if we desired he would set his own hand to it. Yet afterward,
in the later part of the same day, by the means of the said Manning, the Deputy
came again with Manning, and Thomas May being with him wept, and then in the
presence of the Deputy we said to the Master, If he would deny, or were not
free to stand to, or avow his Discharge which he had given us, and command us
aboard, we were ready there to go with him, The Deputy said that was as much as
could be desired, and it was very honest, and so he departed from us again.
Then the Master, Thomas May appointed us to meet him on the morrow morning at
the at the sea side, the which we did accordingly, but Manning came, his
brother also, and another wicked man came with him. And he seeing then again
that the Master would not command us aboard, nor consent to carry us, and that
he could not by any means gain Assistance from the Deputy and Officers of the
Town, to execut his wretched will and wicken design upon us, who according to
several probable circumstances, thought to have the sale of us beyond the seas
for slaves, threw off his cloak, and laid violent hands upon us, commanding the
other two to do the like, which accordingly they did, and helped him to force
us into an empty boat, then lying on the beach; and because we would not
willingly be subject to his command, who we knew had nothing at all to do with
us, nor no interest at all in the Ship (as we were informed by those who had
good reason to know, to wit the Master, the Masters Mate, and the Mariners
thereof) no, not so much as a bed for himself to lie upon, although he has the
confidence to say, among the rest of his lies, that he furnished us with beds;
some of us they draged by the legs, head and shoulders, trayling upon the
stones; and some of us they carried to the boat, and so heaved us all in, at
which cruelty all the people that were spectators, both men, women, and
children (which were very many) were much displeased, and cried it was a great
shame men should be used so. We sat in the boat about half an hour at the
least, even till the tide increased the waves, and tossed the boat up at one
end; (the boat before being loose upon the beach.) And all the while we fate
there no one man would lay a hand to an Oar to row us aboard, the people that
were beholders wi^^ing the hands of such as should do it might rot off; so when
the boat was like to be a float, and consequently run a drift, we came out of
it, and walked again by the sea side, then we met with Thomas May the Master,
and asked of him, whether he had any thing to say to us? he answered, if he had
he would come again to us. Thus he departed from us and we saw him no more, for
he went aboard that night, and in the morning, we coming again to the sea side,
espied the Ship under Sail, and there we stood some time, the Deputy of the
Town happening to be there at the same time also, who saw the Ship sail from
us, and said he could witness the Ship went from us, and not we from it. As
appears also by the testimonial of many witnesses in this form following.

We whose names are under written do and shall witness and testify, if we are
thereunto called, That there were four men called Quakers, That is to say,
Nicholas Lucas, Francis Pryor, Jeremiah Herne, and Samuel Traherne, All which
were put into a boat, by the Order of one who is called Edward Manning, upon
the twenty fourth day of the last month called November, all which stayed in
the boat until the sea came up to the boat, whereby the boat had like to gone a
drift, there being no body in the boat but them four above named, who came out
of the boat again and walked up and down near by the boat, and the man that
owned the boat (to wit) Richard Davis, haled up his boat upon the full to
secure her from the sea, the said Edward Manning being present acted no farther
toward them. That the next morning early the ship called the Anne of London,
Thomas May, Master, sailed and left the four persons above named on shore. To
the truth hereof we have subscribed our Names the eigth day of the tenth month,
called December, in the year 1664.

Richard Jordan. Henry S^ripling. Jeffery Safferie Francis Robinson. John
Green. John Banks. Anne Callo. Humphry Biggleston. Jane Biggleston. John
Lawrance. William Lawrance.
Then said we to the Deputy, now if thou as a Magistrate* have any thing to say
or do to us now the Ship is gone, and left us, thou may, he answered he had
not, but said, he wished us well, and so we departed that day from the Town
toward London, whither we came the third day of the tenth month; And being
well acquainted, and having had large experience of the enmity and cruelty of
some of the Magistrates of the Town and County of Hertford, least they should
under the pretense of our being fugitives, seize us as Fellons, as they had
causlesly done our companion Samuel Trahern, as is before related; we thought
it expedient to inform the King of our case and present condition, the which
accordingly we did in this manner following, annexing thereunto the Copy of our
forementioned discharge from the Master Thomas May.

Be it known unto the King, or whom else it may concern, that whereas we whose
names are hereafter mentioned, were sentenced at Hertford, for transportation
to the Kings foreign Plantatious, in order unto which we were brought by the
Jailer of Hertford unto London, and here imb^rqued in the Ship called the Anne
of London, Thomas May Commander, who brought us down into the Downs, and there
set us on shore, giving us a certificate signifying the cause and reasons why
he would not carry us, and the ship being sailed and gone, and left us behind,
we came back in order to go home to our wives and families: And thus we thought
expedient to inform the King hereof, and herewith also to insert a Copy of the
Certificate, which is as follows.

Then followed a Copy of Thomas May's Certificate as is before recited.

We also added this Postscript.
And if it be the Kings pleasure to be further informed in this matter by us or
any of us, we may be found or heard on at our respective dwellings at or about
Hertford.

London the 4. of the 10. month 1664. Nicholas Ducas, Henry Feast, Henry
Marshall, Francis Pryor. Jeremiah Herne, John Blendall, Samuel Trahern,




The which being delivered and read in Council, an Order was passed thereupon,
which is as follows.

At the Court at White Hall the 7th. of December. 1664.
Present,
The Kings most excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness the Duke of York. Lord
Arch Bishop of Canter. Lord Treasurer. Lord-Privy Seal. Duke of Albemarle.
Marquess of Dorchester. Lord Chamberlin. Earl of Berkshire. Earl of St. Albans.
Earl of Anglesey. Earl of Bath. Earl of Lawderdaile. Lord Barkley. Mr.
Treasurer. Mr. Vice Chamberlin. Mr. Secretary Morris. Mr. Secretary Bennet.
Mr. Chancel. of the Duchy. Sir Edward Nicholas.
WHereas Nicholas Lucas, Henry Feast, Henry Marshal, Francis Pryor, John
Blendall, Jeremiah Herne, and Samuel Trahern, Persons convicted at the last
Assizes held at Hertford in the County of Hertford, and sentenced to be
Transported to some of his Majesty's Plantations in the West Indies, and who
accordingly were put on Board the Ship called the Anne of London, whereof one
Thomas May was Master, and who undertook and engaged himself for their
transportation, yet set them on shore in or about the Downs, leaving them at
liberty to go whether they pleased, and it appearing to be a matter of
contrivance and design between the said Master and persons before mentioned.

It was this day Ordered (his Majesty present in Council) That the High Sheriff
of the County of Hertford (now being) do cause the said Nicholas Lucas, Henry
Feast, Henry Marshal, Francis Pryor, John Blendall, Jeremiah Herne, and Samuel
Traherne to be apprehended and secured until means of Transporting them can be
made by some shipping bound unto those parts.

And if it were a contrivanee on our parts, Judge thou O Lord our God, for thy
Judgments are Holy, Just and True, and even miraculous in our eyes.

Having thus in Gods fear truly and plainly given relation of the whole matter,
We leave it to the just measure of God in every man's conscience to judge
whether our carriage in this thing from first to last, has not been wholly
innocent, inoffensive, and absolutely free and clear before the Lord from those
imputations, lies and railing accusations heaped up against us in that
pernicious Pamphlet subscribed by Edward Maning. Touching whose going down to
Hertford, bearing his own charges thither, paying Fees for Samuel Trahern etc.
(as by way of interrogation is alleged in the said Pamphlet) As for Fees there
was not one penny paid, and his charges was boarn both horse and man's meat, and
also his horse hire was by us paid for; and his going down was from an earnest
request of his own to Thomas May, who would have went himself to have justified
that Samuel Trahern had liberty from him to go down to Hertford. But Maning
being officious importuned Thomas May that he might go (its like for some bad
ends of his own) so May wrote to the Magistrates, and Maning rod down, and
being May did send, or permit him to go, we boar his charges horse and man, as
aforesaid, the Lord knows.

And whereas this interrogative lier also says: Why did you give me thanks for
my kindness to you all, and especially for my kindness to you at Hertford? Why
did you promise to attend me, to be my true and faithful prisoners, and to go
on board with me whenever I should require you? etc. This is utterly false,
and he himself knows it to be a mere forged lie, for promise we never made any
to him, and any manner of obligation we never received from him; indeed
ofttimes, like one of them called a shirk, he thrust himself upon us, and eat
of our Victuals, and drank of our wine, which we had provided to have served us
at sea, other intimacy there never was between us; And again we say, God
knows that promise to attend him to be his prisoners, or go on board with
him, whenever he should require us, or the like, we never made to him, and an
obligation of any sort we never received from him, and this the righteous God
knows to be true. And what the false man means in charging us in being
traitors to him, its with himself, for none of us ever received any trust from
him, and how therefore we could be traitors to him* let the reasonable judge.
As for those texts of Scripture he profanely quoteth throughout his discourse,
his several other vain and vile interrogations with those fragments of Latin
he also interweaveth therewith, with the rest of his confused and non-sensical
stuff, we judge it not worth a replication, it being chiefly in our hearts to
declare the truth of Gods dealings with and for us in this matter, and not to
meet or answer a fool in his folly.

THE END.

