A True and Impartial ACCOUNT of Their Majesty's Army in Ireland. Discovering
the Designs of the Late K. JAMES, and the FRENCH ARMY, since the Embarking and
Landing of His GRACE the DUKE of SCHONBERG, to this present Time; with the
Particulars of what happened lately at the Siege of Carickfergus, Dundalk,
Charlemont, and Cavan, and of several other Passages since the Army went into
Winter Quarters.
Licensed March 28. 1690. J. Fraser.

ON Monday the 21st. of August, 1689. about Eight of the Clock in the Morning,
his Grace the Duke of Schonberg, with fourteen Regiments of Foot, sailed from
High-lake, and safely landed at Banger, about One of the Clock in the Afternoon
of the day following; upon the appearance of the Fleet, several small Boats
came from the Shore, at least two Leagues to meet it, to give an Account of the
Country and the Harbors thereabouts, as also giving an Account of the Irish
Army, both Horse, Dragoons, and Foot, flying from their Quarters upon the News
of the English Army Landing. So great was the Consternation amongst them, that
several ran as far as Newry, being 36 Miles, before they stopped, to know either
the quality or quantity of the Army. The appearance of our Fleet did so much
comfort the Protestants of that Country, that the Shore was covered with
Horses, Cows, and Sheep for the benefit and advantage of the Army, and
Provisions of all sorts being so plentifully brought in; a quarter of good
Mutton was sold at four pence, and every thing else at very reasonable rates.
The General made Mr. Hamilton's House at Banger his head Quarters, and giving
Orders that all Men should on pain of Death stand to Arms all that Night,
having first very advantagiously lined some Hedges and Ditches with small Shot.
At Night an Allarm was in the Camp of the Enemies approach; whereupon the whole
Army was resolved to maintain their Ground, but this afterward appeared a
Stratagem of War, to try the Men's courage in case the Enemy had really attackt
them. The next day the General received Advice, that the Enemy then at
Carrickfergus were intended to Plunder and Burn the Towns of Belfast and
Lisburn; whereupon Colonel Wharton's Regiment of Foot were immediately ordered
to March from the Camp at Banger to Belfast, which was saved from Plunder and
Fire, some of the Enemy being killed, and others taken Prisoners: Within two or
three days afterward, the Army decampt from Banger, and encampt at Belfast for
two Nights, and then moved in order to the besieging of the Town and Castle of
Carickfergus: on our approach against that place the General summoned the Town
by a Drum, and a Parley was agreed to, but the besieged insisting upon very
great Conditions, viz. to March out with flying Colors, Arms, Baggage, and
Plunder, then pretended to be their Property; the General would not agree to
them, but in regard there were many Protestants in the Town, was willing to
comply on reasonable Terms, but the besieged utterly refused any manner of
Conditions, other than what they had proposed, and if such were not agreed to,
would dispute the Town, which the General his Grace finding them so obstinate,
ordered 4 Battering Guns, and 2 Mortar Pieces, to be planted at the Pigeon
house very near the Town, and played for a considerable time hotly against the
Castle and Town, while the lines of Circumvallation were flinging up, and then
Batteries were raised on the lines, but being at too great a distance, no great
prejudice was done; the General observing the Batteries to be at great
distance, did in Person ride within 40 paces of the Walls, and appointed the
Ground for a new Battery, and running the line of Circumvallation, so that the
next day 6 Pieces of Cannon and 2 Morters were drawn up to that Ground; from
this Battery the Besiege were so warmly saluted with our 6 Cannon, one Mortar
casting Shells of 600 l. weight, and the other flinging 9 small Shells at once
into the Town, with a continued Firing of our small Shot from the Trenches,
that they hung up a Flag and begged for a Parley, the besiegers having made 4
Breaches in their Wall, the General being inclinable to preserve the
Protestants in the Town, did hearken to a second Treaty; the Conditions were,
that the besieged should March out with their Arms, and to March no further in
a day than the Convoy appointed for them pleased; the General had not made any
Conditions with them, had it not been on the account of the Protestants in the
Town, he being affronted on the first Parley; for when the Enemy had mounted
some Guns on their Walls, and put other things into order, which could not
possibly be done without a forbearance of firing from the Trenches, they
barbarously fired a warning Piece, and took down their Flag, and began to fire
furiously after the General, and some Officers before they could get fairly
off; however his Grace was pleased to perfect Articles with the besieged, and
the next day they Marched out about 400, there being several killed in the Town,
but the Country People who were before plundered by them, came down and took
what they saw was their own, so that in two or three miles March, the Enemy
lost most of their Baggage; the General was much offended at this usage to the
besieged, but it was a thing altogether impossible to be prevented, the Rabble
falling so numerously upon them, and taking their own goods where ever they
found them; for seven days the Army lay against the Town constantly firing, and
2 Frigots lying before the Castle firing Broadside after Broadside so mighty
sharply that there was a continued light clear round the Town the whole, Night,
and to do the besieged right, they behaved themselves verey brave as any Men
could do. When the Town and Castle were actually in our hands, we found several
hundred Barrels of Beef, Pork, Pease, Wheat, Malt, and Oatmeal in the Stores,
but very little Ammunition. As we Marched against the Town of Carrickfergus, the
General received Advice that 16 Troops of the Iniskilling Horse, and 2 Troops
of Dragoons were on their March to join us by Major General Kirk's Orders,
which they accordingly did, and at that time they were acceptable enough, there
being no Horse landed out of England; the next day Colonel Coy's Regiment of
Horse, Colonel Levison's Regiment of Dragoons, and several Regiments of Foot,
landed at the White-house near Carrickfergus, and upon our March from the
Siege, the Lord Delamare's, and Lord Devonshire's Regiments of Horse, and Sir
Tho. ^owre's Regiment of Foot joined us, so that we entirely Marched to Belfast,
save Sir Hen. Ingoldsby's Regiment of Foot left in Garrison at Carrickfergus,
Major General Kirk remaining with his and some of Londonderry Forces at
Coleraine. On the 3d. of Sept. we Marched to Lisburn, having sent most of our
heavy Luggage and Guns by Sea, in order to meet us at Dundalk or Drogheda; and
now there being about 800 of the Irish in the Glens near Glenarme, in the
County of Antrim, headed by one Mac Donnel Naturalson to the Earl of Antrim,
who very much infested that Country. One Captain Stewart was ordered to detach
a certain number out of Sir H. Ingoldsby's Regiment, to suppress these Rebels,
which was accordingly done, and a considerable prey of Cattle got from them.

On September the 4th, we encamped at Dromore, being seven Miles from Lisburn,
and received an account that Major General Mackay was landed at Belfast, with
some Horse and Dragoons; but this proved a mistake: On the 5th we encamped at
Loghbracklan, and the Enemy being then at Newry, in a considerable Body,
commanded by the Duke of Berwick; the Iniskilling Horse were ordered for the
advance Guards, who discovering a great Body of Horse, thought fit to retreat,
believing the Enemy might have pursued, and so followed them into our Camp,
which was in a readiness to receive them; but the Enemy imagining some such
thing, did not at all pursue them, but thought to keep the Pass at the Newry.
On our March two Drums belonging to the Lord Kingston's Regiment were hanged
near Dromore, having revolted and got into Carickfergus at the time of the
Siege. On the 6th, we encamped at Newry, the Enemy having deserted that Pass,
and burnt the Town, with all the Inhabitants Goods, and flinging a piece of
Cannon into the River, and moved to Dundalk, 8 Miles from Newry, the
Iniskilling Horse (the Duke's Tartars, for so they were termed,) still keeping
the advance Guard, who marched so near the Town of Dundalk, that they took a
prey of 150 Cows from the Enemy's Quarters in their view, with some Sheep, and
great quantities of Oatmeal and Butter. We continued our Camp at the Newry till
the 8th, and the General having advice that the Enemy were marched from
Dundalk, only leaving some few Troops there for a Rear-guard, ordered the
Iniskilling Forces to march forward, and detached 50 Foot out of each Regiment,
and 20 out of a Troop, to follow the Iniskilling Forces toward Dundalk, having
before sent a Trumpet to tell them, that if they burned the Town, or destroyed
any more Towns on their retreat, or destroyed the Protestants Goods, he would
not extend mercy to any that should happen in his power, and that Major General
Macarty, then Prisoner at Iniskilling, should be executed; this so terrified
them that they marched away without firing the Town of Dundalk, or doing any
great harm to the Protestants there; and at 8 of the Clock at Night we entered
the Town with these Detachments, and found there great stores of Wheat and
other Grain, and Salt, laid up in stores for the Irish Army; when the whole
Body of the Army had moved up, we encamped at Dundalk, the one part of the Army
on the Newry side of the River, and the Dutch Regiments, with the Iniskilling
Forces on Dundalk side, and in some few days after had marched forward, but
that our Cannon and Provisions did not come by Sea so soon as was expected, nor
were there draught-horses for our March in case both Ammunition, Guns, and
Provision had come by the time expected; which was the chief cause of the Army
not moving upwards toward Dublin, Comissary Shales not sending the Horses over
in due time: Upon our coming to Dundalk the Army plentifully fed on the Lord of
Duleek's Mutton, he having fled, and in command with the Rebels: Upon our
approach to Dundalk, the Enemy likewise deserted Atherdee being 8 Miles from
Drogheda, and some of the English Forces advanced so far, and then the late
King James designed to rendezvouze his Forces, and encamp on the other side of
the River of Boyn beyond Drogheda; but finding the English Army did not move
forward, sent a Body of Horse and some Foot to Atherdee, and secured that Town,
banishing the Protestants and taking their Substance; between which place and
Dundalk there was some small skirmishing, and particularly at Mapestown-bridge
our Scou^s met some of the Enemy, killed about 9, and took some Prisoners; in
which action one of the Iniskilling Horse and an English Dragoon fell by an
Ambuscado. On the 15th, the Enemy's Van guard, consisting of 4000 Horse were
seen to advance within 4 or 5 Miles of our Cam^ and the General not having
Horse enough to engage them, ordered some Trenches to be cast up a small way
beyond the Town of Dundalk, between us and the Enemy, where the two Dutch
Regiments were constantly encamped, and 2 Regiments mounted the Trenches every
day, and ordered 8 pieces of Cannon to be planted upon the Works. On the 16th
Major General Scragmore embarked for England; and on the 17th, Mr. Holsort, the
General's Secretary, died at Dundalk: On the 18th, 100 Men out of each Regiment
were detached to bring the Forage between the Enemy and us: On the same day 24
Companies of Foot and 4 Troops of the Iniskilling Forces joined us in the Camp,
and brought 600 Cows with them, leaving one Regiment of Foot, and some Troops
of Horse at Iniskilling. About this time Colonel Gustavus Hamilton's Regiment
of Foot, Colonel Langston's Horse, and part of Colonel Villers's Regiment of
Horse, landed at Belfast, which Horse were daily expected in the Camp; but
Colonel Hamilton's Foot were ordered to Carickfergus, and Sir Hen. Ingoldsby's
to march to the Camp. In this time the Enemy daily increased, and came
downwards in great Bodies; and on the 19th, the Irish Scouts appeared within a
Mile of the Town of Dundalk, with whom out Out-guards had a smart Dispute, in
which some fell on both sides. On the 20th, two Gentlemen came from the Irish
Army, and gave the General an account that the Irish were very numerous, but
many of them Rabble, and that several Protestants had great desire to come off
if they could do it with safety; and that the Late King James was in person at
the head of them, and were encamped at Lurgan Race, 3 Miles from Dundalk. On
the 21st, about 7 of the Clock in the Morning several of the Enemy's Troops
were seen advancing near our Camp, and about 10 the whole Body of Horse,
consisting of 10000, drew up into 5 divisions within half a Mile of our
Trenches, their whole Body of Foot being about 35000 were in the Rear of the
Horse; which account the General had from a Deserter, who farther said, that
although they appeared in so great numbers, yet they had not above 4 or 5000
good Horse, the rest being ill mounted, and worse armed, several of their Horse
being Lanciers for want of other Arms, and the greatest part of the Foot a
perfect Rabble, and fitter for plunder than doing service: Some of the Enemy's
Horse advanced within Musket Shot of our Trenches, but were forced to retreat,
being warmly received by some Granadeers at the Bog side, between our Camp and
the Enemy's Body, and thereupon the General ordered a good guard of Horse to
march toward them, but the Bog being between, no action happened: His Grace
likewise ordered 300 of the Iniskilling Foot, commanded by Colonel Tiffin, to
march down to the Bog side, the Enemy having drawn down a Body of Foot to the
other side of the Bog, and lined all the Hedges and Ditches thereabouts;
several firings were on both sides, but being at too great a distance, no great
harm was done; and so brave was the Iniskilling Foot, that they passionately
desired to march over the Bog, and in order to it, every Man of them stripped off
his Coat, so that instead of a gray Regiment they appeared in white, being
their usual way in fighting to enable them for better action in the service;
the General with a strong Guard rid round the Bog, and posted Men at all places
where he apprehended danger; in this manner both Armies stood in readiness, but
no Engagement, and after the late King James with his whole Army, had remained
so for 4 or 5 hours, he marched back to his Camp. On the 23d, 6 Men were taken,
one whereof being an experienced Soldier, but a private Sentinel, had drawn a
Scheme of our Camp, where we lay open, how the Enemy might have fallen in upon
us, how our Men sickned, what number of Horse and Foot we were, and how
victualled, and was going over to the Late King, but he and the other 5 were
taken, and this Scheme found upon him; so that they were all hanged, and 150
more of the French who were suspected, sent Prisoners to Chester. It is
believed that the Late King had some assurance of the French Regiments
deserting, if both Armies had then engaged. On the 25th, we had advice from
Sligo, that Colonel Lloyd, with 5 Companies of Foot, and 4 Troops of Horse and
Dragroons, had engaged the Enemy at Abbyboyle, and killed 300 in the Church,
and in the pursuit took Colonel Kelly, Colonel Dillon, and Colonel Farrel,
and killed 300 more, having the pursuit of them for about 11 or 12 Miles, and
had their Horse been first, might have cut off the whole Body, being 5000; in
which action but 6 of the Protestants were killed, and 5 wounded; for joy of
which great Conquest, there was a running Fire through the Camp, and the Guns
in the Fleet returned the same.

On the 6th of October. the Irish Army decamped and Marched toward Drogheda,
having first burned the whole Country about them, setting all their Huts on
fire before they marched away: Salt, Tobacco, and Brandy were very scarce among
them, and more especially Salt, for that the Soldiers were forced to boil their
Meat in Salt Water, little or no Silver was current amongst them, but all
Copper. On the 6th. the General had an account how Colonel Lloyd had taken
James Town and Carugdrumroosk from the Enemy; on the 8th. 150 Horse Granadeers,
150 Dragroons, and 150 Inskilling Horse were detacht to March to Sligo,
commanded by Colonel Russel and Colonel Tiffin: At their coming to Sligo the
Enemy were prepared for them, and a smart Engagement happened; but at length
about 80 of the Granadeers possessed themselves of the Fort, and very well
defended the same for some days against Colonel Sarsfield and his Forces; but
being straightened for Provision, were forced to capitulate and made honorable
Conditions, which were performed by Colonel Sarsfield, yet he endeavored by
all fair means to bring these Men over to King James upon promises of
Preferments, etc. but they utterly refused him. When the late King had decamed,
his Grace the Duke of Schonberg ordered the greatest part of the Army to Winter
Quarters, making Lisburn his own head Quarters; but there being some Shipping
in the River of Dundalk, which could not sail for want of a Wind, Colonel L.
Moleniere was left Governor at Dundalk, with 4 Regiments of Foot, and some
Horse, to preserve these Shipping from the Enemy until they could get out, and
then the 4 Regiments marched entirely from Dundalk to Winter Quarters; Sir H.
Ingoldsby's Regiment being left at the Newry the frontier Garrison. As soon as
the Protestant Forces had Marched from Dundalk, the Enemy possessed themselves
of that place, and most of the Creates, or poor Country People, droven up by
the Irish Army, returned to that Country, and remained upon the Mountains
between Dundalk and the Newry, several of them endeavoring to bring what small
stock of Cattle they had into the County of Down; such as brought any goods
with them were admitted to go into the Counties of Down and Antrim, but such as
brought nothing, were sent back to the Mountains again, and not permitted to go
into our Country. Sir Hen. Ingoldsby's Regiment being at the Newry, commanded
by Leiutenant Colonel Purcel, Governor of that place, remained peaceably
there till about the 5th. or 6th. of December, at which time the Governor had
an Account of a considerable Body, both Horse and Foot, of the Enemy were
marching toward Dundalk, and intended to attack the Garrison at Newry, being
the Key of the North; whereupon 60 Men and a Captain were passed at Narrow
Water, 12 with a Sergeant at Fatham Castle, being a pass on the River, which
was fordable when the Tide was out; and likewise a considerable number of Men
were at Pointz pass, and these being the only dangerous Passes and thus
fortified, Colonel Purcel thought himself secure as to the Pass at the Newry;
but about the 8th. or 9th of December 1700 Foot, and 6 Troops of Horse and
Dragoons, came within a quarter of a mile of Newry, out of which 300 were
detacht and sent into the Town by break of day, having killed our out Guards:
Upon which the Garrison received the Allarm, yet so very quick was the Enemy,
that they were in the Town before the main Guard could draw out, there not
being above 40 effectual Men, who behaved themselves so well, that they forced
that part of the Enemy marching up from the Bridge to retreat, but some of the
Enemy getting sooner into the Town, and having notice where the Officers
quartered, killed Captain Whitfield going out of his Quarters, and killed
Captain Miller in the street; Leiutenant Shrould received a wound on the thigh,
whereof he died, and 4 of the Soldiers killed. There was killed of the Enemy a
Lieutenant Colonel, with 14 Men in the Town, besides several taken off dead,
and many wounded, of which the Governor had a certain account afterward: The
main Body finding the forlorn thus defeated, marched back to Dundalk, and although
they have often resolved to attack the Garrison again, have never yet attempted
it; and since they could not come into the North of Ireland at the Passes of
Naview Water, fathom Castle, Newry or Pointz his Pass, they intended to attack
the Garrison at Belturbet in the County of Cavan, then and now under the command
of Colonel Wolsely, Colonel of a Regiment of the Iniskilling Horse, and think
to get into the North that way; but Colonel Wolsely having an account of their
design resolved to prevent them, and on the 12th. of March with 700 Foot and
300 Horse marched toward Cavan, where 2000 of the Enemy were; his purpose was
to fall upon them by break of day, having but 7 Miles to March from Belturbet
to Cavan; but the Enemy having posted some small number of Men at a place
called Butlers-Bridge, the Colonel could not pass there without allarming
them, which would very soon after be at Cavan, therefore it was agreed to March
peaceably up the Riverside, to afoord at a place called Bullynacarrig being 4
Miles out of the way, when the Colonel had advanced as far as this place, the
Enemy had likewise some Men posted there, who gave notice to them of Cavan, the
Colonel notwithstanding marched all his Men over the Biver, and soon after
daylight was within half a mile of Cavan on Dublin side of the Town, but
instead of surprising them, he found their Garrison reinforced by 2000, and the
whole Body fairly formed into a defensive posture, and ready to receive him,
commanded by the Duke of Berwick; this much surprised him, and to retreat would
certainly ruin the whole business, therefore the Colonel detached 150, and
posted them at a convenient pass for a reserve, and with the remainder charged
the Enemy; the Iniskilling Dragoons made the first onset, but were forced to
lose ground, upon this the Colonel commanded some Dutch Granadeers to march
up, who behaved themselves so well, that the Enemy lost ground; by which means
the Iniskilling Dragoons rallied and joined the body again, and then for an
hour the matter was horly disputed, and at length the Enemy took to flight, one
part of them made to the Fort, and the other toward Finah. In the pursuit were
killed 139 besides several Officers, Colonel, Edmond O Reily, with some other
Officers of great Note was killed in the first Engagement; on our side we lost
4 Captains and 20 Men. When this action was over, the Iniskilling Men began to
plunder the Town, and were straggling in odd numbers about the place, which the
Enemy discovering from the Fort, drew out a fresh party, and came down upon
them; but the reserve as I mentioned before, being in order and a readiness
engaged them, and forced them into the Fort again, and then Colonel Wolsley
ordered the Town to be burned, and likewise burned Killishandrew on his March
to Belturbet; in some few days after, a party of Horse fell on some of the
Enemy, who were intrencht at Butlers-Bridge, killing about 36 and taking
several Prisoners, with the chief Officers commanding there, in which second
action not a man of the Protestants were lost. As for the Garrison of
Charlemont, they are in a manner blockt up, for since Colonel Withers burned
the Bridge, and took their Boats, they cannot make any incursions into the
Country, we having Garrisons at Dungannon, Armagh, Benburl, and Loghgall; the
General took a view of the place and makes no doubt of having it before the
Army take the Field, yet the Enemy have not been idle in fortifying this place,
for they have flung up a Ditch on the outside of the Trench, equally high with
the Wall, so that although the Castle be of it self weak, yet the
Fortifications about it are strong. The Prince of Wirtemberg is arrived with
the Danish Forces at Carickfergus, whither his Grace the Duke of Schonberg is
just now a going to see them, the Mary Yatcht has brought to Belfast a Boat
that was going with eight Passengers from Scotland to Dublin. The Army is now
in a very good Condition, both as to Health, etc. and well provided with
Provisins, and are most impatient for the Season of the Year in taking the
Field.

LONDON, Printed for James Partridge at the Post House at Charing Cross, 1690.


