A True and Wonderful RELATION OF A Murder Committed in the PARISH OF
Newington, The 12th. Day of this present January. BY A MAID WHO Poisoned her
self, AND Cut the Throat OF A CHILD.

LONDON, Printed for T. Benskin, in Gaeen's Rents; near Fleet-Bridge, 1681.

A True and Wonderful Relation of a Murder Committed in the Parish of
Newington, etc.
SAtan that enemy of Mankind, who goes about as a Roaring Lion, seeking whom
he may devour, has of late been very busy amongst us, and by his divelish
Instigation, many horrid Murders have been perpetrated and committed in
several parts, for the which those evil Instruments have received condign
punishment; for according to his spightful and malicious nature, he always
forsakes his evil Instruments when ever they fall into the hands of Justice;
yet so frail and weak is the nature of Sinners, they will not take warning by
the harms of others, and though they see Felony and Murder every day
punished, by an ignominious and shameful Death, however, by the subtilty of
Satan, they fall into the same snare, and are overwhelmed in the pit of
Destruction.

God, it is true, has an overruling hand, and he often ties up this Leviathan,
that would else devour and destroy all the Race of Mankind, and we have seen
him miraculously take care of this poor Nation, in Muzling this devouring
Beast, and in making known his bloody designs, in plotting our Ruin, and
designing horrid and bloody Massacres and Murders, and finding himself thus
restrained by the over ruling Hand of the Omnipotent, he seems enraged and
furious, and where he is permitted for the Chastizement of sinful Creatures, he
prevails often on private persons, and that way seems to expert and put forth
his Hellish Poison and Malice. But that I may not make my Porch bigger than my
House, or my Preamble longer than my Narration, I will enter upon it, and give
you the full Narrative of it, and that upon certain knowledge of the same. But
before I begin, I must observe, that among the many Murders that have been
committed in our Age, this is one of the most pitiful, and also the strangest,
showing plainly the power, malice, and sedulity of the Devil, to enter and
possess Mankind, and to stir up both Men and Women to horrid and evil Actions
and Murders.

On the 12th. day of this present January, one Charity Philput, being the
servant of one Mrs. Mathews, a Sempstress, who lives in Kent-street, in the
Parish of Newington, near St. Georges Church; being certainly Instigated by the
Devil, and not having the fear of God before her eyes, was possessed by him,
for on a sudden without cause given, she rushed in upon her Mistress, who was
in a Room with her Child with her, and with a strange and fearful Look, more
like a Fury, or one possessed then a Christian, she came toward her Mistress,
who being affrighted to see her in that manner, never observing her so before,
she asked of her what she ailed, and what she would have; the Maid, this
Charity Philpot, replied hastily, and told her Mistress, That she came to Kill
her, and then she would fire her House. The Mrs. being in no little affright at
her words, and seeing her come toward her, fled out of the Room, calling out
for help; but in the mean time this possessed Wretch stepping to the affrighted
and amazed Child, Cut its Throat. The Mother of it presently returning, with
some Neighbors, whom she had called in to her Assistance, and seeing her Child
sprawling in its Gore, she shrieked out, and cried; Oh! what have you done to
my Child! The Maid presently returned answer, I have cut its Throat, as I would
have done yours, had you not fled, They immediately laid hold on her, and began
to Interrogate her upon what occasion she had committed so abominable and
horrible an action; she told them, That a Man in an High-crown'd Hat bid her to
do it, and that he had wheted the Knife and put it into her hand, and also told
her she should fire the House. They told her then that she would be hanged for
it; she replied, no but she would not, for she had taken Poison, which she said
she had bought of some Apothecary near. They took her for the present and
locked her up in a Garret to secure her, till they could send for a Constable
to have her before a Justice of the Peace, but she had not been long in the
Garret, before she had flung her self out at the window, and though it was two
Stories high, she received no hurt. But she was then secured again, and all the
windows and doors being made fast, it being late, they left her upon the Bed,
and the next morning they found her dead, for the Poison she had taken had
killed her, her face and body being hugely Swelled.

This is the True Relation of this Horrid Murder, as many persons can
Testify; from the like Effects of Satan's Malice, Good Lord Deliver all good
Christians.

FINIS.

