

Courteous Reader,
THou have here the true perfect Picture of this wonderful Monster, cut
according to a Draught thereof sent from Ireland, which the following
Description will make so plain, that it is impossible thou should mistake
any part, only being straightned for room in this Quarto Page, we were forced
to contract the body, and represent it something shorter than it ought to be,
that there might be more space for seting out plainly the Heads and Horns,
which seem more Rare and Remarkable.

A True and Perfect ACCOUNT Of the Miraculous SEA MONSTER. OR, Wonderful FISH
Lately taken in IRELAND: Bigger than an Ox, yet without Legs, Bones, Fins, or
Scales, with two Heads, and ten Horns of 10 or 11 foot long, on eight of which
Horns there grew knobs about the bigness of a Cloakbutton, in shape like Crowns
or Coronets, to the number of 100 on each Horn, which were all to open, and had
rows of Teeth within them: And in all other parts wonderful and unparalleled.
Together with the manner how it first appeared and was taken at a place called
Dingel Ichough in the West of Ireland, and since brought to Dublin, to be shown
publicly: And all other Material Circumstances relating thereunto.

Faithfully Communicated by an Eye witness.

Printed for P. Brooksby, and W. Whitwood, 1674.

A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE Strange Monster: OR, Wonderful FISH Lately
taken in Ireland, etc.
WHereas several Rumors and various ^eports have been spread abroad in
Discourse, concerning the strange Fish lately taken in Ireland, we having a
very perfect and faithful Account and Description thereof, sent us sometime
since in a Letter from a Credible person that was an Eyewitness of that
monstrous sight, have thought fit, for unveiling report from the disguises of
Fiction, and preventing the obtrusion of La^e imperfect Relations on the too
often abused World, to present the same plainly and truly to public view, as a
thing real and deservedly Admirable.

ON the third of October last past, at a place called Dingel Ichough, in the
County of (...) ^n the West of Ireland, one James Steward riding by the
Seaside, as the Tide was coming in, perceived at a distance something of a
strange bigness to make toward the shore: At first he apprehended it might be
some Horse that might have been caught away with the violence of the Tide, and
having recovered himself was now swiming to Land, but approaching nearer on a
closer view, he was infinitely surprised and amazed, not so much at the bigness
(which yet he found to exceed that of a Horse which he first took it for in the
Body) as at the uncouth shape, and a number of strange Horns of great length,
which rendered it not a little terrible to behold: Insomuch that he durst not
go nearer to it, least it should destroy both him and his Horse, wherefore
rideing off, he went immediately to one Tompson that dwelt hard by on the
Beach, and acquainting him with this strange adventure desired his Aid, and
that he would bring Ropes and Handspikes with him, and what other help he could
procure, but there being none at that time at home but himself and his wife,
they could not get any other assistance; However they two went down with him to
the place, where the Man and his Wife were both almost astonished at the sight
of this strange Monster, and the Woman especially so far frighted that she
would by no means permit her Husband should go near or meddle with it, yet
Steward the first discoverer, boldly adventured to ride up pretty near it, and
at last to touch it with a Rope, and found it made no resistance, but lay
stranded on the Ground, and wanted water to carry it off. Upon this Tompson and
his Wife, seeing it so peaceable and inoffensive, grew courageous and came near
to assist the other man, and by their joint Labor they got their Ropes so
about it as they tumbled it over and were able to Hale it further on shore;
during all which time it made no resistance, but when they went to lay hold on
the Horns, they found thereon Shells like Coronets with Teeth within them which
got hold of their hands and fingers, so that they were glad to let them go. And
the Night coming on, they were forced for that time to leave it, having
dragged it quite upon dry Land. Early next morning they return with more
Company, whom the noise of this rare Accident soon drew together. But at their
coming find the Monster quite dead, and now had time to view, and not without
wonder, consider it is wonderful and prodigious shape, which they found as
follows.

The Length of this Sea-wonder, Horns and all, was full Nineteen foot, and in
Bulk or Bigness of Body somewhat larger then a Horse. It had two heads, the
largest of which joining immediately to the Body, had no perfect distinct
shape; but like a vast lump, wherein nothing plainly appeared but two Eyes of
an Oval form and of Extraordinary Bigness, this great head carried the Horns,
ten in number, of which the two longest were situated in the middle, and were
smooth; the other eight, Viz. Four on each side were all wreathed or crooked,
and upon them there grew curious shells (as it were) of the bigness of a large
Clock Button, but in form and shape like Crowns or Coronets, two and two
together and over against each other, to the number of one hundred in all on
each Horn; on the top of every one of these Buttons or Coronets, was the
resemblance of a pearl which was to open and shut as a little Mouth, and had
within it a row of Teeth, so that it should seem (beside the mouth of the
little Head which we shall describe by and by) this Monster received
nourishment for its Body at eight hundred several places, for to that number or
thereabouts did the Crowns on all the eight Horns amount: Besides, it had a
natural power to contract or draw in these Horns into it is Head, (as a Snail
does) and extend them again at pleasure. But when it was dead they all stood
out at their full length, some of them being eight or ten foot long, and the
two longest which were of equal size and length eleven foot.

Between these two smooth longest Horns, and in the middle of all the rest,
grew up from the great head, the little or smaller head, at about three or four
foot distance; this was in shape much like the head of a Hawk, looking upward,
and had a strange mouth, and two tongues in it, and here too, no doubt it did
take in much of its nourishment.

The Body it self, besides the Horns, was about eight or nine foot long, it was
altogether smooth without Scales, Fins, or Legs, and all over of a
flesh-colors, save only a large fleshy skin like a mantle, which was fast to
the back, but hung down loose on both sides with a fringe round at bottom; and
this was of bright red or the outside, and perfect white within: This mantle
was generally supposed to be its chief support in swiming, for it had not one
bone in or about, nor any tail, but toward the lower end it grew sharp like a
wedge.

In brief, every thing in the said Monster was wonderful; the Liver being taken
out, is credibly reported to have weighed thirty pounds; for experiment the
people boiled some of the flesh, but the longer it boiled, the harder it
became; it gave a very good scent as it boiled, and seemed fat, but in boiling
the fat hardened, and no Creature (though several at diverse times were tried)
would eat a bit of it, or so much as taste of it.

A true Draught of this rare Animal, together with one of its heads, and two of
its Horns, was carried to Dublin, the 16 of December last; and presented to
several persons of Honor, since which time there is leave granted by Authority
for the public showing thereof; both in Dublin, and other places.

We might now divert the Reader a little, and tell him, that some Zealots
hearing of a strange Creature with several Heads, ten Horns, and more then
tripple Crowns, took it for the Apocaliptical Beast, and fancied the Pope was
landed in Person; But -- Non bonum est Ludere cum Sanctis, we dare not prophain
a Text for a Jest, nor play the fool with Thunderbolts, and hope none will be
so impertinently vain, as to place every strange production in Nature to be
account of Prodigies, since, if we consider how large a share the Sea makes of
this inferior Globe, and that Nature is ever active and wonderfully fruitful,
we may not irrationally conclude, or at least suspect the Ocean to be inhabited
with as many several species of Creatures, as the Earth; and that the vast
wilderness of Waters contains as many Monsters, and altogether as strange ones,
as any in the Deserts of Afrique.

FINIS.

